$  %    

  
  
   

 
 !"#&''(
))#*++,,,- "+##+,&''(
 .$    
/'0' 12))32
-4"5 '6/7&
 3-6'''

)! 845 )%  354 18)9 :188)1)154
 $) 845;)$8 )58$5.4 84-"51 )).2))885) 885
%-8;)5 )-5 84 28"4 88 49 8#9281 )4
412 54). 4$21<!8 124))3); 9 1"4)
3  9 1)34$21 89 9182## )   
    

       

  !" #$ # ! %   &   '  
  %  '(          '   % '
%  

      
    
 ! "  # $%%&
' (%%%
)$*+(,+-./
$%#%
            

  01  0     2 0'0'  1    1 
-  304   5+00      1  
1 3 0   0    0  - +
  0 1  1   00  1  6 3
   4 0 1 +0 '    1   
71 0   1'  3+.&$8    

 1

71  '   '  1 -  304     16 
      3   0 .&$8  1
311   ' /.  + 6     "  .&&*
 6 1   3       6 
! 0 9  :  10  '    1'  - 0  1 0 
  6 %. 00 01300     
;    
  
   1 30
 /</
30  - 0
+ %(.</
 
 >'1

  
9 #0   
       1 30
*%.3 
 ' + 8$.%&=.(/8
 
;  >1 1

1.

Introduction
On November 18, 1997, the European Union brought a complaint before the World Trade

Organization (WTO), accusing the United States of violating the rules prohibiting members of
the WTO from subsidizing exports. Europe maintained that provisions allowing American firms
to route their export sales through tax-avoidance devices known as Foreign Sales Corporations
(FSCs) provide firms with export-contingent tax subsidies of roughly $4 billion a year. The
European Union argued that European firms are thereby unfairly disadvantaged in competition
with American firms in foreign markets, and requested that the WTO require the United States to
discontinue its program or else face WTO-imposed sanctions and penalties.
As trade disputes often do, the conflict between the European Union and the United
States then moved to consultations between the two parties, in this case to no avail. Ultimately,
in July 1998, the European Union lodged a more formal complaint, and over the following
months the complaint was considered by a panel of WTO member countries. This WTO dispute
resolution panel issued a report in May 1999 highly critical of the U.S. FSC rules, a report that
was formally adopted by the WTO in February 2000.
While the World Trade Organization initially gave the United States a deadline of
October 1, 2000 for legislating changes in the FSC provisions, a last-minute agreement extended
the deadline for the resolution of this trade dispute through the middle of 2001. As of the time of
this writing (October 2000), new American legislation that is intended to meet the WTO
requirement is currently working its way through Congress. This new legislation formally scraps
the existing system of FSCs while replacing it with an almost identical tax regime that adds
minor sales incentives for foreign affiliates of American firms. Whether this legislation will

ultimately become U.S. law, and, if it does so, whether the WTO and the European Union will be
placated by this change, remain to be seen.
The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the economic impact of the American export
incentives that lie at the heart of this dispute. Section two of the paper describes the two primary
tax subsidies currently available to American exporters and their interaction. 1 While FSCs allow
firms to exempt a portion of export profits, separate provisions of the Internal Revenue Code
allow exporters to allocate some fraction of profits on export sales to foreign source income from
the standpoint of U.S. taxation, thereby shielding the allocated portion from U.S. taxes. Section
three traces the history of these tax subsidies and the disputes with which they are associated.
Section four presents data on the extent to which American exporters enjoy the benefits of these
two subsidies and the patterns of their use over the last two decades. It is noteworthy that, in
spite of the WTO’s focus on FSCs, the export incentive provided by the ability to allocate export
profits to foreign source income is quite possibly several times larger than the export incentive
that arises from exempting a portion of export profits attributed to FSCs.
Section five of the paper evaluates the impact of export incentives on the behavior of
American firms by considering the repercussions of two events: the establishment of FSCs and
repeal of their predecessors, the Domestic International Sales Corporations (DISCs) in 1984; and
the filing of the complaint against the United States before the WTO in 1997. The evidence
indicates that the transition from the DISC regime to the more administratively burdensome FSC
program in 1984 led to reduced American exports. This reduced export activity is most
1

The phrase “export subsidy” appearing here and elsewhere refers only to the economic concept of export subsidy
(as used, for example, by Krugman and Obstfeld (1991, pp. 108-111)), and not the legal concept of “export
subsidy” as defined by WTO rules. A far more elaborate legal and textual analysis than that provided in this paper
is necessary in order to determine whether or not U.S. export tax incentives represent “export subsidies” as defined
by the WTO.

2

pronounced in those sectors characterized by the greatest historic use of DISCs and those
dominated by smaller exporters. This evidence suggests that transitions between export
incentive regimes can be costly to American exporters, particularly small ones. By 1997,
however, FSCs were well established, and the filing of a European complaint against the United
States is associated both with a decline in the value of the U.S. dollar and with reduced share
prices for American exporters. The magnitudes of these exchange rate and stock price
movements are consistent with the threatened removal of the widely used tax subsidy provided
by the FSC program. Stock market reactions to the news of the European complaint are also
indicative of the incidence of the export subsidy. Section six of the paper is the conclusion.
The magnitude and scope of U.S. export incentives warrant particular attention not
simply because of the recent WTO dispute. The importance of trade to U.S. multinational
corporations, domestic concern over outsourcing of production to foreign affiliates, the
magnitude of FSC benefits received by large American exporters, 2 and the chronic trade deficit
facing the United States, all suggest that the delivery of tax incentives to exporters will remain a
central aspect of the public policy debate surrounding how corporations are taxed. Regardless of
the outcome of the WTO dispute, it is worthwhile to evaluate the impact of the curious
mechanisms that have evolved to subsidize American exports. 3
2.

American export incentives
The U.S. tax system contains several provisions designed to encourage American firms to

export goods from the United States to foreign countries. These provisions are dizzyingly
complex, even by the standards of the Internal Revenue Code, as a result of which it can be
2

Oyola (2000) provides estimates of the contribution of FSC benefits to the net incomes of major exporters.

3

difficult to establish their revenue impact and the incentives for which they are responsible. The
goal of this section is to describe current export tax subsidies, their interactions, and the
incentives they create for American firms.
The United States provides export tax subsidies through the exemption of export profits
from U.S. taxation and through the ability to allocate export profits to foreign source income.
Exemption of a fraction of export profits from taxable income typically occurs by the routing of
exports through a distinct entity such as an FSC. The alternative of allocating certain export
profits to foreign source income for the purposes of U.S. income taxation effectively shields such
export profits from U.S. income taxation for those firms with excess foreign tax credits. While
the allocation method is more generous for some taxpayers than the exemption method, it is also
the more complicated of the two, and the focus of much less popular attention. Consequently,
this section first reviews the U.S. tax provisions that permit the exemption of certain fractions of
export income from U.S. taxation.
2.1

Subsidy by exemption of income: FSCs and IC-DISCs
Firms that export goods from the United States are entitled to do so in a legally

roundabout fashion that enables them to exempt a fraction of export profits from taxation. While
complying with the necessary rules can be cumbersome, the tax advantages are large enough to
make it well worth the while of most large American exporters to take advantage of this
opportunity.
In order to benefit from this export tax subsidy, it is necessary to establish an FSC in an
offshore location such as Guam, Barbados, or the Virgin Islands. For legal purposes, exports
3

Desai and Hines (2000a) further outline alternative export subsidy regimes and their relative merits.

4

might then travel from the United States to their ultimate foreign destinations via the FSC.
Hence, an American computer company that sells a computer manufactured in Texas to a buyer
in northern Italy first sells the computer to its FSC located in Guam, which in turn sells the
computer to the buyer in Italy. The computer does not travel to Guam in the course of this sale,
nor are the FSC offices located in Guam typically very active; instead, these are largely paper
transactions. In the course of these transactions, the FSC located in Guam earns a profit; some of
this profit is immediately subject to U.S. taxation, but a fascinating 15/23 is forever exempt,
thereby providing a tax subsidy for exporters. 4
For an American firm whose profits are fully taxed by the United States at the 35 percent
corporate tax rate, there is a benefit associated with making the FSC’s share of total export
profits as large as possible. 5 Consider the case in which the American computer manufacturer
produces its computer for $1,500 in the United States and sells the computer in Italy for $2,000.
Without the use of an FSC, all $500 of this profit is subject to U.S. taxation at the 35 percent
rate. With the FSC involved in the transaction, the FSC might purchase the computer for $1,885
and sell it in Italy for $2,000, thereby earning an export profit of $115. The American exporting
company therefore will owe taxes on the remaining $385 of export profits, and its FSC will
likewise owe U.S. taxes on (8/23)*$115, or $40. The remaining $75 [(15/23)*$115 = $75] of
FSC profit is exempt from U.S. taxation, and, since FSCs are located in offshore jurisdictions
that impose no taxes, the $75 is also exempt from foreign taxation. At a tax rate of 35 percent,
this translates into a tax saving of $26.25. Since law fixes the 15/23 exclusion ratio, it is

4

Alternatively, the Guamanian FSC might not take title to the export property, but instead receive a commission for
facilitating the export sale. According to data reported by Belmonte (2000), 21% of FSCs in 1996 bought and sold
export property, while the remaining 79% simply received commissions for export sales.
5
The tax benefits of exporting through FSCs are available to all corporations in the United States, including those
that are foreign-owned.

5

therefore in the taxpayer’s interest to establish that the FSC export profits are as large as
possible. 6
As a consequence, U.S. law also requires taxpayers to calculate the profit of an FSC
based on methods that limit the exempt fraction of total export profits. Taxpayers are entitled to
choose among several different methods of distributing export profits between the exporter
located in the United States and its offshore FSC. The first, and most commonly used, method is
simply to assign the FSC a commission equal to 23 percent of export profits. In the previous
example, $115 of FSC profit was arrived at through the application of this method. It is on the
basis of the prevalence with which exporters assign their FSCs 23 percent of export profits,
together with the 15/23 exclusion ratio, that FSCs are typically described as exempting 15
percent of export profits from taxation.
The second method is to assign the FSC a commission equal to 1.83 percent of gross
export sales. The profits assigned to the FSC under this second method are required not to
exceed twice those that would have been assigned the FSC under the 23 percent profit allocation.
The third profit calculation method is to use arm’s-length pricing between the American exporter
and the FSC to determine the amount of export income for which the FSC is responsible. Since
FSCs typically do very little on their own to facilitate export sales, it is difficult to justify large
FSC profits on the basis of the third method, and as a result, it is seldom used.
In addition, taxpayers are also entitled to use what are known as marginal costing
techniques in order to determine the size of export profits when calculating FSC income. With
marginal costing, export profits equal the difference between the ultimate sales prices of export
6

Taxpayers are not entitled to defer U.S. taxation of FSC profits. Corporations exporting through FSCs instead

6

property and the American exporter’s marginal cost of production. For this purpose, marginal
production costs include only direct material and labor costs, thereby excluding selling costs and
various fixed costs such as interest expense and general administrative expenses. While the
ability to expand the size of export profits is very appealing to taxpayers, marginal costing is
subject to two important limitations. The first is that marginal costing cannot be used to allocate
more profit to an FSC than the firm actually earns on its exports, after taking into account selling
costs and a pro rata share of various fixed costs. The second limitation is that the profit rate on
exports, as defined by marginal costing, and measured as a fraction of export sales, must not
exceed the firm’s overall profit rate, defined as the ratio of the firm’s combined (domestic plus
foreign) profits to total sales. As a result, it is useful to calculate FSC income based on marginal
costing only when the profit rate on exports is lower than the profit rate for the firm as a whole.
Taxpayers are not required to use the same methods to calculate FSC profits for all export
transactions, but can instead pick and choose among methods to maximize tax benefits. In
particular, it is possible to combine export transactions involving similar products in calculating
export profits.
There are restrictions on the kinds of export sales that may be routed through an FSC, as
well as restrictions on the details of FSC management. In order to be eligible for the tax benefits
offered by FSCs, export property must have no more than 50 percent of non-U.S. content and
cannot be intended for ultimate use in the United States. Qualifying export property must be
tangible; meaning that patents, copyrights, trademarks, and like property cannot receive FSC

receive tax benefits in the form of the exemption of 15/23 of FSC profits.

7

treatment. 7 Furthermore, certain specific items are ineligible for FSC treatment. These include
oil and gas products (other than petrochemicals), 50 percent of military equipment sales, and
various idiosyncratic commodities, including unprocessed softwood timber, western red cedar,
and horses for slaughter shipped by sea. 8
FSCs are subject to strict administrative requirements. U.S. law requires FSCs to be
corporations organized in foreign countries or qualifying U.S. possessions. 9 FSCs cannot have
more than 25 shareholders, must have at least one foreign director, and must hold all board of
directors and shareholder meetings outside the United States. An FSC must use a foreign bank
account and maintain a foreign office, complete with a permanent set of books, though the
foreign office need not be located in the FSC’s country of incorporation. There is, however, no
requirement that any important decisions be made in an FSC’s foreign office. The FSC is
required to participate in foreign sales activity, meaning at least one of solicitation, negotiation,
and concluding sales contracts – though this requirement is made rather less burdensome by the
FSC’s ability to hire its related supplier or another company to undertake this activity on the
FSC’s behalf. The FSC is also required to incur at least half of the direct costs of foreign sales,
including advertising and sales promotion, processing orders, transportation, and the like. Again,
an FSC is entitled to hire other firms, including related parties, to perform these activities on its
behalf.

7

Exporters of intangible property such as patent rights are typically compensated in the form of royalties that are
treated as foreign-source income under U.S. law and therefore effectively untaxed if received by domestic taxpayers
with excess foreign tax credits. See Hines (1995) for an analysis of the economic impact of this treatment of royalty
income. Additionally, the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 permitted computer software to receive FSC treatment
starting in 1998.
8
Importantly, slaughter horses shipped by air remain eligible for FSC treatment.
9
FSCs may be incorporated in U.S. possessions other than Puerto Rico, countries covered by the Caribbean Basin
Economic Recovery Act of 1983, or countries whose bilateral tax treaties with the United States contain exchange of
information provisions.

8

While the FSC rules are designed to facilitate the use of FSCs by all exporters, the
administrative burdens they impose can be daunting for small exporters. As a result, legislation
establishing FSCs also authorized the creation of “small FSCs,” “shared FSCs” and “ICthat serve to facilitate the exports of small companies. Small FSCs offer the same tax benefits as
regular FSCs while limiting the foreign materiality requirements; they can be used by firms with
export receipts of less than $5 million. Similarly, a small FSC or a traditional FSC can be shared
by up to twenty-five exporters and thereby provide the benefits of an FSC to exporters incapable
of supporting the foreign materiality requirements individually. Taxpayers also have the option
of routing up to $10 million of export sales each year through an “Interest Charge-Domestic
International Sales Corporation,” or “IC-DISC.” An exporter is able to defer domestic tax
liability on export profits earned by sales routed through an IC-DISC and not distributed to the
parent company, though it is necessary to pay the U.S. government interest (at Treasury bill
rates) on any undistributed profits of an IC-DISC. The administrative requirements of IC-DISCs
are quite modest, and their use typically permits small exporters to obtain the benefits of lowinterest rate loans from the government equal to the amount of tax liabilities generated by
exports.
2.2

Subsidy by allocation of income: Export source rules
An entirely separate type of export subsidy is available to American multinational firms

with excess foreign tax credits. The nature of the subsidy is that part or all of export profits can
be treated as foreign source income for the purpose of U.S. income taxation. This export subsidy
is more generous to qualifying firms than is the subsidy provided by the use of FSCs. Since

9

many American multinational firms have excess foreign tax credits, 10 and the parent companies
of American multinational firms account for 58 percent of all U.S. exports of goods, 11 it follows
that this export subsidy is potentially quite important. Notably, this export subsidy is not
available to American exporters that are not multinational firms.
In order to understand the tax subsidy available from the foreign source rules, and the
circumstances under which taxpayers might be eligible for the associated tax benefits, it is
necessary to review certain aspects of U.S. taxation of the foreign income of American
taxpayers. A brief description of some of the relevant features follows. 12
2.2.1 The foreign tax credit
Almost all countries tax income generated by economic activity that takes place within
their borders. In addition, many countries—including the United States—tax the foreign
incomes of their residents. In order to prevent double taxation of the foreign income of
Americans, U.S. law permits taxpayers to claim foreign tax credits for income taxes (and related
taxes) paid to foreign governments. 13 These foreign tax credits are used to offset U.S. tax
liabilities that would otherwise be due on foreign-source income. The U.S. corporate tax rate is
currently 35 percent, so an American corporation that earns $100 in a foreign country with a 10
10

Grubert et al. (1996) report that firms with excess foreign tax credits received 33 percent of the foreign income of
American corporations in 1984, and 66 percent in 1990, which follows the U.S. tax rate reduction in 1986. They
note that even this 66 percent figure is smaller than the 79 percent predicted right after 1986, and conjecture that
contemporaneous foreign tax law changes along with the endogenous behavior of American companies may account
for the difference. They also note that the fraction of foreign income received by firms with excess foreign tax
credits appears to be falling over time, reaching 35 percent in 1992. In a subsequent study, Grubert (forthcoming)
reports additional evidence that changes in taxpayer behavior (such as greatly expanded receipts of foreign-source
royalty income) account for much of the unexpectedly low incidence of excess foreign tax credit status after 1986.
11
See the data for 1997 reported in Mataloni (1999, p. 14).
12
Portions of this description are excerpted from Hines (1991, 1999a).
13
The United States is not alone in taxing the worldwide income of its residents while permitting them to claim foreign
tax credits. Other countries with such systems include Greece, Italy, Japan, Norway, and the United Kingdom. Under

10

percent tax rate pays taxes of $10 to the foreign government and $25 to the U.S. government,
since its U.S. corporate tax liability of $35 (35 percent of $100) is reduced to $25 by the foreign
tax credit of $10.
2.2.2 Tax deferral
Americans are permitted to defer U.S. tax liabilities on certain unrepatriated foreign
profits until they receive such profits in the form of dividends. 14 This deferral is available only
on the active business profits of American-owned foreign affiliates that are separately
incorporated as subsidiaries in foreign countries. The profits of unincorporated foreign
businesses, such as those of American-owned branch banks in other countries, are taxed
immediately by the United States. Interest, rent, and royalty income received from foreign
countries also represents foreign-source income on which U.S. tax obligations cannot be
deferred.
U.S. tax law contains provisions designed to prevent American firms from delaying the
repatriation of lightly-taxed foreign earnings. 15 These tax provisions apply to controlled foreign
corporations, which are foreign corporations owned at least 50 percent by American individuals
or corporations who hold stakes of at least 10 percent each. Under the Subpart F provisions of
U.S. law, the passive income of controlled foreign corporations is “deemed distributed,” and

U.S. law, taxpayers may claim foreign tax credits for taxes paid by foreign firms of which they own at least 10 percent,
and only those taxes that qualify as income taxes are creditable.
14
Deferral of home-country taxation of the unrepatriated profits of foreign subsidiaries is a common feature of systems
that tax foreign incomes. Other countries that permit this kind of deferral include Canada, Denmark, France, Germany,
Japan, Norway, Pakistan, and the United Kingdom.
15
In spite of these provisions, it appears that American multinationals selectively repatriate profits from foreign
affiliates based on tax considerations. See the evidence reported in Hines and Hubbard (1990), Altshuler and
Newlon (1993), Altshuler, Newlon, and Randolph (1995), and Hines (1999b).

11

therefore immediately taxable by the United States, even if not repatriated as dividend payments
to American parent firms. 16
2.2.3 Excess foreign tax credits
Because the foreign tax credit is intended to alleviate international double taxation, and
not to reduce U.S. tax liabilities on profits earned within the United States, the foreign tax credit
is limited to U.S. tax liability on foreign-source income. For example, an American firm with
$200 of foreign income that faces an U.S. tax rate of 35 percent has a foreign tax credit limit of
$70 (35 percent of $200). If the firm pays foreign income taxes of less than $70, then the firm
would be entitled to claim foreign tax credits for all of its foreign taxes paid. If, however, the
firm pays $90 of foreign taxes, then it would be permitted to claim no more than $70 of foreign
tax credits.
Taxpayers whose foreign tax payments exceed the foreign tax credit limit are said to have
“excess foreign tax credits;” the excess foreign tax credits represent the portion of their foreign
tax payments that exceed the U.S. tax liabilities generated by their foreign incomes. Taxpayers
whose foreign tax payments are smaller than their foreign tax credit limits are said to be in
“excess limit” or to have “deficit foreign tax credits.” American law permits taxpayers to use
excess foreign tax credits in one year to reduce their U.S. tax obligations on foreign source
income in either of the two previous years or in any of the following five years. 17

16

Subpart F income consists of income from passive investments (such as interest and dividends received from
investments in securities), foreign base company income (that arises from using a foreign affiliate as a conduit for
certain types of international transactions), income that is invested in United States property, money used offshore to
insure risks in the United States, and money used to pay bribes to foreign government officials. American firms
with foreign subsidiaries that earn profits through most types of active business operations, and that subsequently
reinvest those profits in active lines of business, are not subject to the Subpart F rules, and are therefore able to defer
U.S. tax liability on their foreign profits until they choose to remit dividends at a later date.
17
Foreign tax credits are not adjusted for inflation, so are generally the most valuable if claimed as soon as possible.

12

In practice, the calculation of the foreign tax credit limit entails certain additional
complications, notable among which is that total worldwide foreign income is used to calculate
the foreign tax credit limit. This method of calculating the foreign tax credit limit is known as
“worldwide averaging.” A taxpayer has excess foreign tax credits if the sum of worldwide
foreign income tax payments exceeds this limit. The combination of worldwide averaging and
selective repatriation of dividends from subsidiaries located in countries with differing tax rates
implies that the average foreign tax rate used to calculate the foreign tax credit limit need not
equal the average foreign tax rate faced by a firm’s foreign affiliates. 18 The ability of
multinational firms to adjust the amount of foreign income received in non-dividend forms (such
as interest and royalties) contributes to their control over whether or not they have excess foreign
tax credits. 19 This flexibility is further enhanced by the source rules discussed in the next
section.
2.2.4

Source rules and excess credits
Firms with excess foreign tax credits benefit whenever they can treat income earned by

activities undertaken in the United States as having foreign source for purposes of U.S. income
taxation, since those firms are effectively untaxed on such income. The benefit to a firm with
excess foreign tax credits of allocating income to foreign source is illustrated by the comparison
presented in Table 1. The American multinational firm in this example earns $40 by exporting

Barring unusual circumstances, firms apply their foreign tax credits against future years only when unable to apply
them against either of the previous two years.
Firms paying the corporate alternative minimumtax (AMT) are subject to the same rules, with the added
restriction that the combination of net operating loss deductions and foreign tax credits cannot reduce AMT liabilities
by more than 90 percent. It is noteworthy that, since the AMT rate is only 20 percent, firms subject to the AMT are
considerably more likely to have excess foreign tax credits than are firms that pay the regular corporate tax.
18
Average foreign income tax rates paid by foreign affiliates reflect investment decisions as well as transfer pricing
practices that affect the location of reported taxable income. There is ample evidence, surveyed by Hines (1999a),
that both types of decisions are sensitive to their tax implications.

13

from the United States and an additional $100 from the operations of its foreign affiliate. The
affiliate is located in a country with a 50 percent tax rate, which, since it exceeds the U.S. tax
rate of 35 percent, implies that the parent company has $15 of excess foreign tax credits. If
export profits are treated as domestic income, then the firm’s $40 of export income is fully taxed
at the domestic tax rate of 35 percent, resulting in a tax liability of $14. If instead the exporter
can characterize 50 percent of export profits as having foreign source, then $7 of the firm’s
excess foreign tax credits can be applied against the U.S. tax liability on export profits, leaving a
net tax liability of $7 on export profits. An important aspect of this benefit is that foreign
governments do not coordinate their taxation of export income with the United States. Thus, the
election by an American taxpayer to treat $20 of export profits arising from sales to Italy as
having foreign source for U.S. tax purposes will have no effect on any Italian taxes that the
taxpayer may owe.
U.S. tax law embodies the curious principle that the location of income arising from a
sale is determined, in part, by the site of the sale rather than the site of production. For a firm
with minimal production activities in the United States and selling only for export, all or most of
its income can be characterized as foreign income under Section 862 of the Internal Revenue
Code. If this firm is part of a controlled group with excess foreign tax credits, then this firm’s
profits from exports would be entirely untaxed by the United States. 20 Most exporters produce
some of their export property (rather than simply buying and selling goods for export), and under
U.S. law then have a combination of domestic and foreign income. For these taxpayers, section
19

Hines (1994, 1995) and Grubert (1998) offer evidence that foreign-source interest and royalty receipts are
sensitive to tax considerations.
20
It is not known to what extent American exporters use such domestically-located foreign sales subsidiaries to
allocate 100 percent of export income to foreign source. While strict application of arms-length pricing between a
domestic producer and a domestically-located foreign sales subsidiary would negate such benefits, it is also not clear
how closely transfer pricing within the U.S. is monitored.

14

863(b) of the Internal Revenue Code provides that half of export-related profits will be deemed
to have foreign source if the taxpayer arranges to pass the export title in the foreign location
rather than in the United States. Therefore, firms with excess foreign tax credits are eligible to
avoid U.S. taxation of 50 percent of their export profits by taking advantage of the opportunity
provided under section 863(b).
2.3

Incentives for exporters
American exporters are faced with the enviable choice between two export subsidies: the

partial exemption of export income earned using an FSC, and the allocation of half of export
income to foreign source under section 863(b). For firms with deficit foreign tax credits, the
export source rules do not offer the prospect of reduced U.S. tax liabilities, since income
allocated to foreign source is nonetheless immediately taxable by the United States. Such firms
do better to route their exports through FSCs, in which case they are eligible for a 15 percent
exclusion of export profits from U.S. taxation. 21 Firms with excess foreign tax credits minimize
their taxes by avoiding the use of FSCs altogether, and instead using 863(b) to allocate 50
percent of export profits to foreign source, since doing so effectively excludes 50 percent of
export profits from U.S. taxation.
The first two columns of Figure 1 summarize the relevant differences between the
exemption and allocation methods of subsidizing exports for a Texan manufacturer exporting a
computer to an Italian customer. Regardless of a firm’s excess foreign credit status, a 15%
exemption of export profits is available through the creation of an FSC and the routing of exports

21

Firms with very low profit margins on their exports can exclude up to 30 percent of their export profits from U.S.
taxation by electing to determine FSC income with the 1.83 percent rule. Firms have incentives to make this
election whenever export profits represent less than 7.96 percent of export sales prices.

15

through the FSC. In contrast, if the exporter is a multinational firm with excess foreign tax
credits, 50 percent of export profits can escape taxation through the use of 863(b). The final
column of Figure 1 outlines the interaction of these provisions and is discussed in section 3.2.
There is an important complication to this otherwise simple story, stemming from the fact
that a firm’s excess foreign tax credit status changes over time and is itself a function of many
decisions that the firm makes every year. Such decisions include where to locate foreign
operations, whether to finance foreign operations with debt or equity, how many dividends to
repatriate from each of its foreign subsidiaries, and what costs (such as interest expenses or R&D
expenses) the firm will incur in the United States and allocate in part against foreign income. As
a result, the distinction between a firm with excess foreign tax credits and one with deficit
foreign tax credits is perhaps more a matter of degree, reflecting different circumstances and
incentives, than it is a stark characteristic of a firm carrying clear-cut implications. Since excess
foreign tax credits can be carried back two years and forward five, a firm’s excess foreign tax
credit status in a given year is less consequential than the pattern of its foreign tax credits over
time, and the costs it incurs in taking the actions necessary to change its status. 22
3.

History of U.S. export subsidies
The United States has a long history of providing tax subsidies for American exports. 23

This section recounts the history of U.S. export subsidies provided by the exemption of export
profits, subsidies provided by the allocation of export profit to foreign source income, and the

22

See, for example, Scholes and Wolfson (1992) for an analysis of the costs and benefits of undertaking actions that
affect foreign tax credit status.
23
See Hufbauer (1992) for an interpretive survey of the history of American export subsidies.

16

recent controversy over the compatibility of FSCs with WTO rules. This history of export
subsidies is also mapped out in Table 2.
3.1

Tax exemptions for export profits
The original idea behind exempting export profits from U.S. taxation was to encourage

trade with strategically important parts of the world. The Revenue Act of 1939 authorized the
creation of China trade corporations, which permitted taxpayers to exclude from U.S. tax a
fraction of profits earned on exports to China. The Revenue Act of 1942 authorized the creation
of Western Hemisphere trade corporations, which similarly exempted from U.S. taxation a
fraction of profits earned on trade within the Western Hemisphere.
In practice, exporters could frequently generate their own export tax incentives by routing
exports through sales affiliates located in offshore tax havens. With adept use of transfer
pricing, 24 a fraction of export profits could be attributed to the sales affiliates, thereby removing
this fraction from the taxable income of the parent company. If the sales affiliate is located in a
jurisdiction with low or zero taxes, then its profits are untaxed. The introduction of the U.S.
Subpart F rules in 1962 threatened to reduce greatly the value of this tax-avoidance opportunity
on the part of exporters, since profits earned by foreign sales affiliates are subject to immediate
U.S. taxation under Subpart F. As a result, the 1962 legislation permitted taxpayers to route
exports through Export Trade Corporations, the income of which is not subject to immediate
U.S. taxation as long as this income does not exceed 150 percent of export promotion expenses
24

There is controversy over the extent to which American companies can reduce their tax obligations by adjusting
transfer prices on transactions between members of a controlled group. U.S. law, and the laws of most
industrialized countries, requires taxpayers to use arm’s-length prices in transactions between related parties.
Arm’s-length prices are difficult to establish for many transactions, however, leaving taxpayers some latitude in
setting transfer prices. Grubert and Mutti (1991), Hines and Rice (1994), and Clausing (forthcoming), among

17

(or 10 percent of gross receipts, whichever is less). Furthermore, Export Trade Corporations are
required to reinvest their profits in export trade assets in order to continue to defer U.S. tax
obligations. Due to these requirements, and the attractive alternatives available to American
exporters, Export Trade Corporations are seldom used.
Concern over the languid performance of American exports led Congress in 1971 to
establish Domestic International Sales Corporations (DISCs). A certain fraction of export profits
could be allocated to the DISC rather than the domestic exporter. The income of a DISC was
tax-exempt until distributed to its domestic parent company, and DISCs were required under the
1971 legislation to distribute only half of their profits. The remaining half of DISC profits could
therefore be deferred from U.S. taxation indefinitely. Exporters could choose among three
alternatives in assigning export profits to the DISC: 50 percent of export profits, 4 percent of
gross export sales, or those profits that could be justified on the basis of arm’s-length pricing
between the exporter and its DISC. 25 The third of these alternatives was of course very seldom
used given the inability to justify large DISC profits based on the economic activity undertaken
by DISCs. Of the first two, the 50 percent method was the election of choice for most exports.
Together, the 50 percent method of determining DISC profits and the 50 percent distribution
requirement implied that 25 percent of export profits could be exempt from domestic taxation.
In response to budgetary pressures, Congress subsequently reduced the tax subsidy
available from routing exports through DISCs. The Tax Reform Act of 1976 permitted
taxpayers to claim deductions only for exports in excess of firm-specific targets equal to 67

others, offer evidence that the profitability and trade patterns of the foreign affiliates of American companies are
consistent with tax-motivated adjustment of international transfer prices.
25
Of course, the law contained many details beyond these, for example permitting taxpayers to augment DISC
profits by 10 percent of export promotion expenses.

18

percent of average exports in the preceding four years. The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility
Act of 1982 further reduced DISC benefits by requiring DISCs to distribute to their taxable
parents 57.5 percent of income, leaving only 42.5 percent available for indefinite deferral.
Unfortunately for the DISC program, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT), of which the United States was a member, proscribed export subsidies, including tax
subsidies taking the form of reduced income taxes on export profits. The European Community
filed a complaint with the GATT over the DISC program in July 1972. The United States
responded by filing a complaint with GATT against Belgium, France and the Netherlands,
claiming that the tax systems of those countries indirectly allowed exporters to avoid domestic
tax on export profits by using transfer prices to shift export profits into foreign sales subsidiaries
located in tax havens. In November 1976, GATT panels issued reports finding that the DISC
program, as well as the European tax practices, violated GATT rules. The GATT membership
accepted these findings in December 1981, subject to the qualifications that home countries are
entitled to provide double-tax relief for foreign income taxes paid, including the exemption of
foreign profits from home country taxation, as long as international transactions are based on
arm’s-length prices. The United States maintained that these qualifications implied that the
DISC was permissible under GATT rules, but acknowledged that continuing its DISC program
in the wake of the GATT ruling had the effect of undermining GATT. In October 1982 the
United States announced its intention to eliminate the DISC program, and did so in creating
FSCs with the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984. 26 FSCs were fashioned to require more extensive
foreign activity than DISCs in the hope that their foreign presence would blunt GATT criticism
of the program.

19

3.2

Export source rules
The allocation of export profits between domestic and foreign source was originally

codified by the Revenue Act of 1918, which provided that all export profits represent foreign
source income as long as the relevant marketing activity takes place abroad. The Tax Reform
Act of 1954, and subsequent Treasury regulations in 1957, imposed a new requirement that
taxpayers use “independent factory prices” to determine the location of export profits. Exporters
selling goods for which arm’s-length (“independent factory”) prices are available must use such
prices to determine the amount of export profit. Thus, an exporter producing a good in the
United States for $200 and selling it abroad for $280 might use a comparable good selling for
$250 to establish an independent factory price. Consequently, $50 of the associated export profit
would be assigned to domestic source, and $30 to foreign source. In the (large number of) cases
for which such independent factory prices do not exist, or arguably do not exist, taxpayers with
domestic and foreign income were entitled to allocate half of export profits to foreign source,
provided only that the title to the export property passed hands in the foreign location. As a
practical matter, exporters were generally able to allocate to foreign source half of their export
income.
The 1986 U.S. tax rate reduction increased the numbers of taxpayers with excess foreign
tax credits and impelled the U.S. Treasury to issue regulations in 1988 and 1989 intended to limit
the benefits available from allocating export profits to foreign source. These new regulations
tightened the requirement that taxpayers use “independent factory prices” to determine export
profits that are subject to allocation under section 863(b). The regulations gave taxpayers the

26

The 1984 Act provided that undistributed DISC income as of the end of 1984 was to be distributed to parent
companies without any accompanying tax obligation of the recipients.

20

alternative of routing exports through an FSC, in which case full FSC benefits were available
plus the taxpayer could subject half of export profits to the 50-50 split under section 863(b).
This alternative would effectively exempt from U.S. taxation 40 percent of the export profits of
firms with excess foreign tax credits, since 863(b) treatment of half of export profits makes 25
percent foreign source income, to which can be added the 15 percent FSC exemption. While
exporters selling goods for which there are no obvious market comparables might do better by
determining the source of all export profits according to “independent factory prices,” the
Treasury strongly hinted its willingness to confront such elections. This alternative is
summarized in the final column of Figure 1.
Taxpayers nonetheless eagerly continued to allocate half of export income to foreign
source under section 863(b), which led to high-profile court confrontations with the Treasury and
ultimately a retreat on the part of the U.S. government. 27 Court decisions in 1993, along with
1997 Treasury regulations, confirmed the ability of exporters to allocate half of export profits to
foreign source. While confrontations with the Treasury were no longer a threat, taxpayers
continued to have the option of routing exports through FSCs while jointly allocating half of
export profits through 863(b).
3.3

The WTO controversy

27

In a 1991 opinion, the Tax Court originally sided with the IRS interpretation of the 863(b) statute requiring the use
of “independent factory prices,” but two important 1993 cases were decided in favor of taxpayers taking liberal
interpretations of the statute. As U.S. Treasury official Rousslang (1994, p. 1049) commented at the time, “The
possibility that the taxpayer may be forced to use an independent factory price appears to have been significantly
reduced, however, by recent court findings in Intel v. Commissioner, 100 T.C. No. 39 (June 28, 1993). The finding
appears to require the U.S. parent to sell the exports through a foreign branch before it is required to use an
independent factory price. Few exports are sold through foreign branches; most are sold to foreign subsidiaries or to
unrelated parties.” Macdonald (1999, p. 470) notes later that, “As a practical matter, the 1993 Intel and Phillips
decisions left taxpayers with a choice of methods [including the 50-50 profit split method] because they could
typically structure their transactions to avoid creating an independent factory price.”

21

Ongoing trade disputes between the United States and Europe took an interesting turn on
November 18, 1997, when the European Union lodged a complaint with the WTO alleging that
the American FSC program represented an illegal export subsidy. Contemporaneous observers
noted that the European complaint represented a retaliation for successful American claims that
European import regimes for bananas and hormone-treated beef violated WTO rules. The
original FSC complaint was followed by inconclusive consultations between the United States
and the European Union on December 17, 1997, and continued unfruitful consultations on
February 10, 1998. On July 23, 1999 the WTO’s Dispute Resolution Panel issued its interim
report stating that the American FSC program violated WTO rules. The July 23 report also
indicated that the United States would be required to rescind its FSC provisions by October 1,
2000 or else face retaliatory penalties. Following the appearance of the interim report, the
European Union and the United States together requested on August 6, 1999 that the panel
review the precise aspects of the interim report. The WTO’s final ruling against the United
States appeared on September 17, 1999.
On October 28, 1999, the United States indicated its intention to appeal the WTO’s
report, and filed a formal notice of appeal. The U.S. appeal was withdrawn on November 2,
1999, but refiled on November 26, 1999. Following rounds of submissions by all parties to the
dispute, as well as oral hearings, the WTO formally ruled on the legality of FSCs on February
24, 2000, finding that the FSC program violates WTO rules and must be replaced by October 1,
2000.
The American response came quickly. On February 28, 2000 American Treasury
Secretary Lawrence Summers said that the United States would not abandon its program of
subsidizing exports, and would instead start consultations with the European Union to determine
22

appropriate compensation. On April 7, 2000, the United States informed the Dispute Resolution
body of its intention to implement its recommendations consistently with WTO obligations.
Finally, on September 13, 2000, the House of Representatives voted in favor of legislation (H.R.
4986, the FSC Repeal and Extraterritorial Income Exclusion Act of 2000) that would effectively
retain current export subsidies while adding small subsidies for sales by foreign affiliates of
American multinational corporations.
4.

The magnitude of tax incentives for U.S. exports
This section profiles the magnitude and scope of tax incentives for American exporters

over the last two decades. Accordingly, it captures two major events in the legislative history of
international taxation and export subsidies: the repeal of the DISC provisions in 1984 and the
passage of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which reduced U.S. tax rates and thereby increased the
likelihood that an American multinational firm had excess foreign tax credits. In describing the
scope of export incentives, this section separately considers exemption of export profits through
distinct entities (DISCs, IC-DISCs, and FSCs) and subsidies through interactions between export
source rules and the foreign tax credit (863(b) allocations).
4.1

DISCs, IC-DISCs, and FSCs
Table 3 and Figure 2 present available information on numbers and activities of DISCs,

IC-DISCs, and FSCs used by American taxpayers in 1980, 1983, 1987, 1992 and 1996 by
industry category. 28 Data for 1980 and 1983 report the activities of DISCs, while data for

28

Data for FSC usage are only available for years 1987, 1992, and 1996. DISC data are available more regularly
prior to the repeal of the DISC legislation in 1984.

23

subsequent years report the total activity of FSCs and IC-DISCs together. 29 As of 1996,
American taxpayers used 5,136 FSCs and IC-DISCs to export goods worth $290.5 billion.
Eighty-nine percent of those entities and 86 percent of those exports were in manufacturing
industries as of 1996. The prevalence of FSCs and IC-DISCs can be expressed as the share of all
U.S. exports that employ these entities. In 1996, 49.8 percent of all U.S. exports passed through
these entities. Their use is more prevalent in the non-manufacturing sector, as 71.5 percent of
exports employ these entities, while only 47.2 percent of manufactured exports employ them. 30
Within manufacturing, the usage of FSCs and IC-DISCs appears heavily weighted toward four
sectors—chemicals, nonelectrical machinery, electrical machinery and electronics, and
transportation equipment.
The dynamics of the use of these distinct export entities suggests that the repeal of the
DISC legislation in 1984 had a large impact on U.S. exporters. From 1983 to 1987, the number
of export entities fell by 60.7 percent and the volume of exports passing through these entities
dropped by 36.7 percent. This drop in exports employing FSCs and IC-DISCs was more
pronounced in non-manufactured products, where there was a 67.1 percent reduction between
1983 and 1987. While the number of export vehicle tax returns within manufactured products
dropped by 60.7 percent, the total value of exports employing these entities dropped by only 26.9
percent, suggesting that smaller exporters were less likely to replace DISCs with FSCs and ICDISCs immediately. Finally, the share of all U.S. exports employing these export vehicles
dropped from 70.9 percent to 36.0 percent between 1983 and 1987, with the nonmanufacturing
sector dropping from 93.2 percent to 31.5 percent and the manufacturing sector dropping from

29

For 1992, data represent the sum of FSC activity in 1992 and IC-DISC activity in 1991.
Non-manufacturing industries that employ FSCs include agricultural services, computer software, and leasing
services.
30

24

65.8 percent to 36.8 percent. As such, the repeal of the DISC legislation appears to have had a
sizable impact on U.S. exporters and particularly smaller U.S. exporters. This link between the
repeal of DISC and subsequent U.S. export performance is explored further in section 5.1.
Subsequent to 1987, and particularly after 1992, the frequency of FSC and IC-DISC use by
exporters has grown considerably and is approaching the 1983 DISC level.
The evolution of FSC usage is explored further in Figure 3 and Table 4. Figure 3
illustrates that the upward surge in numbers of FSCs did not begin until the early 1990s.
Information on numbers of FSCs is available on an annual frequency, making it possible to
depict the growth of FSC usage, as in Figure 3. Of course, changes in the number of FSCs need
not coincide with important changes in the economic impact of the FSC program, since major
exporters are very likely to have availed themselves of the advantages of the FSC program from
its inception.
Table 4 provides details on the location, pricing methods and parental characteristics of
FSCs. FSCs are highly concentrated in five attractive foreign locations—the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Barbados, Guam, Jamaica, and the Netherlands—which together account for 95.0 percent of FSC
tax returns and 95.3 percent of export receipts in 1996. While the U.S. Virgin Islands continues
to be the most popular location for an FSC, Barbados appears to have attracted larger exporters
in recent years.
The pricing methods chosen by FSCs exhibit differences based on sizes of exporters. In
1996, exclusive usage of either the 1.83 percent gross receipts method or the 23 percent
combined taxable income method accounted for 73.6 percent of FSC tax returns but only 29.8
percent of export receipts. Larger exporters show signs of opportunistically employing

25

combinations of pricing methods, as 17.6 percent of returns and 59.6 percent of exports employ
combinations of the gross receipts, combined taxable income, and marginal costing methods.
The importance of large exporters in understanding the impact of the FSC program is
underscored by the fact that parents with over $1 billion in assets account for only 16.3 percent
of FSC returns but 74.3 percent of export gross receipts. Table 5 further details the usage of
FSCs by size of parent assets. While most corporations use only one FSC, large parents appear
to use more than one FSC. 31 Overall, 29.2 percent of all non-financial corporations with assets
of more than $250 million employ FSCs, further indicating the dominance of large firms as FSC
users.
4.2

Source rules and the use of 863(b)
Figure 4 provides details on the magnitude of export subsidies that were derived through

the use of foreign source allocation rules by U.S. exporters in 1980, 1984, 1990, 1992 and
1996.32 In 1996, $27.4 billion of export income was treated as foreign source income under
863(b). Figure 4 also presents ratios of 863(b) income to total taxable foreign profits, showing
that, in 1996, 863(b) allocations represented 18.9 percent of foreign taxable profits. While
manufacturing accounted for 66.4 percent of total 863(b) income, the transportation and FIRE
sectors accounted for 17.4 percent and 10.9 percent of the income allocated. As is also true of
FSC usage in the manufacturing sector, 863(b) manufacturing income is highly concentrated in
chemicals, electronics, instruments and motor vehicles. Industry figures for 1990, 1992 and

31

The use of more than one FSC by a single firm is commonly the short-term result of a merger between two
companies, each of which has an FSC.
32
Data on 863(b) allocations are provided in the Corporate Foreign Tax Credit data releases provided in the SOI
Bulletin. Prior to 1992, these releases are biannual while after 1992 they are provided annually. Data for 1988 were
not collected.

26

1996, not reported here, suggest that exporters are opportunistic in their usage of 863(b)
allocations, as usage varies considerably from year to year.
Despite these year-to-year variations, it is clear that the period from 1984 to 1990
represents a dramatic change in the use of 863(b) allocations. Across all sectors, gross 863(b)
income grew almost nine-fold, and manufacturing 863(b) allocation grew almost seven-fold,
from 1984 to 1990. As a share of foreign taxable income, 863(b) allocations grew from 3.7
percent to 22.5 percent between 1984 and 1990 across all sectors, and from 4.92 percent to 20.29
percent in manufacturing. Across most sectors, the share of taxable income represented by
863(b) allocations reached a peak in 1992 and receded slightly by 1996. 33
This trend in use of 863(b) allocations can be at least partly explained by the overall trend
in the excess foreign tax credit status of American multinationals. The Tax Reform Act of 1986
(TRA) reduced the U.S. corporate statutory tax rate from 46 percent to 34 percent, forcing a
number of U.S. multinationals into excess foreign tax credit status. Accordingly, the appeal of
using 863(b) allocations grew considerably after TRA and would have dominated the use of
FSCs for any firm with excess foreign tax credits. Since electing to allocate export income
entirely through 863(b) prevents the use of FSCs, the relatively limited growth of FSCs from
1987 through the early 1990s is consistent with incentives created by the increasing incidence of
excess credit status. After the early 1990s, FSCs resumed their rapid growth, suggesting, along
with other evidence, that U.S. multinationals were less likely to have excess foreign tax credits
by the early 1990s.

33

The comparability of this data across years is limited by a reporting change between 1984 and 1990. Specifically,
figures for 1980 and 1984 represent net 863(b) allocations after deductions while figures for 1990, 1992 and 1996
are gross 863(b) allocations. Conversations with IRS officials and filers suggest that there exists considerable
confusion about what relevant deductions are for 863(b) income. Nonetheless, consideration of definitely allocable

27

The relative importance of FSCs, IC-DISCs and the 863(b) source allocation rules for
U.S. exporters is explored in Table 6 for manufacturing exports. While FSC data provide export
receipt figures, isolating the exports that employ 863(b) is complicated by two factors. First, if
taxpayers employ the joint use of FSCs and 863(b) as described above, then income allocated to
863(b) would not represent exports that uniquely use 863(b) as an export subsidy. Second, data
are available for the income allocated through 863(b) but not for the corresponding exports. In
order to circumvent these difficulties, the calculations reported in this table presume that half of
all FSC exporters jointly use 863(b) and that the profitability of 863(b) exports is represented by
the overall profitability of U.S. manufacturing firms. 34 Table 6 shows that, under these
assumptions, 863(b) was the dominant export subsidy for manufacturers in 1992, covering more
than 60 percent of their exports. By 1996, however, the relative use of FSCs had increased
substantially.
4.3

The revenue impact of FSCs and 863(b)
Figure 5 provides official estimates of the actual and projected tax expenditures for the

FSC and 863(b) export subsidies from 1985 to 2005. 35 While the tax expenditures related to
FSCs reported in Figure 5 follow a steady upward trend, tax expenditures associated with 863(b)
allocations are reported only after 1986 and dominate FSC expenditures until 1993. Beginning
in 1993, 863(b) expenditures drop precipitously, and subsequently follow a more orderly pace,
suggesting a change in estimating methodology. By 2005, FSCs are estimated to constitute an
annual tax expenditure of $5.5 billion while the 863(b) source allocation rules are estimated to

deductions in years after 1990 does not mitigate the conclusion that 863(b) activity increased substantially between
1984 and 1990.
34
The actual figures for the joint use of FSCs and 863(b) are not known.
35
For the purpose of these estimates, “tax expenditures” consist of tax revenue foregone due to the provision of
special export tax incentives.

28

constitute an annual tax expenditure of $1.6 billion. For the five years from 1995 to 2000, the
combination of the two programs provided tax expenditures that grew at a compound annual rate
of 13 percent.
The methodology employed by the U.S. Treasury to calculate the figures reported in
Figure 5 may considerably underestimate the tax expenditures associated with these subsidies,
particularly the subsidy implicit in the 863(b) allocation rules. 36 The potential understatement of
the tax expenditures of export tax subsidies is apparent from the magnitude of 863(b) income,
which is $27.4 billion in 1996 (the last year for which figures are available). If taxpayers using
863(b) were able to take full tax advantage of their allocations, then the tax benefit associated
with this allocation would equal ($27.4 billion)(0.35), or $9.6 billion. 37 This upper bound for the
impact of 863(b) contrasts with an official estimate of $1.4 billion as the 1996 revenue cost of
the 863(b) provision. Of course, not all firms that allocate export income against foreign source
are able to benefit from this allocation, either because they have net operating losses for tax

36

The values of these tax subsidies are calculated by using actual tax returns to evaluate the changes in tax liabilities
that would accompany repeal of the FSC or 863(b) provisions, assuming that taxpayer behavior did not respond to
the changes. Also, the calculated revenue impacts of the subsidies ignore the implicit values of excess tax credit
carryforwards and other intertemporally dependent tax characteristics. Since a firm’s excess foreign tax credit status
is, to a certain degree, a function of its endogenous decisions, and since foreign tax credit carryforwards and
carrybacks are valuable to firms that anticipate changes in the future, it follows that it would be a mistake to attribute
zero value to 863(b) allocations made by firms with deficit foreign tax credits in the current year—yet that is what
the official budget figures do. Since rational taxpayers who appear to have deficit foreign tax credits always have
the option of routing their exports through FSCs , it follows that they would not elect to allocate all of their export
profits through 863(b) unless by doing so they anticipate receiving tax benefits at least as great as those available
from using FSCs . Rousslang (1994) describes the U.S. Treasury’s method of calculating the revenue cost of the
863(b) sales source rules. These calculations have been criticized by Hufbauer and DeRosa (1997) on the grounds
that they fail to incorporate the beneficial revenue effects of encouraging domestic export activity, a criticism to
which Rousslang (1997) replies.
37
This calculation is based on the U.S. statutory corporate income tax rate of 35 percent. It is important to note that,
in 1996, taxpayers claimed $10.0 billion of “definitely allocable deductions” against their gross 863(b) income of
$27.4 billion, making net 863(b) income of $17.5 billion. Unfortunately, the ambiguous nature of these deductions
– specifically, what it is that taxpayers do, and think that they should, include among such deductions – makes it
very difficult to know the extent to which it is appropriate to reduce gross 863(b) income in calculating the net tax
benefit. We are grateful to various U.S. Treasury and IRS officials in drawing attention to the problem of
identifying the magnitude of actual net 863(b) income. Hence, in calculating the upper bound on 863(b) tax
benefits, we do not consider reported definitely allocable deductions.

29

purposes, and are therefore effectively exempt from taxation, or because they have deficit
foreign tax credits. 38,39
While $9.6 billion represents an upper bound on the 1996 expenditure associated with
863(b), it is also possible to establish a lower bound on 863(b) expenditures. Firms electing to
allocate income to foreign source under 863(b) rather than use an FSC must anticipate greater
benefits from the former than from the latter. Consequently, it is possible to infer a lower bound
to the benefits that exporters anticipated from the export source rules in 1996 by calculating the
tax savings available by using FSCs rather than 863(b). FSCs offer the prospect of excluding at
least 15 percent of export income from the domestic tax base; moreover, exporters can
simultaneously allocate half of export profits through 863(b). 40 Hence, this alternative implies
that the value of 863(b) allocations for firms that use 863(b) exclusively must equal or exceed the
available FSC benefit plus half the 863(b) benefit. It follows that the 863(b) allocation when
used exclusively must be worth at least double the FSC benefit of excluding 15 percent of export
profits from taxable income.

38

There is a separate issue that features prominently in government calculations but which is unlikely to change the
interpretation of the calculations that follow. Allocations of income against foreign source using section 863(b),
typically triggers an automatic allocation of various expenses (such as interest charges and R&D expenses) likewise
against foreign source. This expense allocation does not affect the tax liabilities of taxpayers with deficit foreign tax
credits, but will modestly affect the tax liabilities of taxpayers with excess foreign tax credits.
39
In the absence of perfect knowledge of what firms would do without the 863(b) provisions, any calculation of
their revenue impact is potentially subject to error. Putting aside the quantitatively unimportant issue of exporters
with excess foreign tax credits who use 863(b) but have net operating loss carryforwards, the main issue concerns
the extent to which firms benefit from 863(b) allocations due to their foreign tax credit status situations. Applying
the findings of Grubert, Randolph and Rousslang (1996), who report that, in 1992, 35 percent of foreign income is
received by American multinational firms with excess foreign tax credits, it follows that the $9.6 billion figure might
be reduced by 65 percent, to roughly $3.4 billion. Of course, even this simple calculation is likely to understate the
actual revenue impact of 863(b), since exporters with excess foreign tax credits are more likely to use 863(b)
allocations than are others, and Grubert, Randolph, and Rousslang’s 35 percent figure is calculated after 863(b)
allocations are performed.
40
Taxpayers have several options other than the 23 percent combined taxable income method of determining FSC
income, any of which can provide greater than 15 percent exclusion of export income. Table 4 offers suggestive but
inconclusive evidence of the use of these alternatives.

30

Since gross 863(b) income in 1996 equals $27.4 billion, it follows that this income
corresponds to the allocation of $54.8 billion of export profit. If those export profits were
instead routed entirely through FSCs using the 23 percent allocation method, they would
generate ($54.8)(0.15)(0.35) = $2.9 billion of U.S. tax saving from the FSC exclusion. By the
previous reasoning, the value of the $54.8 billion of 863(b) income must be at least twice $2.9
billion, or $5.8 billion, which exceeds four times the government’s estimates.
This calculation is subject to three important limitations. The first is that not all exports
are eligible for FSC treatment, so the lower bound on the value of section 863(b) benefits should
exclude export income for FSC-ineligible items. Restricting attention just to manufacturing
industries, a subset of FSC-eligible export property, yields $18.2 billion of section 863(b) income
and implied export profits of $36.4 billion. This, in turn, would generate $1.9 billion of tax
saving if routed instead through FSCs, so this 863(b) income must have been anticipated to
generate tax savings of at least $3.8 billion, which is almost three times the government’s
estimate.
The second limitation is that many taxpayers using FSCs elect to allocate half their export
income through 863(b) as a matter of course, even though the 863(b) treatment might be of little
value since they have deficit foreign tax credits for the foreseeable future. In practice, the
magnitude of 863(b) income is such that, even if all FSC transactions generated such 863(b)
income, there nonetheless exist taxpayers who use the 863(b) allocation method exclusively. In
order to estimate the magnitude of this income, it is necessary to infer total export profits run
through FSCs by inverting the reported FSC manufacturing net exempt income figure of $7.4
billion, which corresponds to $49.1 billion [($7.4 billion)/(0.15)] of export profit. If all
taxpayers using FSCs also allocate half of export profits (the maximum to which they are
31

entitled) through 863(b), then $24.6 billion of 863(b) income would represent allocations by
firms running their exports through FSCs. 41
In order to determine an extreme lower bound on the export subsidy through 863(b),
suppose that firms using FSCs and simultaneously allocating half of export profits through
863(b) consider the 863(b) allocation to have zero value. For the purpose of calculating 863(b)
benefits, suppose also that only manufactured exports can receive FSC treatment. Since
manufacturing export profits allocated via section 863(b) equal $36.4 billion, it follows that a
minimum of $11.8 billion (the difference between $36.4 billion and $24.6 billion) of export
profits were allocated through 863(b) without using FSCs. These taxpayers had the option of
simultaneously running their exports through an FSC and allocating half of export profits via
863(b), and chose not to do so. Using the same methodology as above, this implies that the
value of the 863(b) treatment of these $11.8 billion of export profits exceeds the value of running
corresponding exports through an FSC, or $1.24 billion. 42 Thus, an extreme lower bound of the
value of 863(b) elections for 1996, based on restricting FSCs to manufacturing only, assuming
that taxpayers splitting income between FSCs and 863(b) obtain no value from the latter, and
assigning taxpayers with 863(b) allocations the benefits they would have received had they
chosen FSCs instead, is only 11 percent below the value reported by the U.S. federal
government. 43

41

Note that this calculation ignores the impact of the “marginal costing” option that taxpayers can use to overstate
FSC income. Since “marginal costing” is not an option in allocating 863(b) income, the calculation therefore
overstates the amount of aggregate 863(b) income derived from FSC use and understates the total value of 863(b)
allocations.
42
This figure is derived as: ($11.8 billion)(2)(0.15)(0.35) = $1.24 billion.
43
This calculation is predicated on a certain degree of rationality on the part of taxpayers. Naturally, even rational
taxpayers can make planning mistakes, only to find afterward that other choices would have led to more beneficial
tax outcomes. From the standpoint of export incentives, however, what matters is what taxpayers believe at the time
they decide to export goods from the United States. Since exporters are aware of their FSC options, those who

32

The third limitation is that the starting point of these calculations is information gleaned
from corporate tax returns together with the official revenue figures published by the federal
government. Inaccuracies in this information will lead to erroneous conclusions. If, for
example, the federal government underestimates the revenue impact of FSCs, then the preceding
calculation will generate too high a lower bound of the value of 863(b) allocations. The general
point is that the existence of an FSC alternative implies a lower bound to the value that taxpayers
must anticipate receiving from 863(b), and this lower bound exceeds official estimates of the
863(b) tax saving. Since export incentives are functions of what taxpayers think they receive in
return, it follows that total export incentives exceed official estimates. Finally, these calculations
omit consideration of other export subsidies, such as the foreign-source treatment of 100 percent
of the income of domestically-located foreign sales subsidiaries, for which no public information
is available.
Having established the relevant bounds for the tax expenditures associated with 863(b), a
conservative, central estimate can be derived by assuming that one half of all exports using FSCs
jointly use 863(b) and that these 863(b) allocations are not valuable to exporters. The value of
the remaining 863(b) allocation is established by doubling the FSC-equivalent incentive as
described above, yielding a tax expenditure estimate of $2.8 billion for the 863(b) subsidy in

choose not to exercise them in favor of 863(b) must believe that they have available a more attractive alternative whatever their ultimate tax situation may be at year’s end.
There is a separate issue concerning “definitely allocable deductions” against 863(b) income. It is not clear
whether reported “definitely allocable deductions” actually represent expense items that are appropriate to deduct
from 863(b) income – or if such expenses would be deductible from FSC income if taxpayers chose to route exports
through FSCs instead. Even granting full FSC deductibility to “definitely allocable deductions” changes the lower
bound calculation minimally. According to unpublished IRS statistics, manufacturing exporters claimed $4.9 billion
of “definitely allocable deductions” against $18.2 billion of 863(b) income in 1996. Hence, “definitely allocable
deductions” represent 27 percent of gross 863(b) income in manufacturing that year. By this reasoning, the $11.8
billion of gross export profits allocated strictly through 863(b) corresponds to $8.6 billion (73 percent of $11.8
billion) of net 863(b) income. The extreme lower bound of the value of 863(b) elections for 1996 then becomes
$905 million (which equals ($8.6 billion)(2)(0.15)(0.35)).

33

1996.44 Combining this figure with a $3.0 billion estimate for FSC tax expenditures, 45 it follows
that the 1996 ratio of total export tax subsidies to total U.S. goods exports is $5.8 billion/$612
billion, or roughly one percent. In this sense, the export subsidies provided through the income
tax are equivalent to a one percent ad valorem subsidy.
4.4

Previous estimates of the effect of export incentives
There is extensive interest in the impact of U.S. export incentives on the behavior of

American multinational firms. The U.S. Department of the Treasury produces periodic estimates
of the impact of the FSC and 863(b) provisions on the volume of U.S. exports. These estimates
are based on a standard trade model that employs assumptions on the elasticity of U.S. supply
and elasticity of foreign demand for U.S. exports to derive the direct effects of the subsidies
along with the indirect effects created by changes in the exchange rate. Employing these
methodologies, the U. S. Treasury (1993, 1997) estimates that repeal of FSC provisions would
have resulted in the loss of $1.5 billion in goods exports in 1992 and that the repeal of the sales
source rules would have resulted in the loss of $2.1 billion in goods exports in 1990. In these
reports, the impact of exchange rate changes on imports mitigates the overall impact of the
subsidies on the trade balance.
Horst and Pugel (1977) analyze the likely incidence and allocative effects of the DISC
program in place in the mid-1970s. Based on a set of assumed demand elasticities and pricing

44

This calculation begins with total net exempt income of $8.5 billion for FSCs in 1996. If half of these profits are
allocated to foreign source through 863(b) without providing associated tax benefits, then $28.3 billion [$4.2
billion/0.15]of the $54.8 billion of 863(b) export-related profits should not be considered in calculating the tax
consequences of 863(b). The remaining $26.5 billion of export profits translates into estimated expenditures of $2.8
billion as follows: ($26.5 billion)(2)(0.15)(0.35) = $2.78 billion.
45
This figure corresponds to $8.5 billion of net exempt income multiplied by the tax rate of 35%. It differs from the
numbers provided in Figure 5 due to the lag between budget estimates of tax expenditures and the publication of the
1996 FSC report.

34

behavior of American exporters, they conclude that the tax savings from DISCs are likely to be
three-quarters reflected in lower export prices, and one-quarter reflected in greater after-tax
profits of American companies. They conclude, on the basis of these estimates, that the DISC
program increased U.S. exports by $2.1 billion in 1974, a figure significantly lower than the U.S.
Treasury estimate of $4.7 billion.
Mutti and Grubert (1984) create a general equilibrium model to study the welfare
consequences of the DISC program. In this model, Mutti and Grubert capture the direct effects
on exporting behavior along with the welfare consequences of capital reallocations on three
factors of production – skilled labor, unskilled labor, and capital. Employing parameter values
estimated from DISCs in 1979, the general equilibrium model suggests that removal of the DISC
program would have resulted in a 3.1 percent decline in exports and a welfare benefit of half the
tax cost of the DISC program.
Rousslang and Tokarick (1994) estimate that the FSC and sales source rules together
have the same effect on trade volume as would reducing American tariffs by more than one third.
This study illustrates the ambiguity of the welfare effects of export tax incentives due to terms of
trade effects that serve to counteract the impact of preexisting tariffs.
Kemsley (1998) explores the effect of 863(b) on a firm’s choice between offshore
production and domestic exporting. Kemsley’s study differs and differs from much of this
literature by examining the responses of actual firms to changing tax incentives. Kemsley
analyzes a pooled cross-section of American multinational firms from 1984-1992, finding that
firms with contemporaneous excess tax credits have higher ratios of exports to sales by foreign
affiliates than do other firms. Since exporting from the United States and selling locally by

35

foreign affiliates represent two substitute means of serving foreign markets, it follows from
Kemsley’s results that the availability of excess foreign tax credits encourages American firms to
export, though he does not test the proposition directly.
5.

Evidence of the impact of export incentives
This section considers three types of evidence of the market impact of U.S. export

incentives. The first is the export impact of the 1984 DISC repeal and transition to FSCs. The
second is the effect on the U.S. dollar of events surrounding the 1997 European complaint
against the United States before the WTO. The third is U.S. stock market reactions to the 1997
WTO event. The results all indicate that U.S. export incentives have important effects on the
behavior of American exporters.
5.1

The impact of the 1984 DISC repeal on U.S. export performance
As suggested by the aggregate evidence provided in Section 4.1, the 1984 repeal of the

DISC provisions and their replacement with FSC provisions appears to have had a large impact
on the usage of these entities. While FSCs were designed to offer roughly the same tax subsidies
as those available with the prior DISC program, the use of FSCs is more cumbersome given the
need to create a new offshore entity meeting various requirements. As such, the transition to the
FSC regime may have prevented exporters, particularly small exporters, from realizing the
benefits of the export subsidies.
The regressions reported in Table 7 explore the link between the transition from DISCs to
FSCs and subsequent export performance. The dependent variables in these regressions are
export growth rates of two- and (non-overlapping) three-digit SIC industry segments within

36

manufacturing. In the specifications reported in columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is
the percentage change in exports from 1984 to 1985. The mean and median of the dependent
variable are -3.14 percent and -3.84 percent, respectively. 46 Average exports per DISC in 1983
is used to proxy for average exporter size within industry segments, while the importance of
DISCs to an industry is captured by the share of exports routed through DISCs in 1983. 47
As column (2) illustrates, exports of manufacturing industries characterized by smaller
average exporter size and higher initial use of DISCs grew more slowly in the year following
repeal of the DISC provisions. This specification suggests that an increase of one percent in the
DISC share of industry exports corresponds to 0.14 percent slower export growth between 1984
and 1985. This relationship can then be extrapolated in order to estimate the effect of DISC
repeal on total manufacturing exports, based on the insight that firms not using DISCs in 1984
would not be adversely affected by their discontinuance. Since DISCs accounted for 65.8
percent of manufacturing exports in 1983, it follows that the 1984 change reduced an average
industry’s exports by 9.2 percent (the product of 65.8 and 0.14 percent) compared to a
hypothetical industry that never uses DISCs.
In order to calculate the net effect of DISC repeal on total U.S. manufacturing exports, it
is necessary to incorporate the response of the exchange rate, since long run trade balance
requires dollar weakening to compensate for reduced export subsidies. The impact of induced
exchange rate changes is not captured in the estimated 0.14 coefficient, since this coefficient is

46

The dollar value of all U.S. exports dropped by 2.4 percent from 1984 to 1985 and overall manufacturing exports
increased by only 1.4 percent.
47
Although 1982 legislation limited the attractiveness of DISCs , DISC usage did not abate significantly by 1983.
The results reported in Table 7 are robust to using data on average exporter size and share of exports in 1980. To
the degree that some exporters used multiple DISCs, the average size variable would be improperly measured.
Evidence provided in Table 5 suggests, however, that - at least in the case of FSCs - it is uncommon for single
exporters to use several export entities.

37

identified by differences between industries in their DISC usage prior to 1985, while all
industries face the same exchange rate. Taking the aggregate price elasticity of U.S. exports to
be roughly equal to -1.0, and the aggregate price elasticity of U.S. imports to be roughly equal to
–0.5,48 it follows that the exchange rate response significantly mitigates the export effect of
DISC removal. 49 This calculation implies that the 1984 policy change was responsible for a 3.1
percent decline in U.S. manufacturing exports.
Table 7 also reports significant coefficients on average sizes of DISC exporters,
suggesting that the repeal of DISC legislation was particularly costly to smaller exporters.
Evaluating the coefficient reported in column (2) at mean exports per DISC implies that doubling
the average size of exporters in an industry is associated with 6.5 percent faster industry export
growth between 1984 and 1985. Columns (3) and (4) report similar results for export
performance over the 1984-1986 period. The estimated coefficients in these regressions are less
significant than are those for the regressions reported in columns (1) and (2), reflecting the
growing importance over time of omitted variables.
The repeal of the DISC provisions and the transition to the FSC/IC-DISC regime
represented an effort on the part of the United States to provide a similar export subsidy through
a different vehicle. The regressions described in Table 7 suggest that these changes, while
largely formal rather than substantive, nonetheless adversely impacted U.S. export performance.
As events transpired, the adverse consequences of DISC repeal were attenuated by the

48

Sawyer and Sprinkle (1996) suggest these estimates on the basis of their survey of empirical studies of aggregate
U.S. export and import elasticities. See also Hooper, Johnson, and Marquez (1998).
49
Based on these estimates, and starting from trade balance, DISC repeal reduces exports by (9.4 + e) percent and
reduces imports by (-0.5)e percent, in which e is the change in the dollar exchange rate. Trade balance then implies
that e = -6.3, and the resulting change in exports is 3.1 percent

38

subsequent 1986 U.S. tax rate reduction that increased the numbers of exporters with excess
foreign tax credits and thereby heightened the value and importance of 863(b) allocations.
5.2

Export subsidies and exchange rates
U.S. tax policies encourage exports by improving the after-tax margins received by

American exporters. As a result, the introduction of an export subsidy typically makes exporters
eager to expand their sales abroad, which in competitive markets results in reduced purchase
prices for foreign buyers and greater export volume. 50 Long-run trade balance then implies that
the prices of American goods must appreciate relative to the prices of foreign goods, since
otherwise the United States would become a net exporter. This price adjustment can be
accomplished either by greater inflation differentials between the United States and other
countries, or, more likely, by an appreciation of the value of the American dollar relative to the
values of foreign currencies. One simple way to think about how this happens is to note that the
export subsidy makes American goods more attractive to foreign buyers, which leads to dollar
appreciation. The endogenous change in the value of the dollar in turn serves to attenuate the
effect of the export subsidy on export volumes, since American goods become less attractive to
foreign buyers as the dollar appreciates. The net effect of the subsidy and the endogenous
change in the value of the dollar is to expand the volumes of both American exports and
American imports. These expansions are of course nonuniform, and in particular, exports of
goods that are ineligible for the tax subsidy will fall, even as exports of those that are eligible for
the tax subsidy will rise.

50

The situation is somewhat more complex when firms export to their own foreign affiliates, since then the
existence of export subsidies encourages exporters to charge higher export prices. This incentive conflicts with
regulations that require firms to charge arm’s-length prices for exports to related parties, so the net effect on final
prices is unclear. See Rangan and Lawrence (1993) and Clausing (forthcoming).

39

This section considers evidence of the impact of the FSC program on the value of the
American dollar relative to the values of foreign currencies. Over the course of November
1997–April 2000 there were several twists and turns in the negotiations between the United
States and the World Trade Organization over the likelihood of the retention of American export
subsidies. By looking at changes in the value of the American dollar on those dates, it is possible
to infer the effect of the FSC program on proclivities to export from the United States. Since
many other factors also influence exchange rates, it is necessary to interpret this information
carefully.
The leftmost column of Table 8 identifies the dates of major events surrounding the FSC
controversy between the United States and the WTO. Of these, two are prominent: November
18, 1997, when the EU complaint was first lodged with the WTO, and July 23, 1999, when the
WTO’s Dispute Resolution Panel issued its interim report stating that the American FSC
program violated WTO rules. The July 23 report also indicated that the United States would be
required to rescind its FSC provisions by October 1, 2000. Contemporaneous press accounts
indicate that both the November 18, 1997 and July 23, 1999 dates were considered momentous
for the history of the trade dispute; other dates are significant to differing degrees.
A simple way to identify the impact of the events surrounding the WTO controversy is to
regress daily changes in the value of the U.S. dollar against dummy variables for event dates,
controlling for other observable factors. Table 8 presents estimated coefficients from such
regressions. The sample for these regressions consists of foreign exchange trading days between
January 1, 1997 and June 13, 2000. The dependent variable is the daily percent change in the

40

value of the American dollar relative to the British pound sterling. 51 Since the dependent
variable is calculated as the percentage change in numbers of pounds to the dollar, it follows that
a negative value of the dependent variable corresponds to dollar weakening. Exchange rates are
calculated as of market closing in New York, so prices will reflect any impact of European news
on the same days.
The results reported in the first column of Table 8 indicate that the dollar weakened on
November 18, 1997, falling by 0.1092 percent against the pound sterling. This decline is
statistically significant and quite consistent with the predicted effect of removing U.S. export
subsidies, since doing so shifts the supply schedule for American exports. Of course, the foreign
exchange market could not be confident, on the basis of the November 18, 1997 action, that the
United States would ultimately remove the FSC portion of its export tax subsidies. Nonetheless,
it was known at the time that the United States was vulnerable to charges such as those brought
by the European Union, since the FSC program was so similar to its ill-fated predecessor, the
DISC program. All that was necessary was for a major complaintant to appear with charges
against the United States, and that happened on November 18, 1997.
Given uncertainty over the ultimate impact of any WTO action, an exchange rate
response of roughly 0.1 percent is quite in line with the effect of estimated supply and demand
elasticities. At an average profit margin of 10 percent, a 15 percent tax exclusion reduces taxable
income by 1.5 percent of sales. At a tax rate of 35 percent, this generates a tax saving of 0.5
percent of sales – which, given the 35 percent tax rate, produces approximately a 0.75 percent
reduction in prices at which exporters would be willing to offer goods for foreign sale. Of
51

The British pound is chosen as the alternative to the U.S. dollar for these calculations because it is a common
benchmark currency, and one that was not buffeted either by events surrounding the European Monetary Union or

41

course, elimination of the FSC program would not necessarily entail elimination of export
subsidies through section 863(b) allocations, so not all the value of FSCs is likely to be lost in
the course of a successful dispute brought by the European Union.
It follows from the aggregate export and import price elasticities cited earlier that an
offsetting exchange rate movement of two thirds the size of the lost export subsidy – or 0.5
percent – is required to restore trade balance. 52 Then allowing for the incomplete use of FSCs,
and the backstop use of 863(b) allocations by firms currently electing FSC treatment of their
exports, together reduces this predicted effect, as does uncertainty over the final disposition of
the FSC program. So the likely impact of the European Union action is to reduce the value of
the dollar by perhaps 0.1 percent, which appears to be what happened on November 18, 1997.
Subsequent events in the WTO controversy are also associated with changes in the value
of the dollar, though these events are likely to be less important from the standpoint of their
direct impact on dollar values. As reported in column one of Table 8, the failure of initial
consultations between the United States and the European Union on December 17, 1997 is
associated with a fall of 0.7160 percent of dollar value, though other major news items of the day
no doubt contributed to the dollar’s fall in value. Most other event dates are associated with
dollar movements whose signs are consistent with the impact of FSC removal on foreign
exchange values, though magnitudes of estimated coefficients are significantly greater than what
might be expected from FSC removal alone. Thus the failed second consultations between the
European Union and the United States on February 10, 1998 were associated with a 0.5695
percent drop in the value of the dollar, the (largely anticipated) July 23, 1999 interim report of

the economic crises in Japan and Asia.

42

the Dispute Resolution Panel with a 0.3004 percent drop in the dollar’s value. The attempted
reconciliation of the United States and the European Union on August 6, 1999 is associated with
a 0.1050 percent strengthening of the dollar, while the (anticipated) September 17, 1999 WTO
ruling against the United States is associated with a fall of 0.0078 percent of the dollar’s value.
The American appeal on October 28, 1999 coincides with an appreciation of 0.3342 percent of
the dollar’s value, and the withdrawal of this appeal on November 2, 1999 coincides with a fall
of 0.3922 percent of dollar value.
The only anomalous sign appears on February 24, 2000, when the fully anticipated WTO
final ruling against the United States is associated with a rise in the value of the dollar of 0.4503
percent. The aggressive February 28 response by U.S. Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers is
associated with a dollar appreciation of 0.4981 percent, while the formal American reply to the
Dispute Resolution Board on April 7, 2000 is associated with an appreciation of 0.1320 percent.
Since many events in the course of a day are likely to influence exchange rates, and the
expected impact of the FSC program is subtle, it is a mistake to overinterpret the results reported
in column one of Table 8. Columns 2-4 of the same table report estimated coefficients from
regressions that add daily measures of changes in stock market indices and short-term interest
rates. Specifically, the stock market variable is the daily difference in the performance
(measured in percentage terms) of the U.S. S&P 500 index and the British FTSE 100 index. The
benefit of including such a variable in the regression is that stock market prices reflect the impact
of omitted news variables, such as economic news, inflation fears, and various political
developments that may be correlated with exchange rate movements and therefore impart a

52

Starting from trade balance, loss of FSC benefits reduces exports by (0.75 + e) percent and reduces imports by (0.5) e percent, in which e is the change in the dollar exchange rate. Trade balance then implies that e = -0.5.

43

correlation between exchange rates and equity prices. When included in the regression reported
in column two of Table 8, this variable takes the expected positive sign, while the absolute value
of the coefficient on the dummy variable for November 18, 1997 falls slightly to 0.1076.
Column three introduces a variable equal to the difference in the daily change in U.S. and British
short-term (90 day) government interest rates, which, when included, has little effect on daily
event coefficients. The regression reported in column four of Table 8 includes both the stock
index and interest rate differences, with results that are similar to those reported in column two.
While the results reported in Table 8 appear to be robust to the inclusion of additional
explanatory variables that reflect the economic significance of daily events, it is inevitable that
important factors are omitted. November 18, 1997 differs from most others in being a very slow
news day, the main international trade-related nuggets being the (anticipated) failure of a large
Japanese bank and the lifting of the European ban on imports of Iranian pistachios. Hence, the
filing of a European complaint against the United States was a major development, and it is
reasonable to infer that the exchange rate movement on that day reflects the impact of that news.
While the consistency of the sign pattern for other event days, as reported in Table 8, is
reassuring, these coefficients reflect the cumulative impact of many factors unrelated FSCs.
The November 18, 1997 evidence indicates that the market reaction to news of the
European Union filing against the United States is consistent with other evidence of aggregate
trade demand and supply elasticities, and with an expectation that the inability to use FSCs
would affect American exports. Hence this evidence serves the function of offering a marketbased test of previous conjectures as to the likely impact of FSCs on export patterns.

44

5.3

Export subsidies and equity prices
It is useful to consider other indicators of the market’s interpretation of events on

November 18, 1997 in order to verify the role of the FSC controversy in influencing the value of
the dollar on that day. Stock market valuations of publicly traded firms offer such indications,
since, to the extent that the market believes the European Union complaint to have an effect on
the American FSC program, the profitability of major American exporters is likely to be
negatively affected. Correspondingly, the reaction of stock prices can be used to identify the
incidence of these export subsidies.
The American stock market fell on November 18, 1997, but this in itself is inconclusive,
since many factors influence stock prices. It is more instructive to contrast the performance of
firms for which exports represent large fractions of their total sales with firms for which exports
are relatively unimportant. In order to reduce the problems that inevitably accompany such
comparisons, attention is restricted to firms reporting export sales, specifically Compustat firms
continuously reporting their exports (which in some cases are zero) over the 1992-1998 period.
This sample of 630 firms was divided into two groups, based on the fraction of total sales
accounted for by exports from the United States, and divided at the median ratio of exports to
total sales (approximately 11 percent). Within each group, stock price returns for November 18,
1997 were calculated, and within-group medians compared.
Figure 6 depicts this comparison. Firms for which export sales represented more than 11
percent of total sales in 1997 generally lost value on November 18, 1997, the median loss
representing 0.7169 percent of the start of day stock value. Firms for which export sales
represented less than 11 percent of total sales in 1997 also generally lost value on November 18,

45

1997, but these losses were considerably milder, the median loss representing just 0.2379 percent
of the start of day stock value. This pattern is consistent with the value losses that would
accompany the inability to benefit from FSCs in the future, and is all the more striking in light of
the fact that a reduced value of the American dollar generally enhances the stock market prices
(which are quoted in dollars) of major exporters. 53
It is possible to take this analysis one step further, since even among firms with identical
export exposures there is variation in the degree of share price sensitivity to future changes in tax
subsidies for exports. In particular, firms with net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards do not
pay current taxes, and have some chance of never doing so. To be sure, the existence of NOL
carryforwards is an imperfect indicator of future tax sensitivity, but nonetheless one that is useful
to consider.
Figure 7 depicts the stock price reactions on November 18, 1997 of firms with and
without NOL carryforwards. The median firm with NOL carryforwards and a high fraction of
sales from exports lost 0.674 percent of value on that day, while the median NOL firm with a
low fraction of export sales lost 0.377 percent. The difference was considerably starker for firms
without NOL carryforwards, where the median firm with a high fraction of export sales lost
0.7976 percent of value, while the median firm with a low fraction of export sales lost just
0.2263 percent of value. The pattern described in Figure 7 is quite consistent with expectations
of future tax liabilities, since firms without NOL carryforwards are generally more tax-sensitive

53

See Desai and Hines (2000b) for a more detailed econometric evaluation of the evidence of differential stock price
reactions on November 18, 1997.

46

than those with NOL carryforwards. Furthermore, the difference between group median returns
is generally consistent with differences in lost value as calculated from export fractions. 54
6.

Conclusion
The U.S. government provides sizable export incentives through the tax system. Because

these tax subsidies are delivered in complicated ways, it can be difficult to assess their effects on
behavior or even their overall magnitudes. What evidence is available suggests that the current,
roughly $4 billion a year, subsidy available from the use of FSCs is matched in magnitude by the
subsidy associated with the allocation of export profits to foreign source income. In
combination, the export-related benefits available through the income tax translate to a one
percent ad valorem equivalent export subsidy.
There is ample evidence that these export incentives influence the behavior of American
taxpayers. Repeal of the DISC system in 1984, and its replacement with FSCs, is associated
with significant changes in the patterns of American exports. This behavioral response suggests
that the 1984 legislation did more than just replace one system with an identical alternative
designed to meet GATT legal requirements. Event studies of market reactions to the WTO
dispute similarly indicate the importance of these export subsidies. Foreign exchange markets
reacted to the possibility of reduced American export subsidies, particularly as evidenced by the
dollar’s fall on November 18, 1997, the date on which Europe first filed its complaint with the
WTO. The American stock market likewise reacted negatively to the WTO news on that date,
with share prices of major American exporters falling in response to the possibility that their tax
obligations might rise in the future.

54

See Desai and Hines (2000b) for a detailed calculation.

47

Whatever one may think of the economic merits of providing export subsidies, it is clear
that the American practice of embedding them within the income tax system introduces several
distortions compared to the simple ad valorem alternative. First, U.S. tax subsidies are not
available for all categories of export goods, and administrative requirements make access costly
for small exporters. Second, export incentives vary according to an exporter’s profit rate and tax
loss carryforward situation. And third, an important class of export subsidy is available only to
multinational firms with highly taxed foreign income. These considerations might be weighed
against whatever advantages stem from complicating the workings of these subsidies and thereby
obscuring them from casual inspection.
Multinational firms are responsible for most American exports, and these firms are
subject to a very complicated array of tax rules providing what are often very curious incentives.
The current trade dispute between the European Union and the United States draws close
attention to the size and impact of Foreign Sales Corporations, and may thereby result in a new
and different kind of export subsidy through the tax system. One possibility is that FSCs might
be replaced with a more uniform type of export incentive that would entail fewer economic
distortions than the current system. Whatever the outcome of the current dispute, this is unlikely
to be the last time that American policies are challenged by members of the World Trade
Organization. And similarly, whatever system replaces the current Foreign Sales Corporation
regime is not likely to be the final tax program to encourage American exports.

48

References
Altshuler, Rosanne and T. Scott Newlon, The effects of U.S. tax policy on the income
repatriation patterns of U.S. multinational corporations, in: Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn
Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod, eds. Studies in international taxation (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1993), 77-115.
Altshuler, Rosanne, T. Scott Newlon, and William C. Randolph, Do repatriation taxes matter?
Evidence from the tax returns of U.S. multinationals, in: Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines Jr.,
and R. Glenn Hubbard, eds. The effects of taxation on multinational corporations (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1995), 253-272.
Belmonte, Cynthia, Foreign sales corporations, 1996, SOI Bulletin, Spring 2000, 19(4), 87-122.
Clausing, Kimberly A., The impact of transfer pricing on intrafirm trade, in: James R. Hines Jr.,
ed. International taxation and multinational activity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
forthcoming.)
Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr., The design of alternative export subsidy regimes,
working paper, University of Michigan, 2000a.
Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr., The incidence of export subsidies as revealed by market
reactions, working paper, University of Michigan, 2000b.
Grubert, Harry, Taxes and the division of foreign operating income among royalties, interest,
dividends and retained earnings, Journal of Public Economics, May 1998, 68 (2), 269-290.
Grubert, Harry, Tax planning by companies and tax competition by governments: Is there
evidence of changes in behavior?, in: James R. Hines Jr., ed. International taxation and
multinational activity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.)
Grubert, Harry and John Mutti, Taxes, tariffs, and transfer pricing in multinational corporate
decision making, Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1991, 73 (2), 285-293.
Grubert, Harry, William C. Randolph and Donald J. Rousslang, Country and multinational
company responses to the Tax Reform Act of 1986, National Tax Journal, September 1996, 49
(3), 341-358.
Hines, James R., Jr., The flight paths of migratory corporations, Journal of Accounting, Auditing,
and Finance, Fall 1991, 6 (4), 447-479.
Hines, James R., Jr., Credit and deferral as international investment incentives, Journal of Public
Economics, October 1994, 55 (2), 323-347.
Hines, James R., Jr., Taxes, technology transfer, and the R&D activities of multinational firms,
in: Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines Jr., and R. Glenn Hubbard, eds. The effects of taxation on
multinational corporations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 225-248.

Hines, James R., Jr., Lessons from behavioral responses to international taxation, National Tax
Journal, June 1999a, 52 (2), 305-322.
Hines, James R., Jr., The case against deferral: A deferential reconsideration, National Tax
Journal, September 1999b, 52 (3), 385-404.
Hines, James R., Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard, Coming home to America: Dividend repatriations by
U.S. multinationals, in: Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod eds., Taxation in the global economy
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 161-200.
Hines, James R., Jr. and Eric M. Rice, Fiscal paradise: Foreign tax havens and American
business, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1994, 109 (1), 149-182.
Holik, Daniel S., Interest-charge domestic international sales corporations, 1991, SOI Bulletin,
Summer 1995, 14 (1), 46-57.
Holik, Daniel S., Foreign sales corporations, 1992, SOI Bulletin, Summer 1997, 16 (1), 114-131.
Hooper, Peter, Karen Johnson, and Jaime Marquez, Trade elasticities for G-7 countries, Federal
Reserve Board of Governors International Finance Discussion Paper No. 609, April 1998.
Horst, Thomas, An economic analysis of the foreign international sales corporation proposal,
Tax Notes, December 7, 1981, 1347-1351.
Horst, Thomas and Thomas Pugel, The impact of DISC on the prices and profitability of U.S.
exports, Journal of Public Economics, February 1977, 7 (1), 73-87.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, U.S. taxation of international income: Blueprint for reform (Washington,
DC: Institute for International Economics, 1992.)
Hufbauer, Gary C. and Dean A. DeRosa, Costs and benefits of the export source rule, Tax Notes
International, May 19, 1997, 1661-1674.
Kemsley, Deen, “The effect of taxes on production location,” Journal of Accounting Research,
Autumn 1998, 36 (2), 321-341.
Krugman, Paul R. and Maurice Obstfeld, International economics: Theory and policy, second
edition, (New York: HarperCollins, 1991).
Macdonald, J. Ross, The administration’s proposed revision to §863(b): The administration fails
to make its best case, Tax Management International Journal, 1999, 469-473.
Mataloni, Raymond J., Jr., U.S. multinational companies: Operations in 1997, Survey of Current
Business, July 1999, 79 (7), 8-35.
Mose, Vergie, Corporate foreign tax credit, by industry, 1984, SOI Bulletin, Winter 1989/1990, 9
(3), 57-90.

Mutti, John and Harry Grubert, The Domestic International Sales Corporation and its effects, in:
Robert E. Baldwin and Anne O. Krueger, eds. The structure and evolution of recent U.S. trade
policy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984), 279-317.
Nutter, Sarah, Corporate foreign tax credit, 1990: An industry focus, SOI Bulletin, Spring 1994,
13 (4), 78-106.
Oyola, José, Foreign sales corporation beneficiaries: A profile, Tax Notes, August 14, 2000,
933-937.
Rangan, Subramanian and Robert Z. Lawrence, The responses of U.S. firms to exchange rate
fluctuations: Piercing the corporate veil, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1993 (2),
341-369.
Rousslang, Donald J., The sales source rules for U.S. exports: How much do they cost? Tax
Notes, February 21, 1994, 1047-1054.
Rousslang, Donald J., Comment on Hufbauer and DeRosa, Costs and benefits of the export
source rule, Tax Notes International, July 7, 1997, 43-52.
Rousslang, Donald J. and Stephen P. Tokarick, The trade and welfare consequences of U.S.
export-enhancing tax provisions, IMF Staff Papers, December 1994, 41 (4), 675-683.
Sawyer, W. Charles and Richard L. Sprinkle, The demand for imports and exports in the U.S.:
A survey, Journal of Economics and Finance, Spring 1996, 20 (1), 147-178.
Scholes, Myron S. and Mark A. Wolfson, Taxes and business strategy: A planning approach
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992).
Scoffic, Matthew and Patrice Treubert, Corporate income tax returns, 1996, SOI Bulletin,
Summer 1999, 18 (1), 50-68.
States, William, Corporate foreign tax credit, 1980: An industry focus, SOI Bulletin, Summer
1984, 3 (1), 63-84.
United States Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Foreign sales corporation
statistics for 1987, SOI Bulletin, Spring 1992, 11 (4), 59-67.
United States Department of the Treasury, The operation and effect of the foreign sales
corporation legislation: July 1, 1992 to June 30, 1993, November 1997.
United States Department of the Treasury, The operation and effect of the domestic international
sales corporation legislation: July 1, 1981 to June 30, 1983, February 1988.
United States Department of the Treasury, Report to the Congress on the sales source rules,
January 1993.
United States Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United States Government,
Fiscal Year 2001, (Washington D.C., Government Printing Office, 2000).

Figure 1: Overview of Incentives for Exporters
Subsidy by Exemption: FSC
Texas

Subsidy by Allocation: 863(b)

Joint Use

Texas

Texas
100%

Guam

Italy

Italy

Guam

50%

Italy

Approximately 15% of profits
exempt due to allocation of
profits to FSC and 15/23
exemption

50% of profits allocated to
foreign source and these
profits face no taxation if
exporter has excess foreign
tax credits

40% of profits exempt due
to full use of FSCs (15%)
and partial use of 863(b)
(25%=50% x 50%)

Available to most firms

Valuable only to firms with
excess foreign tax credits

Available to all firms
but full advantage only
to firms with excess foreign
tax credits

Requires creation
of FSC

Requires creation
of FSC

Figure 2: The Prevalence of Subsidy by Exemption, 1980-1996

$300,000

100.0%
94.0%

93.2%

$250,560

90.0%

80.0%
71.5%

$200,000
65.1%

70.0%

65.8%

$150,000

60.0%

$139,387

$111,561

$105,042

47.2%

50.0%

DISC/FSC Share of Exports

DISC/FSC Export Gross Receipts, dollars million

$250,000

$100,000
$76,735

40.0%

38.2%
36.8%

$50,000

36.4%

$42,517
$33,904

$37,726

31.5%
$11,167

30.0%
$16,138

$0

20.0%
1980

Nonmanufacturing Export Gross Receipts

1983

1987

Manufacturing Export Gross Receipts

1992
Nonmanufacturing Share of Exports

1996
Manufacturing Share of Exports

Note: For 1980 and 1983, columns represent total export gross receipts from DISC returns. For 1987, 1992, and 1996, columns represent the export gross receipts of
FSC and IC-DISC returns combined. For 1992, columns represent export gross receipts of IC-DISCs for 1991 plus export gross receipts of FSCs for 1992. Export
shares represent the ratios of gross DISC, FSC, IC-DISC export receipts to total exports. All dollar figures are millions of current dollars.
Sources: Belmont (2000), Holik (1995, 1997) and U.S. Treasury (1988, 1992).

Figure 3: Growth of FSCs, 1987-1996
5,000
4,815

4,800

Numbers of FSC Tax Return Filings

4,600
4,408

4,400
4,200
3,968

4,000
3,800

3,701

3,600
3,445

3,400
3,200

3,294
3,109

3,105

1987

1988

3,183

3,184

1989

1990

3,000
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Tax Year

Note: This figure depicts aggregate numbers of FSC tax returns filed by year. These numbers include some inactive and duplicate tax returns, which is why they differ
from figures in Tables 3 and 4.
Source: Belmonte (2000).

Figure 4: The Prevalence of Subsidy by Allocation, 1980-1996
30,000

30.0%
27,443
25.2%

25,000

25.0%

20,189
19,458

20,000

18.9%

20.0%

15,000

15.0%

10,000

10.0%

5,000

5.0%

3.7%
2.2%
1,532

2,360

1980

1984

863(b) share of CFC Taxable Profits

863(b) Income Allocation, dollars million

22.5%

-

0.0%

863(b) Income Allocation

1990

1992

1996

Share of CFC Taxable Profits

Note: Columns represent allocations of income to foreign source through 863(b) in millions of current dollars. Figures for 1980 and 1984 are net 863(b) allocated income while figures for 1990, 1992 and 1996
are gross 863(b) allocated income. The line represents the ratio of annual 863(b) income to toal pretax income expressed in percentage terms.
Source: Nutter (1994), Mose (1990), States (1984) and unpublished calculations furnished by the Internal Revenue Service.

Figure 5: Actual and Projected Tax Expenditures for Export Subsidies, 1985-2005

6,000
5,460
5,100

5,000

4,770

Tax Expenditures (dollars million)

4,460
4,160
3,890

4,000

3,640
3,780

3,000
2,875

3,020

2,625

2,150

Foreign Sales Corporations
Source Allocation Rules

2,000
2,000
1,845
1,050

945

1,000

895

770
450

1,175 1,200

460

525

1,100

1,300
1,200

1,400
1,300

1,500
1,400

1,600
1,500
1,100 1,150
1,000 1,050

1,250

1,350

1,450

1,550

1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Tax Year
Note: This figure presents tax expenditure estimates, in millions of current dollars, for FSCs and sales source allocation rules by year.
Source: Office of Management and Budget (2000) and earlier budget reports.

Figure 6: Stock Price Returns for Major and Minor Exporters, November 18, 1997
0

-0.1

-0.2

Daily Return (%) for group median

-0.2379%

-0.3
Minor Exporters
(317 firms)

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6

-0.7
-0.7169%

-0.8

Major Exporters
(313 firms)

-0.9

-1
Note: The figure depicts stock returns of American firms on November 18, 1997, the day on which the European Union filed its complaint over the U.S. FSC program.
Major exporters have export to total sales ratios exceeding 11 percent; minor exporters have export to total sales ratios of less than 11 percent. The bars depict the median
daily returns of firms in each group.
Source: Desai and Hines (2000b).

Figure 7: Stock Price Returns for Major and Minor Exporters, by Tax Loss Status, November 18, 1997
0

-0.1

-0.2

Daily Return (%) for group median

-0.2263%

-0.3
Minor Exporters
(238 firms)

-0.4

-0.3770%
Minor Exporters
(79 firms)

-0.5

-0.6

-0.7

-0.6740%

-0.8

Major Exporters
(87 firms)

-0.9

-0.7976%
Major Exporters
(225 firms)

-1
Firms with current net operating losses

Firms without current net operating losses

Note: The figure depicts stock returns of American firms on November 18, 1997, the day on which the European Union filed its complaint over the U.S. FSC program. The first two bars are
for firms with net operating losses in 1997; the second two bars are for firms without net operating losses. Major exporters have export to total sales ratios exceeding 11 percent; minor
exporters have export to total sales ratios of less than 11 percent. The bars depict the median daily returns of firms in each group.
Source: Desai and Hines (2000b).

Table 1: The Benefits of Foreign Source Allocation to Firms with Excess Foreign Tax Credits

Pretax
Export
Income

Pretax
Income
From
Foreign
Subsidiaries

Domestic
Source
Income

Foreign
Source
Income

Domestic
Tax Rate

Foreign
Tax
Rate

After-Tax Net
Income

Excess
Foreign Tax
Credits

Without Foreign
Source Allocation

$40

$100

$40

$100

35%

50%

$76=
$50 ($100 x 50%) +
$26 ($40 x 65%)

$15

With Foreign Source
Allocation of 50% of
Export Income

$40

$100

$20

$120

35%

50%

$83=
$50 ($100 x 50%) +
$20 ($20 x 0%) +
$13 ($20 x 65%)

$8

Note: The figures above depict the tax payments associated with a firm with excess foreign tax credits that receives both export income and dividend repatriations
from foreign subsidiaries. In the top row, there is no foreign source allocation of export income. As a result, the firm has $15 ($100*(50%-35%)) in excess foreign
tax credits. In the second row, foreign source allocation of half of export income allows the exporter with excess foreign tax credits not to pay taxes on the portion
of export income allocated to foreign source. It is important to note that U.S. allocation rules have no effect on foreign tax liabilities.

Table 2: History of U.S. Export Incentives
Subsidy by Exemption

Subsidy by Allocation
1918 – Initiation of allocation rules

1939 – China Trade Corporations
1942 – Western Hemisphere Trade
Corporations
1954,1957 – Use of independent factory
prices (IFP) or 50/50 allocation

1962 – Subpart F Rules

1971 – Creation of DISCs
1972 – EC complaint to GATT

1976, 1982 – Reduction of DISC benefits
and GATT rulings

1984 – Initiation of FSCs and IC-DISCs
1986 – Cut in corporate tax rate
1988 – Regulations issued to tighten use
of IFP
1993 – Court decisions backing 50/50
allocation
1997 – WTO complaint

Table 3: The Use of DISCs, FSCs, and IC-DISCs from 1980 to 1996 by industry, numbers of returns
83-87
% Change

87-96
% Change

1980

1983

1987

1992

1996

Total

8,665

9,663

3,798

4,053

5,136

-60.7%

35.2%

Nonmanufactured Products

1,052

1,073

419

437

560

-61.0

33.7

Manufactured products

7,613

8,589

3,379

3,525

4,557

-60.7

34.9

336

352

198

187

160

-43.8

-19.2

12

20

10

12

10

-50.0

0.0

Textile mill products

284

263

50

58

72

-81.0

44.0

Apparel, etc.

180

172

17

17

52

-90.1

205.9

Lumber, etc. except furniture

198

292

55

139

139

-81.2

152.7

42

39

27

28

39

-30.8

44.4

Paper and allied products

160

184

70

72

66

-62.0

-5.7

Printing and publishing etc.

126

122

74

43

79

-39.3

6.8

Chemicals and allied products

621

625

219

302

334

-65.0

52.5

Rubber and misc. plastics products

162

282

82

45

126

-70.9

53.7

Leather and leather products

79

43

32

32

36

-25.6

12.5

Stone, clay, glass and concrete products

78

78

29

48

51

-62.8

75.9

Primary metal industries

281

222

111

106

165

-50.0

48.6

Fabricated metal products

773

820

230

239

331

-72.0

43.9

Machinery, except electrical

1,448

1,467

525

622

984

-64.2

87.4

Electrical machinery and equipment

1,354

1,655

745

708

835

-55.0

12.1

Transportation Equipment

441

537

251

294

486

-53.3

93.6

Professional and scientific instruments

439

636

313

350

322

-50.8

2.9

Miscellaneous manufactures

545

743

326

178

253

-56.1

-22.4

Food and kindred products
Tobacco manufactures

Furniture and fixtures

Note: For 1980 and 1983, data represent total numbers of DISC returns. For 1987, 1992 and 1996, data represent the numbers
of FSC and IC-DISC returns combined. For 1992, data represent numbers of IC-DISC returns for 1991 plus 1992 FSC returns.
The last two columns present the percentage change from 1983 to 1987 and from 1987 to 1996.
Sources: Belmonte (2000), Holik (1995, 1997) and U.S. Treasury (1988, 1992).

Table 4: Profile of FSC activity, 1987-1996
1987
Number of returns
Foreign Trading Gross Receipts
of FSCs and related suppliers
% by location
U.S. Virgin Islands
Barbados
Guam
Jamaica
Netherlands
All other

1992

1996

2,613

3,073

4,363

$ 84,280

$ 152,253

$ 285,902

by
returns
64.6%
6.2
14.5
7.8
2.0
4.9

by gross
receipts
55.6%
5.5
19.6
6.4
12.2
0.6

by
returns
65.8%
11.9
7.3
4.8
1.1
9.0

by gross
receipts
62.8%
11.7
14.4
2.6
6.8
1.7

by
returns
58.0%
29.2
4.4
2.8
0.5
5.0

by gross
receipts
38.1%
30.5
14.7
3.2
8.8
4.7

14.7%
54.0
7.2
12.1
11.9

9.6%
25.7
3.1
60.8
0.7

16.7%
52.3
0.7
9.2
9.4
3.6
8.1

7.4%
27.1
0.3
1.0
16.7
41.3
6.3

13.2%
60.4
0.4
5.0
9.8
6.8
4.3

6.1%
23.7
0.4
0.5
19.2
40.4
9.8

17.3%
35.2
20.9
10.4
16.3

2.0%
3.6
8.6
11.5
74.3

% by intercompany
pricing methods
1.83% gross receipts method
23% combined taxable income method
Marginal costing method
Section 482 method
1.83% and 23%
1.83%, 23%, and marginal costing
All others
% by size of parent assets
Zero to $1,000,000
$1,000,000 to $50,000,000
$50,000,000 to $250,000,000
$250,000,000 to $1,000,000,000
$1,000,000,000 and over

na
na
na
na
na

na
na
na
na
na

na
na
na
na
na

na
na
na
na
na

Note: For each year, the first column is the share of returns by location, pricing method, and size of parent assets and the second column is the share of export gross
receipts by location, pricing method, and size of parent assets. The figures for FSC returns differ from Figure 1 because duplicate, inactive, and delinquent returns
have been removed from the sample. All dollar figures are millions of current dollars.
Sources: Belmonte (2000), Holik (1997) and U.S. Treasury (1992).

Table 5: The Use of FSCs in 1996 by size of parent assets

All Non-FIRE Corporate Returns

Size of parent total assets

Returns

Zero to $100,000

2,332,957

Share of Income Tax
After Credits

Foreign Sales Corporations

Returns

Parent
Shareholders

1.25%

639

638

Export Gross
Recipts
$

4,405,403

% of Non-FIRE
Corporate
Returns w/ FSCs
0.03%

$100,000 to $250,000

631,497

0.48

35

35

108,618

0.01

$250,000 to $500,000

356,738

0.65

57

57

1,236,684

0.02

$500,000 to $1,000,000

245,848

0.90

23

23

74,161

0.01

$1,000,000 to $5,000,000

259,815

3.72

290

290

1,021,315

0.11

$5,000,000 to $10,000,000

39,845

2.19

363

363

1,446,323

0.91

$10,000,000 to $50,000,000

30,863

5.96

882

882

7,824,272

2.86

$50,000,000 to $100,000,000

4,063

3.26

415

415

7,499,445

10.22

$100,000,000 to $250,000,000

2,928

5.67

497

487

16,974,893

16.64

$250,000,000 and over

3,061

75.90

1,162

894

245,311,378

29.20

4,363

4,083

285,902,492

0.10%

Total

3,907,616

100.00%

$

Note: All figures are estimates based on samples. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding. All dollar figures (other than parent assets) are thousands of current dollars.
The first two columns present data for the number of returns and the share of income tax after credits for all non-FIRE (Finance, Insurance and Real Estate) corporate returns
by size of assets. The next three columns present data for the number of FSC returns, the number of parent shareholders of FSCs, and the total export gross receipts of FSCs
by size of parent assets. The final column presents the ratio of numbers of parent shareholders of FSCs to the number of non-FIRE corporate returns by size of parent assets.
Source: Belmonte (2000), Scoffic and Treubert (1999) and unpublished calculations furnished by the Internal Revenue Service.

Table 6: The Prevalence of Export Subsidies in Manufacturing Exports, 1992 and 1996
1992

1996

Total Manufacturing Exports

$ 383,082

$ 530,484

FSC/IC-DISC
Export Gross Receipts

$ 139,387

$ 250,650

36.39%

47.25%

FSC/IC-DISC share

FSC Manufacturing Net
Exempt Income

$

3,615

$

7,368

Corresponding FSC
Export Profits

$

24,100

$

49,120

863(b) Income Jointly
Employing FSCs

$

6,025

$

12,280

Total 863(b) Income
Allocation

$

13,145

$

18,229

863(b) Income Exclusively
Employing 863(b)

$

7,120

$

5,949

SOI Pretax Margin for Manufacturing
Corresponding 863(b)
Exports
863(b) share

6.19%

8.20%

$ 230,048

$ 145,098

60.05%

27.35%

Note: Dollar figures are millions of current dollars. Total manufacturing exports represents exports for all
U.S. manufacturers. FSC/IC-DISC Export Gross Receipts is total exports for FSCs and IC-DISCs combined.
FSC/IC-DISC share is the ratio of FSC/IC-DISC export gross receipts to total manufacturing exports. FSC
manufacturing net exempt income is the export profit that is not taxed due to the use of a FSC. Corresponding
FSC export profits is FSC net exempt income divided by 15 percent and represents total FSC export
profits. 863(b) income jointly employing FSCs is corresponding FSC export profits divided by four
according to the assumption that half of FSC export profits employ joint use of 863(b). Total 863(b) income
allocation represents total manufacturing 863(b) income. 863(b) income exclusively employing 863(b) is
the difference between total 863(b) income allocation and 863(b) income jointly employing FSCs. SOI
pretax margin for manufacturing is the ratio of pretax profits to business receipts for all manufacturing
firms. Corresponding 863(b) exports is 863(b) income exclusively employing 863(b) multiplied by two and
divided by the SOI pretax margin for manufacturing. 863(b) share is the ratio of corresponding 863(b)
exports to total manufacturing exports.
Source: Belmonte (2000), Holik (1995, 1997), and unpublished calculations furnished by the Internal Revenue
Service.

Table 7: The Effect of the 1984 DISC Repeal on U.S. Export Performance
Panel A: Regression Results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

% Change in
U.S. Exports
1984-1985

% Change in
U.S. Exports
1984-1985

% Change in
U.S. Exports
1984-1986

% Change in
U.S. Exports
1984-1986

Constant

-0.0823
(0.0161)

-0.0211
(0.0333)

-0.0440
(0.0282)

0.0092
(0.0456)

Average Exports per
DISC, 1983

0.0032
(0.0005)

0.0041
(0.0004)

0.0029
(0.0010)

0.0037
(0.0012)

DISC share of U.S.
Exports, 1983
R-Squared
Number of Observations

-0.1434
(0.0686)

-0.1247
(0.1053)

0.4594

0.5663

0.1842

0.2234

29

29

29

29

Panel B: Descriptive Statistics
Number of
Observations

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

% Change in
U.S. Exports
1984-1985

29

-0.0314

-0.0384

0.0951

% Change in
U.S. Exports
1984-1986

29

0.0023

0.0151

0.1368

Average Exports per
DISC, 1983

29

15.7866

9.8800

20.0124

DISC share of U.S.
Exports, 1983

29

0.5188

0.5308

0.2466

Note: The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 of Panel A is the percentage change in U.S. exports from 1984 to 1985 by
industry sector. The dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 of Panel A is the percentage change in U.S. exports from 1984
to 1986 by industry sector. "Average Exports per DISC, 1983" is an industry's ratio of export gross receipts (in $ million)
for all DISCs to the number of DISC returns in 1983. "DISC share of U.S. Exports, 1983" is an industry's ratio of export gross
receipts for all DISCs to total exports in 1983. Observations correspond to (non-overlapping) two-digit and three-digit
manufacturing industry segments. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. Descriptive statistics
are provided in Panel B.

Table 8: Exchange Rate Responses to WTO Events

Dependent variable: one-day % change in £/$ exchange rate.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Constant

-0.0094
(0.0165)

0.0099
(0.0169)

0.0093
(0.0165)

0.0099
(0.0169)

November 18, 1997
Charges Filed (-)

-0.1092
(0.0165)

-0.1076
(0.0181)

-0.1099
(0.0170)

-0.1080
(0.0186)

December 17, 1997
Inconclusive Consulations (-)

-0.7160
(0.0165)

-0.7165
(0.0174)

-0.7101
(0.0332)

-0.7128
(0.0376)

February 10, 1998
Inconclusive Consulations (-)

-0.5695
(0.0165)

-0.5732
(0.0180)

-0.5758
(0.0175)

-0.5738
(0.0188)

July 23, 1999
Interim Report Issued (-)

-0.3004
(0.0165)

-0.3070
(0.0217)

-0.3018
(0.0183)

-0.3078
(0.0227)

August 6, 1999
Joint Review Request (+)

0.1050
(0.0165)

0.1117
(0.0255)

0.1028
(0.0205)

0.1103
(0.0290)

September 17, 1999
WTO Ruling (-)

-0.0078
(0.0165)

-0.0130
(0.0196)

0.0054
(0.0209)

-0.0115
(0.0241)

October 28, 1999
American Appeal (+)

0.3342
(0.0165)

0.3239
(0.0282)

0.3362
(0.0197)

0.3252
(0.0310)

November 2, 1999
Appeal Withdrawal (-)

-0.3922
(0.0165)

-0.3930
(0.0168)

-0.3921
(0.0165)

-0.3929
(0.0169)

February 24, 2000
Final Ruling (-)

0.4503
(0.0165)

0.4476
(0.0173)

0.4504
(0.0165)

0.4477
(0.0173)

February 28, 2000
Summers Rebuttal (+)

0.4981
(0.0165)

0.4831
(0.0381)

0.4918
(0.0389)

0.4793
(0.0503)

April 7, 2000
Formal American Response (+)

0.1320
(0.0165)

0.1360
(0.0210)

0.1328
(0.0171)

0.1365
(0.0214)

% change [S&P 500 (US)
– FTSE 100 index (UK)]

0.5398
(1.3269)

Change (US-UK interest
rate difference)
R-Squared
Number of observations

0.0090
840

0.0096
810

0.5372
(1.3295)
-0.0374
(0.2068)

-0.0230
(0.2106)

0.0091
840

0.0096
810

Note: The sample consists of observations of foreign exchange trading days between January 1, 1997 – June 13, 2000.
The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable equals the daily percent change
in the value of the American dollar relative to the British pound sterling. Since the dependent variable is calculated as the
percent change in numbers of pounds to the dollar, a negative value of the dependent variable corresponds to dollar
weakening. The table reports estimated coefficients for dummy variables for each of the eleven event dates; expected
signs are indicated in parentheses. "% change [S&P 500 (US) - FTSE 100 index (UK)]" is the daily difference in percentage
performance of the S&P 500 and FTSE 100 Indices. "Change (US-UK interest rate difference)" is the daily change in U.S.
and British 90-day government interest rates. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.

