                               ( $  




                      
                           


                                         
                                          ! " #!


                                        $%& ')*+*
                                ',,---.&,''!,-)*+*


                       (    /
                              +*0* !!#!! 1#
                                 .2&3  *4+5)
                                   1 . 4***




                 
         !   "    !  # #   
  $    !#    #%       &#  
 ' $(      # )      $ ! )  
   #        #    #   $

*+,,,'  $-    %$" $  !$   # )   
)      '.   )    !    #   *
   !  $
  ! 2 2# '& &!
12 6  # #!
   2  ! " #!
( $%& '  )*+*
1 . 4***
"  +5


                                               
 ! '' 7 !  !' .- 2# '& 6&! 2        6!
$ !-   7&  6##! 66  -  6 2# '&  ''! -8!3
  %&  1 66  6&!  .&##!  8 !&83  !#  .&#8 !
122   2 7 &  6& '! 6  6#       9 #!! 6  - 2#& 
+:)*;;:) '2 - 62   7& ! 2 2 !    &- . 1
!!8 !&6  '!  6&! ( 6& 2 2   ;!22 21
 '' 6  2 ! #8 !! 6&! .8 55< -  ;!22 21
6  2 !    !! 6&! .8 45<




                                                   ! " #!
 #%  6 (#!!!                                             '  6  !
   # &                                               #&! 1!8
/13 / *5=00                                                - (#!-%3 " *):*+
2 (                                                         2 (
%>2 #2#                                            '#!>#&!2#
1. Introduction

The GATT/WTO antidumping (AD) statute requires two criteria to be met in
order to impose duties on foreign suppliers named in antidumping suits. First,
there must be evidence that the domestic industry has suﬀered “material injury”
(e.g., a decline in proﬁtability) as a result of foreign imports. Second, the foreign

suppliers must be found to be pricing at “less than fair value” (LTFV). This latter
criterion can be determined in either of two ways: (1) by showing that the price
charged in the domestic market by the foreign suppliers is below the price charged
for the same product in other markets (i.e., the “price-based” method) or (2) by

showing that the price charged in the domestic market is below an estimate of
cost plus a normal return (i.e., the “constructed-value” method).
       The focus of this paper is on how macroeconomic factors in general, and ﬂuc-
tuations in real exchange rates in particular, can aﬀect the determination of each
of these criteria. At a theoretical level it is not obvious how real exchange rates

will aﬀect ﬁling behavior, given the criteria laid out above. For example, when
the domestic currency strengthens, the normal response of foreign ﬁrms is to in-
crease the foreign currency price of shipments to the domestic market relative to
other destinations, but by less than the appreciation of the domestic currency.1

An increase in the price of shipments to the domestic market obviously reduces
   1
    The relationship between exchange rate ﬂuctuations and destination-speciﬁc pricing of ex-
ports is known as pricing-to-market behavior. The evidence on pricing-to-market varies by
industry (see Goldberg and Knetter (1997)), but the median price response to a real exchange
rate change across industries studied in the literature is close to 50%—i.e., half of the movement
in the real exchange rate is oﬀset by destination-price adjustment.



                                                1
the chance that the foreign ﬁrm is guilty of LTFV pricing. Thus, a strong (weak)
domestic currency makes it less (more) likely that the foreign ﬁrm is guilty of
LTFV pricing.

       However, since the price increase in foreign currency units does not typically
oﬀset the full eﬀect of the domestic currency appreciation, the domestic currency
price of foreign goods will fall. This would be expected to reduce the proﬁts of
domestic producers in the same industry by lowering their margins or market
share.2 Thus, a strong (weak) domestic currency should increase (decrease) the

likelihood of a ﬁnding of material injury to the domestic industry.
       Empirically which eﬀect is more important is an open question. Within the
business community there appears to be a belief that a strong domestic currency
precipitates ﬁlings. For example, in its March 26, 1999 Economic Analyst publi-

cation, Goldman Sachs documents a rise in AD cases associated with an increase
in the value of the trade-weighted U.S. dollar. Interestingly, the existing empirical
literature reaches the opposite conclusion. In particular, using a dataset based on
U.S. AD ﬁlings from 1982–87 Feinberg (1989) ﬁnds that ﬁlings increase with a

weaker dollar.
       Fluctuations in economic activity, both in the importing country and the ex-
porting country, might also aﬀect ﬁling decisions. Clearly, a slump in economic
   2
    Note that the dollar price of imported goods will fall relative to domestic goods with a real
appreciation of the dollar provided the foreign ﬁrm does not completely oﬀset the relative cost
change with a markup change. The special case in which markups are adjusted to fully oﬀset
the eﬀects of currency movements is known as “complete pricing-to-market” in the literature.
The opposite case, in which exchange rate changes are fully passed-through to foreign buyers is
known as “full pass-through.”



                                               2
activity in the importing country makes it more likely domestic ﬁrms perform
poorly which may facilitate a ﬁnding of material injury. Also, a weak economy
in the importing country might naturally lead foreign ﬁrms to reduce prices on

shipments to the importing country. This could increase the likelihood of pricing
below fair value. Thus we would expect that import country GDP will be neg-
atively related to ﬁlings. It is less clear how export country GDP is related to
ﬁlings. One possibility is that a weak foreign economy increases the likelihood
that foreign ﬁrms will cut prices to maintain overall levels of output. While such

behavior might cause injury to domestic ﬁrms, it is not clear that it would trigger
pricing below “fair value” in the price-based sense, since foreign ﬁrms would pre-
sumably be lowering prices to all markets (especially their own home market). It
is possible, however, that generally low prices would increase the chance of LTFV

using the “constructed-value” method.
   The conventional wisdom on these issues seems to be that the more diﬃcult
test to pass for a successful antidumping ﬁling (i.e., one that leads to duties being
imposed on the foreign ﬁrm) is the material injury criterion. For instance, over the

past 20 years only 28 of 800 U.S. cases received negative LTFV determinations; by
contrast, there have been over 300 negative injury determinations. This fact might
suggest that more antidumping cases would be ﬁled when exchange rates or output
ﬂuctuations improve the odds of an aﬃrmative material injury decision—i.e., when
the domestic currency is strong in real terms or when the domestic country is in

recession. However, the exact relationship will depend on the sensitivity of prices
and proﬁts to exchange rates changes and the correlation between exchange rates

                                         3
and other macroeconomic variables. Furthermore, the criteria for imposition of
duties may be implemented somewhat diﬀerently across other countries. It is
therefore an empirical issue.

       Our goal in this paper is to determine the relationship between ﬁlings, real
exchange rates, and economic activity. First, we develop a model that links cur-
rency ﬂuctuations to the criteria for dumping. We presume that the incentive
to ﬁle an AD case is positively related to the likelihood of aﬃrmative decisions
on the injury and LTFV criteria. Then, we investigate the empirical relationship

between ﬁlings and macro factors since 1980 for four of the primary AD users
(Australia, Canada, the European Union, and the U.S.).3 We believe systematic
evidence that macro factors are related to ﬁlings would be further ammunition
for the view that antidumping law is a tool of protectionism that is frequently

abused. While ﬂuctuations in real GDP and real exchange rates are certain to
aﬀect industry equilibria, they are unlikely to be systematically associated with
malevolent behavior by foreign ﬁrms. A ﬁnding that dumping allegations are re-
lated to macro factors would seem to suggest that foreign ﬁrms are potentially

being held responsible for the impact of factors beyond their control.4
   3
      Several recent papers study issues related to those examined in this paper. Hens, et. al.
(1999) study pricing-to-market in a reciprocal duopoly model. However, they do not address
the issue of how pricing-to-market is aﬀected by AD law. Blonigen and Haynes (1999) study
the pricing behavior of ﬁrms following the imposition of AD duties. We are interested in the
pricing behavior prior to an AD investigation. Finally, a number of papers including Baldwin
and Steagall (1994) and Krupp (1994) examine how various factors inﬂuence the ITC injury
decision. We focus not on the injury determination but on the number of ﬁlings in this work.
    4
      This view is echoed in the Goldman Sachs Economic Analyst which claims that “the corre-
lation between the number of AD cases initiated and the change in the G7 trade-weighted dollar
index suggests that domestic producers have been seeking protection against adverse market
conditions, not against anti-competitive dumping.”


                                              4
2. The Model

This section will setup a two-period duopoly model that identiﬁes how AD law
complicates the foreign ﬁrm’s pricing decision. We begin by assuming that there
are two ﬁrms, one domestic and one foreign. In each period, the ﬁrms produce
diﬀerentiated products that are close, but not perfect, substitutes for one another.

The domestic ﬁrm services the domestic market with local production while the
foreign ﬁrm exports to the domestic market.
      For simplicity we will ignore the foreign ﬁrm’s behavior in its own home mar-
ket. This assumption can be justiﬁed on two grounds. First, it avoids needless

complication without much cost. Second, in the majority of AD investigations
the foreign ﬁrm’s home market pricing is not directly relevant to the investiga-
tion. This is the case, for instance, when a constructed-value approach is used
to calculate the LTFV margin.5 Also, when home market sales are too small (or
do not exist), or when the exporter operates in a centrally planned economy, the

dumping calculation will be based on sales of a comparable product sold by a
third party in another market. In all these circumstances the home market price
used in the AD investigation is largely outside the control of the foreign ﬁrm.
      As discussed by McKinnon (1979) and Giovannini (1988) the foreign ﬁrm faces

a decision as to which currency to use when announcing its price. We will not
analyze that problem here, but rather follow Feenstra (1989) and assume that the
  5
    Clarida (1992) reports that about two-thirds of US AD cases use the constructed value
method. Messerlin (1989) reports an even higher percentage of EU cases use the constructed
value method.



                                            5
foreign ﬁrm sets its price in the domestic currency and then uses the exchange
rate to convert into foreign currency units. Let et denote the bilateral exchange
rate at time t, expressed as foreign currency per unit of domestic currency. Let

qt (pt ) denote the foreign (domestic) ﬁrm’s price and yt = y(qt , pt ) (xt = x(qt , pt ))
denote the foreign (domestic) ﬁrm’s quantity in period t, t = 1, 2. Let ϕ(yt ) and
φ(xt ) denote the foreign and domestic ﬁrms’ costs of production.
       If AD duties are not present, the domestic ﬁrm will earn proﬁt πt (qt , pt ), and
the foreign ﬁrm will earn Πt (qt , pt , et ),


                             πt (qt , pt ) = pt x(qt , pt ) − φ(x(qt , pt ))            (1)

                         Πt (qt , pt , et ) = et qt y(qt , pt ) − ϕ(y(qt, pt ))         (2)


It is important to realize that π is denominated in the domestic currency while Π
is denominated in the foreign currency.
       When ﬁrms compete under the specter of AD law, the foreign ﬁrm’s pricing
decision is complicated by the LTFV and injury determinations. We will say

that the foreign ﬁrm has sold at LTFV if its price in the domestic market during
the ﬁrst period is less than some benchmark price (denominated in the foreign
currency). In other words, LTFV sales are said to occur if e1 q1 < qH , where we are
implicitly assuming that the benchmark price is calculated using the constructed

value method.6
   6
   The model is equally relevant for a price-based case in which the comparison price is in-
dependent of e. For example, qH could be the price in the home market if there are constant
marginal costs and no imported inputs.



                                                   6
   At this point we will assume that both the domestic and foreign ﬁrms only
know the general rules by which qH is constructed. In other words, the distri-
bution governing qH , F (·), is common knowledge. We also assume that F (·) is

twice-continuously diﬀerentiable on support [0, q]. The probability of a LTFV
determination can be written as

                                                           q
                    L
                   ρ (q1 , e1 ) = Prob(e1 q1 < qH ) =             F  (x) dx.
                                                         e1 q 1



   An injury determination must also be made before duties can be levied. For
simplicity, we will say that the domestic ﬁrm has been injured if π1 (q1 , p1 ) ≤ π I +µ.
In other words, we interpret the injury criterion as establishing a minimum proﬁt

level, π I . However, factors beyond the ﬁrms’ control—the political environment,
the general state of the economy, etc.—create a random component to the injury
decision, µ, which we assume is drawn from a twice-continuously diﬀerentiable
distribution G(·). We assume that G(·) is common knowledge and has zero mean.

Thus, the probability that injury occurs is

                                                               ∞
          ρ (q1 , p1 ) = Prob(π1 (q1 , p1 ) − π ≤ µ) =
            I                                I
                                                                               G (x) dx.
                                                            π1 (q1 ,p1 )−π I



   The timing of play is as follows: (1) The exchange rate, e1 is realized. (2) Firms
announce their ﬁrst period prices; ﬁrst period sales and proﬁts are realized. (3) If
it desires, the domestic ﬁrm can initiate an AD investigation at a cost of C. (4) If

a petition is initiated, the government determines whether or not both criteria



                                           7
are satisﬁed and announces its decision. (5) The exchange rate, e2 is realized.
(6) If dumping is found, a dumping duty is charged; in a manner consistent with
current WTO rules, we will model the dumping order as establishing a minimum

price, below which the foreign ﬁrm cannot sell in the domestic market. We will
denote this price as qD ; the foreign ﬁrm collects only q1 . If dumping is not found,
the ﬁrms simply announce their second period prices. (7) Second period sales and
proﬁts are realized.


Equilibrium Pricing and Pricing-to-Market without Antidumping Law

Without the threat of AD the ﬁrms simply maximize their proﬁt in each period.

Letting δ denote the common discount factor we can write the ﬁrms’ objectives
as


                        max π = π1 (q1 , p1 ) + δπ2 (q2 , p2 ),                  (3)
                       {p1 ,p2 }


                       max Π = Π1 (q1 , p1 , e1 ) + δΠ2 (q2 , p2 , e2 ).         (4)
                       {q1 ,q2 }



     The ﬁrst order conditions can be written as

                         ∂πt           ∂xt               ∂xt
                             = xt + pt        − φ (xt )     = 0,                (5)
                         ∂pt            ∂pt              ∂pt
                         ∂Πt                 ∂yt            ∂yt
                             = et yt + et qt     − ϕ (yt )     = 0.             (6)
                         ∂qt                 ∂qt            ∂qt

     We will assume that the second order conditions are satisﬁed, that the own-

price eﬀects dominate the cross-price eﬀects, that there exists a unique, stable

                                              8
Nash equilibrium, and that in equilibrium both ﬁrms’ prices and output are
strictly positive.7 Let (qt∗ (et ), p∗t (et )) denote the Nash equilibrium prices and let
the domestic and foreign best response functions be denoted as β(qt ) and γ(pt , et ),

respectively.
       Totally diﬀerentiating the ﬁrst order conditions we can derive the eﬀect of the
ﬁrst period exchange rate on the ﬁrms’ ﬁrst period prices:
                                                                                
                          dp1              −∂ 2 Π1        ∂ 2 π1            ∂ 2 π1
                         de1    1        ∂q12         ∂p1 ∂q1         ∂p1 ∂e1   
                               =                                                ,
                          dq1     D        ∂2Π   1       −∂ 2 π   1        ∂2Π   1
                          de1              ∂q1 ∂p1        ∂p21             ∂q1 ∂e1



where D denotes the determinant of the Jacobian matrix. The assumptions made

earlier to guarantee a unique solution also guarantee that D > 0.
       Of most interest is the elasticity of the foreign ﬁrm’s price with respect to the
exchange rate:

                                         
                       dq1 e1   1 −∂ 2 π1 y1 e1 2 (1 + η1 )2
                              =                              < 0,                             (7)
                       de1 q1   D   ∂p21      ϕ (y1 )η1

where ηt = (qt /yt )∂yt /∂qt is the foreign ﬁrm’s own price elasticity of demand.
       The latter is the typical pass-through result found in the literature (Feenstra,

1989; Knetter, 1989) and it implies that when the domestic currency appreciates,
the foreign ﬁrm lowers its domestic currency price.8 Feenstra established con-
   7
    Friedman (1983) discusses the suﬃcient conditions for these conditions to hold.
   8
    We should point out this result does not depend on which currency the foreign ﬁrm uses
to set its price. If we suppose instead that the foreign ﬁrm sets its price in its home currency,
then the above result implies that an appreciation of the domestic currency will raise its foreign
currency price.


                                                     9
ditions when pass-through is less than one-for-one, which implies that that the
foreign ﬁrm’s price rises in terms of foreign currency. Empirically, Goldberg and
Knetter (1997) ﬁnd that about half of the movement in the real exchange rate is

oﬀset by destination-speciﬁc price adjustment.
    This result provides the intuition behind the conjecture that exchange rate
ﬂuctuations have an ambiguous eﬀect on AD ﬁlings. Given the above result, we
expect that when the domestic currency appreciates, the foreign ﬁrm will lower
its domestic currency price by less than the change in the exchange rate. With

partial pass-through, this means that an aﬃrmative LTFV determination is less
likely (since e1 q1 increases) and an aﬃrmative injury determination is more likely
(since q1 falls). We now formally consider how pricing decisions are aﬀected by
AD law.


Equilibrium Pricing and Pricing-to-Market with Antidumping Law

In general, the threat of an AD action implies that the strategy of simply maxi-
mizing proﬁt on a period-by-period basis will not be optimal. Rather, ﬁrst period
pricing decisions inﬂuence second period proﬁt.
    We therefore need to solve the model recursively. At the beginning of period
two, ﬁrms know whether duties have been levied. If duties have not been levied,

the ﬁrms’ simply maximize second period proﬁts, just as they did without AD law.
Denote this equilibrium as {q2∗ , p∗2 }. In this case, the ﬁrms will earn π2 (q2∗ , p∗2 ) and
Π2 (q2∗ , p∗2 , e2 ), respectively.
    If, on the other hand, dumping has been found, the domestic government

                                             10
requires the foreign ﬁrm’s price equal qD . In this case, the domestic ﬁrm sets a
price pD = β(qD ) and will earn proﬁts π2 (qD , pD ).
   The domestic ﬁrm’s gain when AD duties are imposed can be expressed as


                            ∆(qD ) ≡ π2 (qD , pD ) − π2 (q2∗ , p∗2 ) > 0.                            (8)


   Recall that when dumping duties are levied the foreign ﬁrm collects only q1

per unit. Thus, the foreign ﬁrm’s expected loss is


      Γ(qD , e2 ) ≡ Π2 (qD , pD , e2 ) − e2 (qD − q1 )y(qD , pD ) − Π2 (q2∗ , p∗2 , e2 ) < 0.        (9)


   For the moment, we will assume that the domestic ﬁrm ﬁnds it proﬁtable to
ﬁle an AD petition. In this case, we can write the AD law-distorted two-period
expected proﬁt functions as


          π(q1 , p1 ) = π1 (q1 , p1 , e1 ) + δ π2 (q2∗ , p∗2 ) + ρI (·)ρL (·)∆(qD ) − C ,           (10)

  Π(q1 , p1 , e1 , e2 ) = Π1 (q1 , p1 , e1 ) + δ Π2 (q2∗ , p∗2 , e2 ) + ρI (·)ρL (·)Γ(qD , e2 ) .   (11)


   The ﬁrst order conditions are

         ∂π(·)   ∂π1 (·)
               =         1 + δρI1 (·)ρL (·)∆(qD ) = 0                                               (12)
          ∂p1     ∂p1
                                        
         ∂Π(·)   ∂Π1 (·)                       ∂ρI (·) ∂π1 (·)          ∂ρL (·)
               =         + δΓ(qD , e2 ) ρL (·)                 + ρI (·)         e1
          ∂q1     ∂q1                           ∂π1 ∂q1                  ∂q1
                                     + δρI (·)ρL (·)e2 y(qD , pD ) = 0                              (13)


                                                  11
      The conditions can be interpreted as follows. In both equations the ﬁrst term
is the marginal change to ﬁrst period proﬁt while the bracketed expression is the
net eﬀect of a price change on second period proﬁt. When the ﬁrms myopically

maximize their ﬁrst period proﬁts, as they do without AD law, the prices are
chosen so that the ﬁrst term (in each equation) equals zero, as seen in (5)–(6).
      For the domestic ﬁrm, simply maximizing ﬁrst period proﬁt (i.e., setting p1 =
β(q1 )) is always a solution to (12). Since our focus here is the eﬀect of AD on
pass-through behavior, we will assume that this is indeed the unique outcome.9

      By contrast, simply maximizing ﬁrst period proﬁts cannot be a solution for the
foreign ﬁrm. Altering its ﬁrst period price directly impacts both the LTFV and
injury determination. In particular, an increase in the ﬁrst period price decreases
both the probability of injury and LTFV sales. An increase in the ﬁrst period

price also reduces the second period loss if duties are imposed. All three eﬀects
lead the foreign ﬁrm to announce a higher ﬁrst period price than it would without
AD law. In other words, letting γD (p1 , e1 ) denote the foreign ﬁrm’s best response
function with AD law, we know that γD (p1 , e1 ) ≥ γ(p1 , e1 ).

      We will once again assume that the second order conditions are satisﬁed,
that there exists a unique, stable Nash equilibrium in this AD-distorted scenario
and that in equilibrium both ﬁrms’ prices and output are strictly positive. Let
(q1D (e1 ), pD
             1 (e1 )) denote the Nash equilibrium prices.

      Totally diﬀerentiating (12) and (13) we can derive the eﬀect of the ﬁrst period
  9
    In a related paper, Prusa (1994) establishes conditions when p1 = β(q1 ) is the unique
equilibrium response.



                                           12
exchange rate on pricing:

                                                                            
                       dp1                  −∂ 2 Π       ∂2π            ∂2π
                      de1     1           ∂q12       ∂p1 ∂q1      ∂p1 ∂e1   
                            =                                               ,
                       dq1      H            ∂2Π        −∂ 2 π          ∂2Π
                       de1                  ∂q1 ∂p1      ∂p21          ∂q1 ∂e1


where H denotes the determinant of the Jacobian matrix. Given our assump-
tions that the second order conditions are satisﬁed and that the own-price eﬀects
dominate the cross-price eﬀects, we know that H > 0.
   Now, solving for the eﬀect of the exchange rate on ﬁrst period pricing:

                   2            
dq1   1     −∂ 2 π    ∂ Π1           I     ∂ρL (·)
    =                        +   δ  ρ  (·)         q1 e2 y(qD , pD )
de1   H      ∂p21    ∂q1 ∂e1                ∂e1
                   L                                        2 L
                                                                                           
                    ∂ρ (·) ∂ρI (·) ∂π1 (·)                    ∂  ρ   (·)          ∂ρL
                                                                                      (·)
         + δΓ(·)                           q1 + ρI (·)e1                 + ρI (·)
                     ∂e1 ∂π1 ∂q1                               ∂q1 ∂e1             ∂q1

                                                                                        (14)

                                  ∂ 2 Π1
   From (7) we know that         ∂q1 ∂e1
                                           < 0. The ﬁrst square bracketed term measures

the impact that if duties are levied a higher ﬁrst period price generates higher
second period revenue (because the ﬁrm pays lower duties). This term is nega-
tive, reﬂecting that the higher exchange rate lowers the probability of a LTFV
determination and thus allows more pass through.

   The second square bracketed term is where ambiguity appears. It can be ei-
ther positive or negative. Recall that Γ(·) < 0 so the second bracketed term is
the change in the probability of the foreign ﬁrm loss. The ﬁrst curly bracketed
term captures that the foreign ﬁrm’s incentive to raise its price in order to reduce


                                                   13
                         I
the chance of injury ( ∂ρ∂π(·)
                           1
                               ∂π1 (·)
                                ∂q1
                                       < 0) is attenuated by the fact that the exchange
                                                     L
rate appreciation reduces the chance of LTFV ( ∂ρ∂e1(·) < 0). In eﬀect, in terms of

the LTFV determination the exchange rate appreciation allows the foreign ﬁrm
to lower its price. The second curly bracketed captures the direct eﬀect of a
higher price on the LTFV determination. In general, either eﬀect can dominate.
Therefore, we cannot be sure whether AD law will increase or decrease the in-

centive for incomplete pass-through. If the competing eﬀects roughly oﬀset each
other, we would expect incomplete pass-through to be common in the presence
of AD law (as it appears to be in the empirical literature on pass-through and
pricing-to-market).
   The domestic ﬁrm may not, of course, choose to ﬁle an AD petition. It will

ﬁle a petition if
                             ρI (·)ρL (·)∆(qD ) − C ≥ 0.

For some industries the expected payoﬀ from ﬁling will not exceed the costs.

   One would expect that ﬁlings would be positively related to ρI (·), ρL (·), and
the expected dumping margin. What we have shown is that exchange rate pass-
through creates a trade-oﬀ between ρI (·) and ρL (·). If the outcome of AD cases
tend to hinge on the injury test then we would expect ﬁlings to be associated with

strong domestic currency. If, on the other hand, the the LTFV test tends to be
the crucial determination, then we would expect ﬁlings to be associated with weak
domestic currency. While our model has taken the dumping duty as exogenous, it
is likely that in practice a weak domestic currency increases the dumping margin.


                                          14
Therefore, if anything, our model may understate the incentives to ﬁle when the
domestic currency is weak. This suggests that in our empirical study we must
be careful in our interpretation if we ﬁnd that a weak currency stimulates ﬁlings,

since this could be due to ρL (·) or the size of the margin. If, on the other hand,
we ﬁnd that a strong currency stimulates ﬁlings then it is clear that the injury
determination is the key factor in ﬁlings.


3. Data

To investigate the relationship between antidumping ﬁlings and macroeconomic
conditions, we collected data on AD ﬁlings by the four largest users: Australia,

Canada, the United States, and the European Union. The ﬁling data is available
from the GATT/WTO annual reports.
       These four users accounted for more than two-thirds of all AD actions ﬁled
worldwide since 1980. For each of these four reporting regions (henceforth referred

to as “reporting” or “ﬁling” countries), we have aggregate ﬁling data on an annual
basis from 1980–98.10 For each ﬁling, we know the ﬁling country, the industry, the
country named in the ﬁling (i.e., the defendant), and the ultimate determination
(injury or no injury). The GATT/WTO reports do not include any information

on the dumping margin which precludes us from directly looking at how exchange
rate changes aﬀects margins.
       Figures 1 displays the number of ﬁlings by ﬁling country for our 1980–98
  10
    Changes in antidumping law in 1979 preclude us from using ﬁling data prior to 1980. Also,
due to reporting problems we do not have Australian ﬁlings in 1980 and 1981.



                                             15
sample period. The solid line depicts total ﬁlings while the dashed line depicts
ﬁlings excluding those made by the steel industry, which is generally viewed to
be unique in terms of its proclivity to ﬁle a large number of cases.11 The ﬁgures

show there is considerable variation in the number of ﬁlings from year-to-year.
Furthermore, it is clear that ﬁlings are related to the business cycle, especially for
the United States and Australia. The recessions that began in the early 1980s
and early 1990s (the only two in our sample) are associated with large spikes in
the number of ﬁlings.

      The level and variation of ﬁlings across ﬁlers is also summarized in Table 1.
Adjusting for the fact that its ﬁling data is missing for 1980–81, we ﬁnd that
Australia is the heaviest ﬁler of the four regions. This is surprising given that it
is the smallest of the four countries by a fairly large margin (e.g., Canada has a

population about 50% greater than Australia, while the U.S. and EU are about
10 times the size of Canada.) Table 2 shows the pattern of bilateral ﬁlings across
countries. As is readily apparent there is substantial variation in ﬁling across
countries. The US and EU have frequently targeted Japanese products while

Australia and Canada have both made the US a prime target.
      The International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics CD-ROM
provided real GDP data for both the ﬁling countries and the named countries. In
our empirical work we perform tests using both aggregate ﬁlings and also the
number of ﬁlings against individual countries. For the aggregate ﬁling behavior,

we use the real eﬀective exchange rate index (based on labor costs) for the ﬁling
 11
      GATT/WTO reports have only identiﬁed industry since 1987.


                                            16
country as reported by the IMF. In our examination of ﬁlings against individual
foreign countries (i.e., “bilateral ﬁlings”), we used bilateral real exchange rates
between each of the four ﬁling countries and each country named in at least

one antidumping case since 1980. The Economic Research Service of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture was a convenient source for bilateral real exchange
rates since they report exchange rates in a consistent fashion for virtually all
countries in the world. The exchange rate is deﬁned as foreign currency per
unit of domestic currency so that an increase in the exchange rate reﬂects an

appreciation of the ﬁling country’s currency. Also, we normalize each country’s
exchange rate by dividing by the sample average.


4. Empirical Specification and Results

The theoretical model motivates how ﬁlings might be aﬀected by real exchange
rates, ﬁling country GDP, and rest of world GDP. The dependent variable in our

econometric work will be the number of ﬁlings (and for robustness, sometimes
number of ﬁlings excluding steel—an industry with an unusually large amount of
ﬁling activity) occurring in a year.
   Since the number of ﬁlings is a non-negative count variable, we will estimate the

relationship between number of ﬁlings and macroeconomic factors using Poisson
and Negative Binomial regression as well as OLS, with the belief that the Poisson
or Negative Binomial regression is probably more appropriate given the nature of
the data.



                                        17
   The Poisson regression model assumes that the incidence rate v (the rate per
unit time at which happenings occur) is a function of some underlying variables
as follows:

                           vj = eβ0 +β1 x1j +β2 x2j +···+βk xkj

   The expected number of occurrences is equal to this incidence rate multiplied
by the exposure (the number of units of time over which observations are mea-

sured). The exposure is uninteresting in our case since each observation in the
data set is the number of AD ﬁlings in a one year interval. We believe that the
incidence rate is a function of GDP growth in the home and foreign countries,
the real exchange rate, and possibly other factors. This Poisson regression is
estimated by maximum likelihood.

   One feature of the Poisson model that is frequently violated in applications is
the equivalence of the expected value and variance of a Poisson random variable.
Often, count data exhibit overdispersion with respect to the Poisson model—i.e.,
the variance of the observed counts exceeds their mean. This is certainly true

regarding the data reported in Table 1. In such cases, an alternative is to assume
that the data are generated by a negative binomial random variable, which allows
for a variance that is greater than the expected value of the distribution. While
we will base most of our conclusions on the negative binomial (NB) regression

model, all models yield similar results in terms of the statistical and economic
signiﬁcance of the macroeconomic factors on AD ﬁlings.
   In addition to method of estimation, another important speciﬁcation issue is


                                           18
the lag structure of the regressors. The legal framework for determining LTFV
and material injury oﬀers some guidance here. While not speciﬁed under WTO
rules, all of the reporting countries generally analyze pricing behavior over the

year prior to the ﬁling of the case in order to assess LTFV. By contrast, all of the
reporting countries evaluate injury over a longer time horizon. In general, injury
is determined over the three years preceding the ﬁling. Given these features of the
law, it seems plausible to consider lags from one to three years for our variables.
We report results with a one-year lag on the real exchange rate (since we conjecture

that exchange rates may be more important for LTFV which is assessed over the
one year period) and three year lags on real GDP growth. We have experimented
with other lag structures (and contemporaneous values) and are conﬁdent that
none of our main results is aﬀected by the choice of lag structure.


Annual Data on Aggregate Filings

Our ﬁrst set of results is based on the annual number of ﬁlings for each of our
four reporting units (Australia, Canada, EU, and US). We estimate the number
of ﬁlings as a function of the real exchange rate, domestic real GDP growth, and
rest of world real GDP growth using OLS, Poisson, and NB regression. The real
exchange rate variable is normalized by dividing each exchange rate series by its

sample mean before taking logs. The real GDP growth variable is the three-year
growth rate from t − 3 to t (i.e., the three years prior to the ﬁling date).
   Table 3 reports the results of OLS estimation when the data from all four
countries are pooled in a single regression. We experiment in diﬀerent speciﬁ-

                                         19
cations with the set of independent variables and the lag structure used for the
real exchange rate and the real GDP variables. In all speciﬁcations, the real ex-
change rate is statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level. The positive sign implies

that ﬁlings increase as the currency of the ﬁling country strengthens against its
trading partners. The range of values of the point estimates for the exchange rate
response across these speciﬁcations is from 45-55. This implies that a 100% real
appreciation (a unit increase in the log of the real exchange rate) of the ﬁling
country’s currency would be expected to generate an additional 45-55 AD ﬁlings

in the following year. Given the linear speciﬁcation, we can also conclude that
a one (two) standard deviation appreciation in the real trade-weighted exchange
rate (which is a 12% (24%) increase in our exchange rate variable) will tend to be
associated with six (12) more AD ﬁlings.

   Our other macro factors, growth in ﬁling country real GDP and growth in rest
of world GDP, have a more ambiguous relationship with AD ﬁlings. When ﬁling
country real GDP is added to a model with real exchange rates and ﬁling country
dummy variables, we ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant negative relationship, which

is what we would expect. For each percentage point decline in real GDP growth
between (t−3) and (t), we expect slightly more than three additional ﬁlings in year
t. However, when we add world real GDP growth (deﬁned over the same interval)
to this regression, neither GDP variable is statistically signiﬁcant, although both
have a negative sign. Other regressions experiment with changing the window

over which the exchange rate variable and GDP variables are deﬁned, but these
modiﬁcations do not alter the basic ﬁnding about the impact of real exchange

                                        20
rates. When we use only the most recent year’s growth in real GDP, world GDP
growth is negative and signiﬁcant at the 5% level, suggesting that weak economic
conditions outside of the ﬁling country may precipitate more dumping allegations.

   As noted earlier, OLS is not the appropriate method for analyzing the count
data on AD ﬁlings. Table 4 reports the results for the Poisson regression, which
uses random eﬀects, rather than ﬁxed eﬀects as were used in the OLS regressions.
In these tables, we report “incidence rate ratios” associated with the parameter
estimates. The incidence rate ratio (IRR) is the ratio of the counts predicted by

the model when the variable of interest is one unit above its mean value and all
other variables are at their means to the counts predicted when all variables are
at their means. Thus, if the IRR for the real exchange rate is 1.50, then a one unit
increase in the real exchange rate (a 100% real appreciation given that we use the

log of the real rate) would increase counts by 50% when all other variables are at
their means. The t-statistics are reported for a test of the null hypothesis that
the IRR= 1, which would imply no relationship between the dependent variable
and the regressor.

   Our ﬁndings regarding the impact of real exchange rates on AD ﬁlings are
qualitatively the same using the Poisson regression as they were using OLS. In
every speciﬁcation, the real exchange rate is statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
The range of IRR values associated with the exchange rate coeﬃcients suggest
that the count of AD ﬁlings increase anywhere from 240% to 355% in response

to a 100% real appreciation of the currency of the ﬁling country. Given a mean
number of annual ﬁlings around 32, this implies between 77 and 114 additional

                                          21
ﬁlings due to a 100% real appreciation. This is a greater quantitative impact than
we found using OLS. Because the Poisson model is non-linear, we also calculate
the increase in ﬁlings for one- and two-standard deviation real appreciations. A

one-standard deviation real appreciation is associated with six more ﬁlings, while
a two-standard deviation real appreciation is associated with 14 ﬁlings for the
model presented in column (2) of Table 4.
       The ambiguity we witnessed regarding the impact of real GDP growth on
ﬁlings is less apparent in the Poisson model. Filing country real GDP growth over

the three-year interval corresponding to the period over which material injury is
assessed is negatively and signiﬁcantly (at the 1% level) related to ﬁlings, whether
or not world real GDP growth is included.12 A one percentage-point decline in
the three-year real GDP growth of the ﬁling country leads to a 5-10% increase in

the number of ﬁlings, depending on whether world real GDP is included. A one
percentage-point decline in the three-year world real GDP growth leads to a 12%
increase in the number of ﬁlings when ﬁling country real GDP growth is included.
Both domestic and world GDP growth variables are statistically signiﬁcant at the

5% level.
       Although the Poisson model seems more intuitively appealing than OLS as
a way to analyze the count data on ﬁlings, the goodness of ﬁt statistics show
that we can reject that the data obey the Poisson distribution at the 1% level
for each model. Usually this is a result of “overdispersion” of the data—i.e.,
  12
    Note that IRR values less than 1.0 imply a negative relationship between a variable and
ﬁling counts.



                                            22
the variance of the counts exceeds the mean. Based on the means and standard
deviations reported in Table 1 this ﬁnding is not terribly surprising. Consequently,
we consider an alternative count data model, the negative binomial (NB), which

is similar to Poisson but does not constrain the relationship between mean and
variance.
       The results of estimating the NB model on aggregate ﬁlings are presented in
Table 5. Once again, rather than report the coeﬃcient estimates themselves, we
report the IRR associated with each estimate. The ﬁrst point to note is that the

IRR estimates associated with the real exchange rate using the NB model are very
similar to those obtained using Poisson. The various models imply that a 100%
real appreciation is associated with an increase in ﬁlings of 265% to 370%. They
are all statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level. Clearly, the aggregate ﬁling data

suggest that AD ﬁlings increase substantially when the ﬁling country currency
strengthens in real terms, which contrasts with Feinberg’s (1989) result that U.S.
ﬁlings rise with a weakening currency.13
       The relationship between real GDP growth and ﬁlings in Table 5 is somewhat

diﬀerent from Table 4. Domestic GDP growth is negatively related to ﬁlings when
it is included alone, but when domestic and world GDP growth are both included,
neither variable is statistically signiﬁcant, although both have the expected neg-
  13
    Feinberg’s analysis diﬀers from ours in two ways. First, he uses quarterly data from 1982–87
for U.S. ﬁlings against Korea, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Second, he uses a Tobit model with
the contemporaneous exchange rate. We have estimated a Tobit model on aggregate ﬁling data
with the contemporaneous exchange rate and ﬁnd that these results are very similar to what is
obtained with our speciﬁcations reported in Tables 3–5. (Results available upon request.) Thus,
it appears that the larger data sample is what leads to the diﬀerences in our ﬁndings, not the
method of estimation or lag structure of the regressions.


                                              23
ative relationship.
   In Table 6 we report results on aggregate ﬁlings that include a ﬁling-country
speciﬁc real exchange rate eﬀect. This allows us only 19 annual observations (17

for Australia) with which to detect a relationship, and more importantly, only a
few big swings in the real exchange rate series for each ﬁling country. Here we
ﬁnd that Australia has by far the most pronounced exchange rate eﬀect. The
IRR values exceed 50 in some cases and the coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant at the 1%
level. The U.S. results are “borderline signiﬁcant” with t-values ranging from

1.6 to 1.8 and IRRs between 2.5 and 2.6. Canada and the EU are never close
to being statistically signiﬁcant and the IRRs tend to be quite small. Part of
the problem may be the limited number of observations, which we can rectify by
examining ﬁlings by “aﬀected country” (i.e., those countries named in a suit as

“defendants”) for each of our ﬁling countries. These results are discussed below.
All of the countries have the expected negative relationship between own GDP
growth and ﬁlings, but only Canada’s is statistically signiﬁcant.
   Since our ﬁndings in Tables 3–6 are based on pooling all data on AD ﬁlings

across our four ﬁling countries, it is of interest to see how these eﬀects hold up for
various subsets of the universe of cases. In particular, we are interested in whether
our ﬁndings hold for ﬁlings outside the steel industry (the steel industry ﬁles a
large fraction of U.S. and Canadian cases). The results are reported in Table 7.
When we exclude steel cases from the data, we ﬁnd that the statistical signiﬁcance

of the real exchange rate eﬀects is similar and the economic signiﬁcance (given by
the magnitude of the IRR in NB regression) is much greater. The real GDP growth

                                         24
eﬀects become insigniﬁcant (although the point estimates are still negative) when
steel cases are excluded from the data. The impact on exchange rates and GDP
from excluding steel suggests that AD ﬁlings in steel are heavily inﬂuenced by the

business cycle, but not so much by exchange rates.


Annual Data on Bilateral Filings

In constructing the database with ﬁlings broken down by aﬀected country, we
lost a relatively small number of observations due to the inability to construct
real exchange rates or real GDP growth over the sample period. Most of the
cases involved countries that were part of the former Soviet Union. Once these

observations were eliminated, we had a panel dataset with 4 ﬁling countries, 48
aﬀected countries (47 for each ﬁling country), and 19 years (17 for Australia).14
We model the number of cases against an aﬀected country by a ﬁling country in
each year as a function of the bilateral real exchange rate, ﬁling country real GDP

growth, and aﬀected country real GDP growth. The advantage of this dataset,
which we believe is substantial, is that the exchange rate and foreign GDP growth
variables are more precisely targeted to match the country named in the ﬁlings.
Following the ﬁndings with aggregate ﬁling data, we apply the negative binomial
regression model to the data.

       The main results are presented in Table 8. These regressions use random eﬀects
for each ﬁling-aﬀected country pair. When we estimate a common response to
  14
    There are still a small number of missing observations for certain aﬀected countries due to
missing GDP data.



                                              25
exchange rates across all ﬁling countries, we ﬁnd the real exchange rate variable
is signiﬁcant at the 1% level in all models, with an IRR ranging from 3.28 to
3.37. Although the estimated IRR values are somewhat lower than with aggregate

ﬁlings, one must keep in mind that the bilateral exchange rate series are much
more volatile than the trade-weighted exchange rates used in the aggregate ﬁlings
(e.g., the standard deviation tends to be about twice as big).
   The results when we allow for a ﬁling-country speciﬁc response to the real ex-
change rate with random eﬀects and real GDP growth are reported in column (4).

We ﬁnd that the real exchange rate impact is signiﬁcant at the 1% level for Canada
(with an IRR of 2.37), the U.S. (IRR equal to 2.09), the EU (IRR equal to 4.23)
and Australia (IRR equal to 7.80). The increased detail of the observations has
the greatest impact on our results for the EU, which with the aggregate data

showed no indication of increased ﬁlings when the trade weighted real exchange
rate appreciated. In the bilateral data, it is clear that ﬁlings rise systematically
against countries whose real exchange rates have depreciated against the countries
of the EU. The exchange rate impacts are very similar when we allow reporting

country-speciﬁc real GDP growth eﬀects (column 5). It is worth noting that
the country that has ﬁled the most AD cases, Australia, also has the greatest
estimated increase in ﬁlings in response to a currency appreciation.
   In the bilateral ﬁlings database, it is also apparent that ﬁling country real
GDP growth is negatively and signiﬁcantly related to the number of ﬁlings. In

the model with random eﬀects and a common real exchange rate response in
column (2), we ﬁnd that a one percentage-point increase in ﬁling country three-

                                        26
year real GDP growth leads to a 3% decrease in the number of ﬁlings (i.e., the
IRR is 0.97). Adding real GDP growth of the aﬀected countries in column (3)
does not aﬀect this estimate. Aﬀected country real GDP growth now appears to

be unrelated to the number of ﬁlings. The IRR estimates are very close to 1.00
and are never close to being statistically signiﬁcant. This change in the impact of
reporting country and aﬀected country real GDP growth on the number of ﬁlings
is the main diﬀerence from the results obtained with the aggregate ﬁlings data.
It appears that domestic, but not foreign, recessions systematically provoke more

ﬁlings.
   In terms of the economic signiﬁcance of the macro factors in the bilateral
ﬁlings data, we ﬁnd that for the speciﬁcations in columns (1) and (2) of Table 8,
a one-standard deviation real appreciation of the domestic currency leads to a

33% increase in ﬁlings, while a two-standard deviation real appreciation results
in a 77% increase. In column (2), the estimated real GDP impact implies that a
one standard deviation reduction in real GDP growth leads to a 23% increase in
ﬁlings. Based on these estimates, we conclude that both variables are economically

signiﬁcant in explaining the pattern of ﬁlings across countries and over time, and
that real exchange rates are somewhat more important.
   The more robust link between ﬁlings and macro factors (especially for ﬁling-
country speciﬁc responses to exchange rates) in the bilateral data is no doubt
attributable to the increased number of observations and the reduction in noise

associated with the real exchange rate. The latter results from the fact that the
real exchange rate is matched to a speciﬁc aﬀected country, rather than being

                                        27
a trade-weighted average rate as it was for the regressions based on aggregate
ﬁlings. This appears to be a case where aggregation over the aﬀected countries
and studying total ﬁlings in relation to a trade-weighted exchange rate obscures

some interesting information. We place more faith in the bilateral results.


5. Conclusion

Antidumping suits have become an increasingly popular form of protection for
ﬁrms engaged in international markets. This paper has examined how macroeco-
nomic factors in general and the real exchange rate in particular, can inﬂuence
the probability of aﬃrmative ﬁndings for the LTFV and material injury criteria.

Using a duopoly model of trade we ﬁnd that changes in the real exchange rate
have oﬀsetting eﬀects on the dumping determinations. A real currency appreci-
ation (depreciation) increases (decreases) the likelihood of injury and decreases
(increases) the likelihood of LTFV. Ultimately, which eﬀect is more important in

driving AD ﬁlings is an empirical matter.
   Our empirical work uses data on AD ﬁlings from Australia, Canada, the Euro-
pean Union, and the United States. We ﬁnd that a real appreciation of the ﬁling
country’s currency will lead to a signiﬁcant increase in AD ﬁlings. This result is at

odds with existing research on the subject, but is robust to the method of estima-
tion, to the inclusion of other macroeconomic variables such as real GDP growth,
and to the elimination of steel cases in the ﬁling data. The results are strongest
when we examine bilateral ﬁlings. The economic signiﬁcance is substantial—a one



                                         28
(two) standard deviation real appreciation of the ﬁling country currency leads to
a 33% (77%) increase in AD ﬁlings in our speciﬁcation that contrains the response
to be common across ﬁling countries. We also ﬁnd that a one standard deviation

fall in domestic real GDP growth leads to a 23% increase in AD ﬁlings.
   The link between real exchange rates and ﬁlings suggests that either foreign
ﬁrms are being held responsible for factors outside of their control or that foreign
ﬁrms behave in a “predatory” manner when conditions favor them most. Given the
ﬁndings of other related literature (Boltuck and Litan, 1991) we are more inclined

to believe the former hypothesis, which casts further doubt on the fairness of AD
law.


References




Baldwin, Robert E., and Jeﬀrey W. Steagall, “An Analysis of ITC Decisions in An-
   itdumping, Countervailing Duty, and Safeguard Cases,” Weltwirtschaftliches
   Archiv, 130: (2) 290–308, 1994.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Stephen E. Haynes, 1999, Antidumping Investigations
   and the Pass-Through of Exchange Rates and Antidumping Duties, NBER

   Working Paper No. W7378.

Boltuck, Richard and Robert E. Litan, 1991, Down in the Dumps, (The Brookings

   Institution: Washington, DC).

Clarida, Richard H., 1993, Entry, dumping, and shakeout, American Economic

                                        29
   Review, 83, 180–202.

Feenstra, Robert C., “Symmetric Pass-through of tariﬀs and exchange rates un-
   der imperfect competition: An empirical test”, Journal of International Eco-
   nomics, 27, 1989, 25-45.

Feinberg, Robert M., “Exchange Rates and Unfair Trade”, Review of Economics
   and Statistics, 1989, pp. 704-07.

Friedman, James, Oligopoly Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
   1983.

Giovannini, Alberto, “Exchange rates and traded goods prices”, Journal of Inter-
   national Economics, 24, 1988, 45-68.

Goldman Sachs, Economic Analyst, March 26, 1999.

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Michael Knetter, “Goods prices and exchange rates: What

   have we learned?”, Journal of Economic Literature, 35, September 1997, 1243–
   72.

Hens, Thorsten, Eckart Jäger, Alan Kirman, and Louis Phlips, 1999, “Exchange
   Rates and Oligopoly”, European Economic Review, 43, 621–48.

Knetter, Michael, “Price discrimination by U.S. and German exporters”, Ameri-
   can Economic Review, 79, March 1989, 198–210.

Krupp, Cory, “Antidumping Cases in the U.S. Chemical Industry—A Panel Data
   Approach,” Journal of Indusrial Economics, 42:(3) 299-311, September 1994.



                                       30
McKinnon, Ronald I., 1979, Money in international exchange (Oxford University
   Press, New York).

Messerlin, Patrick, 1989, The EC antidumping regulations: A ﬁrst economic ap-
   praisal, 1980–85, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 125, 563–87.

Prusa, Thomas J., “Pricing behavior in the presence of antidumping law”, Journal
   of Economic Integration, 9, 1994, 260–89.




                                       31
Table 1. Mean and Standard Deviation of Filings by Source Country, 1980-98



                            Avg. Filings Per Year Std. Dev.
               Australia*             41             24
               Canada                 23             15
               EU                     30              9
               USA                    39             19

               *1982-98




Page 32
                      Table 2: Bilateral Filing Patterns
                                         Reporting Country
                                            European
Affected Country         Canada    USA       Union         Australia   Total
Japan                      26       88         53            45        212
USA                        83        0         30            63        176
South Korea                25       47         37             47        156
PR-China                   14       60         45            37         156
Taiwan                     16       50         11            49        126
Germany                    31       43          0             47        121
Brazil                     15       43         20             23        101
Italy                      22       35          0             28         85
United Kingdom             25       27          0             31        83
France                     24       29          0             28         81
Spain                      18       18         18              9        63
Canada                      0       41          8             11         60
Thailand                    2       10         17             25         54
Czechoslovakia              8        1         37              7         53
Poland                     8        8          28             6         50
Belgium-Luxembourg         11       16          0             22         49
India                       5       14         21              7        47
Romania                     9        9         25              2         45
Mexico                      6       21          8              4         39
Singapore                   5        5          6             21         37
Sweden                     10        8          7             11         36
Hungary                     1        5         22             6         34
Netherlands                 5       12          0             16         33
Malaysia                    5        3         11             13         32
Indonesia                   2        3         11             15        31
South Africa                3        6          5             15         29
Hong Kong                   5        4         10            10         29
Turkey                      0        6         14              4        24
Argentina                   3       13          1              6         23
Austria                     3        7          5              8         23
New Zealand                 2        3          0             17         22
Venezuela                   1       17          1              2         21
All Other Countries        24       58         58             56       196
Total                     417      710        509            691       2327




Page 33
                                     Table 3. OLS Estimation of Aggregate Filings


Model                     (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)

Constant                 33.10              41.00              54.70              59.30              56.90              50.60
                        (16.20)            (10.40)             (9.34)             (8.71)             (7.87)             (8.43)
rxr (-1)                 52.50              54.70              45.60              47.10                                 52.70
                         (3.09)             (3.48)             (3.01)             (3.11)                                (3.41)
rxr (avg)                                                                                            46.40
                                                                                                    (2.77)
FGDP (avg)                                                     -3.26              -1.76              -2.63
                                                              (-3.03)            (-1.12)            (-1.68)
FGDP (-1)                                                                                                                0.48
                                                                                                                        (0.54)
WGDP (avg)                                                                        -4.05              -2.34
                                                                                 (-1.31)            (-0.74)
WGDP (-1)                                                                                                                -4.24
                                                                                                                        (-2.11)
Country effects           NO                YES                YES                 YES                YES                YES

R-squared                 0.11               0.24               0.32               0.32               0.28               0.27

Notes: rxr is the log of the real exchange rate, FGDP (WGDP) is percentage growth in real GDP of filing country (rest of world) over
prior three years (avg) or previous year (-1). t-statistics in parenthesis beneath coefficients. Number of observations = 74.




Page 34
                                      Table 4. Poisson Estimation of Aggregate Filings


Model                                   (1)                          (2)                         (3)                          (4)

rxr (-1)                                4.57                        4.16                         3.39                         3.50
                                       (9.45)                      (9.27)                       (7.70)                       (7.94)
FGDP (avg)                                                                                       0.90                         0.95
                                                                                               (-7.96)                      (-2.77)
WGDP (avg)                                                                                                                    0.88
                                                                                                                            (-3.41)

Random effects                          NO                          YES                         YES                          YES


Notes: All variables defined as in Table 2. Estimates are reported as "incidence rate ratios". Number of observations = 74.
t-statistics reported for a test of no effect on filings (which corresponds to an IRR value of 1.0). Poisson goodness of fit test statistic
indicates that the data are incompatible with the Poisson model at a marginal significance level of 0.00.




Page 35
                             Table 5. Negative Binomial Estimation of Aggregate Filings


Model                                 (1)                        (2)                        (3)                        (4)

rxr (-1)                              4.18                      4.69                        3.67                       3.91
                                     (2.75)                    (3.40)                      (2.80)                     (2.96)
FGDP (avg)                                                                                  0.93                       0.97
                                                                                          (-2.05)                    (-0.61)
WGDP (avg)                                                                                                             0.89
                                                                                                                     (-1.21)

Random effects                        NO                        YES                        YES                        YES


Notes: All variables defined as in Table 2. Estimates are reported as "incidence rate ratios". Number of observations = 74.
t-statistics reported for a test of no effect on filings (which corresponds to an IRR value of 1.0).




Page 36
                                   Table 6. Negative Binomial Estimation of Aggregate Filings ---
                                   Country Specific Exchange Rate and Domestic GDP Response
Model                                 (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)                     (5)

rxr (AUS)                            51.6                      30.4                     38.2                                             36.2
                                    (4.46)                    (3.58)                   (4.09)                                           (4.43)
rxr (CAN)                            2.22                      0.93                     1.17                                             0.11
                                    (0.55)                   (-0.05)                   (0.11)                                          (-1.33)
rxr (EU)                             2.16                      2.04                     1.68                                             1.98
                                    (0.56)                    (0.55)                   (0.39)                                           (0.55)
rxr (US)                             2.51                      2.62                     2.60                                             2.61
                                    (1.57)                    (1.67)                   (1.70)                                           (1.79)
FGDP (avg)                                                     0.94                     1.00
                                                             (-1.56)                   (0.08)
WGDP (avg)                                                                              0.86
                                                                                      (-1.73)
rxr                                                                                                              3.56
                                                                                                                (2.75)
GDP (AUS)                                                                                                        .97                     .96
                                                                                                               (-0.99)                 (-1.01)
GDP (CAN)                                                                                                         .82                    .79
                                                                                                               (-2.99)                 (-3.50)
GDP (EU)                                                                                                          .92                    .90
                                                                                                               (-1.28)                 (-1.67)
GDP (US)                                                                                                          .97                    .95
                                                                                                               (-0.63)                 (-0.90)

Note: All regressions include random effects. All variables defined as in Table 2. Estimates are reported as "incidence rate ratios". Number of
observations = 74.




  Page 37
                   Table 7. Negative Binomial Estimation of Aggregate Filings, Excluding Steel


Model                                 (1)                        (2)                        (3)                         (4)

rxr (-1)                              8.64                      7.95                       8.74
                                     (4.14)                    (3.84)                     (4.04)
FGDP (avg)                                                      0.97                       1.03                        1.02
                                                               (-0.63)                    (-0.49)                     (0.36)
WGDP (avg)                                                                                 0.87                         .83
                                                                                          (-1.29)                     (-1.66)
rxr (AUS)                                                                                                              56.9
                                                                                                                      (3.73)
rxr (CAN)                                                                                                               .15
                                                                                                                      (-1.14)
rxr (EU)                                                                                                                .86
                                                                                                                      (-0.08)
rxr (US)                                                                                                               12.0
                                                                                                                      (4.11)


Note. All specifications include random effects. All variables defined as in Table 2. Estimates are reported as "incidence rate
ratios". Number of observations = 74.




Page 38
                               Table 8. Negative Binomial Estimation of Bilateral Filings

Model                           (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)

rxr (-1)                        3.28                   3.30                   3.37
                               (7.98)                 (8.14)                 (8.02)
rxr (AUS)                                                                                             7.80                   7.57
                                                                                                     (6.29)                 (6.14)
rxr (CAN)                                                                                             2.37                   2.37
                                                                                                     (2.54)                 (2.55)
rxr (EU)                                                                                              4.23                   4.22
                                                                                                     (4.47)                 (4.43)
rxr (US)                                                                                              2.09                   1.97
                                                                                                     (2.93)                 (2.66)
FGDP (avg)                                              0.97                   0.97                   0.97
                                                      (-6.12)                (-5.93)                (-5.36)
AGDP (avg)                                                                     1.00                   1.00                   1.00
                                                                             (-0.43)                (-0.48)                (-0.56)
GDP (AUS)                                                                                                                    0.96
                                                                                                                           (-5.01)
GDP (CAN)                                                                                                                    0.98
                                                                                                                           (-1.81)
GDP (EU)                                                                                                                     0.96
                                                                                                                           (-1.74)
GDP (US)                                                                                                                     0.98
                                                                                                                           (-1.71)
No. of Obs.                        3469                    3469                  3397                 3397                  3397
Note: All specifications include random effects for each reporting country-affected country pair.
t-statistics reported for a test of no effect on filings (which corresponds to an IRR value of 1.0). The number of observations falls in
specifications (3)-(5) due to missing values for affected country GDP.



Page 39
Total AD Filings                                Total AD Filings, excl. steel
       Australia                                       Canada

 80


 60


 40


 20


  0

       European Community                              USA

 80


 60


 40


 20


  0
      1980    1985   1990   1995   2000            1980      1985   1990   1995   2000

                                          AD Filings
                                      Figure 1
