                                                   




                              
                          
                                   


                                           !"#$% &%$'$()
                                         *$++,$- & %% #').(


                                          .,/ (0 #1$,2
                                  "331455666&(7$,&.,051#1$,)562



                              
                                8#))#!"9)$33) :$(9$
                                  #'7, ;0$ 2
                                     $!$'7$,2



                   
                 
    !"  #$          
    %       &  !  %   !   ' (  ) ""  
 '   *  +      
  %  !  '  '  ,'- . )") "
) %  /  0 / / 12 "  ) 3"+ 3
                                 
     4   (   ,5666789:    ! 
     '        * + 
         4   ,        

;:666 "  !   % -      + 
 +  <   +       ;
      
"$,$; ;, 3 )".,$ 0(#1 3#% .9(;#'$(3#%)# %9,$)#(;
3"$9!#) #,#;.<4
 !"#$% &%$'$()#(;*$++,$- & %% #').(
.,/ (0 #1$,.&2
$!$'7$,2
*.&22
                                              $%#%

 ;$!#;$"#)1#))$;) (!$.7$,39!#)#)/$;6"-!#1 3#%;.$)(.3+%.6+,.', !"3.1..,
!.9(3, $)&9!#)9)$;#!.(3$'1.,#,-$<#'1%$3. %%9)3,#3$" ) #,#;.<3"$:$,-'.;$)3+%.6.+
!#1 3#%+,.'3"$( 3$; 3#3$)3. (; #;9, (03"$)$!.(;0,$#30%.7#%!#1 3#%'#,/$37..'#+3$,&
#;"$1# ;'.,$#33$(3 .(3.3"$+ ,)30,$#30%.7#%!#1 3#%'#,/$37..'#+3$,"$' 0"3"#:$7$$(
%$)))9,1, )$;&=$,-% 33%$.+, 3 )"!#1 3#%$<1.,3)6$(33.1..,%#7.,#79(;#(3!.9(3, $)& (;$$;
#7.9336.3" ,;).+ 36$(33.3"$%#7.,)!#,!$$6.,%;6"$,$.(%-#3$(3".+3"$6.,%;>)1.19%#3 .(
% :$;#(;.(%-#7.93#?9#,3$,.+ 36$(33.%#7.,#79(;#(3 ) ##(; +, !#6"$,$#%'.)336.3" ,;)
.+3"$6.,%;>)1.19%#3 .(% :$;&"-#) 3!#9)$;7-).'$ (3$,(#3 .(#%'#,/$3+# %9,$.,6#) 3
;9$3.).'$)".,3+#%% (9(;$,%- (0$!.(.' !;$'.0,#1" !.,0$.0,#1" !+9(;#'$(3#%)3"#3'#;$
!#1 3#%>)1,.;9!3 : 3-%.6 (1..,!.9(3, $)" )1#1$,!.()3,9!3)#1#($%;#3#)$3+.,@!.9(3, $)6".
#)#0,.910.321$,!$(3.+, 3 )"!#1 3#%#(;9)$) 33.!.(!%9;$3"#3 (3$,(#3 .(#%!#1 3#%'#,/$3
+# %9,$A (!%9; (06"$3"$,3"$!.9(3,-6#).(.,.++3"$ .%; 3#(;#,;B6#)(.3 (:.%:$;& 33"$(,#(/)
3"$3",$$7 0+9(;#'$(3#%)3"#3'#33$,$;C)!"..% (0(#39,#%,$).9,!$)#(;;$'.0,#1"-&




 !"#$% &%$'$()                                      *$++,$- & %% #').(
$1#,3'$(3.+!.(.' !)                                 $1#,3'$(3.+!.(.' !)
#,:#,;( :$,) 3-                                      #,:#,;( :$,) 3-
#'7, ;0$ 2                                     #'7, ;0$ 2
#(;$(3$,+., (3$,(#3 .(#%$:$%.1'$(3                #(;
'!%$'$()D+#)&"#,:#,;&$;9                                #(;$(3$,+., (3$,(#3 .(#%$:$%.1'$(3
                                                        E6 %% #'D/9F($3)&"#,:#,;&$;9
                                        I. Introduction



Lucas and Two Views

       A decade has passed since Robert Lucas (1990) asked why capital does not flow from

rich to poor countries, posing what is widely known as the Lucas Paradox. His point that a

simple neoclassical growth model makes empirically untenable predictions regarding

differentials in the marginal product of capital between countries had been made before (e.g.,

Barro 1989; King and Rebelo 1989), but Lucas’ concise statement spawned the debate that

continues today.

       Lucas used a contemporary example to illustrate his paradox, the very modest flow of

capital from the United States to India during the second great global capital market boom,

after 1970. Had he paid more attention to the first great global capital market boom, after

1870, he might have been less surprised. Table 1 summarizes British investment experience

abroad just prior to World War I, and very little of it went to poor, capital-scarce and labor-

abundant countries. Indeed, about two-thirds of it went to the labor-scarce New World where

only a tenth of the world’s population lived, and only about a quarter of it went to labor-

abundant Asia and Africa where almost two-thirds of the world’s population lived. The

simplest explanation of this apparent paradox is that British capital chased after European

emigrants and that both were seeking cheap land and other natural resources (O’Rourke and

Williamson 1999, Chap. 12), although Table 1 shows that French and German capital did not

chase after the emigrants anywhere near as much as did the British. While French and




                                               1
German capital preferred European to New World opportunities, the same small shares of

went to Asia and Africa.1

         The venerable capital-chased-after-labor explanation argues that there must have been

an omitted third variable at work, and most economic observers of the late 19th century

would say that the omitted variable was natural resources. In contrast, most economic

observers of the late 20th century would say it was human capital. But surely the paradox

deserves more serious attention than that offered by some mono-causal natural resource or

human capital endowment explanation. In addition, we want to explore other explanations

recently offered by economic theorists as well as some old chestnuts that have lain on the

historical forest floor for some time. Furthermore, we want to sort out what role policy and

institutions played in the process—like the gold standard—after we have controlled for the

economic, demographic and political fundamentals. Finally, we hope to combine this study

of late 19th century British investment abroad with a similar study of late 20th century United

States investment abroad (Clemens ongoing) to learn how the main forces accounting for the

paradox have changed with time.

         The debate over the cause of the Lucas Paradox breaks down into two camps: those

who believe that capital is in fact highly productive in poor countries but does not flow there

due to failures in the global financial capital market or in the global capital goods market,

and those who believe that capital would not be very productive in poor countries even with

perfect capital markets and thus has no reason to flow there. Proponents of the neoclassical

revival in growth economics tend to fall into the former camp, while endogenous growth


1
 Unfortunately, we have not been able to secure the same kind of panel data for France and Germany that is available
for Britain in the four decades prior to World War I. Too bad, since we’d like to see whether French and German
investors obeyed the same laws of motion that characterized British investors, even though the latter favored the New
World.
                                                          2
economists tend to fall in the latter. We shall refer to the first claim as the capital market

failure view, and the second as the unproductive capital view.

           These two camps have their counterparts in the economic (social, political and world)

history literature, and it is that literature which we stress in the summary that follows.2



                   II. What Might Explain the Direction of British Capital Flows?



The Capital Market Failure View

           The wide range of studies positing failure of a perfectly competitive international

capital market invites the following organization. The demand for foreign savings can be

choked off by tariffs and other distortionary policies that prevent capital goods price

equalization, resulting in wide user cost differentials between countries even where financial

costs are equalized. The supply of foreign savings can be deflected by a gamut of other

capital market failures, like adverse selection, herding, unenforceable property rights, the

absence of a stable monetary standard, and colonial intervention through the application of

force. Each will be discussed in turn.

           Tariffs, Transport Costs and Other Distortions. Matthew Higgins (1993;

summarized in Taylor 1998) demonstrates that after correcting for higher prices of capital

goods in many contemporary less development countries (LDCs), much of the incentive to

invest in those countries evaporates. Empirical work by Charles Jones (1994) on the years

following 1950, and William Collins and Jeffrey Williamson (2000) on the years before

1950, extend the investigation of J. Bradford DeLong and Lawrence Summers (1991) to show


2
    A recent survey of empirical literature on the Lucas Paradox can be found in Clemens (2000).
                                                            3
that distortions in equipment prices significantly depress domestic investment as well as

growth. What distortion might prevent the capital market from sending enough financial

capital to poor countries where the marginal product of capital is high? The idea that tariffs

on manufactures early in industrial development could deter capital flows, by decreasing the

“national dividend” from which that capital takes its return, is as old as List (1856, pp. 227,

314) and Pigou (1906, p.11).3 Transport costs might do the same. Citing the example of

Argentina after the 1930s, Alan Taylor (1998) shows how fiscal indiscipline, overvalued

currencies and import substitution policies—and their accompanying price distortions—can

stifle capital flows even when the undistorted marginal product of capital is high. Collins

and Williamson, however, show that the late 19th century was very different than the 20th

century explored by DeLong, Taylor and Summers, since tariffs lowered the relative price of

capital goods in the previous case where equipment was much less tradable (Collins and

Williamson 2000, Table 4) while they raised them in the latter case where equipment was

much more tradable.

           Adverse Selection. Applying asymmetrical information theories, several authors have

argued that the international credit market is rationed by adverse selection. That is, wealthy

investors will not accept the high returns to capital available in developing countries because

the presence of that capital may attract high-risk borrowers, creating potential losses which

exceed the gains due to otherwise outstanding investment opportunities.

           Herding and the Foreign Bias. One of the older hypotheses used to explain Victorian

and Edwardian Britain’s economic slowdown and alleged failure was that the City of London

systematically discriminated against domestic borrowers, starved the home industry for funds


3
    O’Rourke (2000) provides evidence that protective tariffs raised TFP before WW1 in ten economies more advanced in

                                                           4
by an irrational foreign bias, thus contributing to an accumulation slowdown. According to

this thesis, market failure at home accounts for the huge capital export from Britain

(O’Rourke and Williamson 1999: p. 226). Evidence offered by Michael Edelstein (1976,

1981, 1982) certainly did grave damage to the thesis, but it may still have power in

accounting for the heavy preference for New World investment. After all, this foreign

capital export boom seems to be characterized by the same attributes theorists assign to

herding behavior in financial capital markets today (Banerjee 1992; Cont and Bouchaud

2000).

          Unenforceable Property Rights. Even if an investor can easily prove noncompliance

to an investment contract, this information is of little use if the enforcement mechanism is

inadequate or, even worse, non-existent. Thus, foreign investment will not take place in

potential-borrowing countries where contract enforcement and property rights are absent, and

wide differences in the marginal product of capital can exist. Contracts may be

unenforceable due to the absence of needed judiciary and executive public institutions, both

at the national and international level. Aarón Tornell and Andrés Velasco (1992) proposed

just such an explanation for low capital flows to poor countries. Sometimes these capital

flows can even be negative, as in Cecil Rhodes’ Africa, when rents from mines underwent

capital flight to rich countries where returns were low but property rights were enforced by

law rather than by gunpowder and steel. Riccardo Faini (1996) offers another example. He

shows how labor mobility out of countries with low capital stocks—like 19th century Ireland

and Italy—toward those with high capital stocks (and thus high wages)—like the New

World—can keep the marginal product of capital low even in countries with low capital: by



their industrialization, just as List said it would.
                                                       5
depopulation. Since labor cannot be used as collateral for loans no matter how profitable,

these countries cannot borrow against their labor force to build sufficient physical capital

stocks to prevent the emigration.

       Stable Monetary Systems. The global economy was dominated by the gold standard

after the 1870s, when the German Reich and the post-Civil War United States joined much of

the rest of Europe. Many observers argue that the gold standard promoted international

capital mobility by eliminating exchange risk (as summarized in Eichengreen 1996). Others

argue that the gold standard commitment provided an investor guarantee that the country in

question would pursue conservative fiscal and monetary policies (Bordo and Kydland 1995;

Bordo and Rockoff 1996), policies that would make potential investors more willing to risk

their capital overseas. While the argument certainly seems plausible, it is, of course,

possible that the gold standard policy choice and the foreign capital inflow were both

determined by more fundamental influences. Barry Eichengreen (1992) has persuasively

argued the case for these political and economic fundamentals, a position taken some time

ago by Karl Polanyi (1944) and restated in modern economic language recently by Maurice

Obstfeld and Taylor (1998).

       Colonial Intervention. The late 19th century was a remarkably peaceful and stable

era, and colonial intervention (plus gun-boat diplomacy) created a friendly environment for

international lending, or so says a very large literature. After controlling for other things that

mattered to investors, did British foreign capital follow the flag or follow the market?



The Unproductive Capital View




                                                6
       The alternative view of the Lucas Paradox is to explain it by appealing to absent and

critical third factors. This unproductive capital view actually assumes perfect financial

capital markets, although it stresses that there may be failures in other markets that might

impact on this one. The supply of foreign capital may be cut back by positive correlations of

business cycles between developed and developing countries, since wealthy-country investors

seek both high average returns and insurance against financial disaster that a diversified

portfolio offers. The demand for international investment can be choked off by limitations on

internationally immobile third factors such as schooling, skills, natural resources, urban

agglomerations, specialized intermediate inputs, and what has come to be called social capital

(Putnam 1995).

       Business Cycle and Long Swing Correlations. Several economists (Cox et al. 1985;

Tobin 1992; Bohn and Tesar 1996) have sought to explain gross (rather than net) capital

flows by the increased supply of foreign capital available to countries with business cycles

uncorrelated or, even better, inversely correlated with that of the host country, allowing

portfolio diversification for investors in the latter. This theoretical view will find a

comfortable haven in history since the inverse pre-1913 correlation between British domestic

investment and capital exports has long been appreciated by economic historians, often called

long swings by the literature written in the 1950s and 1960s (Cairncross 1953; Thomas 1954;

Williamson 1964; Abramovitz 1968; Easterlin 1968; Edelstein 1982). Perhaps this

correlation in the aggregate also played a role in influencing the direction taken by British

foreign capital.

       Internationally Immobile Third Factors. Consider a neoclassical production function

Y = AKαLβSγ, where S is some third factor and there are constant returns (α+β+γ=1).

                                                7
Taking derivatives, the marginal product of capital YK and the marginal product of labor YL

are

                                              YK = AαK α −1 Lβ S γ
                                              YL = AβLβ −1 K α S γ

It is easy to see that low marginal products of capital and low marginal products of labor can

coexist—provided the country is sufficiently poor in S.

          The economic history literature would be quick to offer a candidate for this immobile

third factor role—natural resources, and David Bloom and Jeffrey Sachs (1998) have argued

the same case when looking for explanations of African performance more recently. It has a

venerable tradition in economic history,4 and we will give that tradition plenty of scope to

influence the empirical results later in this paper.

          In his original note, however, Lucas took the view that the immobile third factor was

human capital—skills and schooling. While there are reasons to suppose that human capital

was much less central to the growth process in the 19th than in the 20th century, Gabriel

Tortella (1994) has effectively argued the contrary to help account for Iberian backwardness.

    Kevin O’Rourke (1992) gets the same result by introducing the assumption of asymmetry

between physical capital and labor in his study of 19th century Irish emigration. If Irish

workers with the greatest human capital endowments self-selected for emigration, effective

labor per worker in Ireland might have decreased with respect to Britain, meaning that

effective capital-labor ratios, and thus capital’s marginal product, might have converged

between Ireland and Britain, thus choking off the capital flow from Britain across the Irish

Sea. Similarly, the work of Gregory Clark (1987) on cotton textile mills across the globe just


4
 The literature is large. See, for example, Cairncross 1953; DiTella 1982; Green and Urquhart 1976; Kuznets 1958;
O’Rourke and Williamson 1999: Chap. 12.
                                                         8
before World War I shows enormous differences in profitability, and cheap labor did not help

poor countries since it was very unproductive. However, Clark thinks it was local

environmental and cultural forces that reduced worker productivity rather than skills and

schooling per se.

       Consider another immobile third factor that might influence international capital

flows. The dependency ratio, defined as the percentage of the population not engaged in

productive activities (whether remunerated or not), is typically viewed as an immobile

characteristic of a country’s labor force. It increases in response to baby booms, improved

child survival rates and adult longevity, although the latter was a minor event in the 19th

century. Assuming that dependents affect a household’s ability to save and that labor force

participation affects productivity and therefore investment, dependency rates have the

potential to impact capital flows. Demographic models like those of Higgins and Williamson

(1997) and Bloom and Williamson (1998) show how changes in the demographic structure can

matter. As the country develops, the demographic transition to a lower youth dependency

burden and a more mature adult population increases the productivity of both the population

and the labor force. Further development, of course, can reverse the effect as the elderly

dependency burden rises.

       In order for the demographic structure to affect capital flows in a perfect capital

market, it must have differential effects on investment and savings. Its effect on investment

is clear from the simple third factor equations above: lower youth dependency and higher

adult participation rates means a higher marginal product of capital, which, in turn, implies

more investment demand. And more investment demand implies more demand for foreign

capital unless domestic savings increases. The response of domestic saving to a change in

                                               9
the dependency burden is, however, less clear as those who have followed the debate over the

life cycle model know. While the negative impact of the youth dependency rate on saving is

often ambiguous on modern evidence,5 it is unambiguous on late 19th century evidence

(Taylor and Williamson 1994 and). In the absence of any direct information on investment

demand, we expect the dependency rate to play a role in determining capital flows, young

populations being more dependent on foreign capital.

          There are other candidates for the immobile third factor role. In their recent efforts to

reclaim the importance of geography on late 20th century economic performance, Bloom and

Sachs (1998) stress distance from periphery to core, a factor which is likely to have been

even more important in the 19th century when distance had a bigger impact on cost. Helmut

Reisen (1994) has explicitly pointed to the potential role of geographic distance to

neighboring markets and urban agglomerations on capital flows. The seminal industrial

organization theories of Raymond Vernon (1966) and Stephen Hymer (1976) fall into this

category as well; their vision of scale effects, managerial knowledge, distribution networks,

product cycles and other firm-specific intangibles can all be modeled as immobile third

factors affecting the marginal product of capital. Others have explored yet another immobile

third factor—specialized, nontraded intermediate inputs.

          It is very clear that we have enough theoretical assertions to motivate empirical

analysis. What’s missing in the literature on the Lucas Paradox, however, is the empirical

analysis, and at this point economic history has much to offer.



                                     III. Where Did British Capital Go?


5
    But see the late 20th century results reported by Higgins and Williamson (1997).
                                                            10
         The Lucas Paradox badly needs an empirical test. To do so, modern social scientists

have gone to Ghanaian factory floors in search of unproductive capital (e.g. Bigsten et al.

1998) and they have polled investment bankers in search of international capital market

failure (e.g. Bhattacharya et al. 1997). While these methods of settling the question are

inaccessible to historians, we do have volumes of indirect information on foreign capital

productivity and market failure which was generated by the actions of British investors prior

to 1914. We do not know for sure how they made their decisions, but we can make

inferences if we are willing to assume that they wished to maximize returns.

         To the degree that return-maximizing international investors were attracted to or

deterred from countries with fundamental national characteristics which affected in equal

measure the returns to national or international investors, we can reject the capital market

failure view. 6 To be precise, we say that the market for British capital exports exhibits the

Lucas Paradox when a country’s GDP per capita—without any other explanatory variables

present—has a powerful positive affect on the share of total British capital exports received

by that country. We say that we “explain” the Lucas Paradox when variables representing

country fundamentals and market failure have a statistically significant effect on British

capital inflows and GDP per capita loses its positive significance.

         We turn now to the recorded behavior of British overseas investors between 1870 and

1913, the first great globalization boom. We choose British capital for two reasons. First,

the British evidence is available, and it is not for other capital exporters. Second, Britain


6
  Remember that this view posits international capital market failure rather than domestic capital market failure; the latter
implies unproductive capital for investors of all flags. Note also that the converse of our test is not true. That is, while
the determination of flows by fundamental national characteristics is sufficient to reject the capital market failure view,
lack of such determination is merely a necessary condition to reject the unproductive capital view.
                                                             11
was then the world’s leading capital exporter, far exceeding the combined capital exports of

its nearest competitors, France and Germany (Feis 1930, pp. xix-xxi, 71). London was,

quite simply, “the chief abode of the great god Money” (Turner 1900, p.33). The keystone

of our analysis is the data on gross British capital exports collected by Leland Jenks and

Matthew Simon, as reported by Irving Stone (1999; 2000), broken down annually by

destination and type.

        As potential determinants of those flows, we have assembled, from the ground up, a

large database documenting 34 of the 36 countries which received most of the British capital

during this period. The two countries eliminated, Rhodesia and South Africa, present

insurmountable data-collection challenges. In 1914, our 34 countries held approximately

86% of the world’s population, produced 97% of the world’s GDP, and received 92% of

British capital exports.7

        The database, which the Data Appendix discusses in detail, contains a range of

variables related to market failure and capital productivity. On the capital market failure

side, it includes import duties as a fraction of total import value, colonial affiliation,

monetary regime, exchange rate variance against the pound sterling, changes in the terms of

trade, and an index combining shipping costs and distance from London. On the capital

productivity side, it includes the youth dependency ratio, net immigration rates, primary

school enrollment rates, urbanization, and indices of natural resource abundance made

popular by Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner (1995). The database also includes real PPP-




7
 The countries are Argentina, Australia, Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Cuba, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia (Dutch East Indies), Italy, Japan, Mexico, New
Zealand, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Russia, Serbia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand (Siam), Turkey (Ottoman
Empire without Egypt and European territories), the USA, and Uruguay. See Data Appendix.
                                                       12
adjusted unskilled urban wages relative to Great Britain for thirty countries, and prices of

capital equipment for eight.

          Each data point represents one country in each of six time periods, shown in Figure 1.

    The decision to aggregate our annual data into multi-year periods was based on a desire to

defuse the effects of outlier years and the need for a right-hand side matrix of significant

variance. Six periods were chosen to utilize local minima as divisions between successive

waves of outflows. Economic historians since Hobson (1914, pp. 142-9) have divided prewar

British capital exports into three periods, separated by two large troughs. The first

corresponds to a depression in the aftermath of the Franco-Prussian war and a series of

defaults in 1874, and the second to economic collapse in Argentina, Australia, and elsewhere

in 1890-91. We exploit minor local minima to achieve a slightly higher resolution, balancing

the need to aggregate against our desire to reveal dynamic changes in flow determinants.8

          Unlike most studies of British capital exports,9 ours focuses exclusively on what

pulled British capital into some countries versus others, rather than what pushed it out of

Great Britain. Our dependent variable is therefore the value of total British capital exported

to a given country during a given period as a fraction of all British capital exported during

that period. Push effects are thus entirely eliminated. Population scale effects are eliminated

by the inclusion of log population share on the right-hand side.10



The Determinants of Capital Destination


8
  Another concern influencing the division of flows into periods was the possible creation of a large number of left-
hand-side zeros in a given period if the divisions were too fine, with the consequent risk of censored data and material
non-linearities. Given our six-period division, an average of 2.2 countries out of 34 received no British capital in each
period, with the largest number being 4 countries (in Period I) and the smallest number being 0 countries (in Period
VI).
9
  E.g. Cain and Hopkins (1980) or Richardson (1972).
10
   Population Share is country population divided by the sum of the populations of all 34 countries in the first year of the
                                                            13
         Rejecting Capital Market Failure. Our central result, presented in Table 2, is that

the Lucas Paradox was alive and well during 1870-1913, and that it can be explained during

1894-1913 in a way that is sufficient to reject the capital market failure view.

         Note first the significant, positive effect of GDP per capita (alone) on flows—the

original puzzle expounded by Lucas. During the period of a relatively thin and volatile

international market for British capital through the 1880’s, the positive effect of GDP per

capita on flows survives the inclusion of proxies for market failure and of fundamental

national characteristics. Following the early 1890’s, however, the Paradox does not survive

the inclusion of other variables: after accounting for the significant capital attraction of

natural resource abundance and (after the turn of the century) education, population growth

and immigration, the Paradox disappears. Since fundamental national characteristics can

explain the Paradox during this period, there is little room left for the capital market failure

view.

         There is a notable exception to this story, namely the significant negative impact of

transport costs on flows during period VI. This might come as no surprise, since it was

between 1907 and 1912 that transoceanic shipping costs—which had been in general decline

since 1870—spiked upwards and gained back half the ground they had lost in the previous 37

years (Isserlis 1938). How can we gauge the relative importance of this indicator of capital

market failure during period VI against the several significant indicators of unproductive

capital? First, no other capital market failure indicator mattered—not the Gold Standard, not

the height of tariffs, and not colonialism. Second, we are skeptical that transport costs can

fully explain the Paradox in period VI, given that unproductive capital fundamentals were



period. Omitting China from the sample does not materially alter results.
                                                          14
able to explain it fully in period V without any significant help from transport costs. Third,

only around one eighth of the explained variation in flows during period VI is due to

transport costs—an indicator of market failure.

         The results in Table 2 are robust to several changes of specification. Consider just

two examples. If, instead of the fraction of the period the country was on the Gold Standard,

we substitute the fraction of the period the country was on a gold, silver, or bimetallic

standard, the variable remains insignificant in all periods. Substituting the real PPP-adjusted

urban wage relative to that of Great Britain for GDP per capita does not significantly change

the results either. 11

         Identifying the Fundamentals That Mattered. Which of the underlying fundamentals

measured here were doing most of the work in dictating where British capita went? One

useful way of sorting out important from unimportant variables is to calculate “beta

coefficients.”12 When we make this calculation for the last period—the years 1907 to 1913—

here is what those beta coefficients look like in absolute value: fraction of children enrolled

in primary school, 0.92; primary product share in exports, 0.81; immigration, 0.51; transport

costs, 0.36; and population growth rate, 0.30. This suggests that fundamentals that mattered

most were good endowments of education, skills and schooling plus natural resources. Still,

demographic forces mattered too, here captured by immigration and population growth. As

we pointed out above, the only capital market failure variable that mattered was

transportation cost, and it takes a distant fourth place.


11
   However, using real wages does decrease the significance of education in period VI (down to being significant merely
at the 16% level). This is hardly a surprise, since higher real wages capture some of the effect of increased human
capital.
12
   Defined as the estimate of the coefficient on the variable in question multiplied by the ratio of the standard deviation of
the underlying explanatory variable to the standard deviation of the dependent variable. Although without formal
statistical content, the beta coefficient can be interpreted as the number of standard deviations of the regressand
explained by one standard deviation of the regressor, and is one indication of the relative “importance” of different
                                                             15
         Since the measurement of “natural resource endowment” can be (and has been)

debated, and since the variable joins schooling for top billing, some sensitivity analysis is in

order. Substituting land area for primary product share of exports gives positive and

significant coefficients only in periods I and VI. Both of these variables were popularized as

indicators of natural resource abundance by Sachs and Warner (1995). Land area can capture

many effects potentially deterrent to capital flows that are unrelated to resource abundance,

such as the deterrence of low population density to the creation and diffusion of new

technologies. A third indicator they used, primary product-based exports as a share of GDP,

only carries a positive and significant coefficient in period I. This variable, however, also

has limitations as an indicator of natural resource abundance in a nineteenth century context.

Many countries in the sample exported almost entirely primary products, making this

variable highly correlated with the size of the export sector relative to the economy. Since

much of British capital was invested in export-related industries, there is reverse causation

from British capital investment on the left-hand side to the share of exports in GDP, and

therefore to the share of primary product-based exports in GDP. This endogeneity makes

coefficients on the variable suspect.

         The Deepening of Capital Markets Through Time. What made flows respond to

fundamentals after 1894 more than they had previously? Figure 1 suggests that the

international capital market was simply deeper than it had been before.13 Transoceanic trade

awoke from post-Boer War depression, the Russo-Japanese war stimulated borrowing, the

Canadian and Argentine railways expanded, and British capital spread to a wider area than

ever before—including major movements to Brazil, Mexico, Chile, Egypt, South Africa,


regressors.

                                               16
India, Russia, and the Far East (Hobson 1914, pp. 157-8). The speculative bubbles

surrounding American range-cattle in the 1880’s and Australian construction in the 1890’s

had burst and gone (Court 1965, pp. 216-225), and the Argentine-located Baring crisis was

over. Herbert Feis (1930, pp. 12-13) puts it thus:

            Changing political relations took British capital into countries from which it had
            previously abstained--Japan [Alliance of 1902], Russia [Anglo-Russian agreement,
            1907], and Turkey. But more important than these causes in producing a great
            growth in foreign investment was the fact that during the 1900-1914 period those
            distant lands to which the capital had been going in earlier periods, seemed to have
            overcome the risks and crashes of their first growth. Now in the greater stability and
            greater order of their development, they needed still more capital than before and
            offered surer return. Or—the idea presents itself in alternative form—it was as
            though many regions of the world in which British capital had invested itself had come
            to fit themselves better for the investment, learning from pioneer failures. In their use
            of capital they were tending to resemble more and more the land from which the
            capital came. ... In spite of the deferring influence of financial stringency, losses,
            war, and the like, there comes to the observer of this process of British capital
            investment a sense that the great increase in investment that occurred after 1900 had
            been prepared by the earlier investment. Conditions were created which made the
            borrowing regions more safely penetrable, capable of using more capital well ...


We suspect that regularities dictating who got British capital prior to 1894 are hidden by a

thin global market for that capital. The deepening of that market after 1893 allows us to

better isolate the determinants of those flows. It is here that the evidence rejecting capital

market failure explanations of the Lucas Paradox is strongest.



Capital Flows to Governments and to the Private Sector

            Disaggregating capital flows by recipient sector allows us to learn even more about

how they were determined. Table 3 shows that during most of the prewar years, British




13
     About 60% of British capital exports that occurred during 1870-1914 flowed after 1894.
                                                           17
capital exports were primarily invested in the private sector of the destination country. What

drove these private and public flows, and how did they interact?

       Tables 4 and 5 repeat the estimation presented in Table 2, but break it down by the

private and public recipient distinction. Investment in the private sector drives the results in

Table 2; there is in fact little meaningful difference between the determinants of total flows

and those of flows to the private sector. While Table 4 (private-sector recipients) closely

resembles Table 2 in all aspects, Table 5 (public-sector recipients) does not. Abundant

anecdotal evidence suggests that warfare was the main determinant of demand for sovereign

borrowing, which in itself would make capital flows to governments unrelated to recipient

country characteristics even without international market failure. There were massive loans

to the French and German governments during the Franco-Prussian War in the 1870’s, to the

South African government at the time of the Boer War in the 1890’s, and to the Japanese

government to finance its war with Russia just after 1900. For each of these countries, total

wartime sovereign borrowing dramatically exceeded the cumulative total of all peacetime

borrowing during the five decades that preceded the First World War. Contemporary

observers (e.g. van Oss 1898, p. 228) likewise identified warfare as the primary determinant

of sovereign borrowing from Britain.

       We must be cautious, however, in drawing a hard and clear line between flows to

governments and flows to the private sector, as Simon, Jenks and Stone defined them. For

one thing, government involvement in many of these “private sector” loans tended to be

heavy—especially in the case of railroads, the largest category of private sector borrowing.

Whether through land grants, subsidies, or loan guarantees, governments were indirect

partners to many private sector investments (Nurkse 1954, p. 749). Furthermore, when

                                               18
analyzing these flows from the perspective of the 21st century, we must remember that most

of these private-sector flows went to investments in what Simon (1968, p. 23) calls “social

overhead capital.” These included projects with significant positive external effects, projects

like railroads and public utilities, today often undertaken by government borrowers.

       Based on the behavior of British flows to the private sector, we have rejected the

capital markets failure view. But what can we say about government-bound British flows?

Does the capital market failure view apply here? Lack of evidence supporting the

unproductive capital view is a necessary condition for acceptance of the capital markets

failure view, but it is not sufficient. After all, this necessary condition could easily be

brought about by demand effects such as wartime borrowing unrelated to either country

fundamentals or market failure, and there is ample anecdotal evidence that this was indeed

the case. Still, historians such as Feis (1930, pp. 98-117) have documented highly unreliable

contract enforcement efforts by the British government on behalf of British investors in

foreign governments—suggestive of widespread failure in the sovereign debt market. In spite

of the Palmerston Circular of 1849, proclaiming a “national duty” to intervene with foreign

governments to protect British investors (Feis p. 103), many shirts were lost in the sovereign

debt crisis of 1876 (Court 1965, p. 216). In other episodes such as the Baring crisis

following massive default on Argentine sovereign loans, the British government and central

bank did step in (Ferns 1960, p. 459). It appears that such interventions were often guided

more by British political or territorial aspirations than by a sense of duty to its investors.

Feis describes intervention on behalf of British investors in the Egyptian case as secondary to

the primary goal to secure influence over the Suez Canal (p. 108). In light of these




                                                19
qualitative accounts, we cannot reject capital market failure explanations for government-

bound flows, but we can and do reject capital market failure for private-sector-bound flows.



Did Investment in Governments Crowd In Private Investment?

           The analysis presented in Table 6 suggests that previous investment in governments

“crowded in” subsequent private sector investment. For this table, capital flow data were

divided into ten periods of five years each, spanning 1865-1914, and the figure for flows

within a given period represents total flows of that type during all five years. Thus, “lagged”

refers to the five-year period preceding the one in question. Because two lags were necessary

for the panel fixed-effects model, the number of observations is (34 countries x 10 periods) –

(34 countries x 2 lags) = 272. Similarly, the Anderson-Hsiao estimator, which uses 3 lags,

lowers the number of observations to 238.

           The panel fixed-effect estimates reveal a positive effect of lagged public sector

investment on current private sector investment (significant at 9%), while the effect of lagged

private sector investment on current public sector investment is much smaller and

insignificant. It is well-known, however, that inclusion of a lagged dependent variable in a

fixed-effects panel regression can produce severely biased coefficients, especially for small

panels like this one (Nickell 1981). Anderson and Hsiao (1981) offer a solution by

instrumenting for the once-differenced dependent variable with the twice-differenced

dependent variable.14 The results of this Anderson-Hsiao estimation are also reported in

Table 6. The crowding-in effect of public sector investment on private sector is confirmed,

and again no such causation is seen from private sector investment to public sector


14
     Judson and Owen (1996) use a Monte Carlo approach to demonstrate that the Anderson-Hsiao estimator essentially

                                                           20
investment. It is no surprise that the coefficient estimate on lagged public investment as a

determinant of current private investment increases in magnitude with the Anderson-Hsiao

estimator, since both Nickell and Judson and Owen make it clear that the direction of the

relevant bias would be negative in this case. Note the negative coefficient on past private

investment as a determinant of current private investment, likely reflecting the fact that in

each period private investment was expanding into countries that had never received it before.

The lack of such a coefficient on public flows reflects the aforementioned patterns of public

investment, which tended to grow large in wartime and fall thereafter, rather than

progressively expanding.




Equipment Prices and Expensive Capital Goods

         Equipment price series for this period are available in Collins and Williamson (2000,

Table 2), but they are only available for eight countries,15 all of which fall at the upper end of

the per capita income spectrum. The consequent degrees-of-freedom and sample-selection

biases prevent inclusion of these prices in the Table 2 specifications. Thus, we cannot

directly observe whether expensive capital goods in the recipient country choked off financial

capital inflows from Britain, but we can make some qualified inferences based on the

behavior of equipment prices with respect to the fundamental and failure variables whose

effects on flows we have previously identified.

         Collins and Williamson have already analyzed the determinants of their equipment

price data (ibid., Table 4); Table 7 expands slightly on their results by including variables on


eliminates this bias, though it is not as efficient as other methods for small panels.

                                                             21
schooling, transportation costs, and urbanization. The regressions of Table 7 take as their

dependent variable the “relative equipment price ratio”—that is, equipment prices as a

fraction of consumer goods prices in each country, divided by the same fraction for Great

Britain.16 Just as Collins and Williamson predict, skill endowments decrease the relative

equipment price ratio over time, while the effects of tariffs are ambiguous. Table 7 shows

that nearly all of the variation in the relative equipment price ratio can be explained by

transport costs and schooling—significant determinants of capital flows—but not by tariff

barriers, which had little effect on capital flows. Note the declining effect of shipping costs

on equipment prices, as ocean travel got cheaper.

         One interpretation of these results is that better-educated countries absorbed new

technologies faster and could make their own equipment rather than import it, and those that

imported it paid more for it when transportation costs were higher. Again, the results are

merely suggestive, and we can make no conclusion about the effects of equipment prices on

flows without observing those effects. But it is indeed suggestive that high equipment prices

are almost perfectly predicted by variables proven to predict low capital flows.



                                       IV. Discussion and Historiography



         The question of whether pre-WWI British capital exports were driven by capital

productivity or by market failure has been around at least since Hobson (1914), who was

writing at the capital export peak. Hobson raised the question and then offered as an



15
  Canada, Denmark, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway, Sweden, and the United States.
16
  (Pe,j /Pc,j )/(Pe,GB/Pc,GB), where Pe,j denotes the absolute price level of equipment in country j; Pc,j denotes absolute price
level of consumer goods in country j; and GB stands for Great Britain.
                                                               22
explanation the declining importance of market failure and thus, presumably, the rising

importance of capital productivity fundamentals:

         The causes of foreign investment are primarily economic, and centre in the return
         which capitalists expect to derive from various kinds of investment, and in the risks
         and uncertainties which investors are willing to assume. Other things being equal,
         the investor will naturally prefer the investment that yields him the largest income.
         But it is often difficult to judge the quality of a possible investment in a distant land,
         especially when that land is inhabited by a different race of men, possessing different
         institutions, and speaking a strange tongue. Barriers to intercourse impede the flow
         of capital to those parts of the world where it would yield the highest return. … This
         tendency, however, is now much weaker than it has been in the past … (p. xii)


Were Hobson alive today, he probably would want to leave the above paragraph unchanged.17

 After all, the evidence we have presented suggests that the largest capital exporter in history

was indeed sending its money where it could earn the highest return, and that was where the

fundamentals served to raise capital’s productivity. Our answer to Hobson’s question is not

new. As Edelstein (1982, p. 7) points out, the idea that third factors like land could allow

for increasing returns to British capital exports in newly-settled regions goes back at least to

Adam Smith (1776, pp. 89-93). Feis (1930, pp. 25, 31) also favored third-factor

fundamentals by asserting that the “British investor was sending his capital where there was

the growth of youth, and where the land was yielding riches to the initial application of

human labor and technical skill,” undeterred by “[s]trong risks, bad climates” and

“isolation.” After clearly identifying the Lucas Paradox by stating that “income per head in

the principal debtor countries of the nineteenth century—the newly settled regions—can never

have been far below European levels,” Ragnar Nurkse (1954, p. 757) also concludes that

capital was attracted “not to the neediest countries with their ‘teeming millions,’” but rather



17
  However, he might wish to revise his sanguine 1914 prediction that “the opening up of the world will proceed with
unexampled celerity” (p. 161).
                                                         23
chased the “great migration” to the “spacious, fertile, and virtually empty plains” of certain

countries (pp. 745, 750).



Things That Didn’t Matter

       The contribution of this paper has been to provide statistical confirmation of the above

views (which precede those of Lucas) and to weigh them directly and favorably against

competitors. We now consider several popular competing explanations of British capital

flows for which there appear to be no empirical support.

       Terms of Trade. We can find no evidence supporting the view that capital flows were

driven by recent shocks to the terms of trade. Brinley Thomas (1968, pp. 49-50) felt that

“movements in the terms of trade are to be looked upon more as consequences than as causal

forces” of capital flows. “Cairncross [1953],” he writes, “has to go out of his way to find

reasons why heavy British capital exports in the eighties should have coincided with a

deterioration in the terms of trade of the borrowing countries, for the link seemed to work so

well in the nineties and the 1900s.” In defense of his critique, Thomas expounds a plausible

model of causation from capital flows to terms of trade. Our results support his critique (but

not necessarily his model).

       Colonial Status. Many historians have viewed British capital exports as part and

parcel of British colonial expansion. This view appears reasonable in light of such

developments as the 1900 revision of the Colonial Stocks Act, which promoted Empire

investment by allowing registered securities in British colonies and dominions to be

purchased by trust bodies and large institutional investors previously banned from foreign

investment (Feis 1930, pp. 92-95). Yet, many have criticized this view by simply citing

                                              24
counter-examples like non-Empire capital flows to Argentina and the United States, that is,

by implementing what amounts to a univariate regression. Simon (1968, p. 24), for example,

uses such analysis to conclude that the “availability of abundant private ventures and the

expanding needs of various public authorities, especially in the independent countries of the

New World and to a lesser degree in Europe and Asia, more than counterbalanced the real or

‘alleged’ advantages associated with the protection of the British flag.” Similarly, Platt

(1986, p. 95) concludes that “[b]efore the war, the benefits of investing outside the Empire

were sufficient to overcome whatever slight advantage might exist for the British Dominions

and colonies …” What we add here is multivariate, quantitative support their univariate,

qualitative analysis. Our results leave no doubt whatsoever that markets mattered far more

than flag for private-sector British investment heading abroad.

            The Gold Standard. Eichengreen (1996, p. 18) has stated unequivocally that in the

1870s, “[i]ndustrialization rendered the one country already on gold, Great Britain, the

world’s leading economic power and the main source of foreign finance. This encouraged

other countries seeking to trade with and import capital from Britain to follow its example.”18

 How, then, do we interpret our inability to detect any significant influence of the Gold

Standard on British capital flows? Was going on gold a misguided fad? Probably not, and

here are five alternative explanations for our otherwise revisionist finding:

            1) The effects of economic, demographic and geographic fundamentals simply

                outweighed the effects of the Gold Standard on capital flows. Michael Bordo and

                Anna Schwartz (1996, p. 41) find anecdotal evidence that “adherence to the rule

                by Argentina may have had some marginal influence on capital calls on new issues


18
     For an anecdote on how capital flows to Brazil stagnated after departure from the Gold Standard, see Eichengreen

                                                            25
                of securities in London before 1890 ..., but that the key determinant was the

                opening up of the country’s vast resources to economic development once

                unification and a modicum of political stability were achieved.” We confirm their

                finding on a far larger scale.

         2) Flows may have reacted to the arrival of information about adherence to the Gold

                Standard rather than to actual changes in the monetary regime. Analyzing both

                Argentina and the United States, Bordo and Schwartz conclude that “events

                suggesting the restoration of convertibility during suspension and threats to

                convertibility during adherence seem to be associated with increases and declines

                in capital calls on new issues of securities in London” (1996, p. 44).

         3) There may be measurement error in our indicator variable for adherence to the

                Gold Standard, given that varying degrees of de facto adherence often

                accompanied de jure adherence. Historians have debated, for example, the true

                monetary regimes of Italy and Austria during this period (de Cecco 1996, p. 108).

         4) Several historians document reverse causation from capital flows to Gold Standard

                adherence. If these effects were sufficiently large, the resulting endogeneity

                would throw into question our coefficients. Marcello de Cecco (1996, p. 105)

                records sly international arbitrageurs betting against the currencies of countries

                from which large sovereign debt payments were about to come due—to a degree

                that threatened their ability to maintain a fixed exchange rate. In a different

                mechanism of reverse causation, Jaime Reis (2000, p. 88) describes how

                transmission of negative macroeconomic shocks from the lending core to the



(1992, p. 60)
                                                    26
           borrowing periphery via the inflexible Standard might have motivated certain

           episodes of temporary abandonment of the rule. Furthermore, some authors (e.g.

           Aceña, Reis and Rodríguez 2000) define the ‘Gold Standard’ as the presence of

           fixed exchange rates, convertibility, and perfect capital mobility. That is, our

           Gold Standard variable on the right-hand side and our capital flow variable on the

           left-hand side could be simultaneously determined by unobserved capital mobility

           conditions (such as direct legislated capital controls).

       5) Eichengreen and Marc Flandreau (1996) suggest that determinants of the adoption

           of the Gold Standard included the level of economic development, the size of the

           economy, imperial ties, and historical contingencies. Since we control for many

           of these factors, such causation would raise the possibility of colinearity between

           some of our included regressors and the Gold Standard variable—inflating standard

           errors on the latter.



                                         V. Conclusion



       We conclude that the evidence on British capital exports from the mid 1890s until the

First World War rejects any international market failure explanation of the Lucas Paradox.

British capital heading abroad, especially that invested in private enterprise, went where it

was most profitable—chasing natural resources, educated populations, migrants, and young

populations. Flows to private sector investment opportunities abroad were encouraged by

previous investments in government-financed projects.




                                               27
       We also should emphasize what our results do not imply. Our results do not suggest

that international capital market failure was absent in the years leading up to the First World

War. Rather, they suggest that the observed Lucas Paradox was not explained by

international capital market failure. It is doubtlessly possible to imagine capital flows that,

although unobservable because market failure stopped them cold, would have gone primarily

to capital-poor countries. One candidate for such flows is investment in manufacturing,

which accounted for less than four percent of British capital exports (Simon 1968, p. 23).

Edelstein (1982, pp. 41-2) points directly to market failure as the cause of this tiny figure,

citing insuperable informational advantages of local manufacturers in local input and output

markets. He also mentions the increasing importance of tariff barriers in keeping British

manufacturing investment at home as the war approaches. Feis (1930, p.31) agrees, calling

foreign industrial investment during this period particularly “risky, difficult to manage well

from a distance.” We can make no statement about whether or not such flows, had they

occurred, would also have chased resources, education, migrants and youth. Given the

variety of investment types represented by the flows we do observe, however, any assertion

that other investment types were determined in a totally different fashion would require very

strong evidence.

       We have shown that market failure did not determine how large a slice of the British-

capital-export pie was received by a given capital-importing country between 1894 and 1913.

Whether the relative size of that slice would have changed had the entire pie been augmented

by a total absence of any international capital market failure during those years is an entirely

different question that may never be answered. We have also shown that the major

fundamentals that determined where capital went were, in order of importance, schooling,

                                               28
natural resource endowment, and immigration (plus other demographic features). Whether

the fundamentals driving capital exports in the late 19th century were the same as those

driving capital exports in the late 20th century is another question which can be answered,

but must await future research.

       One thing is certain: the Lucas Paradox was alive and well a century ago.




                                              29
                                              References



Abramovitz, M., 1968, “The Passing of the Kuznets Cycle,” Economica 35: 349-67.

Anderson, T. W. and C. Hsiao, 1981, “Estimation of Dynamic Models with Error Components,” Journal

       of the American Statistical Association, 76 (September): 598-606.

Banerjee, A. V., 1992, “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (3):

       797-818.

Barro, R. J., 1989, “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries,” NBER Working Paper 3120,

       National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Bhattacharya, A., P. J. Montiel, and S. Sharma, 1997, “How Can Sub-Saharan Africa Attract More

       Private Capital Inflows?” Finance and Development 34 (June): 3-6.

Bigsten, A. et al., 1998, “Rates of Return on Physical and Human Capital in Africa’s Manufacturing

       Sector,” Working Paper No. 98-12, Centre for the Study of African Economies, Institute of

       Economics and Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Bloom, D. and J. G. Williamson, 1998, “Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in Emerging

       Asia,” World Bank Economic Review 12 (3): 419-55.

Bloom, D. and J. Sachs, 1998, “Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth in Africa,” Brookings

       Papers on Economic Activity, 2 (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution): 207-95.

Bohn, H. and L. L. Tesar, 1996, “US Equity Investment in Foreign Markets: Portfolio Rebalancing or

       Return Chasing?” American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings, 86 (May): 77-81.

Bordo, M. D. and H. Rockoff, 1996, “The Gold Standard as a ‘Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval’,”

       Journal of Economic History 56 (2): 389-428.

Bordo, M. D. and F. E. Kydland, 1995, “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in Exploration,”

       Explorations in Economic History 32 (October): 423-64.




                                                  30
Bordo, M. D. and A. J. Schwartz, 1996, "The Operation of the Specie Standard: Evidence for Core and

       Peripheral Countries 1880-1990," in J. Braga de Macedo, B. Eichengreen and J. Reis, eds.,

       Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and Beyond (New York: Routledge).

Cain, P. J. and A. G. Hopkins, 1980, “The Political Economy of British Expansion Overseas, 1750-

       1914,” Economic History Review, Second Series, 4 (November): 463-90.

Cairncross, A., 1953, Home and Foreign Investment (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Clark, G., 1987, “Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed? Lessons from the Cotton Mills,” Journal of

       Economic History 47 (1): 141-73.

Clemens, M. A., 2000, “The Lucas Paradox Ten Years Later: Where Are We and Where Do We Need

       To Go?” mimeo., Department of Economics, Harvard University (July).

Clemens, M. A., ongoing, “Where Has US Foreign Capital Gone? The Lucas Paradox in the Late 20th

       Century.”

Collins, W. J. and J. G. Williamson, 2000, “Capital Goods Prices and Investment: 1870-1950,” Journal

       of Economic History (forthcoming).

Cont, R., and J-P. Bouchaud, 2000, “Herd Behavior and Aggregate Fluctuations in Financial Markets,”

       Macroeconomic Dynamics 4 (June):170-96.

Court, W. H. B., 1965, British Economic History 1870-1914: Commentary and Documents (Cambridge:

       Cambridge University Press).

Cox, J. C., J. E. Ingersoll Jr., and S. A. Ross, 1985, “An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model of

       Asset Prices,” Econometrica 53 (March): 363-84.

de Cecco, M., 1996, “Short-Term Capital Movements under the Gold Standard,” in J. Braga de Macedo,

       B. Eichengreen and J. Reis, eds., Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and Beyond (New

       York: Routledge).

DeLong, J. B. and L. Summers, 1991, “Equipment Investment and Economic Growth,” Quarterly

       Journal of Economics 106: 445-502.




                                                  31
DiTella, G., 1982, “The Economics of the Frontier,” in C. P. Kindleberger and G. DiTella (eds.),

        Economics in the Long View, Vol. 1 (New York: New York University Press).

Easterlin, R. A., 1968, Population, Labor Force and Long Swings in Economic Growth (New York:

        National Bureau of Economic Research).

Edelstein, M., 1976, “Realized Rates of Return on UK Home and Overseas Portfolio Investment in the

        Age of High Imperialism,” Explorations in Economic History 13: 283-329.

Edelstein, M., 1981, “Foreign Investment and Empire 1860-1914,” in The Economic History of Britain

        Since 1700, Vol. 2, eds. R. Floud and D. N. McCloskey (Cambridge: Cambridge University

        Press).

Edelstein, M., 1982, Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism (New York: Columbia

        University Press).

Eichengreen, B., 1992, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression 1919-1939

        (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Eichengreen, B., 1996, Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System (Princeton,

        New Jersey: Princeton University Press).

Eichengreen, B. and M. Flandreau, 1996, “The Geography of the Gold Standard,” in J. Braga de

        Macedo, B. Eichengreen and J. Reis, eds., Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and

        Beyond (New York: Routledge).

Faini, R., 1996, “Increasing Returns, Migrations, and Convergence,” Journal of Development Economics

        49:121-36.

Feis, H., 1930, Europe, The World’s Banker 1870-1914 (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press).

Ferns, H. S., 1960, Britain and Argentina in the Nineteenth Century (Oxford: Clarendon Press).

Green, A., and M. C. Urquhart, 1976, “Factor and Commodity Flows in the International Economy of

        1870-1914: A Multi-Country View,” Journal of Economic History 36: 217-52.

Higgins, M. D., 1993, “Why Capital Doesn’t Flow from Rich to Poor Countries,” mimeo., Department

        of Economics, Harvard University.


                                                   32
Higgins, M. D., and J. G. Williamson, 1997, "Age Structure Dynamics in Asia and Dependence on

        Foreign Capital," Population and Development Review 23 (2): 261-93.

Hobson, C. K., 1914, The Export of Capital (London: Constable).

Hymer, S. H., 1976, The International Operations of National Firms: A Study of Direct Foreign

        Investment (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Isserlis, L., 1938, “Tramp Shipping Cargoes, and Freights,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 101

        (1): 53-146.

Jones, C. I., 1994, “Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital,” Journal of Monetary

        Economics 34: 359-82.

Judson, R. A. and A. L. Owen, 1996, “Estimating Dynamic Panel Data Models: A Practical Guide for

        Macroeconomists,” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Washington, D.C., mimeo.

King, R. G. and S. T. Rebelo, 1989, “Transitional Dynamics and Economic Growth in the Neoclassical

        Model,” NBER Working Paper 3185, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Kuznets, S., 1958, "Long Swings in the Growth of Population and in Related Economic Variables,"

        Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 102 (1): 25-52.

List, F., 1856, The National System of Political Economy (Fairfield, New Jersey: Augustus M. Kelley

        Publishers, reprinted 1991).

Lucas, R., 1990, “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American Economic Review

        80 (May): 92-6.

Nickell, S., 1981, “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica 49 (November): 1417-

        26.

Nurkse, R., 1954, "International Investment To-Day in the Light of Nineteenth-Century Experience,"

        Economic Journal 64 (December): 744-58.

Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor, 1998, "The Great Depression as a Watershed: International Capital

        Mobility in the Long Run," in M. D. Bordo, C. D. Goldin and E. N. White (eds.), The Defining




                                                   33
        Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century (Chicago:

        University of Chicago Press): 353-402.

O’Rourke, K. H., 1992, “Why Ireland Emigrated: A Positive Theory of Factor Flows,” Oxford

        Economic Papers 44: 322-40.

O'Rourke, K. H., 2000, “Tariffs and Growth in the Late 19th Century,” Economic Journal 110 (April):

        456-83.

O’Rourke, K. H., and J. G. Williamson, 1999, Globalization and History (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT

        Press).

Pigou, A. C., 1906, Protective and Preferential Import Duties (London: Frank Cass, reprinted 1968).

Platt, D. C. M., 1986, Britain’s Overseas Investment on the Eve of the First World War: The Use and

        Abuse of Numbers (London: MacMillan).

Polyani, K., 1944, The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time (New

        York: Rinehart).

Putnam, R., 1995, “Bowling Alone: America’s Declining Social Capital,” Journal of Democracy 6

        (January): 65-78.

Reis, J., 2000, “The Gold Standard in Portugal,” in P. Martin Aceña and J. Reis, eds., Monetary

        Standards in the Periphery: Paper, Silver and Gold, 1854-1933 (New York: St. Martin’s Press).

Reisen, H., 1994, “Public Finance in Developing Countries and the Attraction of Foreign Capital,” in

        Debt, Deficits and Exchange Rates: Essays on Financial Interdependence and Development

        (Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development).

Richardson, H. W., 1972, “British Emigration and Overseas Investment,” Economic History Review,

        Second Series, 25 (February): 99-113.

Sachs, J. D. and A. M. Warner, 1995, “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth,” NBER

        Working Paper 5398, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Simon, M., 1968, “The Pattern of New British Portfolio Foreign Investment, 1865-1914,” in A. R. Hall,

        ed., The Export of Capital from Britain 1870-1914 (London: Methuen).


                                                  34
Smith, A., 1776, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (New York: The

        Modern Library, reprinted 1937).

Stone, I., 1999, The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914 (New York: St. Martin’s

        Press).

Stone, I., 2000, personal communication.

Taylor, A. M., 1998, “On the Costs of Inward-Looking Development: Historical Perspectives on Price

        Distortions, Growth, and Divergence in Latin America from the 1930s to the 1980s,” Journal of

        Economic History 58 (1): 1-28.

Taylor, A. M., and J. G. Williamson, 1994, “Capital Flows to the New World as an Intergenerational

        Transfer,” Journal of Political Economy 102 (April): 348-71.

Thomas, B., 1954, Migration and Economic Growth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Tobin, J., 1996, “On the Internationalization of Portfolios,” in Essays in Economics: National and

        International (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Tornell, A. and A. Velasco, 1992, “The Tragedy of the Commons and Economic Growth: Why Does

        Capital Flow from Poor to Rich Countries?” Journal of Political Economy 100 (6): 1208-31.

Tortella, G., 1994, “Patterns of Economic Retardation and Recovery in South-Western Europe in the

        Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries,” Economic History Review 47 (1): 1-21.

Turner, C. C., 1900, “Living London” in R. C. Michie, ed., The Development of London as a Financial

        Centre (New York: I. B. Tauris Publishers).

Van Oss, S. F. ed, 1898, Introduction to Fenn on the Funds, 16th ed., London., p. ix, reprinted in W. H.

        B. Court, 1965, British Economic History 1870-1914: Commentary and Documents (Cambridge:

        Cambridge University Press).

Vernon, R., 1966, “International Investment and International Trade in the Product Cycle,” Quarterly

        Journal of Economics 80 (May): 190-207.

Williamson, J. G., 1964, American Growth and the Balance of Payments, 1820-1913 (Chapel Hill, North

        Carolina: University of North Carolina Press).


                                                   35
Table 1: Distribution of European Foreign Investment 1913-1914 (in percent)

_____________________________________________________________________________

   Destination                             Britain      France     Germany
_____________________________________________________________________________

    Eastern Europe                                                        3.6                35.5                 27.7
    Western Europe                                                        1.7                14.9                 12.7
    Europe (not specified)                                                0.5                 3.3                  5.1
    Total Europe                                                          5.8                53.8                 45.5

    Latin America                                                        20.1                13.3                 16.2
    North America and Australasia                                        44.8                 4.4                 15.7
    Other New World (not specified)                                       2.8                 0.0                  2.1
    Total New World                                                      67.7                17.7                 34.0

    Asia and Africa                                                      26.5                28.4                 20.5

   Total                                    100.0        100.0        100.0
_____________________________________________________________________________

Sources and Notes: O’Rourke and Williamson (1999, p. 229), taken from Feis (1930). Columns may not add up due to rounding. Turkey is
allocated to Asia.




                                                                    36
Figure 1: Division of Pre-WW1 British Capital Exports into Six Time Periods



                                       200,000
                                                           Period I:   Period II:          Period III:     Period IV:     Period V: Period VI:
                                                            1870-       1878-                1886-           1894-         1902-      1907-
                                       180,000              1877         1885                1893            1901           1904      1913

                                       160,000



                                       140,000
Thousands of current Pounds Sterling




                                       120,000



                                       100,000



                                       80,000



                                       60,000



                                       40,000



                                       20,000



                                            0
                                             1865   1870        1875   1880         1885       1890      1895      1900       1905      1910


                           Source: Stone 1999.




                                                                                       37
Table 2: Determinants of total British capital flows to 34 countries as a fraction of all British capital exports in each period.

                                      I: 1870-77                     II: 1878-85                     III: 1886-93                  IV: 1894-1901                    V: 1902-06                     VI: 1907-13

GDP per capita                 0.0000200       0.000193        0.0000331       0.0000321       0.0000322       0.0000430       0.0000196       0.0000229       0.0000198      -0.0000231       0.0000187      -0.00000701
                                 (1.97)*         (1.25)        (4.03)***        (2.17)**       (3.84)***        (2.50)**        (2.24)**         (1.21)         (2.35)**        (-1.23)        (2.88)***        (-0.620)
Log population                                   0.0189                          0.0237                          0.0216                          0.0245                          0.0330                          0.0303
share1                                         (2.98)***                       (4.45)***                       (4.21)***                       (4.63)***                       (5.17)***                       (6.33)***
British Colony                                  0.00227                         -0.00572                         -0.0172                        0.0259                          -0.0449                         -0.0102
                                                (0.088)                          (-0.234)                        (-0.768)                       (1.10)                           (-1.64)                        (-0.489)
Other Colony                                    0.00400                         -0.0174                          -0.0147                       0.000146                         -0.0357                         -0.0220
                                                (0.155)                         (-0.671)                         (-0.509)                       (0.005)                         (-0.970)                        (-0.795)
Fraction of period                              -0.0148                         -0.00126                         -0.0161                        0.0116                          0.0146                         -0.00703
on Gold Standard                                (-0.701)                         (-0.062)                        (-0.667)                       (0.569)                         (0.735)                         (-0.462)
Import duties                                   0.00231                        0.000240                       -0.0000269                       0.000161                       0.00000257                       -0.000132
over imports                                    (2.12)**                        (0.262)                         (-0.029)                        (0.195)                         (0.003)                         (-0.186)
Lagged change in                               0.000257                        -0.000128                      -0.0000580                       0.000193                        0.0000470                       -0.000311
Terms of Trade 2                                 (1.31)                         (-0.421)                        (-0.143)                        (0.518)                          (0.096)                        (-0.674)
Transport costs3                                -0.00307                        -0.00369                       -0.00814                        -0.00140                         0.00274                         -0.0106
                                                 (-1.12)                         (-1.13)                        (-1.55)                         (-0.287)                        (0.410)                        (-2.33)**
Population                                     -0.000865                        0.00441                          0.00690                       -0.00771                         0.0214                          0.0216
Growth Rate                                     (-0.227)                        (0.673)                           (1.18)                        (-0.718)                        (1.85)*                         (1.96)*
Net immigration                                 0.0120                           0.0137                          0.0133                         0.00523                         0.00730                          0.0122
                                                (1.94)*                         (2.43)**                        (2.32)**                         (1.10)                          (1.25)                        (2.90)***
Fraction of exports based                       0.0327                            0.142                           0.154                          0.129                           0.250                           0.246
on primary products                             (0.558)                         (2.39)**                        (2.40)**                        (2.06)*                        (3.03)***                       (4.22)***
Urbanization4                                    -0.101                         0.0193                           -0.0738                         0.110                          -0.0458                         -0.0272
                                                (-0.057)                        (0.126)                          (-0.472)                       (0.632)                         (-0.277)                        (-0.231)
Fraction of pop. < age 15                     0.00000855                      0.00000884                      0.00000541                      0.00000280                       0.0000394                       0.0000299
enrolled in primary school                       (1.08)                          (1.08)                         (0.576)                         (0.310)                        (2.95)***                       (3.21)***
Constant                        -0.00481        -0.0438         -0.0162          -0.147         -0.0182          -0.148         -0.00166         -0.133         -0.00552         -0.261         -0.00802         -0.224
                                 (0.328)        (-0.771)         (-1.18)       (-2.57)**         (-1.24)       (-2.32)**         (-0.103)      (-2.22)**        (-0.314)       (-3.07)***        (-0.509)      (-4.16)***
N                                  34              34              34              34              34               34             34              34              34              34              34              34
R2                               0.108           0.641           0.337           0.736           0.316            0.737          0.136           0.688           0.148           0.690           0.206           0.817
Adjusted R2                      0.0803          0.407           0.316           0.564           0.295            0.566          0.109           0.485           0.121           0.489           0.181           0.698
T-statistics are shown in parentheses. * Significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. 1 Population share is defined as the population of destination country as a
fraction of population in all 34 countries in first year of period. 2 During the five years up to and including the first year of the period. 3 Product of an index of shipping costs per unit distance and the pre-Panama
Canal, post-Suez Canal shipping distance between London and the principal port of the destination country. 4 Fraction of population living in urban agglomerations of 100,000 or more.




                                                                                                            38
Table 3: Percentage of British capital exports to 34 countries, by recipient sector

                                  Public Sector    Private Sector

Period I              1870-1877      55.4%            44.6%
Period II             1878-1885      42.3%            57.7%
Period III            1886-1893      33.0%            67.0%
Period IV             1894-1901      39.0%            61.0%
Period V              1902-1906      29.6%            70.4%
Period VI             1907-1913      28.1%            71.9%


Source: Stone 1999.




                                              39
Table 4: Determinants of British capital flows to private sector recipients in 34 countries as a fraction of total British capital exports to
private sector recipients in each period.

                                       I: 1870-77                     II: 1878-85                     III: 1886-93                   IV: 1894-1901                     V: 1902-06                     VI: 1907-13

GDP per capita                 0.0000323        0.0000209       0.0000259       0.0000127         0.00003        0.0000264       0.0000303       0.0000351        0.0000307      0.00000400       0.0000222      -0.00000103
                                 (1.72)*          (0.746)         (2.01)*         (0.646)        (2.75)***         (1.28)        (3.31)***         (1.63)         (2.92)***        (0.156)        (2.86)***        (-0.068)
Log population                                    0.0378                           0.0376                          0.0301                           0.0261                          0.0361                           0.0343
share1                                          (3.27)***                        (5.32)***                       (4.89)***                        (4.34)***                       (4.17)***                        (5.33)***
British Colony                                   -0.0358                         -0.0274                          -0.0427                          0.0118                          -0.0381                             -0.0325
                                                 (-0.760)                        (-0.845)                          (-1.59)                         (0.442)                          (-1.02)                             (-1.16)
Other Colony                                     0.0270                          -0.0120                         -0.00355                          0.0103                          -0.00564                        -0.0260
                                                 (0.575)                         (-0.347)                         (-0.102)                         (0.294)                          (-0.113)                       (-0.699)
Fraction of period                               -0.0166                         -0.00344                        -0.00218                         0.00212                          -0.00263                        -0.00835
on Gold Standard                                 (-0.434)                         (-0.128)                        (-0.075)                        (0.091)                           (-0.098)                        (-0.408)
Import duties                                    0.00333                         0.00145                         0.000535                         0.000201                       -0.0000102                       -0.000470
over imports                                      (1.69)                          (1.19)                          (0.487)                          (0.213)                         (-0.009)                        (-0.493)
Lagged change in                                0.000238                        -0.000622                        0.0000381                        0.000190                        0.000583                        -0.000386
Terms of Trade 2                                 (0.664)                          (-1.54)                          (0.079)                         (0.446)                         (0.881)                         (-0.623)
Transportation costs3                           -0.00398                         -0.00712                        -0.00940                         -0.00641                         -0.0167                          -0.0146
                                                 (-0.803)                         (-1.64)                         (-1.49)                          (-1.16)                         (-1.85)*                        (-2.39)**
Population                                      0..00565                          0.0109                          0.00853                         0.00263                          0.0120                              0.0229
Growth Rate                                      (0.815)                          (1.26)                           (1.21)                         (0.215)                          (0.769)                             (1.54)
Net immigration                                  0.0226                            0.0247                          0.0202                         0.00919                           0.0188                           0.0172
                                                 (2.02)*                         (3.30)***                       (2.94)***                         (1.70)                          (2.37)**                        (3.04)***
Fraction of exports based                         0.186                            0.186                            0.204                           0.163                            0.276                           0.271
on primary products                              (1.75)*                         (2.36)**                         (2.64)**                        (2.29)**                         (2.46)**                        (3.44)***
Urbanization4                                    0.0770                          -0.0277                           -0.122                          0.0532                           -0.107                          -0.139
                                                 (0.242)                         (-0.136)                         (-0.647)                         (0.268)                         (-0.478)                        (-0.878)
Fraction of pop. < age 15                       0.0000293                       0.0000235                        0.0000175                       0.00000590                       0.0000282                       0.0000301
enrolled in primary school                        (2.04)*                        (2.17)**                          (1.56)                          (0.573)                          (1.55)                         (2.41)**
Constant                         -0.0103          -0.236         -0.00628          -0.188         -0.0149          -0.194         -0.0186           -0.175         -0.0248          -0.228         -0.0150          -0.224
                                 (-0.385)       (-2.29)**         (-0.292)       (-2.47)**        (-0.778)       (-2.55)**         (-1.10)        (-2.57)**         (-1.13)        (-1.98)*        (-0.799)       (-3.09)***
N                                  34               34              34               34              34              34              34               34              34              34              34                  34
R2                               0.0867           0.636           0.112            0.746           0.191           0.737           0.255            0.682           0.210           0.663           0.204               0.767
T-statistics are shown in parentheses. * Significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. 1 Population share is defined as the population of destination country
as a fraction of population in all 34 countries in first year of period. 2 During the five years up to and including the first year of the period. 3 Product of an index of shipping costs per unit distance and the
pre-Panama Canal, post-Suez Canal shipping distance between London and the principal port of the destination country. 4 Fraction of population living in urban agglomerations of 100,000 or more




                                                                                                        40
Table 5: Determinants of British capital flows to government recipients in 34 countries as a fraction of total British capital exports to government
recipients in each period.

                                      I: 1870-77                      II: 1878-85                    III: 1886-93                   IV: 1894-1901                    V: 1902-06                     VI: 1907-13

GDP per capita                 0.0000101       0.0000180       0.0000430       0.0000586        0.0000366       0.0000768      0.00000283      0.00000380      -0.00000611      -0.0000875      0.00000981      -0.0000223
                                 (1.21)          (1.12)        (4.45)***        (2.81)**        (3.44)***       (2.90)***        (0.262)         (0.166)         (-0.474)        (-3.11)***        (1.65)         (-1.71)
Log population                                  0.00373                         0.00471                          0.00430                          0.0218                          0.0256                           0.0200
share1                                          (0.563)                         (0.626)                          (0.544)                        (3.41)***                        (2.69)**                        (3.63)***
British Colony                                   0.0330                          0.0238                           0.0346                         0.0479                          -0.0611                          0.0468
                                                 (1.22)                          (0.693)                          (1.01)                         (1.69)                           (-1.49)                         (1.95)*
Other Colony                                    -0.0145                         -0.0249                          -0.0374                         -0.0157                          -0.107                         -0.0117
                                                (-0.539)                        (-0.680)                         (-0.841)                        (-0.423)                        (-1.95)*                        (-0.367)
Fraction of period                              -0.0133                         0.00172                           -0.0445                        0.0265                          0.0553                          -0.00367
on Gold Standard                                (-0.606)                        (0.061)                            (-1.20)                       (1.07)                          (1.87)*                          (-0.209)
Import duties                                   0.00149                         -0.00141                        -0.00117                        0.0000987                       0.0000329                        0.000731
over imports                                     (1.31)                          (-1.09)                         (-0.830)                         (0.098)                         (0.025)                         (0.895)
Lagged change in                                0.000273                        0.000547                        -0.000253                       0.000199                         -0.00122                       -0.000119
Terms of Trade 2                                  (1.33)                          (1.27)                         (-0.407)                        (0.440)                          (-1.68)                        (-0.224)
Transportation costs3                           -0.00233                        0.000990                        -0.00560                         0.00645                          0.0489                        -0.000240
                                                 (-0.818)                        (0.215)                         (-0.693)                         (1.10)                        (4.91)***                        (-0.046)
Population                                      -0.00611                        -0.00453                         0.00358                         -0.0239                          0.0436                          0.0184
Growth Rate                                      (-1.54)                         (-0.491)                        (0.397)                         (-1.84)*                        (2.53)**                         (1.45)
Net immigration                                 0.00338                         -0.00128                        -0.000676                       -0.000981                         -0.0199                       -0.000588
                                                (0.525)                          (-0.161)                        (-0.077)                        (-0.171)                        (-2.29)**                       (-0.121)
Fraction of exports based                       -0.0907                          0.0822                           0.0540                         0.0754                           0.188                            0.185
on primary products                              (-1.49)                         (0.983)                          (0.546)                        (0.997)                          (1.52)                         (2.74)**
Urbanization4                                   -0.0801                          0.0835                           0.0232                          0.199                          0.0998                            0.259
                                                (-0.439)                         (0.386)                          (0.096)                        (0.945)                         (0.404)                          (1.91)*
Fraction of pop. < age 15                     -0.00000812                      -0.0000113                      -0.0000192                      -0.00000206                      0.0000662                       0.0000293
enrolled in primary school                      (-0.987)                         (-0.977)                        (-1.33)                         (-0.188)                       (3.31)***                        (2.74)**
Constant                         0.0170           0.111         -0.0298          -0.0915         -0.0247         -0.0527         0.0249          -0.0670         0.0402            -0.337        0.00982          -0.225
                                 (1.40)          (1.87)*        (-1.85)*          (-1.13)         (-1.32)        (-0.540)        (1.25)          (-0.925)        (1.495)         (-2.66)**       (0.685)        (-3.63)***
N                                  34              34               34              34              34               34             34              34              34              34              34              34
R2                               0.0434          0.389            0.382           0.645           0.270            0.590          0.002           0.655           0.007           0.656           0.0785          0.661
T-statistics are shown in parentheses. * Significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. 1 Population share is defined as the population of destination country as a
fraction of population in all 34 countries in first year of period. 2 During the five years up to and including the first year of the period. 3 Product of an index of shipping costs per unit distance and the pre-Panama
Canal, post-Suez Canal shipping distance between London and the principal port of the destination country. 4 Fraction of population living in urban agglomerations of 100,000 or more




                                                                                                             41
Table 6: Evidence that investment in the public sector “crowded in” investment in the
private sector, but not vice-versa

Regressand:                                Current investment                            Current Investment
                                            in private sector                             in public sector
                                      _________________________                     _________________________

                            Panel                         Panel
Estimator:                  Fixed        Anderson-        Fixed        Anderson-
                           Effects         Hsiao         Effects         Hsiao
____________________________________________________________________________________
Regressor:

Lagged investment                       -0.2393                -0.6698                0.05996                0.05299
in private sector                     (-3.670)***            (-4.415)***              (1.465)                (1.023)

Lagged investment                        0.1587                0.4817                 -0.3661                0.01493
in public sector                        (1.721)*             (3.852)***             (-6.320)***              (0.100)

N                                          272                    238                    272                    238

T-statistics are in parentheses. * Significant at the 10% level. *** Significant at the 1% level. See text for a description of the particular
Anderson-Hsiao estimator used.




                                                                        42
Table 7: Determinants of the Relative Equipment Price Ratio1 in Eight Countries


Period                     I: 1870-77         II: 1878-85       III: 1886-93      IV: 1894-1901        V: 1902-06         VI: 1907-13

Transportation               30.76               23.57              29.90              12.81              9.546              6.401
Costs                       (3.437)*           (6.548)**           (3.753)*           (2.258)            (1.034)            (0.715)

Fraction of pop.            -0.05298           -0.05019           -0.03710           -0.03818           -0.04328           -0.04700
< age 15 enrolled           (-1.274)           (-3.473)*          (-1.951)           (-2.138)           (-3.013)*          (-2.997)*
in primary school

GDP per capita               0.1540             0.09896            0.08548            0.03249           0.003178           0.004616
                             (0.879)            (2.046)            (1.046)            (0.647)            (0.113)            (0.203)

Import duties                 -4.867             -1.722             -4.365            -0.3117             1.173             0.8017
over imports                 (-1.916)           (-1.510)           (-1.472)           (-0.109)           (0.390)            (0.240)

Urbanization                  -1580              -1132              -790.6             -743.4             -213.1             -116.8
                             (-0.896)           (-2.466)           (-1.150)           (-1.094)           (-0.525)           (-0.298)

Constant                      124.3             160.2               161.4              266.1              286.0              290.7
                             (1.255)           (4.256)*            (2.988)*          (5.117)**          (5.963)**          (5.870)**

N                               8                  8                   8                  8                  8                  8
R2                           0.9748             0.9890              0.9719             0.9569             0.9508             0.9344

T-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 10% level. **Significant at the 5% level. 1 The Relative Equipment Price Ratio is defined as
(Pe,j/Pc,j)/(Pe,GB/Pc,GB), where Pe,j denotes absolute price level of equipment in country j, Pc,j denotes absolute price level of consumer goods in
country j, and GB stands for Great Britain.




                                                                          43
                                     Appendix: The Data

        All data used come from a novel database constructed for the purposes of this study,
often from primary sources held by the Harvard College Library. The construction of each
variable and its sources will be discussed in turn.

British Capital Exports

        Original gross capital flow numbers for Argentina, Australia, Austria-Hungary,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Cuba, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan,
Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Russia, Spain, Turkey, United States and Uruguay come from
Irving Stone, 1999, The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914, St.
Martin’s Press, New York. Additional figures for Burma, Ceylon, Colombia, Denmark,
Indonesia, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Serbia, Sweden, and Thailand were kindly
provided by Professor Stone. Stone’s division of the flows according to whether they were
received by governments or by the private sector is maintained unchanged.
        In the above, “Egypt” refers to the lands under rule of the Egyptian Pasha before
British occupation, and thereafter to the lands of the de facto British protectorate, although it
was officially part of the Ottoman Empire during the entire period in question. “Germany”
refers to the lands of the Second German Reich. “India” refers to the British colonial
boundaries for India, omitting lands contained within present-day Burma/Myanmar which we
treat as a distinct recipient of capital. “Turkey” refers to the Ottoman Empire without
Albania, Rumania, Serbia, Greece, Bulgaria, or Egypt. “Indonesia” refers to the Dutch East
Indies and corresponds closely to the boundaries of the modern Republic of Indonesia.
“Norway” refers to the area of land over which the Norwegian government retained limited
autonomy during Swedish rule before 1905, and to the state of Norway thereafter.
“Thailand” refers to the Kingdom of Siam.
        Flows are converted first into real Pounds Sterling using the deflator found in John
McCusker, 1992, How Much Is That in Real Money? American Antiquarian Society,
Worcester, Mass. The left-hand side variable is then constructed by calculating the
cumulative flow to each country during each period and dividing by the cumulative flow to all
34 countries during the same period.
        Our use of prewar British capital flows rather than stocks sidesteps a significant
literature criticizing the accuracy of the stock figures. The accuracy of figures on flows and
their geographical distribution has survived decades of scrutiny essentially unsullied (D. C.
M. Platt, 1986, Britain’s Overseas Investment on the Eve of the First World War: The Use
and Abuse of Numbers, MacMillan, London, p. 100). Why this difference? It is one thing to
say that capital flowed from Great Britain to a given country—a well-documented fact. It is
another thing to say that the investments thereby purchased were held by Great Britain, thus
representing a stock of ‘British’ capital. In fact, the nationality of those who purchased
securities in London during this period is very poorly documented. By eschewing stocks in
favor of flows we avoid the issue.

GDP per Capita



                                               44
        The units on this variable are 1990 US dollars per inhabitant of any age. The
regressor used is GDP per capita in the first year of each period. GDP per capita estimates
for Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, and the
United States come from Angus Maddison, 1995, Monitoring the World Economy, 1820-
1992, OECD, Paris. Missing years are estimated by geometric interpolation.
        Estimates for Egypt after 1900 and Turkey in 1913 come from Maddison. Before this
date it is assumed that GDP per capita grew at the same year-on-year rate as did estimates of
Egyptian and Turkish real wages from Jeffrey Williamson, 2000, “Real wages and relative
factor prices around the Mediterranean, 1500-1940,” in Sevket Pamuk and Jeffrey G.
Williamson, eds. The Mediterranean Response to Globalization Before 1950, Routledge,
New York.
        Data for Greece are estimated by projecting Maddison’s (op. cit.) 1913 figure
backwards, assuming the growth rate found in James Foreman-Peck and Pedro Lains, 2000,
“European Economic Development: The Core and the Southern Periphery, 1870-1910,” in
Sevket Pamuk and Jeffrey G. Williamson, eds., The Mediterranean Response to
Globalization Before 1950, Routledge, New York.
        Data for Argentina after 1890 come from Maddison op. cit. Before this date, GDP
per capita is assumed to grow at the same year-on-year rate as the estimates of Argentine real
wages found in Jeffrey G. Williamson, 1995, “The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since
1830: Background Evidence and Hypotheses,” Explorations in Economic History, 32:141-
196. Data for Uruguay after 1882, and Peru and Chile after 1900, come from Maddison op.
cit. Before these dates it is assumed that all three grew at the same year-on-year rate as did
our estimates of Argentine GDP per capita.
        Estimates for Cuba for 1850 and 1913 are based on estimates of Cuban GDP per
capita relative to that of Mexico and Brazil presented in John H. Coatsworth, 1998,
“Economic and Institutional Trajectories in Nineteenth-Century Latin America,” in John H.
Coatsworth and Alan M. Taylor, eds., Latin America and the World Economy Since 1800,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass. An unweighted average of the figures implied
by Coatsworth’s proportion of our estimates for Mexico and Brazil is calculated for both
years, and the intervening years estimated by geometric interpolation.
        Data for Colombia after 1900 come from Maddison op. cit. Before this date, it is
assumed that that GDP per capita grew at an unweighted average of the growth rates for
Mexico and Brazil between 1850 and 1900 given in Coatsworth op. cit.
        Data for the Philippines and Burma after 1900 come from Maddison op. cit. Before
this date it is assumed that Philippine GDP per capita grew at the same year-on-year rate as
our estimates for Thailand, and that Burmese growth mirrored that of India.
        GDP per capita estimates for Austria-Hungary come from David F. Good, 1994, “The
Economic Lag of Central and Eastern Europe: Income Estimators for the Habsburg Successor
States, 1870-1910,” Journal of Economic History, 54(4)(December): 69-891. These are
converted from 1980 to 1990 dollars using a GDP deflator obtained from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis of the United States Department of Commerce (online at
http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/dn/gdplev.htm).
        Estimates for Serbia after 1890 come from Foreman-Peck and Lains, op. cit. Before
1890 GDP per capita is assumed to grow at the same year-on-year rate as it did between 1890
and 1913.
                                             45
         Ceylon presented the most difficult data challenge in this category, as we are not
aware of any published figures for GDP in Ceylon during this period. Campbell (Burnham
O. Campbell, 1993 “Development Trends: A Comparative Analysis of the Asian
Experience,” in Naohiro Ogawa et al., eds., Human Resources in Development along the
Asia-Pacific Rim, Oxford University Press, New York) has estimated that in 1914, GDP per
capita in Ceylon was 1.95 times that of India. Before 1914, it is assumed that real GDP per
capita grew at the same rate as did the ratio of the real value of British colonial revenue from
Ceylon to the population of the Island. A full series of annual nominal colonial revenues and
population figures come from the 1905 and 1914 editions of the annual Ceylon Blue Book, a
statistical publication of the colonial administration in Colombo. Some of these figures were
recorded in rupees, and are converted to pounds sterling using conversion rates from Bryan
Taylor II, 2000, Encyclopedia of Global Financial Markets, Global Financial Data, Los
Angeles, California (online at http://www.globalfindata.com). The resulting figures are
converted to real pounds sterling using the deflator in McCusker op. cit.

Population Share

        Population Share is calculated by dividing the population of the country in the first
year of the period by the total population of all 34 countries in the same year. The regressor
used is log of population share in the first year of each period.
        Annual estimates of the population of Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Colombia, and
Denmark come from Banks, Arthur S. Banks, 1976, Cross-National Time Series, 1815-1973
[Computer File], ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-University Consortium for Political and
Social Research [producer and distributor]. Estimates for Chile, Indonesia, New Zealand,
Peru, the Philippines, Russia and Thailand come from Maddison op. cit. Estimates for
Greece and Turkey after 1900 also come from Maddison op. cit. Before this date we assume
that Greek population grew at the year-on-year rate implied by the population figures in B. R.
Mitchell, 1981, European Historical Statistics, 2nd rev. ed., Macmillan, London. We assume
that Turkish population (omitting Egypt) before 1900 grew at the year-on-year rate implied
by the figures in Halil Inalcik, ed., 1994, An Economic and Social History of the Ottoman
Empire, Vol. 2, Cambridge University Press, New York, p. 779.
        Population estimates for Australia, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Cuba, Egypt, France,
Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Norway, Serbia, Spain, and Sweden are from the
appropriate volume of Mitchell 1998 op. cit.
        Estimates for China are from Angus Maddison, 1998, Chinese Economic Performance
in the Long Run, OECD, Paris. Figures for Ceylon come from Colonial Secretary’s Office,
1914, Ceylon Blue Book, H.C. Cottle Government Printer, Colombo. Estimates for Portugal
come from Ana Bela Nunes, 1989, “Portuguese Economic Growth: 1833-1985,” Journal of
European Economic History, 18(1)(Spring):291-330. Estimates for the United States come
from Historical Statistics of the United States: From Colonial Times to the Present, Basic
Books, New York, 1976. Data for Uruguay come from Mitchell op. cit.; from J. Wilkie,
1996, Statistical Abstract of Latin America, vol. 32, UCLA Latin American Publications,
Los Angeles; and from Uruguay, Bureau of the American Republics, Washington, DC, 1892,
p. 92.



                                               46
Colonial Status

        The regressor for British Colony is 1 if the country was a British colony for a majority
of the period, and zero otherwise—the regressor for “other colony” is constructed similarly.
The year-by-year colonial status of Australia, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Egypt, India, and
Uruguay is taken from the Encyclopedia Britannica. For Burma, Indonesia, and Thailand
colonial status is taken to be as reported in B. R. Mitchell, 1998, International Historical
Statistics, Africa, Asia & Oceania, 3rd ed., St. Martin’s Press, New York., page xii. For
Mexico it is as given in B. R. Mitchell, 1998, International Historical Statistics, The
Americas, 4th ed., St. Martin’s Press, New York. Serbia is taken to be a colony of the
Ottoman Empire until 1878 and independent thereafter, as described in B. R. Mitchell, 1998,
International Historical Statistics: Europe 1750-1993, 4th ed., St. Martin’s Press, New
York, page xiii.
        China is assigned the status of “British colony” during all of 1870-1913 for the
purposes of this study, in light of the special presence of Britain in Shanghai. Canada, Egypt
(after 1882) and New Zealand are similarly assigned the status of “British colony” for the
purposes of this study, though they were not technically colonies. The Philippines are taken
to have been a Spanish colony until 1899 and a colony of the United States thereafter.

The Gold Standard

       The regressor is calculated as the fraction of years in the period during which the
country was on a pure gold standard; an alternative regressor allowed also a silver or
bimetallic standard. A detailed, year-by-year assessment of monetary regime in 28 of our 34
countries during 1870-1914 was kindly provided to the authors by Chris Meissner. These
data provided an indication of gold, silver, bimetallic, or paper standard.
       Monetary regimes for Cuba, Peru, Serbia, Thailand, and Uruguay are taken to be as
reported in Taylor op. cit. The regime for New Zealand is given in J. Ernesto Lopez-
Cordova and Chris Meissner, 2000, “Exchange-Rate Regimes and International Trade:
Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era,” Dept. of Economics, University of
California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California, Table 4.1.

Import Duties over Imports

        The regressor is calculated as the total government revenue from import duties in the
first year of the period, divided by the total value of imports into the country in that year.
        Figures for Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden,
and the United States are given in Kevin H.O’Rourke, 2000, “Tariffs and Growth in the Late
19th Century,” The Economic Journal, 110(April): 456-83.
        Figures for Argentina 1865-1900 are from the Anuario de la Dirección General de
Estadística Correspondiente al Año 1900, vol. 1, Compañía Sud-Americana de Billetes de
Banco, Buenos Aires, 1901, p. 357, while figures for 1910-1913 come from the 1915 edition
of the same publication (p. 798 and 815).
        Figures for Austria-Hungary are estimated in David F. Good, 1984, The Economic
Rise of the Habsburg Empire 1750-1914, University of California Press, Berkeley, p. 227.

                                              47
         There are transcriptions of primary-source numbers for Brazilian imports, government
income, and fraction of government income due to import duties in Laura Randall, 1977, A
Comparative Economic History of Latin America: 1500-1914, Volume 3: Brazil, Institute for
Latin American Studies, Columbia University, New York, pp. 219-249.
         Figures for Burmese import duty revenue come from the Report on the Administration
of British Burma (some years omit the word “British” from the title) printed in Rangoon, for
1891, 1892, 1906, 1907, 1909, and 1910. Burmese imports are given in various editions of
the Statistical Abstract Relating to British India, Eyre & Spottiswoode for HMSO, Presented
to both Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty, London, and Statistics of British
India, Part II: Commercial, Director-General of Commercial Intelligence, Calcutta, 1913.
Missing years are interpolated geometrically; the 1891 figure is assumed to hold constant on
1870-1891, a period during which British trade policy in the area did not significantly
change.
         Figures for Ceylon 1902-1912 on import duties and imports come from the 1905 and
1914 editions of the Ceylon Blue Book. The 1902 figure is assumed to hold for 1870-1901
based on Batemen’s contemporary report that the same rates seen in 1902 also prevailed in
the years leading up to 1885 (A. E. Batemen, 1885, “Customs Tariffs,” Journal of the
Statistical Society of London, 48(4)(December): 617-27).
         Figures for Chile are given directly in Markos J. Mamalakis, 1989, Historical
Statistics of Chile: Government Services and Public Sector and a Theory of Services, Vol. 6,
Greenwood Press, New York, p. 206.
         The treaties of Nanking (1843) and Tientsin (1858), as well as other similar treaties,
limited the Chinese ad valorem tariff rate on imports from essentially all of Europe to 5%.
In fact, the treaties (and their revisions in 1870, 1902 and 1922) did not set ad valorem rates
but rather absolute nominal duties that, although initially equivalent to a 5% ad valorem
tariff, rapidly declined in effective value as prices rose (C. F. Remer, 1926, The Foreign
Trade of China, The Commercial Press Ltd., Shanghai, pp. 171-181). “The average effective
rates were often below three percent and were never above four percent even in the years
immediately following the revisions” (Yu-Kwei Cheng, 1956, Foreign Trade and Industrial
Development of China: An Historical and Integrated Analysis through 1948, The University
Press, Washington, pp. 8-13). For this reason it is assumed that import-duties-over-imports
for China started at 4% in each revision year and declined at a constant rate to 2.5% in the
year immediately preceding the next revision.
         Figures for Colombian customs revenue and imports come from José Antonio Ocampo,
1997, Historia Económica de Colombia, Presidencia de la República, Imprenta Nacional,
Bogotá, pp. 187 and 194. It is assumed that the vast majority of customs revenue came from
import rather than export taxes, as Ocampo reports.
         In Cuba, “On February 10, 1818, freedom of trade was decreed. But the customs
tariffs established in that connection were ferociously protective of Spanish commerce and
ships … with … tariffs ranging from 20% to 36% ad valorem. … This system lasted through
the nineteenth century with occasional changes to increase protection against foreign
products” (Julio Le Riverend, 1967, Economic History of Cuba, Ensayo Book Institute,
Havana, p. 177). A benchmark of import duties and imports from 1840 comes from Cuadro
Analítico del Comercio, Navegación y Rentas de la Isla de Cuba en el Año de 1840, Imprenta
del Comercio, Havana, 1841, pp. 12 and 16, and is assumed to hold constant until 1882.
Various authors support such an assumption, describing how trade policy changed little until
                                              48
the revenue-neutral shift of tariffs away from Spanish goods and towards the produce of other
nations began in 1882 (e.g. Fidel G. Pierra, 1896, Spanish Misrule in America, Cuban
Delegation in the United States, Washington, p.30 and Enrique José Varona, 1917, Cuba vs.
Spain, p. 15). Customhouse revenue in 1895 is quoted from The Cuban Question in Its True
Light, 1896, p. 25, and imports for that year from Gonzalo De Quesada, 1905, Cuba,
International Bureau of the American Republics, Government Printing Office, Washington, p.
154. Import duties and imports for 1905-1914 come from Comercio Exterior, Segundo
Semestre de 1914, Sección de Estadística, Secretaria de Hacienda, República de Cuba,
Havana, 1915, pp. XII-XIV. The import-duties-over-imports figure for 1895 is assumed to
hold until the Treaty of Paris in 1898, from which time through 1904 the 1905 figure is
assumed to hold.
        Data for Egypt on 1885-1908 come from the Statistical Yearbook of Egypt for 1909,
National Printing Department, Cairo, pp. 83 and 103, and the Annuaire Statistique de
l’Egypte 1914, Imprimerie Nationale, Cairo, pp. 303 and 410. Figures for 1909-1913 are
estimated by assuming that import duties grew after 1908 at the same year-on-year rate as did
total customs revenue. The 1885 figure is assumed to hold on 1882-1884. Before the 1882
British occupation, the figure for Turkey is used.
        Figures on import duties and imports for Greece, 1887-1897 come from Commerce de
la Grèce avec les Pays Étrangers pendant l’Année 1900, Imprimerie Nationale, Athens,
1901, p. 5, and figures for 1898-1910 from Statistique du Commerce Special de la Grèce
avec les Pays Étrangers pendant l’Année 1909, Bureau de Statistique du Ministère des
Finances, Imprimerie Nationale, Athens, 1911, pp. 2 and 40 (as well as the same pages of
the 1912 edition). A single datapoint for 1868 is available in Demetrius Bikelas, 1868,
“Statistics of the Kingdom of Greece,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
31(3)(September): 265-98. When, then, during the period 1869-1886 did Greece make the
transition from low tariffs to protective tariffs? Writing in 1878, Newmarch divides the
countries of the world into five groups, according to “the degree in which the Tariffs of the
respective groups are hostile to the admission of exports sent from the United Kingdom”
(William Newmarch, 1878, “On the Progress of the Foreign Trade of the United Kingdom
since 1856, with Especial Reference to the Effects Produced Upon it by the Protectionist
Tariffs of Other Countries,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 41(2)(June):187-298, p.
200). Greece figures in the “most hostile” group. Thus it is assumed that the protective tariff
levels calculated for 1887 had already arrived in 1877, and the years 1869-1876 are
interpolated geometrically.
        Rider notes that India affected a “departure from free trade” in 1894 with the
imposition of a “5 percent ad valorem duty on all imports except cotton goods and a list of
raw materials and machinery used in major Indian industries.” With a few modifications,
including a change that removed the cotton exemption, this arrangement survived “until the
war” (Thomas Rider, 1970, “The Tariff Policy of the Government of India and Industrial
Development,” Journal of Economic History, 30(1)(March): p.278).
        Imports and import duties for Indonesia can be found in Korthals Altes, W. L., 1991,
Changing Economy in Indonesia: Volume 12a, General Trade Statistics 1822-1940, Royal
Tropical Institute, Amsterdam, p. 44-45, 50-54, and 185-187.
        Between 1866 and 1895 the “unequal treaties” limited Japanese import tariffs to 5%
ad valorem (William W. Lockwood, 1968, The Economic Development of Japan: Growth and
Structural Change, Expanded Edition, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey,
                                              49
pp. 18-19). Customs duties for 1893-1894 from ibid. (p. 523) together with imports figures
for those years from Banks op. cit. (converted to Yen via factors from Taylor op. cit.) are
used to benchmark this period. In 1899 Japan regained tariff autonomy, but “[e]ven the
recovery of tariff autonomy in the nineties still left treaty restrictions on the duties applying
to many items. Rates were generally no higher than 10 to 15% until the general tariff
revision of 1911” (Lockwood, p. 539). Following this revision, “[i]n 1914 the ratio of
customs revenue to the value of dutiable imports was just under 20 percent” (G. C. Allen,
1981, A Short Economic History of Modern Japan, 4th ed., St. Martin’s Press, New York,
p. 133).
         For Mexico, import duties for 1886-1891 come from Antonio Peñafiel, 1892, Boletín
Semestral de la Dirección General de Estadística de la República Mexicana, Ministerio de
Fomento, Mexico City, p. 154. Imports from this same period come from Banks op. cit.,
converted to pesos using Taylor op. cit. Import duties and imports for 1894-1910 come from
the Boletín de Estadística Fiscal, Palacio Nacional, Mexico City, pp. 63, 139, 146-7, and
173, except 1) imports 1894-96 which come from Banks op. cit. converted as before with
Taylor op. cit. and 2) the assumption that on 1906-1910, the fraction of total customs
revenue represented by import duties was equal to the average of what that fraction had been
during 1894-1906. Tariffs during 1892-1893 are assumed to equal 1894 levels, since Porfirio
Díaz reformed the tariffs in 1891 and we thus cannot assume continuity from 1891 to 1892
(Graciela Márquez, 1998, “Tariff Protection in Mexico, 1892-1909: Ad Valorem Tariff Rates
and Sources of Variation,” in John H. Coatsworth and Alan M. Taylor, eds., Latin America
and the World Economy since 1800, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, p.
435). A benchmark for import duties in 1871 is found in Exposición que el Ejectutivo
Federal Dirige al Congreso de la Unión, Dando Cuenta del Uso que Ha Hecho de las
Facultades que le Concedio el Artículo 3º de la Ley de 1º Diciembre de 1871, y del Estado
que Guarda la Hacienda Federal en 1º de Abril de 1872, Imprenta del Gobierno, en Palacio,
Mexcio City, 1872, p. 458. This is combined with imports from Banks op. cit. converted via
Taylor op. cit. Figures from 1872-1885 are interpolated geometrically, guided by the 1844,
1865, and 1872 benchmarks for import duties given in Walter Flavius McCaleb, 1921, The
Public Finances of Mexico, Harper & Brothers Publishers, New York, pp. 89, 121-2, and
134.
         Tariff rates on all imports for New Zealand 1894-1925 are given in J. B. Condliffe,
1959, New Zealand in the Making, 2nd ed., George Allen & Unwin Ltd., London, p. 250.
The source indicates that these figures describe the situation “preceding and following major
tariff revisions,” suggesting the acceptability of backwards extrapolation to 1870.
         Primary sources for Peru 1866-1878 and 1883-1913 are directly quoted in Laura
Randall, 1977, A Comparative Economic History of Latin America: 1500-1914. Volume 4:
Peru, Institute for Latin American Studies, Columbia University, New York, pp. 205-6. The
period 1879-1882 is interpolated geometrically.
         Import duties over imports for the Philippines from 1867-1892 are taken from the
Estadística Mercantil del Comercio Exterior de las Islas Filipinas (1867, 1876) and the
Estadística General del Comercio Exterior de las Islas Filipinas (1881, 1885, 1893). For the
periods 1904-1907 and 1912-1914 statistics are available in McCoy, H. B., 1907, Annual
Report of the Bureau of Customs for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 1907, Bureau of
Printing, Manila, pp. 50-53 and Foreign Commerce of the Philippine Islands, January-
December 1914, July-December 1913, Bureau of Customs, Department of Finance and
                                               50
Justice, Government of the Philippine Islands, Bureau of Printing, Manila, p. 138. Since
protection under the Spanish doubled between 1890 and 1892 (from 7.4% to 14.7%), it is not
clear how to fill in the missing years 1893-1903. Since it appears that protection was still
rising between 1904 and 1907 (from 20.3% to 22.4%), it is assumed that it rose shallowly
and slowly on the missing period; that is, the missing years are interpolated geometrically.
        Figures for Portugal come from Pedro Lains, 1995, A Economia Portuguesa no Século
XIX: Crescimento Econômico e Comércio Externo 1851-1913, Imprensa Nacional, Casa da
Moeda, Lisbon, p. 41.
        Figures for Russia are in Forrest Capie, 1983, “Tariff Protection and Economic
Performance in the Nineteenth Century,” in C. Knick Harley, ed., Integration of the World
Economy, Cheltenham, Brookfield, Vermont, pp. 303-4.
        A detailed, year-by-year account of Serbian import duties preceding World War 1 is
found in Ivan Z. Nestorovic, 1913, Der Aussenhandel Serbiens, Verlag von Veit & Comp.,
Leipzig, pp. 6-43.
        Annual figures on customs revenue for Spain, nearly all of which was import duties, is
in the Estadística de los Presupuestos Generales del Estado y de los Resultados que Ha
Ofrecido su Liquidación, Intervención General de la Administración del Estado, Madrid, p.
69 in the 1850 to 1890-91 edition, and p. 178 in the 1890-91 to 1907 edition. For the period
1911-1914 the figures can be found in Estadística General del Comercio Exterior de España
en 1916, Dirección General de Aduanas, Parte Primera, Gráfica Excelsior, Madrid, p. X.
This is combined with data on imports from Taylor op. cit. The years 1908-1910 are
interpolated geometrically.
        Thai customs revenue 1894-1913 and Ticul-denominated imports 1907-1913 are in the
Statistical Year Book of the Kingdom of Siam 1917, English edition, Department of
Commerce and Statistics, Ministry of Finance, Bangkok, 1917, pp. 36 and 127. Imports for
1894-1906 are taken from Banks op. cit. and converted with Taylor op. cit. Between 1865
and 1890 treaties with all the major powers kept import duties below 3% (James C. Ingram,
1971, Economic Change in Thailand 1850-1970, Stanford University Press, Stanford,
California, pp. 34-5). Geometrical interpolation between 1890 and 1894 produces a rapid
doubling of tariff rates on this period, consistent with the record that the Thai government
began in 1890 to revise the earlier treaties and increase its tariff revenue (ibid., p. 138).
        Statistics on import duties for Turkey after 1878 are found in Justin McCarthy, 1982,
The Arab World, Turkey, and The Balkans (1878-1914): A Handbook of Historical Statistics,
G. K. Hall & Co., Boston, pp. 230-1. Stability of the tariff rate during all of 1878-1900 is
assumed to hold true during 1870-1877 as well.
        Figures for Uruguay, 1882-1911, are in the Anuario Estadístico de la República
Oriental del Uruguay 1886, Tipografia Oriental, Montevideo, 1887 (unnumbered page), and
Julio M. Llamas, 1915, Anuario Estadístico de la República Oriental del Uruguay, Años
1911 y 1912, Tipografía Moderna, Montevideo, pp. 91 and 573. Before 1882 it is assumed
that Uruguayan tariff rates mirror those of Argentina. This is justified because 1) Argentine
and Uruguayan tariff rates were nearly identical during 1882-1890, and Uruguay was under
the same military rule during this period as it was during the 1870s, 2) this military
government had close ties to the Argentine government, with which it had fought against
Paraguay 1865-1870, and 3) at the onset of civilian rule in Uruguay in 1890, tariff rates
spiked upwards.

                                             51
Lagged Change in the Terms of Trade

        The regressor is the cumulative change in our best estimate of net barter terms of trade
(ToT) during the five years leading up to and including the first year of the period in
question.
        The index for Argentina is calculated as an average price of principal exports (beef,
hides, wool, grains, linen, tallow) divided by an average price of principal imports (sugar,
iron & steel, liquor & wine, construction materials, textiles, tobacco, pharmaceuticals,
machinery, fuel), where in each case averages are weighted by the share of the total value of
each item in the total value of the named principal items. 1870 weights are used for the
index during 1870-1891; 1910 weights are used to construct an index on 1889-1913. All
figures are taken from various editions of the Anuario del Comercio Exterior, Dirección de
Estadistica, Buenos Aires.
        Figures for Australia during 1870 to 1900 are from W. Vamplew, ed., 1987,
Australians: Historical Statistics, Fairfax, Syme & Weldon, Broadway, NSW, ITFC 81-83,
column 83, p. 194. Figures from 1901-1913 are from Vamplew, op. cit. PC 80-89, columns
87 and 88, p. 220.
        Terms of trade for Austria-Hungary after 1882 are found in Scott M. Eddie, 1977,
“The Terms and Patterns of Hungarian Foreign Trade, 1882-1913,” Journal of Economic
History, 37(2)(June):329-358. An index for 1876-1882 is constructed from indices of the
physical quanta and values of exports and imports given in Statistik des Auswärtigen Handels
des Österreichisch-Ungarischen Zollgebiets im Jahre 1891, Statistischen Departement im K.
K. Handelsministerium, Vienna, 1893, pp. LXVIII-LXIX. For the period 1865-1875 the
same source reports only export and import values, not physical quanta. Since the quanta
display extremely stable trends during 1876-1892 (unlike the values, which are subject to the
vagaries of prices), the quanta for 1865-1875 are extrapolated assuming the same, stable
growth rate observed on 1876-1892. Combining these estimates with the trade value figures
given for 1865-1875 yield a ToT estimate for this period.
        Terms of trade for Brazil for the entire period are calculated in Reinaldo Gonçalves
and Amir Coelho Barros, 1982, “Tendências dos termos de troca: a tese de Prebisch e a
economia brasileira - 1850/1979,” Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, Rio de Janeiro,
12(1)(April):109-132.
        Burmese ToT for 1886-1913 are from Maung Shein, 1964, Burma’s Transport and
Foreign Trade in Relation to the Economic Development of the Country, 1885-1914,
University of Rangoon Press, Rangoon, pp. 223-5, 232-3. During 1865-1885 Burma’s ToT
are assumed to change at the same rate as those of Thailand.
        Figures for Canada come from M.C. Urquhart and K.A.H. Buckley eds., 1965,
Historical Statistics of Canada, The University Press, Cambridge. Export price index:
Series J, cols. 84 and 108 are linked, pp. 299 and 301. Import price index: Series J, cols. 96
and 118 are linked, pp. 300 and 302.
        Ceylon’s terms of trade from 1900-1913 are calculated from the export and import
price indices in Elaine Gunewardena, 1965, External Trade and the Economic Structure of
Ceylon 1900-1955, Central Bank of Ceylon, Colombo, pp. 225 and 227. Figures for before
1900 come from the Ceylon Blue Book, H.C. Cottle Government Printer, Colonial
Secretary’s Office, Colombo, 1914. This source gives imports and export values annually
1865-1912, which are converted to current pounds sterling via Taylor op. cit. and to real
                                              52
pounds sterling via McCusker op. cit. These values are used to construct overall export and
import price indices through the use of physical quanta indices based on shipping tonnages
entered and cleared at port. The source provides separate figures for tonnage entered and
cleared for the period 1903-1910, and a combined “entered and cleared” figure for 1865-
1902. Since the separate figures are close to equal for 1903-1910, it is assumed that this
holds true during 1865-1902 as well.
        Terms of Trade for Chile are constructed as follows. First, an export price index is
calculated using copper prices before 1880, and an unweighted average of copper and nitrate
prices from 1880 to 1914. Copper prices are from Charles L. Knight, 1935, Secular and
Cyclical Movements in the Production and Price of Copper, University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia. Although this is an “international” price, its movements on 1871-1887
closely reflect those of a copper price index for Valparaiso found in Joanne Fox Przeworski,
1978, The Decline of the Copper Industry in Chile and the Entrance of North American
Capital, 1870-1916, PhD Dissertation, Department of History, Washington University, Saint
Louis, Missouri. Nitrate prices 1870-1906 are found in E. Semper and Michels [surname
only], 1908, La Industria del Salitre en Chile, Monografía publicada en la Revista Oficial de
Minas, Metalurjía i Sustancias Salinas, Vol. 52, 1904, Berlin, traducida directamente del
alemán i considerablemente aumentada por Javier Gandarillas Matta i Orlando Ghigliotto
Salas, Imprenta Litografía i Encuadernación Barcelona, Santiago, pp. 334-337. Nitrate
prices from 1909-1913 are found in James A. F. Brodie, 1915, Nitrate Facts and Figures,
Mathieson & Sons, London, p. 7. Second, it is assumed that Chile had the same import price
index as Argentina from 1885-1913, and the same as Uruguay from 1865-1884—an
assumption justified by the close correspondence between separately-calculated indices for
Argentine imports, Uruguayan imports, American exports, and British exports.
        Chinese terms of trade for 1867-1913 are calculated in Yu-Kwei Cheng, 1956,
Foreign Trade and Industrial Development of China: An Historical and Integrated Analysis
through 1948, The University Press, Washington. The figures are reprinted in John K.
Fairbank and Kwang-Ching Liu, 1980, The Cambridge History of China, Vol. II, Cambridge
University Press, New York, pp. 46-7.
        Terms of trade for Colombia are calculated in José Antonio Ocampo, 1984, Colombia
y la Economia Mundial: 1830-1910, Siglo Veintiuno Editores, Bogota, pp. 95-6. Although
Ocampo’s figures are used, a separate calculation is performed to check them. An extremely
similar ToT index can be obtained by dividing an export index that is the unweighted average
of coffee prices (from Taylor op. cit.) and banana prices (from D. W. Rodríguez, 1955,
Bananas: An Outline of the Economic History of Production and Trade with Special
Relevance to Jamaica, The Government Printer, Kingston) by the import price index of
Uruguay.
        Terms of Trade for Cuba are approximated by dividing an export price index by an
import price index. The index of export prices is estimated as an unweighted average of
sugar and tobacco price indices. International sugar prices are taken from Taylor op. cit.
The assumption that an international sugar price index applies to Cuban exports is supported
by Jørgen Pedersen and O. Strange Petersen, 1938, An Analysis of Price Behaviour, Institute
of Economics and History, Copenhagen, p. 99, which demonstrates how sugar prices in the
British West Indies, Bengal, and Java followed each other closely throughout the period in
question; that is, there is evidence for the existence of a single world price for sugar at the
time. An index of tobacco export prices is taken from Uitgave van den Dienst der
                                              53
Belastingen in Nederlandsch-Indië, 1925, Tabak: Tabakscultur en Tabaksproducten van
Nederlandsch-Indië, Landsdrukkerij-Weltevreden. Again, why take a Dutch East Indies
export price as a proxy for Cuban tobacco export prices? First of all, Cuba in the 1920s was
exporting one sixth as much tobacco as the Dutch East Indies and one tenth as much as the
United States. That is, Cuba was a price-taker in world markets relative to exporters like the
Dutch East Indies (T. L. Hughes, 1925, International Trade in Leaf and Manufactured
Tobacco, Trade Promotion Series No. 7, Dept. of Commerce, Government Printing Office,
Washington D.C., p. 2). Second, we have anecdotal evidence that the prices of tobacco
imported from Cuba and from the Dutch East Indies moved together in prewar Europe.
When prices for Sumatran tobacco in Germany fell by half between 1907 and 1910, prices for
Havana tobacco declined by nearly the same percentage (Jacob Wolf, 1922, Der Tabak und
die Tabakfabrikate, Verlag von Bernh. Friedr. Voigt, Leipzig, p.130). An index of import
prices for Uruguay is assumed to hold for Cuba as well, justified by the close correspondence
of similar import price indices throughout Latin America, and moreover the close correlation
between these indices and export price indices for the United States and Britain during this
period.
        For Denmark 1870-1875, ToT come from H.C. Johansen, 1985, Danmarks Historie
Bind 9: Dansk Økonomisk Statistik 1814-1980, Gyldendalske Boghandel, Copenhagen, Table
4.7, col. 5, p. 217. This is linked with figures from 1875-1913 in Niels Kaergard 1991,
Økonomisk Vaekst: En Økonometrisk Analyse af Danmark 1870-1981, Jurist-og
Økonomforbundets Forlag, Copenhagen, cols. 2 and 3, p. 578.
        Figures for Egypt 1885-1913 come from B. Hansen and E. F. Lucas, 1978, “Egyptian
Foreign Trade, 1885-1961: A New Set of Trade Indices,” Journal of European Economic
History, 7(2 and 3)(Fall/Winter): 429-60, Tables 1a and 1b. Export and import indices are
calculated as a Fisher index of price over a Fisher index of quantity. Before 1885 the ToT
are assumed to change as do those of the rest of the Ottoman Empire (Turkey).
        Terms of Trade for France 1870-1896 come from Charles Kindleberger, 1956, The
Terms of Trade: A European Case Study, MIT Technology Press, Cambridge, Table 2-1, pp.
12-13. This is linked to a series from 1896-1913 found in P. Villa, 1993, Une Analyse
Macroéconomique de la France au XXeme Siècle, CNRS Editions, Monographies
d’Économetrie, Paris, pp. 445-6.
        German ToT for the entire period come from Walther G. Hoffmann, 1965, Wachstum
der Deutschen Wirtschaft seit der Mitte des 19 Jahrhunderts, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Table
134, col. 1, p. 548.
        Changes in the ToT for Greece between 1887 and 1899 are obtained by calculating a
total value-weighted index of the unit-value of exports (wine, dried fruit and olive oil) and
imports (grains and textiles) found in Commerce de la Grèce avec les Pays Étrangers pendant
l’Année 1900, Ministère des Finances, Bureau de Statistique, Athens. 1901. Both before
1887 and after 1899, the export price index is linked to an index of dried fruit prices found in
José Morilla Critz, Alan L. Olmstead and Paul W. Rhode, 2000, “International Competition
and the Development of the Dried-Fruit Industry, 1880-1930,” in Sevket Pamuk and Jeffrey
G. Williamson, eds., The Mediterranean Response to Globalization before 1950, Routledge,
New York. The import price index outside the period 1887-1899 is linked to an index of the
prices of European manufactured exports found on page 75 of Charles P. Kindleberger, 1958,
“The Terms of Trade and Economic Development,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
40(1)(February):72-85.
                                              54
        Terms of trade for India are taken from B.M. Bhattle, 1969, “Terms of Trade and
Economic Development: A Case Study of India,” Indian Economic Journal, 16:417-419.
        For Indonesia, ToT are calculated by dividing the export and import price indices
given by W. L. Korthals Altes, 1994, Changing Economy in Indonesia: Volume 15, Prices
(Non-Rice) 1814-1940, Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam, pp. 159-160.
        Italy’s terms of trade with Great Britain are taken as a proxy for overall Italian terms
of trade. The former are found in I. A. Glazier, V. N. Bandera, and R. B. Berner, 1975,
“Terms of Trade between Italy and the United Kingdom 1815-1913,” Journal of European
Economic History, 4(1)(Spring): 5-48.
        Japanese ToT come from Kazushi Ohkawa, Miyohei Shinohara, and Mataji Umemura,
eds., 1967, Estimates of Long-Term Economic Statistics of Japan Since 1868, Vol. 8, Toyo
Keizai Shinpo Sha, Tokyo, Table 18, col. 3, p. 212.
        Mexican ToT are estimated in the appendix of Laura Randall, 1977, A Comparative
Economic History of Latin America 1500-1914, Vol. 1, Institute of Latin American Studies,
Columbia University, New York.
        New Zealand’s terms of trade are given in C. G. F. Simkin, 1951, The Instability of a
Dependent Economy: Economic Fluctuations in New Zealand 1840-1914, Oxford University
Press, London, p. 37.
        Norwegian ToT are calculated from a total value-weighted price index for principal
exports (salted fish, animal skins, timber, and paper products) and imports (meats, grains,
sugar, coffee, textiles, coal, salt, and sailing vessels) using numbers on value and physical
volume from Central Statistics Bureau of Norway, Historical Statistics 1978, Oslo, pp. 262-
3, 279-82, 305-9.
        Peruvian ToT 1860-1900 are calculated in Shane Hunt, 1973, Growth and Guano in
Nineteenth Century Peru, Discussion Paper 34, Research Program in Economic Development,
Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University, p. 42. Numbers for post-1900 are taken
from the appendix of Randall op. cit. Vol. 1.
        Terms of trade for the Philippines 1865-1897 are estimated by dividing an export price
index by an import price index, where the export price index is calculated as the value of
exports over total shipping tonnage clearing port and the import price index is calculated as
the value of imports over total shipping tonnage entering port. All numbers are from Benito
J. Legarda, Jr., 1999, After the Galleons: Foreign Trade, Economic Change, &
Entrepreneurship in the Nineteenth-Century Philippines, Monograph No. 18, Center for
Southeast Asian Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison, pp. 108-9, 112-3. Terms of
trade during American rule, specifically 1902-1913, are from Thomas B. Birnberg and
Stephen A. Resnick, 1975, Colonial Development: An Econometric Study, Economic Growth
Center, Yale University, Yale University Press, New Haven, p. 306.
        Portuguese ToT are given in Lains 1995 op. cit., pp. 237-8.
        Russian terms of trade for 1856, 1881, and 1894 are calculated from an index of
export prices (grains, textiles, oil seed, wool, and naphtha) and import prices (tea, coffee,
cotton, copper, iron, zinc, wool, silk, jute, and wax), weighted by total value, from W. J.
Kowalewski and E. Davidson, 1898, Die Produktivkräfte Russlands, Zusammengestellt im
Kaiserl. Russischen Finanzmisisterium, Verlag von Otto Wigand, Leipzig, pp. 537-8, 543-4.
 After 1894 the export price index is approximated by an index of Odessa wheat prices
(linked to Liverpool prices after 1906) from C. Knick Harley, 1980, “Transportation, the
World Wheat Trade, and the Kuznets Cycle, 1850-1913,” Explorations in Economic History,
                                              55
17:218-250. This is justified by the observation that wheat represented almost half of all
Russian export value in 1910 (Margaret Miller, 1967, The Economic Development of Russia
1905-1915, Frank Cass & Co. Ltd., New York, p. 42). Miller op. cit. also shows that coal
and herrings made up nearly half of Russian imports in 1910, so the import price index after
1894 is estimated as an average of coal and herring prices weighted by their relative value
shares in imports in 1910. Coal prices come from Pierre Boca, 1937, Salaires et Prix du
Charbon dans le Bassin Houiller Rhenan-Westphalien, 1850-1913, Les Editions Domat-
Montchrestien, Paris, p. 47. Herring prices are taken to be the unit-value of herring exports
from Norway in Central Statistics Bureau of Norway op. cit.
        A total value-weighted index of Serbian export prices (pigs, cattle, grains) after 1878
comes from Holm Sundhaussen, 1989, Historiche Statistik Serbiens 1834-1914, R.
Oldenbourg Verlag, Munich, p. 361. The import price index is taken to be the index of
European export prices faced by Serbia, 1850-1910, given by Sundhaussen op. cit. p. 336.
Export prices are assumed to have remained stable 1865-1878.
        Spanish ToT are from Leandro Prados de la Escosura, 1988, De imperio a nación:
Crecimiento y atraso económico en España 1780-1930, Alianza Editorial, Madrid, pp. 257-9.
        Sweden’s terms of trade are taken from Simon Kuznets, 1996 [originally published
1967], “Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of Nations: X. Level and Structure of
Foreign Trade: Long-Term Trends,” reprinted in C. Knick Harley, ed. The integration of the
world economy, 1850-1914, Volume 1, Elgar Reference Collection: Growth of the World
Economy Series, Vol. 3. Cheltenham, U.K, Table 12, p. 150.
        An index of rice prices is assumed to adequately represent an export price index for
Thailand, and import prices are approximated as the grey shirting (textiles) price. Their ratio
approximates Thai terms of trade. All numbers are from Sompop Manarungsan, 1989,
Economic Development of Thailand, 1850-1950, IAS Monograph No. 42, Institute of Asian
Studies, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Table A4, pp. 215-6.
        Terms of trade for Turkey are calculated in Sevket Pamuk, 1978, Foreign Trade,
Foreign Capital and the Peripheralization of the Ottoman Empire, 1830-1913, PhD
Dissertation, Dept. of Economics, University of California, Berkeley, California, pp. 279-
281.
        United States ToT are from Jeffrey G. Williamson, 1964, American Growth and the
Balance of Payments 1820-1913, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, Table B4, p. 262.
        Export and import price indices for Uruguay were kindly provided by Luís Bertola,
and ToT are approximated as their ratio.

Transportation Costs

        The regressor is the product of two quantities. The first is the shipping distance, in
thousands of nautical miles, from London to the principal port of the destination country that
is closest to London. These are taken from the pre-Panama Canal port-to-port distances for
full-powered steam vessels recorded in George Philip, ed., 1914, Philip’s Mercantile Marine
Atlas, 4th ed., The London Geographical Institute, London, endsheet table. The second
quantity is an index of tramp shipping freight charges (per distance and weight) shown in
Table VIII (p. 122) of L. Isserlis, 1938, “Tramp Shipping Cargoes, and Freights,” Journal

                                              56
of the Royal Statistical Society, 101(1):53-146, where the year 1869 = 1.00 (i.e. Isserlis’
figures have been divided by 100).

Population Growth Rate

        The regressor is the year-on-year percent change in population during the first year of
the relevant period. See the aforementioned sources for population data.

Net Immigration

        The regressor is an average, over the period in question, of an annual index taking an
integer value between –3 and +3. The value +3 signifies large net immigration during that
year and –3 signifies large net emigration. Index numbers are constructed for each country in
each of five periods: 1865-69, 1870-79, 1880-89, 1890-99, and 1900-14, and assumed to hold
in each year of these five periods for the purposes of constructing an average value for our
periods I-VI.
        Information used to construct the indices for Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Cuba, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
the United States, and Uruguay comes from T. J. Hatton and J. G. Williamson, 1998, The
Age of Mass Migration, Oxford University Press, New York, p. 10, which draws heavily on
I. Ferenczi and W. F. Willcox, 1929/1931, International Migrations, National Bureau of
Economic Research, New York, Vol. I 1929 and Vol. II 1931. Chile and Uruguay are
assumed to behave similarly to Argentina.
        Figures for Australia are estimated based on A. Timmer and J. G. Williamson, 1996,
“Racism, Xenophobia or Markets?” Working Paper 5867, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Appendix A, and A. M. Taylor and J. G. Williamson, 1997, “Convergence in the
Age of Mass Migration,” European Review of Economic History, 1(1)(April): 27-63, Table
1. Based on Ferenczi and Willcox op. cit., migration New Zealand is assumed to behave
similarly to that of Australia.
        Migration data for Egypt, Greece, Serbia and Turkey are from Williamson 2000,
“Real wages and relative factor prices around the Mediterranean, 1500-1940,” op. cit., pp.
64-6, supplemented by the appendix of Jeffrey G. Williamson, 1998, “Real Wages and
Relative Factor Prices in the Third World 1820-1940: The Mediterranean Basin,” Discussion
Paper 1842, Harvard Institute for Economic Research, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Mass.
        Documentation for migration flows in China, India, and Japan is relatively poor. It is
common knowledge, however, that Madras, other eastern parts of India, and South China
were important “labor surplus” or low-wage areas which supplied huge labor supplies to high-
wage, labor-scarce areas like Ceylon, Burma, Thailand and the rest of Southeast Asia. For
example, see the evidence presented in W. A. Lewis, 1969, Aspects of Tropical
Development, Wiksell , Uppsala; W. A. Lewis, 1978, Growth and Fluctuations 1870-1913,
Allen and Unwin, Cambridge, Mass.; and/or W. A. Lewis, 1978, The Evolution of the
International Economic Order, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey. It is also
true, however, that the population from whence the Chinese and Indian emigrants were
exiting was itself immense. Thus, while the immigration rates into Burma and Thailand were
very large (since the denominators were small), the emigration rates were hardly noticeable
                                              57
for the sending areas (since the denominators were huge). It is also well known that Japan
never played a significant role in foreign migrations in either direction during the pre-1914
years (although Korean immigration during the World Wars and interwar was significant, as
was 20th century Japanese emigrations to Hawaii and the US West Coast).
        Estimates for Burma, Ceylon, Indonesia and Thailand are based on Lewis 1978 op.
cit. p. 185. Further information on Burma is found in Teruko Saito and Lee Kin Kiong,
1999, Statistics on the Burmese Economy, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore,
Table I-2, p. 9. Further information on Thailand is in Manarungsan op. cit. Table. 1.3, p.
34. Low migration levels estimated for Colombia, Mexico, and Peru are based on the scant
discussion of those countries in Ferenczi and Willcox op. cit. esp. pp. 581-90. Estimates for
the Philippines are made based on aforementioned information about the suppliers of their
immigrants, especially China and Indonesia, with some assistance from Daniel F. Doeppers
and Peter Xenos, 1998, Population and History: The Demographic Origins of the Modern
Philippines, Center for Southeast-Asian Studies, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin.
        Estimates for Russia are based on Ferenczi and Willcox op. cit. vol. 2, pp. 521-80.
Estimates for Cuba are based on Blanca Sánchez Alonso, 1995, Las causas de la emigración
española 1880-1930, Alianza Universidad, Madrid, Apendice Cuadro A3.1, p. 281.

Fraction of Exports Based on Primary Products

        The regressor is the fraction of total export value, in the first year of the period in
question, represented by exports of “primary products” (defined below). This number was
made popular as an indicator of the relative abundance of natural resources of all types by
Jeffrey D. Sachs and Andrew M. Warner, 1995, “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic
Growth,” Working Paper No. 5398, The National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Mass.
        Sachs and Warner defined “primary products” as those commodities falling into
categories 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 68 of the United Nations Standard International Trade
Classification (SITC) Revision 1. These categories are, respectively, “food and live
animals,” “beverages and tobacco,” “crude materials excluding fuels,” “mineral fuels,”
“animal or vegetable oils and fats,” and “non-ferrous metals.” This study uses a slightly
different definition of primary products, namely categories I, II, and III of the Brussels 1913
Commodity Classification (recorded in Conference Internationale de Statistique
Commerciale, Bruxelles, 1913: Documents et Procès-Verbaux, Éstablissements Généraux
D’Imprimerie, Brussels, 1914). These categories are, respectively, “live animals,” “food
and drink,” and “raw materials or simply-prepared products.” That is, our definition of
“primary products” includes all exports except categories IV (“manufactured products”) and
V (money and specie). The only substantive differences between our definition of “primary
product” and that based on the SITC are that the former includes iron ore and excludes
manufactured tobacco products like cigarettes and cigars.
        Figures for the United States, France, Germany, Russia, Australia, Austria-Hungary,
Italy, Japan, Spain, Sweden, and Chile are from League of Nations, 1945, Industrialization
and Foreign Trade, Economic, Financial and Transit Authority, Geneva, pp. 157-9. An
additional benchmark for Spain is available in Estadística General del Comercio Exterior de
Espana 1862, Dirección General de Aduanas, Madrid, pp. xxxvii and xxxix.
                                              58
        The League of Nations data for Austria-Hungary, which only go back to 1881, are
extended back to 1865 by numbers from Statistik des Auswärtigen Handels des
Österreichisch-Ungarischen Zollgebiets im Jahre 1891, Statistischen Departement im K. K.
Handelsministerium, Wien, 1893, pp. LXXVI-LXXVII. Note that manufactured food items
had to be removed from “manufactured goods” to make these data fit the Brussels
classification.
        It is clear that Brazil had no significant exports outside Brussels classifications I-III
during this period, from figures for 1904-5 in Importação e Exportação: Movimento
Marítimo, Cambial e do Café da República dos Estados Unidos do Brasil em 1905, Serviço
de Estatística Commercial, Ministério da Fazenda, Imprensa Nacional, Rio de Janeiro, 1907,
pp. 193-5, and figures for 1913-14 in Commercio Exterior do Brasil, Vol. 1, 1910 a 1914,
Directoria de Estatística Commercial, Ministério da Fazenda, República dos Estados Unidos
do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro, 1915, pp. 21-4.
        Figures for India for 1899 and after are found in H. Tyszynski, 1951, “World Trade
in Manufactured Commodities,” The Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies,
19(3)(September): 272-304, on pages 277-8, 299, and 304. It is assumed that the fraction of
Indian exports composed of manufactured goods grew at the same year-on-year rate during
1865-1898 as it did during 1899-1913. Burma is assumed to have the same figure as India in
each period.
        Figures for Canada are found in Canada Bureau of Statistics, 1910, The Canada Year
Book, C. H. Parmelee Printer to the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, Ottawa, pp. 66, 69.
        Detailed ledgers of Ceylon’s exports in 1904 are found in the 1905 Ceylon Blue Book,
pp. U58-U87. Figures for 1912 are in the 1912 Ceylon Blue Book, pp. M44-M83. Both
show that the fraction of exports falling into categories I-III is very close to unity, suggesting
that reliable figures for earlier years can be extrapolated.
        Figures for China are presented in C. Yang, H. B. Hau, and others, 1931, Statistics
of China's Foreign Trade during the Last Sixty-Five Years, Monograph No. IV, National
Research Institute of Social Sciences, Academia Sinica, Beiping, p. 27.
        Figures for Colombia are in Ocampo 1984, op. cit., pp. 100-1, 391-5.
        Cuban figures for 1899-1902 are in Estadística General: Comercio Exterior,
Secretaria de Hacienda, República de Cuba, Mayo y Junio de 1902, Havana, p. 17. Figures
for 1904-1913 are in Comercio Exterior, Segundo Semestre del Año 1913 y Año de 1913,
Sección de Estadística, Secretaria de Hacienda, Republica de Cuba, Havana, 1914, p. 9.
The turn-of-the-century figures are assumed to hold throughout the late 19th century.
        Data from Denmark 1896-1913 are taken from the export ledgers in Importation et
Exportations du Danemark (Danmarks Vareindførsel og -udførsel), Departement de
Statistique, Copenhagen, various years. Since the resulting figure of 96% does not
significantly change between 1896 and 1913, it is assumed to hold constant on 1870-1896.
        Data for Egypt 1885-1909 are in the Statistical Yearbook of Egypt for 1909, First
Issue, Statistical Department, Ministry of Finance, National Printing Department, Cairo,
1909, pp. 87, 98, 104-5. The figures from the early 80’s are assumed to hold back to 1870.
        Data on Greek exports 1887-1910 are in Commerce de la Grèce avec les Pays
Étrangers pendant l’Année 1900, Ministère des Finances, Bureau de Statistique, Athens.
1901, p. 6. The 1887 figure is assumed to hold constant back to 1870.
        Data on Indonesia for 1865-1913 are in W. L. Korthals Altes, 1991, Changing
Economy in Indonesia: Volume 12a, General Trade Statistics 1822-1940, Royal Tropical
                                               59
Institute, Amsterdam, pp. 141, 144. The graph on page 141 clearly justifies extrapolation of
1865-1873 figures all the way to 1913.
        Detailed Mexican export composition for 1880-1891 is found in Antonio Peñafiel,
1888, Boletín Semestral de la Estadística de la República Mexicana, Ministerio de Fomento,
Mexico, pp. 186-189. That there was no decrease in this figure even right before the War is
confirmed by figures for 1912-3 in The Mexican Year Book: A Financial and Commercial
Handbook, compiled from Official and other Returns, 1914, Dept. of Finance, Mexico City,
pp. 16-17.
        Complete data for New Zealand are to be found in G. T. Bloomfield, 1984, New
Zealand: A Handbook of Historical Statistics, G. K. Hall & Co., Boston, pp. 271-2.
        Complete data for Norwegian export composition are in Central Statistics Bureau of
Norway, op. cit., pp. 262-3.
        It is assumed that Peru had no exports in Brussels Class IV during this period, since it
had developed none by 1918—as can be seen in Extracto Estadístico Correspondiente al Año
1918, Preparado por la Dirección de Estadística del Ministerio de Fomento, Lima, p. 89.
        Detailed export ledgers for 1890-4, 1899-1904, and 1906-7 are in Monthly Summary
of Commerce of the Philippines Islands, various years, Division of Insular Affairs, War
Department, Washington. Benchmarks for the years 1867 and 1876 are in Estadística
Mercantil del Comercio Exterior de las Islas Filipinas, Año de 1867 [and 1876], Manila.
        Portuguese export composition is reported in Lains 1995 op. cit., p. 92.
        Figures for Serbia, 1879-1910, are in Nestorovic op. cit. pp. 130, 134, 137, and 139.
        Export breakdowns for Thailand 1908-12 are presented in Foreign Trade and
Navigation of the Port of Bangkok: Years 129 (1910-11) and 130 (1911-12), Prepared in the
Statistical Office, H. S. M. Customs, and Published by Order of the Director-General,
Bangkok, pp. 75-83. These ledgers reveal that manufactures in 1908 were less than 1% of
export value, suggesting that reliable figures can be obtained from extrapolation back to
1870.
        Full data for Turkey are presented in Pamuk 1978 op. cit., pp. 235-249, and
confirmed in Sevket Pamuk, 1995, 19. Yuzyilda Osmanli Ticareti (Ottoman Trade in the 19th
Century), T.C. Basbakanlik Devlet Istatistik Enstitusu (State Institute of Statistics, Prime
Ministry), Ankara, p. 36.
        Detailed ledgers of Uruguayan export composition are given in Anuario de Estadística
de la República Oriental del Uruguay, Dirección de Estadística General, Montevideo, years
1884, 1895, and 1911-12.
        Data for Argentina come from Randall op. cit. Vol. 2, pp. 218-9.

Primary Product Based Exports as a Fraction of       GDP

        The above index of the fraction of exports based on primary products is multiplied by
total export value and divided by total GDP to obtain the value of primary product-based
exports as a fraction of GDP, an alternative indicator of natural resource abundance used in
Sachs and Warner op. cit. Figures for GDP are obtained by multiplying the above estimates
of GDP per capita by estimates of population. Export figures for Argentina, Australia after
1900, Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba after 1902,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Russia,
Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, the United States, and Uruguay come from Banks op. cit.
                                               60
 Those for Australia before 1900, Ceylon, Cuba before 1902, Egypt, India, Indonesia, New
Zealand, Philippines, and Serbia come from Arthur Lewis, 1981, “The Rate of Growth of
World Trade, 1830-1973,” in Sven Grassman and Erik Lundberg, eds., The World Economic
Order: Past and Prospects, St. Martin’s Press, New York.
        Burmese exports for 1913 come from Statistical Abstract for British India,
Government of Calcutta, India Publication Branch, Commercial Intelligence Department,
1914. Burmese exports from 1902-1912 are from Statistics of British India, Part II:
Commercial, Director-General of Commercial Intelligence, Calcutta, 1913. Burmese exports
for 1874-1902 are from Statistical Abstract Relating to British India, Various Years, Eyre &
Spottiswoode for HMSO, Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of Her
Majesty, London. All export figures are converted into real, 1990 US dollars via McCusker
op. cit.

Land Area

        Land areas are in square miles and correspond to country borders as defined in the
first section of this appendix.
        Areas for Argentina, Australia, Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand,
Norway, Peru, Portugal, Russia, Serbia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, the United
States, and Uruguay come from Banks op. cit.
        Areas for Burma, Ceylon, Egypt, India (sum of modern India, Pakistan, and
Bangladesh), Indonesia, and the Philippines come from the Encyclopedia Britannica.

Urbanization

       This regressor is the fraction of the population living in urban agglomerations of
100,000 or more in the first year of the period in question.
       Data for Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Denmark,
France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Russia, Serbia,
Spain, Sweden, Turkey, the United States, and Uruguay come from Banks op. cit.
       Data for Australia, Ceylon, Cuba, Egypt, India, the Philippines, and Thailand are in
the appropriate volume of Mitchell 1998 op. cit. An additional benchmark for India is in
Edwin S. Mills and Charles M. Becker, 1986, Studies in Indian Urban Development, The
World Bank, Oxford University Press, New York, p. 34. An additional benchmark for the
Philippines is in Rajeswary Ampalavanar Brown, 1994, Capital and Entrepreneurship in
South-East Asia, St. Martin’s Press, New York, p. 228.
       Figures for Burma are in Saito and Kiong op. cit., p. 16.
       Data for China come from Kang Chao, 1986, Man and Land in Chinese History: An
Economic Analysis. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto, California. Note that Chao defines
an urban agglomeration as consisting of only 2,000 people, so this number can be best
considered an upper-bound proxy. Since it is low in all years, the error introduced by
overestimation cannot be large.
       Figures for Indonesia are in P. Boomgaard and A. J. Gooszen, 1991, Changing
Economy in Indonesia: Volume 11, Population Trends 1795-1942, Royal Tropical Institute,
Amsterdam, pp. 213, 220.
                                             61
       Data for New Zealand are in G. T. Bloomfield, 1984, New Zealand: A Handbook of
Historical Statistics, G. K. Hall & Co., Boston, p. 56.

School Enrollment

         This regressor is the fraction of the population aged 14 years or less that is enrolled in
primary school in the first year of the period in question, and is in units of enrolled students
per 10,000 persons aged 14 years or below. It is calculated as the quotient of 1) primary
enrollment as a fraction of the total population and 2) children aged 14 or below as a fraction
of the total population. Each is discussed in turn.
         Enrollment as a fraction of total population: Data for Argentina, Australia, Brazil,
Burma, Ceylon, China, Egypt, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the
Philippines, Russia, Serbia, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, and the United States are from Richard
A. Easterlin, 1981, “Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed?” Journal of Economic History,
41(1)(March):1-19., and Richard A. Easterlin, 1996, Growth Triumphant, University of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, p. 61. Data for Australia, Austria-Hungary, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Denmark, Greece, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Sweden, and Uruguay are from Banks
op. cit. Data for Ceylon are from the 1914 edition of the Ceylon Blue Book, endsheet.
Additional data for Colombia are in 1869, 1870, and 1883 are found in Ocampo 1997 op.
cit., p. 160-1 and Gabriel Poveda Ramos, 1979, Dos Siglos de Historia Económica de
Antioquia, Biblioteca Pro Antioquia, Medellin, p. 95. Additional data for Cuba are in Susan
Schroeder, 1983, Cuba: A Handbook of Historical Statistics, G. K. Hall & Co., Boston.
Additional data for New Zealand are in Bloomfield op. cit., p.110.
         Children aged 14 or below as a fraction of the total population (the “youth
dependency ratio”): Data for Argentina, Australia, Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Burma,
Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Norway,
Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, and the United States come from the appropriate volume of
Mitchell 1998 op. cit. Figures for Chile are from Mamalakis op. cit. volume 2. Figures for
Ceylon are approximated using a straightforward demographic model employing population
growth figures from the 1914 Ceylon Blue Book, and viable birth and infant mortality
statistics from L. J. B. Turner, 1923, Report on the Census of Ceylon 1921, H. Ross Cottle,
Government Printer, Ceylon, pp. 11, 15.
         Youth dependency ratio statistics for China are gathered from a range of sources,
giving a picture of trends in the ratio from 1771 to 1990. Data for 1771-1835 and 1872 are
from Ping-ti Ho, 1959, Studies on the Population of China 1368-1953, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 59, 68. A benchmark from 1842 is in Gilbert Rozman, 1982,
Population and Marketing Settlements in Ch’ing China, Cambridge University Press, 1982,
p. 59. A figure from 1953 is in S. Chandrasekhar, 1960, China’s Population: Census and
Vital Statistics, Hong Kong University Press, Hong Kong, p. 47, and figures from 1953,
1964, and 1982 are in Li Chengrui, 1992, A Study of China’s Population, Foreign Languages
Press, Beijing. A datapoint for 1958 is in Chai Sunglin, 1977, Population and Population
Policy in Mainland China, Asia and the World Forum, Monograph 6, Taipei, Taiwan, p. 56.
 Benchmarks for 1926, 1929, 1931, 1934, and 1947 are in Yang Zi Hui, 1995, China
Historical Population Data and the Relevant Studies, China Reform Publishing House,
Beijing, pp. 1364, 1366, 1369. The general agreement of these disparate figures on long-
term trends in the population structure allows confident interpolation for 1870-1913.
                                                62
        Data for Colombia come from Mitchell op. cit. 1998, Ocampo 1997 op. cit. p. 160,
and Poveda op. cit. p. 95. Data for Cuba are from Schroeder, op. cit., pp. 51-3. A
benchmark for Egypt in 1917 is from Mitchell 1998 op. cit., and in preceding years the
Egyptian youth dependency ratio is assumed to change at the same rate as that of India. Data
for Indonesia are from Boomgaard and Gooszen, op. cit. pp. 200-3. Figures for New
Zealand are in Bloomfield op. cit., pp. 48-50. Peruvian figures for 1876 are benchmarked in
Alida Díaz, 1974, El Censo General de 1876 en el Perú, Seminario de Historia Rural
Andina, Lima, Table 8, page 33. These are compared with post-1940 statistics in Mitchell
1998 op. cit. to reveal long-term trends in the Peruvian population structure. For the
Philippines, there is a 1918 benchmark in Felipe Buencamino, Sr., 1921, Census of the
Philippine Islands, Vol. 2, Census Office of the Philippine Islands, Manila, p. 65, and a
1903 benchmark in J. P. Sanger, 1905, Census of the Philippine Islands, Vol. 2, United
States Bureau of the Census 1905, p. 65. Serbian data come from Sundhaussen op. cit. p.
114. Data for Thailand in 1911, 1925, 1947, and 1960 come from the Statistical Year Book
of the Kingdom of Siam published by the Ministry of Finance, and data points for 1929 and
1937 are in Mitchell 1998 op. cit. Together these give a clear view of long-term trends in
the Thai population structure that allow confident extrapolation to the period 1870-1913. For
Turkey, an 1886 benchmark can be found in McCarthy, op. cit., p. 87, and comparison
points for 1935-1960 are in Mitchell 1998 op. cit., giving a clear picture of long-term trends
in Turkish demographic structure. Uruguayan dependency ratios for 1900 and 1908 are in
Mitchell 1998 op. cit., and before 1900 they are assumed to have changed at the same rate as
did those for Argentina.

Unskilled, Real, PPP-adjusted, Urban Wages relative to those of Great Britain

        This regressor is an index of the unskilled, urban, real, purchasing power-adjusted
urban wage in that country in the current year—where the unskilled, urban, real, purchasing
power-adjusted urban wage in Great Britain in the current year corresponds to the index value
100.
        Figures for Australia, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United States come from Jeffrey G. Williamson, 1995,
“The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1830: Background Evidence and
Hypotheses,” Explorations in Economic History, 32:141-196.
        Figures for Burma, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, and Thailand
come from Jeffrey G. Williamson, 2000, “Globalization, Factor Prices and Living Standards
in Asia before 1940,” in A. J. H. Latham and Heita Kawakatsu, eds., Asia-Pacific Dynamism
1550-2000, Routledge, New York.
        Figures for Egypt, Serbia, and Turkey come from Jeffrey G. Williamson, 2000, “Real
Wages and Relative Factor Prices around the Mediterranean, 1500-1940,” op. cit. It is
assumed that the index value for Turkey is a good proxy for that of Greece, due to
similarities of economy and geography as well as a high rate of labor mobility between the
two.
        Figures for Argentina, Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, and Uruguay come from Jeffrey G.
Williamson, 1998, “Real Wages and Relative Factor Prices in the Third World 1820-1940:
Latin America,” Discussion Paper 1853, Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Harvard
University, Cambridge, Mass.
                                             63
        Austro-Hungarian nominal unskilled urban wages 1891-1913 come from Michael
Mesch, 1984, Arbeiterexistenz in der Spatgrunderzeit: Gewerkschaften und Lohnentwicklung
in Österreich 1890-1914, Europaverlag, Vienna, p. 287 (unweighted average of the eight
cities shown). These are converted to real wages with a price index calculated as the
unweighted average of three grain prices given in Alfred Francis Pribram, 1938, Materialen
zur Geschichte der Preise und Löhne in Österreich, Carl Ueberreuters Verlag, Vienna, pp.
371-3. The resulting real wage series is adjusted for purchasing power based on data on
Austrian and British prices for the year 1913 in Wesley C. Mitchell, 1919, International
Price Comparisons, Government Printing Office, Washington, pp. 56-154 and 320-328. The
British real wage series with which it is compared comes from Williamson 1995 op. cit. The
result of extrapolation before 1891 matches well with a relative wage benchmark for the year
1884 in Michael G. Mulhall, 1885, History of Prices since the Year 1850, Longmans, Green,
and Co., London, p. 125. The resulting series also corresponds to the observation that
“…both money wages and real wages probably declined until the mid 1890s. Only after the
effect of mass migration had made its impression on the labor market, i.e., after the turn of
the century, did wages rise again” (Scott M. Eddie, 1983, “Agriculture as a Source of
Supply: Conjectures from the History of Hungary, 1870-1913,” in John Komlos, ed.,
Economic Development in the Habsburg Monarchy in the Nineteenth Century: Essays,
Columbia University Press, New York, p. 111).
        Russian real wages come from the unpublished manuscript Russian Economic Growth
before 1917 by Robert C. Allen of the University of British Columbia. These are compared
to British real wages from Williamson 1995 op. cit. by information on 1913 relative
consumer prices in Russia and Great Britain in Wesley Mitchell, op. cit., pp. 56-154 and
210-225.
        It is assumed that the index value for Australia is a good proxy for that of New
Zealand. This is justified by economic and geographic similarities, labor mobility, and by a
calculation showing that purchasing power-adjusted wages of “builders and general laborers”
in New Zealand 1895-1900 were identical to those of their counterparts in Australia. For this
calculation, New Zealand nominal unskilled urban wages came from M. B. Hammond, 1917,
“The Regulation of Wages in New Zealand,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 31(3)(May):
404-46. An index of New Zealand prices relative to those in Great Britain is found in J. W.
McIlraith, 1913, “Price Variations in New Zealand,” The Economic Journal,
23(91)(September):348-354. British nominal unskilled urban wages are on page 310 of A. L.
Bowley, 1900, “The Statistics of Wages in the United Kingdom during the Last Hundred
Years. (Part IV) The Building Trades, English Towns,” Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, 63(2)(June): 297-315. Lastly, a British real wage index is found in Jeffrey G.
Williamson, 1995, “The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1830: Background
Evidence and Hypotheses,” op. cit.
        For all other regressors we have complete data for all countries in all periods; for
wages, however, we have no data for Ceylon, Chile, and Peru. For Cuba, we only have data
for period VI. All other countries and periods are complete.




                                             64
