                                   & *+                  




                                       
                                 


                                             
                                             !"#$%


                                           &!'%( )!,-./
                                   011)22%#!!(2))!32,-./



                                                            
                                 /-4-335063113 %6
                                    $#!(7 -8/.,
                                      5$#!8---




                 
  !  "#$   %  &    #  ' ( ) * +  '   
    %*, &-,   # . ! !
 /$#       &!! %      &!   %%!! $          !  %
*/ % 0 %   + %,!0 %   ! % % $
1       %       % %
   $

2"1 $           ' $+$/ !  1 $,    
   ! 3%    %   1   %  % !2
 !1  % $
0 33 !%1 %1"
 0% 13%10 9 
% !"#$%
 &!'%( )!,-./
5$#!8---
8:7/87/.788

                                               $%675$&7

        ;%5$ $31050!%!5!(19#% 13 !$10!%%5$9
 !1700(0%5$19)"!3!5!(19#% 13 !$)%%19$)1%3<03
6 3 (!1! 1 103 % 0(0! 19 #!5'13=  % 5%1!317 $;%5$ )!%13 !5
36#31%1" 3$! 19 #% 13 3351 10 50!%  03 ;30) )11!%   #% 13 #"
%5$7050510>$;533)!%1)%1"7?%1%"!333363  !%33@13
(%!13$!(%19!13%$!!()%13 !$!1%5$ $3101!30(0!
0(0!10%103 5%($!;1;19)"!303))!56$%1301019#% 13
50!%!"10%5$7%631!1310!$)51%$!(%19!13%$!!()%13
110%9$%3 )1%3 !!65%(!$%1%(10$;533)!%1)%1"%100(0
$!(%19!13%$!!()%131)!653


                                            !"#$%
*%%" 50 +!%$%1                               *%%" 50 +!%$%1
!!%!31"                                        !!%!31"
 $#!(7 -8/.,                                          $#!(7 -8/.,
%10                                                %10
AB0!!6                                  C !"A#$%B0!!6
       Over the past decade tax benefits for families with children have increased by

roughly 75 percent, due to expansions in the Earned Income Tax Credit and the

introduction of the child tax credit. Some of the tax benefits associated with children,

such as the child tax credit and the dependent care tax credit are generally non-refundable

and thus benefit only those who owe taxes. Similarly, the $2,750 per child dependent

exemption is of value only to those with positive tax liability, and its value rises with a

taxpayer’s marginal tax rate. By contrast the earned income tax credit is refundable and

targeted on low income families.

       The combination of the highly targeted and refundable Earned Income Tax Credit

(EITC) and the non-refundable credits and exemptions creates a situation where the tax

benefits from children are much higher for low and high income parents than for middle

income parents. Middle income parents, who earn too much to qualify for much EITC

and too little to gain much benefit from the other tax-linked benefits might be said to face

a kind of “middle class parent penalty” relative to their poorer and richer counterparts.

       This middle class parent penalty not only raises issues of fairness; it also

generates marginal tax rates and marriage penalties for moderate income families that are

as high or higher than those facing more well to do taxpayers. Marginal tax rates

(including payroll taxes) for two parent families can reach 50 percent or more among

families with incomes near $30,000. And for parents in the same income range the

marriage penalty can, in some cases, exceed $2,000.

       This paper documents how the tax benefits from children vary with income and

illustrates their impact on marginal tax rates and marriage penalties. It then examines

alternative proposals for reducing or eliminating the middle-class-parent-penalty and the

high marginal tax rates and marriage penalties it produces. Assuming that policy makers



                                                  1
would be reluctant to cut back support for low-income working parents, any correction

would necessarily involve providing more tax-based support for middle income parents

and that would berequire additional revenue. But in a context where tax cuts of various

sorts are being widely discussed, strategies that provide greater support for middle-

income working families while improving work and marriage incentives for low and

moderate-income parents are worth examining.



I. U.S. Tax Benefits for Parents

       The U.S. federal income tax code has long offered extra benefits for families and

children. Some benefits are potentially available to all families with children so long as

their income is in the appropriate range. These benefits include the Earned Income Tax

Credit, dependent exemption, and the child tax credit. Others are linked to specific

expenditures such as the credit for child and dependent care expenses, “flexible spending

accounts” for child care, the Hope Scholarship tax credit, and education IRAs. At least

one is linked to family status--the separate schedule for head of household filers. Still

others are more implicit, such as the home mortgage interest deduction, which

presumably provides greater benefits to those with greater housing needs. Only the EITC

and a small portion of the additional child credit for families with three or more children

are refundable, so none of the others advantage people who would not owe taxes in the

absence of these tax provisions

       This combination of policies makes for a complicated tax code and a complex tax

form. Adding to this complexity is the fact that different definitions of " child" are used

in determining eligibility for the provisions. We begin by briefly reviewing these

benefits.



                                                 2
          Earned Income Tax Credit

          The Earned Income Tax Credit was introduced in 1975, in part as a way to offset

the payroll taxes that low-income taxpayers must pay. It is fully refundable. Over the

years it has been expanded considerably. Today it is often seen as a way of ensuring that

working families are not poor. Indeed the latest increase in the EITC was designed

explicitly to ensure that a family of four with one full-time minimum wage worker would

avoid poverty through a combination of earnings, food stamps and the EITC.1 Since

1986, benefits and other program parameters have been adjusted for inflation. Children

qualify a taxpayer for the EITC if they live in the taxpayer’s household for at least 6

months of the year, and they must be the natural child, stepchild, adopted child, or foster

child of the taxpayer, and be under 19 (or under 24 if a full time student or any age if the

child is permanently and totally disabled).

          The EITC has a phase-in, a plateau, and a phase-out. During the phase-in, each

dollar in earnings is matched by an EITC equal to 34% of earnings for a family with one

child, and 40% for a family with two or more. As income rises, the credit reaches its

maximum of $2,312 for a family with one child or $3,816 for a family with two or more

children in 1999. It remains at that "plateau" level until family income reaches $12,460

at which point it is phased out at a rate of 15.98% for families with one child and 21.06%

for families with two or more children. The effect of the EITC on marginal tax rates thus

depends on where one is located in the income spectrum. It sharply reduces marginal tax

rates in the phase-in, has no effect over the plateau range, and it raises rates during the

phase out.

          Dependent Exemption



1
    Ellwood (1996).

                                                  3
        The dependent exemption is deducted from family income before calculating

taxes. In 1999 it equaled $2750 per dependent. Although it is now inflation adjusted, its

value relative to per capita income has shrunk from 42 percent in 1946 to roughly 10

percent in recent years.2 The exemption begins to phase out slowly (0.8% per $1000)

starting at roughly $190,000 in adjusted gross income for married couples and $160,000

for single heads of household. The dependent exemption is available for any child under

19 and any full-time student under 24 for whom the family provides over half of the

support3, regardless of how long the dependent lived in the household.

        Because the exemption reduces taxable income, its value naturally increases with

marginal tax rates until it begins to phase out. For someone who otherwise owes no taxes

it is worthless. For those in the 15% bracket, it is worth $413; for taxpayers in the 28

percent bracket it is worth $770; for those in the 36% bracket, which begins at $159,000

for a married couple, it is worth $990 in tax savings. Unless the exemption moves a

family into a lower tax bracket, it has no impact on marginal tax rates.

        Child Tax Credit

        The child tax credit was adopted in 1997. Families receive a tax credit of $500

for each qualifying child. A qualifying child is the natural child, stepchild, adopted child,

or foster child who is under 17 for whom the family can claim a dependent exemption.

The credit is not refundable for families with fewer than 3 children. For those with 3 or

more children, it is refundable to the extent that the employee portion of payroll taxes

exceeds the refundable portion of the EITC. The credit is phased out at a rate of $50 per




2
  McIntyre and Steuerle (1996). Whittington, Alm, and Peters (1990) present evidence that U.S. fertility
rates have responded to the level of the dependent exemption.
3
  It is also available for others whose gross income is below the exemption amount

                                                         4
$1000 of income starting at $110,000 for married taxpayers and $75,000 for unmarried

heads of households. The benefit and limits are not indexed to inflation.

         The value of the credit is equal to $500 per child or the family's tax liability if it is

less than $500 per child (unless the family has more than three children in which case it

becomes partially refundable). Except for high income taxpayers subject to the credit’s

phaseout, it does not alter marginal tax rates at all (unless it pulls people into a range

where they owe no taxes).

         Dependent Care Credit

         The dependent care tax credit originated in 1954 and has gone through many

changes. Currently it provides a credit of up to 30% for allowable dependent care

expenses for children under 13. Allowable expenses are limited to $2,400 for one

dependent and $4,800 for families with two or more. Benefits are reduced by half a

percentage point for each dollar of income above $10,000, but never fall below 20% of

allowable costs.4 The credit is not refundable. Limits are not indexed to inflation.

         The benefit of this credit generally will be 20% of child care expenses up to a

maximum benefit of $960 for two children. It benefits only those with positive tax

liabilities. It has no impact on marginal tax rates unless people are moved into a zero tax

range.

         Employer-Provided Dependent Care

         The value of certain employer-paid dependent care expenses of up to $5,000 are

also excludable from income. This includes both actual care provided directly in the

workplace, which is rare, and flexible spending accounts, which are much more



4
  Because the dependent care credit phases out so early, and given the other non-refundable credits like the
child tax credit, under the current tax rules, the net gain of the dependent care credit rarely is much greater
than the minimum 20% for taxpayers with children.

                                                            5
common.5 Under a flexible spending account, employees have the option of placing up to

$5,000 in pre-tax income into an employer-sponsored account. This money is then

dispersed by the employer to reimburse for qualifying child care expenses paid by the

employee. Such accounts are uncommon in small firms, but in medium to large

establishments they are often part of a flexible set of benefits. According to the 1998

Green Book, slightly over 1/3 of full-time employees in medium to large size

establishments were eligible for these accounts in 1991.6 Expenses covered by flexible

spending accounts reduce dollar for dollar the amount of expenses eligible for the

Dependent Care Tax Credit. This benefit does not phase-out at higher incomes.7

         Like any deduction, the value of this provision depends on the tax rate of the

family. It is worth nothing to those with no income, or up to $1,800 for those in the 36%

tax bracket. It alters marginal rates only if taxpayers are moved to a lower bracket.

         For low-income households, the dependent care tax credit is usually more

valuable than the flexible spending account. A family in the 15 percent tax bracket with

two children is eligible for a tax credit of between 20 and 30 percent on up to $4800 of

dependent care expenses; the credit is therefore potentially worth between $960 and

$1440. In contrast, the opportunity to exclude $5000 in expenses through a flexible

spending account is worth only $750 to a taxpayer in the 15 percent tax bracket. For a

taxpayer in the 28 percent bracket the relative attractiveness of the two policies is

reversed. The dependent care tax credit is worth 20 percent of the first $4800 of

expenses, or $960, while the opportunity to exclude $5000 of expenses from income is

worth $1400.



5
  Committee on Ways and Means (1998) p. 878.
6
  Ibid., p. 878.
7
  Gentry and Hagy (1996)discuss the distribution of child care tax benefits.

                                                          6
        Education Benefits

        There are a number of education related tax benefits. In 1997, the HOPE credits

were established. They provide a 100 percent credit for the first $1,000 in qualifying

educational expenses and 50% for the next $1,000. It is available for expenses only in

the first two years of post-secondary education. After 2001, the credit will be indexed to

inflation.8

        The lifetime learning credit allows a 20 percent credit of up to $5,000 in

qualifying educational expenses. There is a lifetime limit on the credit of $2,000. There

is no limit on age or relationship. Both the HOPE and lifetime learning credit are phased

out over the range of $80,000 to $100,00 income for joint returns and $40,000 to $50,000

for single filers.

        Parents and grandparents can place money in an education IRA for children. Both

the contributions and the disbursements are not taxed, so long as the money is used for a

qualifying educational institution. The maximum contribution is $500 per year. The

contribution allowance is phased out starting at $150,000 for joint returns and $95,000

for others. Qualified state tuition savings plans are also tax exempt.

        Head of Household Filing Status

        There are three primary filing statuses: married filing jointly, head of household,

and single. As is well known, tax schedules and deductions are such that for a given

level of taxable income, taxes are lowest for joint filers, higher for heads of households,

and highest for single persons, but the tax brackets for couples are less than twice those




8
  Dynarski (2000) finds that Georgia’s HOPE Scholarship, the inspiration for the new federal Hope
Scholarship, increased the college attendance rate of middle- and high-income youth, but widened the
college attendance gap between blacks and whites and between those from low- and high-income families.

                                                       7
of singles.9 Marriage places people into joint filing status, so the benefits or costs of

filing joint returns are not tied directly to the presence of children per se. But in the case

of head of household filers, it is often the presence of children that puts theminto the

filing category. Whether the parent is divorced or never married, he or she would be in a

less favorable tax status without children.

           In some cases, however, eligibility for the head of household status is not

dependent on the presence of children. Some heads of households with children are also

living with other relatives or grown children, so at the margin, the children do not create

the benefit. Moreover, one might argue that the lower tax rates of one-earner joint filers

(relative to filing separate single returns) similarly reflect a recognition that married

couples will generally have children and need to set up a household, even though

technically, joint filing status is tied to marriage, not parenting.

           Still if we ask the simple question: how much benefit does being able to file as a

head of household yield, the answer is sizable. In the case of a single parent, the head of

household status allows her $2050 more in the standard deduction and better tax brackets

than if she filed as a single adult. The benefits of being a head of household filer versus a

single rise with income, from $308 for someone with an income of $20,000 to $3,500 and

more for the small group of single parents with incomes above $150,000 annually.

           Other Tax Benefits

           The mortgage interest deduction also offers some benefits for children. Families

with children may spend more on housing, thus gaining greater tax benefits. The

deductibility of employer paid health insurance premiums, excess health expenses, the

linkage between many state taxes and federal provisions, and even the deductibility of



9
    In two-earner households, the taxes of joint filers may be higher or lower than they would be if persons

                                                            8
state and local taxes all influence the benefits associated with children. Nearly all of

these typically grow with income, largely because the benefits to deductions are greatest

when marginal tax rates are highest.

         The Budgetary Cost of Child Benefits

         Table 1 shows the relative magnitude of the main child-related tax provisions in

terms of the revenue loss for the federal income tax.10 Lost revenue from exemptions for

dependent children will total around $34 billion in 2001, more than any other child

associated tax benefit. The EITC is expected to cost $31 billion in FY2001 and the child

credit $20 billion. The other provisions are much smaller. Allowing taxpayers to file

with the head of household filing status instead of filing as single costs $4 billion dollars.

The total cost of the dependent care credit and the tax expenditure for employer-provided

child care is only $3 billion.



II.      The Cumulative Effect of the Various Child Tax Benefits

         The rather obvious insight from this discussion is that the tax code provides

relatively sizable tax benefits to low and high income families with children--the former

through the EITC, the latter through tax benefits that tend to rise with income, at least to

a point. For the group in the middle income range, tax benefits are much smaller. Yet

this feature has been emphasized by only a few authors. Eugene Steuerle has focussed

particular attention on child tax code provisions, often adding the additional complication

that the interaction of the tax code with provisions of the transfer system creates skewed




with the same income had filed separately--hence this is one source of marriage penalties and rewards.
10
   The cost of tax expenditures in these calculations is only the cost in terms of federal income taxes. Some
of these provisions reduce a taxpayer’s OASDHI taxes as well.

                                                          9
and complex incentives.11 Perhaps the most important work that focuses on the U-shaped

benefit pattern has been done by Robert Cherry (1998) and more recently as part of

significant new work with Max Sawicky.12 In addition, these authors have recently

proposed an expansion to the EITC somewhat similar to an option below. This paper

extends this work, illustrating in detail the actual incidence of the various child tax

benefits, examining impacts of a range of reform proposals, and estimating costs and

impact from actual tax data.

          The current situation can be illustrated with the following example. Suppose that

a married couple has two dependent children living at home and that the couple pays 5%

of its income in allowable child care expenses. Table 2 illustrates their net tax benefits

from having children from the four most important child-linked benefits. In decomposing

the total tax benefits from individual provisions, one must order the benefits. In the

situation where the combined value of various non-refundable child benefits exceeds the

total tax liability of the family without them, taxes fall to zero, and there is ambiguity as

to which benefit to treat as having reduced the liability first.         In such a case, we attribute

benefits first to the dependent exemption and then to the child tax credit since these two

tax benefits are available for nearly every child, and finally to the dependent care tax

credit.

          The treatment of the dependent care credit is ambiguous, since these benefits

depend on expenditures. It seems unlikely that a family with $30,000 would spend the

$4,800 necessary to gain the full benefits. Thus for this example we have assumed that

families child care expenses grow with income. We assume a expenditure equal to 5% of



11
   See for example Steuerle (1990), Steuerle and Juffras (1990), Steuerle (forthcoming) and McIntyre and
Steuerle (1996).
12
   Cherry and Sawicky (2000)

                                                       10
income; families with two children do not get the full benefit of the credit until their

spending reaches $4800 ($96,000 in income in this example). Different assumptions

would yield different results for this credit.

           Families with two children and $12,000 of income qualify for the full Earned

Income Tax Credit of $3,816. A family with $20,000 has a reduced EITC, and gets only

partial benefits from the other child tax provisions because the family would owe

relatively little in taxes, so its benefits total $3,332. A couple with $35,000 receives even

less. The couple gets no EITC, and even with the full benefit of the tax provisions, the

total tax benefits from children fall to under $2,200. Then for families with incomes of

$75,000 the benefit rises again to $3,290 since the dependent exemptions are worth more

to a family in the 28 percent bracket than to one in the 15 percent bracket.

           These figures would be even more dramatic if the higher income family could get

its child care paid through an employer sponsored flexible spending account--that would

add $300. Other tax benefits cited above such as higher education credits are also more

likely to benefit the well-to-do, not only because they are more likely to be eligible for

them, but also because they are often in the form of a deduction whose value is greater

for those in higher brackets. Several authors have shown that children from higher

income families are far more likely to go on to post-secondary schooling than low income

families are.13

           One can see how these benefits play out over a much wider range of incomes and

for several different family settings in Figures 1 to 5. Figures 1 to 3 show married

couples with different numbers of children. Figure 4 is for a head of household filer with

two children where we do not include the potential value of the head of household status,



13
     See for example, Ellwood and Kane (forthcoming) and Cameron and Heckman (1999)

                                                      11
because it is an ambiguous "child" benefit. Then in Figure 5 we include the value of the

head of household filing status based on the assumption that the person would have filed

as a single taxpayer in the absence of the two children. In most of our subsequent work

we do not include the value of this head of household designation as a child benefit.

        We will concentrate on Figure 2, the tax benefits associated two children for a

married couple. Taxpayers filing married joint returns represent 64 percent of all tax

returns claiming child tax benefits and claim almost 70 percent of all dependent child

exemptions.14 The total tax benefit associated with children is decomposed into its four

main components for a married couple with two children. The EITC is the main benefit

for taxpayers with incomes below around $25,000 or so. The value of the dependent

exemption rises from $825 in the 15 percent tax bracket to $1,540 in the 28 percent

bracket, and $1,705 in the 31 percent bracket. The value of the child tax credit is constant

at $1,000 for this family once tax liabilities are positive. However, the child credit is

phased out for households with income above $110,000 ($75,000 for single heads) and

therefore the total tax benefits to children fall above this income level.15

         In all of the figures, the highest benefits tend to be concentrated in the $10,000 to

$12,000 income range and the $75,000 to $100,000 range. At times the tax benefits rise

and fall rapidly. Figure 3, the figure for families with three children is particularly

unusual. The sudden blip at roughly $30,000 is caused by the quasi-refundable nature of

the child tax credit (refundable up to the point where the sum of the credit plus the EITC

equals payroll taxes) for families with 3 or more children.



14
   Among lower income taxpayers, those with AGI below $40,000, taxpayers filing married joint returns
represent only 44 percent of taxpayers claiming children, though they claim 50 percent of the children.
Head of household filers represent the bulk of the balance.
15
   A phase out of dependent exemptions occurs beyond the income level shown in this figure (between
$189,950 and $312,450 for married couples).

                                                       12
       The figures indicate that the pattern varies widely across families, and even these

comparatively simple charts mask considerably greater complexity and variation in actual

practice. Because of the significant number of contingent benefits--those available only

to people with particular costs such as higher education or child care, child benefits vary

considerably even for people with the same incomes. Moreover, the definition of a

qualifying child varies considerably across programs--for example the EITC is available

only to those for whom a child lived in the home for more than 6 month, while the

dependent exemption is based on a dependency test, independent of residence.



III. The Observed Incidence of Child Benefits

       In order to examine the actual impact of these provisions and to gain a greater

sense of what the distribution of child tax benefits looks like in practice, we analyzed

child tax benefits using a sample of tax returns. Specifically, we used the IRS Statistics

of Income 1995 Public Use Tax File. This data set is representative of all individual

income tax returns filed for tax year 1995. Because we want our results to be

representative of more recent tax rules, we “aged” the data to better represent 1999

conditions by increasing all income components at the growth rate of personal income

between 1995 and 1999. Then we applied 1999 tax rules to the data.

       One detail of our methodology deserves further discussion. The child credit was

not in place in 1995, so we do not observe the number of children a taxpayer is entitled to

claim for the child credit. We do have information on the number of children claimed for

the dependent exemption and the EITC. But only children under age 17 can be claimed

for the child tax credit, whereas children up to age 24 who are full-time students can




                                                 13
qualify for the dependent exemption.16 In our marginal tax rate simulations, we assume

that a taxpayer can claim the child credit for any dependent child, though this clearly will

lead to us assigning the credit for some dependent children who are 17 and older.

However, we adjust our cost estimates to ensure that the right number of returns receive

the child credit. We do not examine the education tax credits because they did not exist

in 1995; nor do we examine the credit for employer provided child care because we

cannot observe it in our data.17

         Figure 6 shows the distribution of tax returns with children by income (kernel

density estimates). The top panel shows the distribution of the 27.0 million married tax

returns claiming children. The bottom panel shows the distribution of the 13.6 million

head of household returns claiming children (another 2 million returns claim children

using other filing statuses). These figures show that while the bulk of head of household

taxpayers with children have adjusted gross incomes between $10,000 and $30,000,

married taxpayers with children are distributed across a much wider income range with

substantial numbers of taxpayers with incomes above $50,000 (results not shown indicate

that the average number of children per tax return does not vary much with income

within a filing status. The average head of household tax return has roughly 1.53

children and the average married tax return has 1.94 children).

         Figure 7 depicts the average tax benefit to claiming children by income, and

decomposes this average into the four main tax provisions. Thus, these figure are

analogous to figures 1 to 5. But instead of showing the theoretical tax benefits for a

given household, they show the actual average benefit received for families at different



16
   Even older children with earnings below $2750 in 1999 can be claimed as dependent children, though
this is a very small group.
17
   Mitrusi and Poterba (2000) construct a similar model that includes imputations of education tax credits.

                                                         14
levels of AGI. The estimates in the figure average across all of the tax returns at a given

level of AGI -- households that will receive different benefits because they have different

numbers of children, different tax schedules due to different filing statuses, and

differences in itemized deductions, etc.18 The actual distribution is quite similar to the

theoretical distribution. Taxpayers with around $15,000 of income have the highest

benefits due to the EITC. Benefits then fall for taxpayers in the 15 percent income tax

bracket and rise for higher income taxpayers. Note that in calculating these figures we

did not include the potential value of the head of household status.

           Figure 8 depicts the distribution of total dollars from these four provisions by

AGI, essentially weighting the average tax benefits in the previous figure by the number

of tax returns at each level of AGI. Although high income taxpayers get large average

benefits, this figure shows that relatively few dollars are “spent” on them since there are

relatively few taxpayers with high incomes. In fact, because of their large numbers, more

total dollars are spent on the middle-income families who face the parent-penalty than on

higher income families.

           Generally these benefits look much like what one might predict based on the

figures shown earlier. One interesting fact is that at all income levels, dependent care

credits are quite small on average, though they are undoubtedly highly variable. Thus for

the remaining discussion in this paper, we will concentrate on the child benefits of the

EITC, the dependent child exemption, and the child credit, and ignore any dependent care

or other child related tax benefits.



IV. The Effect of Child Tax Benefits on Tax Rates and Work Incentives



18
     The figures depict kernel regressions of tax benefits on AGI.

                                                            15
       Considerable attention has been devoted to discussions of marginal tax rates and

marriage penalties in recent years. Most of the attention has been directed at the

traditional features of the tax code: notably the brackets, the tax rates, and the differential

treatment of married and single people. Yet the child tax benefits sharply influence

marginal rates and marriage incentives, and for lower income tax filers, their impact is

quite sizable.

       Figure 9 compares marginal personal income tax rates for a married couple with

two children and a married couple without children. 19 The child-linked tax benefits

clearly complicate the comparatively simple picture of incentives facing childless

couples. Any time child benefits are rising with income they lower marginal rates, and

vise versa. For the lowest income taxpayers, the EITC has the effect of making marginal

income tax rates highly negative, thus creating strong work incentives. For a family with

two children the EITC provides a 40 percent credit during a range in which other federal

income taxes are zero, effectively raising pay by 40 percent. Later, after income gets to

about $12,500, the credit is phased out at a 21 percent rate. During part of the phase-out,

the family faces no ordinary taxes as the dependent exemption and child credit offset any

taxes, so the tax rate is 21 percent. Then one reaches a point where all the exemptions

and credits have been exhausted, but the EITC is still phasing-out, so the marginal

income tax rate jumps to 36 percent (21 percent phase-out plus 15 percent tax rate).

Above the EITC phase-out range, rates largely mirror the regular tax rates until the child

credit begins phasing out at $110,000, pushing up marginal rates again.

       Table 3 shows the actual distribution of marginal federal income tax rates for

taxpayers with children at various income levels using the IRS Statistics of Income 1995




                                                  16
Public Use Tax File and aged as described earlier. Seventy percent of taxpayers with

AGI below $10,000 face negative marginal tax rates because of the phase-in of the EITC,

while nearly all of the remaining 30 percent face zero marginal tax rates. At incomes

between $10,000 and $20,000, a substantial number of taxpayers face high marginal

rates. Thirty-one percent face marginal tax rates between 20 percent and 30 percent –

taxpayers who are in the phase-out region of the EITC but owe no federal income tax,

and 14 percent face federal marginal income tax rates above 30 percent – taxpayers who

are in the phase-out region of the EITC and owe federal income tax.

           Between $20,000 and $30,000, 37 percent face marginal tax rates above 30

percent. In contrast, essentially no taxpayers with incomes between $30,000 and $75,000

face marginal tax rates above 30 percent. It is not until incomes exceed $100,000 that a

substantial share of taxpayers faces marginal tax rates as high as those faced by taxpayers

between $15,000 and $30,000. Indeed, of all taxpayers with children facing marginal tax

rates above 30 percent, 55 percent have incomes below $30,000.

           Note that these rates are not the full effective tax rates on earnings. First they do

not include payroll taxes of 7.65% for employees and the equivalent for employers. If we

add the full 15.3% taxes on top of these rates, marginal tax rates exceed 50% for couples

just below $30,000. Nor do they include state taxes. And finally, many low-income

families also qualify for food stamps, transitional assistance for needy families (TANF),

government provided medical insurance, and the like. As earnings rise such benefits fall,

effectively pushing up marginal tax rates still further.

            A major thrust of policy in recent years has been to reduce the transfers to low

income families without workers and expand supports for working ones. Dramatic



19
     This figure is drawn assuming taxpayers take the standard deduction and that all income is earned

                                                           17
expansions in the EITC, changes in welfare policy, and expanded supports for low

income working families have all served to radically alter incentives facing low income

families.20 Ellwood (forthcoming) shows that a woman with two children who leaves

welfare for work full-time at a minimum wage job used to face an effective tax on her

earnings of nearly 80% in the 1986 when one took account of taxes and lost benefits. By

1999, mostly as a result of the expanded EITC, the tax rate was below 30%.

        Numerous authors including Eissa and Liebman (1996), Blank, Card and Robbins

(forthcoming), Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999), and Ellwood (forthcoming) have found

large growth in the labor supply of single parents over this period, and all show that a

significant share of the growth in work by single mothers can be traced to expansions in

the EITC.

        On the other hand, as the earlier figure would suggest, tax rates went in the other

direction in families where income was already at a modest level. So, for a married

mother whose husband earns $15,000, the effective tax rate for taking a full-time job rose

from 53% to 66% between 1986 and 1999. Somewhat less work has been done on the

changing labor supply patterns of low to moderate income married women, but both

Eissa and Hoynes (1999a), Ellwood (forthcoming) find that this rise in tax rates reduced

labor supply of low income married women.21 There is still less work on whether the

high marginal tax rates in this range influence the earnings of first earners. Presumably

both single parents and persons in one worker households could be induced to limit hours

or earnings as a result of the high marginal rates, though the evidence so far does not find




income.
20
   See for example, Eissa and Hoynes (1999b) and Blank et al. (forthcoming)
21
   The reduction in labor supply by married women in response to the EITC does not represent deadweight
loss if it is the income effect that induces the secondary earners to leave the labor force. (See Liebman
(1998) for a discussion).

                                                        18
much effect.22 Thus there is a significant and growing body of evidence that the

incentives created by child tax benefits do influence the behavior of at least some

workers.



V. The Effect of the Child Tax Benefits on Marriage Penalties and Rewards

         Recently policymakers also have become occupied with the marriage penalties

found in the federal tax structure. In political and even many academic discussions, the

origins of such penalties are usually traced to the features of our tax system that provide

for different standard deductions and tax schedules depending a taxpayer’s filing status.

The standard deduction for a married couple can penalize marriage among two earner

couples because the joint deduction is less than twice the level for single individuals. In

addition, the tax brackets for joint filers are wider than for a single individual, but not

twice as wide. As a result, couples where only one person has earnings generally benefit

from joint filing status, but those with two earners with nearly equal incomes are

disadvantaged. These issues are now widely understood and heavily discussed in tax

policy.23

         Less widely understood is the fact that the child tax benefits have important

implications for marriage penalties among couples with children and that their effects can

dwarf the traditional tax bracket aspects.24 There is no one right way to calculate

marriage penalties because one cannot infer whether earnings would change if the couple

were married versus unmarried or who would get custody of the children.25 But if one



22
   See Liebman (1998)
23
   See Alm et al. (1999) for an excellent review.
24
   Feenberg and Rosen (1995) describe how EITC expansions have increased marriage penalties.
25
   For a valuable discussion of alternative ways of calculating marriage penalties, see Bull, Holtzblatt,
Nunns, and Rebelein (forthcoming )

                                                          19
assumes that all of the children would live with one of the parents in the event that the

couple were not married and that earnings of each parent would remain unchanged, the

effects of the child tax credits on marriage are easy to illustrate.

        Married couples will generally have more combined income than the custodial

parent would alone simply because another potential earner has been added to the

household. If so, a married couple will be further along the income spectrum than a

single parent would be. Comparing the level of child benefits at the income of the single

parent alone with those available at the combined income of the couple shows the impact

of child benefits on marriage incentives.

        If a custodial parent of two children with zero earnings (relying on welfare)

marries a single man with $12,000 in earnings, the couple would gain nearly $4,000 in

child tax benefits, all from the EITC. At her previous zero earnings, there are no child

tax benefits. At $12,000, the family gets the full EITC. In effect, her children and his

earnings allow them to qualify for the EITC. Indeed for mothers with no earnings, there

always will be sizable marriage rewards created by the tax benefits for children because

at all income levels above zero, child tax benefits are sizable.

        But if the mother were already earning $12,000 and she married the same man

earning $12,000, child benefits would fall by roughly $1,200 and serve as a marriage

penalty. At $24,000 the child benefits are smaller than at $12,000. In this case, his

earnings reduce "her" EITC. In any region where, by marrying, the mother moves up the

child benefit scale, child benefits will be rewarding marriage. But when the combined

income from marriage pushes her down the benefit schedule, it will penalize matrimony.

Given the large "valley" in child tax benefits, and the low incomes of many working




                                                  20
women, it is quite common for child tax benefits to lead to sizable marriage penalties in

situations where the mother is working.

       Table 4, which is modeled after a table by Wheaton (1998), illustrates the tax-

based marriage penalties and rewards for couples in different situations. The couples’

combined total income is shown on the left hand side of the table, and the share of that

income earned by the woman is shown across the top. In constructing this table, we

assumed that all income is earned income, that both the man and woman's earnings would

remain unchanged if they were living separately, that the woman would retain custody of

the children, and that she would file as a head of household and the man as a single

taxpayer. We have ignored any child care expenses that might lead to dependent care

credits. These are strong assumptions, but they help to illustrate the underlying tax

structures.

       The table shows the total marriage rewards or penalties, and then in parentheses it

shows the marriage reward or penalty associated with changing child benefits alone. As

one would expect, in couples where all the income is earned by the man there are large

marriage rewards. For a man earning $20,000 and an unemployed woman with two

children (so the woman is earning 0 percent of their combined income), the tax system

provides a $4,171 reward to marriage--effectively raising their income by more than 25

percent. Yet surprisingly, if the situation were reversed and an unemployed man were to

marry a mother with two children who is earning $20,000 (so the woman is earning 100%

percent of the income) there are no marriage rewards at all. The result is entirely the

result of the treatment of children in the tax system. A single individual earning $20,000

would owe almost $2,000 in taxes. But if he were to marry an unemployed mother of

two, he would move to the joint tax schedule and qualify for additional child tax benefits.



                                                21
When the situation is reversed, the woman would already be getting the tax benefits of

children.

       By contrast, in cases where the incomes of the parties are more equal, there are

often large tax penalties. For a couple with $35,000 in income earned in equal portions,

the marriage tax is over $2,700. And interestingly most of that is caused by the change in

child tax benefits--not the variation in brackets between singles and couples. Indeed it is

striking that for couples earning $50,000 or less, where both partners have earnings, a

very large share of the marriage penalty or reward is the result of the impact on child tax

credits, not the more traditional features of the tax code. Even in couples earning

$75,000, when the wife is earning a quarter of the total, the child tax penalty is sizable.

       Just as in the case of marginal tax rates, for lower income couples, one cannot

think about the total rewards or penalties to marriage independent of the transfer system.

Unemployed single mothers can usually collect TANF, at least for a period, and will lose

considerable benefits if they marry. The loss of these transfer/welfare benefits almost

always adds additional marriage penalties. Thus when the tax code has marriage

rewards, it helps offset penalties in the transfer system. When taxes create penalties, they

exacerbate marriage disincentives. For working couples with income around $25,000 the

combined marriage penalty from the various sources can reach 20% of disposable

income.

       Unlike the case for labor supply incentives, there is thus far little evidence that

these changing tax incentives have altered marriage behavior in a sizable way. Ellwood

(forthcoming) found limited and ambiguous evidence of any marriage increases in the

group for whom marriage penalties were reduced or decreases in marriage among those

for whom marriage incentives turned more negative. Dickert-Conlin and Houser (1999)



                                                 22
find little impact of the EITC changes on female headship. And Eissa and Hoynes

(1999b) find that reductions in marriage penalties have modest effects on marriages

among low income women.

       Given that child tax benefits create large marriage rewards in some cases, and

smaller, but still sizable marriage penalties in others, their overall behavioral impact is

uncertain. Nonetheless, policymakers may be troubled by the marriage penalties both on

the basis of fairness and because of the potential for behavioral impacts in the long run.

Especially at a time when lawmakers are considering relieving marriage tax penalties in

other parts of the tax code, those created by the middle class parent penalty seem

particularly important.



VI. Options for Reform

       There are several possible ways to remove some or all of the high marginal tax

rates and marriage penalties for middle income families created by child benefits. One

could cut benefits for low income families. This would have the effect of lowering the

income of relatively poor families with children and reducing the incentives for parents to

leave welfare for work. Since the EITC and other worker supports seem to have had a

strong positive effect on work by low wage single parents and have helped to reduce

welfare caseloads, such a policy option seems unlikely to be adopted. Indeed most recent

developments in social policy are moving in the opposite direction and providing greater

support to working parents who are poor or near poor.

       The alternative is to "fill in" all or part of the middle class valley in child-linked

tax benefits so that middle class families get the same benefits as the rich and poor.

There is an obvious argument of fairness for such a plan as well as potentially positive



                                                  23
effects on work and marriage incentives. On the other hand, such plans will inevitably

involve additional expenditures. At a time when tax cuts are being widely discussed by

both parties, however, providing more equal tax benefits for middle class families might

be considered.

       We examine five options for reducing the middle class parent penalty by

providing greater support to middle income families. All of these are designed to

penalize virtually no taxpayer while equalizing child tax benefits across income groups

(and in some cases raising benefits for some low-income families)

Option 1: A $1270 Per Child Partially Refundable Tax Credit for Working Families

       Replace the existing child tax credit and the dependent exemption with a $1270

per child partially refundable tax credit (where the refundability is integrated into the

phaseout of the existing EITC). The credit of $1270 is chosen because it represents the

value of the existing non-refundable credit and dependent child exemption for families in

the 28% tax bracket (the highest bracket for married couples where the full child tax

credit is available). Families with incomes below the EITC phase-down point ($12,500)

would simply get their EITC. The credit above that level would be refundable, but the

maximum refund would be the EITC or the child tax credit, whichever is more.26 This

would preserve the positive work incentive features of the EITC while reducing the

marginal tax rates and marriage penalties for middle income families. The new child tax

credit would be phased down to $1000 for families with incomes over $110,000 ($75,000

for single household heads) to maintain the current pattern of child tax benefits phasing

down for high-income taxpayers while still ensuring that higher-income taxpayers would

be no worse off than under current law




                                                 24
         The effect of this provision on child tax benefits for a married couple with two

children is illustrated on Figure 10. It essentially is a proposal to "fill in the valley" in

child benefits between $30,000 and $60,000. Figure 11 compares the marginal tax rates

faced by married couples with two children at different incomes under this proposal with

those under current law, showing that in the EITC phaseout region marginal tax rates

would fall below 30 percent.

Option 2: Raise the Existing Child Tax Credit to $1000 Per Child

         Presidential candidate George W. Bush and others have proposed raising the child

tax credit to $1,000.27 This plan is illustrated on Figure 12. By itself, such an increase in

the child credit would raise the aid that most middle and upper income families receive.

It would also reduce the number of taxpayers facing high marginal tax rates and reduce

marriage penalties because many taxpayers who currently face both the EITC phaseout

and the 15 percent federal income tax rate would have their pre-EITC tax liability

reduced to zero. But families with two children and incomes below $33,000 could not

take full advantage of the benefit because the credit would remain non-refundable and a

sizable middle class parent penalty would remain.

Option 3: A $1770 Per Child Partially Refundable Tax Credit for Working Families

         This plan would be something of a combination of the first two plans. It would,

in effect, fill in the remaining valley left from the $1,000 tax credit of option 2so that

families with incomes between $20,000 and $60,000 would get the nearly the same tax

benefits as those at incomes of $10,000 or $70,000. It would operate identically to option

1 with a higher benefit level--the new credit would replace the child exemption and child



26
  Any remaining credit could be used to offset taxes, but not to increase the refundable portion of the
credit.


                                                         25
credit. Persons below $10,000 would qualify only for the EITC. The maximum refund

would be the EITC or child credit whichever is more. This plan is illustrated on Figure

14 and its impact on marginal tax rates in Figure 15.

Option 4: No EITC Phase-Out Until Higher Incomes

           The simplest and most complete way to end the middle class parent penalty would

be to eliminate the exemption and child tax credit, and simply not allow the EITC to

phase out at all until family income reaches $110,000 and then phase it down to $1000

per child. Thus any families with earnings above the EITC maximum would receive the

full benefit. This plan is illustrated in Figures 16 and 17.

Option 5: A Three Step Refundable Working Families Tax Credit Integrated into the Tax

Code

           This option was created in an attempt to get many of the benefits of the previous

two options in terms of reduced tax rates and marriage penalties at a lower cost. This

option would replace the child credit, dependent exemption, and EITC with a working

family tax credit that phases in like the EITC and then has three steps as illustrated on

Figure 18. The first step would be for low income working families, with benefits

phasing in the same way as the current EITC and reach the same maximums for families

with one or two children ($2312 for one child, $3816 for two children). For low income

families with more than 2 children, a third tier would be added to the old EITC with a

phase-in rate of 46% and a maximum benefit of $4300. Once a family’s income reaches

this first plateau, benefits would remain constant until the family’s income reached

$18,000 when they would decline at a 10 percent phase-down rate to a level of $1500 per

child for the first two children, and $1270 for each additional child. Then when income



27
     Governor Bush has also suggested phasing it out at much higher incomes and has proposed other tax

                                                         26
reached $110,000, the benefit would phase down at a 5 percent rate to the third tier of

$1000 per child. Under this plan the three key child benefits will be integrated into a

relatively simple three step benefit structure with benefits for every taxpayer that are as

high or higher than benefits under current law.

        Evaluation of the Options

        Table 5 provides a summary of the cost and other impacts of the five reform

options. Current-law child benefits (from dependent exemptions, the EITC, and the child

credit) total $85 billion. The first columns of numbers in Table 5 provides a summary of

the additional costs associated with each plan for FY 2001. All significantly increase the

total cost of child benefits. Not surprisingly, Option 3 (a $1770 partially refundable

credit) and Option 4 (extend the EITC) are the most expensive because their benefits are

the most expansive. In contrast, Option 1 (a $1270 per child partially refundable credit)

costs only $15.8 billion per year; Option 2 (Raising the child credit to $1000 per child)

costs $20 billion per year, and Option 5 (the three step refundable working families tax

credit) costs $27.5 billion per year.

        The next column of Table 5 summarizes the impact of the plans on the marginal

tax rates of low and middle-income taxpayers with children. Under current law, 19.4

percent of families with children and AGI below $40,000 face marginal federal personal

income tax rates of 30 percent or more and 38.2 percent face rates of 20 percent or more.

The first reform, replacing the child credit and dependent exemption with a $1270 per

child partially refundable tax credit, reduces this share with marginal tax rates above 30

percent by nearly 40 percent to 12 percent. Expanding the existing child credit from




changes not related to children which we do not simulate here.

                                                        27
$500 to $1000 per child under Option 2 reduces the fraction of these taxpayers with

marginal tax rates above 30 percent even further, to 10.4 percent.

       The three plans presented in the last three rows accomplish even more. The

$1770 child credit option reduces the share of these taxpayers facing very high marginal

tax rates to 6 percent, a reduction of two-thirds compared to current law. Eliminating the

EITC phase-out, reduces the number to 4 percent. Note that these last two options

greatly reduce the fraction of taxpayers with marginal tax rates between 20 percent and

30 percent as well. In the no EITC phase-out option, 89 percent of taxpayers with

children and incomes below $40,000 have marginal tax rates below 20 percent compared

with only 62 percent under current law. The last option, the three step refundable credit,

is as successful at reducing the share of taxpayers with marginal tax rates above 30

percent as the two previous options, even though it costs only $28 billion. However, it

does less to reduce the share of taxpayers with marginal tax rates between 20 and 30

percent than the more expensive options do.

       The next column of Table 5 summarizes each option’s impact on marriage

penalties. We focus on marriage penalties for families in the $20,000 -$35,000 range

where the woman earns 50 percent of the household income because this is where the

plans have their most significant differences. Further details of the impact on marriage

penalties for other types of families are available in Table 6. Under current law, a

married couple with two children in which each spouse earns $17,500 faces a marriage

penalty of $2707. Options 1 and 2 reduce this by about one third to $1,992 and $1,707

respectively. Options 3 and 4 go much further, reducing marriage penalties to $992 and

$518. Given the pattern of benefits, this should come as no surprise. The less the

difference between the maximum value of the EITC and the value of child benefits for



                                                28
moderate income families, the smaller the marriage penalty and these two options show

little or no fall in benefits as one moves from low to moderate incomes. Finally, Option 5

(the three step working family tax credit) performs reasonably well here. While it does

not reduce marriage penalties as much as the most expensive options it reduces them far

more dramatically than the $1270 flat credit or the expansion of the child credit to

$1000.28

        Figure 20 shows the distribution of dollars spent under these options by AGI. In

most of the plans, the bulk of the dollars go to taxpayers with incomes between $15,000

and $75,000. The main exception is Option 2 (raising the child credit to $1000) and to a

lesser extent the closely related Option 3 which transfer substantial fractions of their

dollars to taxpayers with incomes above $75,000. The distributional impacts of these

plans is summarized in the last column of Table 5 which shows the proportion of benefits

going to families with AGI below $50,000 and the proportion going to families with AGI

below $35,000. Under current law, 62 percent of child tax benefits go to families with

incomes below $50,000, while 51 percent go to families below $35,000. Option 1 (the

$1270 per child refundable credit) and option 5 (the three step credit) provide almost as

high a share of their benefits to families with incomes below $50,000 as under current

law (thought much smaller shares to taxpayers under $35,000). In contrast, option 2

(raise the child credit to $1000) provides only 41 percent of its benefits to families with

incomes below $50,000 and only 19 percent to families with incomes below $35,000.

Options 3 and 4 are somewhere in the middle, providing more dollars to low and middle

income families than option 2, but less than options 1 and 5.



28
   Note that in the more detailed Table 6 there are a few circumstances where marriage penalties rise
slightly for some higher income couples. For them the rising child benefits associated with higher incomes
served as a modest marriage reward that these plans tend to reduce.

                                                        29
       One obvious result here is that the greater the benefits given to moderate income

parents, the better these plans perform in reducing tax rates and marriage penalties. The

extreme plan, simply extending the EITC all the way to $110,000 in AGI virtually

eliminates the adverse incentives. But of course, the plans that accomplish the most are

also the most expensive.

       Conclusion

       The combination of child tax benefits creates a U-shaped benefit pattern by

income. The U-shape arises largely from the introduction of new supports for low

income working families in recent years that are credited with significantly increasing

work of low income workers. But they also create a middle class parent penalty that

creates high marginal tax rates and sizable marriage penalties for some families.

       The obvious way to reduce the parent penalty is to increase the tax benefits

associated with children for middle income families. While this approach leads to

significant benefits in terms of incentives and equity, since this is the densest part of the

income distribution, such plans are expensive.

       If the nation considers an expansion of the child tax credit to $1000 as has been

suggested by some in Congress and by George W. Bush, making it partially refundable

by converting it to a flat $1770 credit and eliminating the child exemptions will target

more of the benefits on middle income taxpayers and more significantly reduce high

marginal tax rates and marriage penalties for low to moderate income families. Other

less costly options, including the replacement of the current set of child related benefits

with a three step working family tax credit, would significantly reduce marginal tax rates

and marriage penalties at a lower cost.




                                                  30
       Inevitably, deciding on the priority we should assign to reducing the middle class

parent penalty will depend on perceptions of fairness, political priorities, and estimated

impacts on incentives. At the current time the adverse tax rates and marriage penalties

have not been shown to create major distortions in behavior in work or marriage in these

income ranges. Conversely the positive work incentives created by the EITC seem

clearly to have increased work by low income workers, especially single parents. Some

may conclude that solving the middle class parent penalty is not worth the cost. If large

tax cuts are seriously considered, however, the options discussed in this paper would both

be targeted on middle class families and would significantly reduce adverse incentives

while maintaining the positive work incentives for low income workers.




                                                 31
                                References



Alm, James, Stacy Dickert-Conlin, and Leslie A. Whittington. “Policy Watch:
The Marriage Penalty.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 13 No. 3 (Summer
1999): 193-204.

Blank, Rebecca, David Card, and Philip Robbins. “Financial Incentives for
Increasing Work and Income Among Low-Income Families.” in Finding Jobs:
Work and Welfare Reform, edited by Rebecca Blank and David Card. New
York: Russell Sage, forthcoming.

Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman. "The Dynamics of Educational
Attainment for Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites." NBER Working Paper No. 7249.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1999.

Cherry, Robert. "Universalizing the EITC: A Progressive Pro-Family Agenda."
Brooklyn, NY: Brooklyn College, 1998.

Cherry, Robert, and Max B. Sawicky. "Giving Tax Credit Where Credit is Due.
A 'Universal Unified Child Credit' that expands the EITC and cuts taxes for
working families." Briefing Papers. Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy
Institute, 2000.

Committee on Ways and Means. 1998 Green Book. Background Material and
Data on Programs Under the Juristiction of the Commitee on Ways and
Means.Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1998.

Dickert-Conlin, Stacy, and Scott Houser. "EITC, AFDC and The Female
Headship Decision." Syracuse University, Mimeo, 1999.

Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Hoynes. "The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor
Supply of Married Couples." University of California at Berkeley, Mimeo,
1999a.

Eissa, Nada, and Hillary Williamson Hoynes. "Good News for Low-Income
Families? Tax-Transfer Schemes and Marriage." University of California,
Berkeley, Mimeo, 1999b.

Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned
Income Tax Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 112 No. 2 (May 1996):
605-637.

Ellwood, David T. “Welfare Reform as I Knew It.” The American Prospect. 26
(May-June 1996).

                                     32
Ellwood, David T. “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social
Policy Reforms On Work, Marriage, and Living Arrangements.” National Tax
Journal. (forthcoming).

Feenberg, Daniel R. , and Harvey S. Rosen. “Recent Developments in the
Marriage Tax.” National Tax Journal. 48 No. 1 (March 1995): 91-101.

Gentry, William M., and Alison P. Hagy. “The Distributional Effects of the
Tax Treatment of Child Care Expenses.” in Empirical Foundations of Household
Taxation, edited by Martin Feldstein and James M. Poterba. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1996.

Liebman, Jeffrey B. “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on
Incentives and Income Distribution.” in Tax Policy and the Economy, edited by
James M. Poterba, 12, pp. 83-119. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, National Bureau
of Economic Research, 1998.

McIntyre, Michael J. , and C. Eugene Steuerle. "Federal Tax Reform: A
Family Perspective." The Finance Project, July 1996.

Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. "Welfare, the Earned Income Tax
Credit, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers." Northwestern University,
Mimeo, 1999.

Office of Management and Budget. Analytical Perspectives. Budget of the
United States.Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2000.

Steuerle, C. Eugene. “Policy Watch: Tax Credits for Low-income Workers with
Children.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 4 No. 3 (Summer 1990): 201-212.

Steuerle, C. Eugene. "Removing Marriage Penalties." Washington, D.C.: The
Communitarian Network, forthcoming.

Steuerle, C. Eugene, and Jason Juffras. "A $1000 Tax Credit for Every Child:
A Base of Reform for the Nation's Tax, Welfare, and Health Systems." Changing
Domestic Priorities Policy Paper. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, 1990.

Wheaton, Laura. "Low-Income Families and the Marriage Tax." The Urban
Institute. 1998. http://www.urban.org/family/marriage_tax.html. Accessed
February 23, 2000.




                                      33
                                    Table 1
    Budgetary Cost of Selected Tax Benefits for Families with Children,
                                    FY 2001
                             (billions of dollars)
Dependent exemption                                   34.0
Earned income tax credit                              30.6
Child tax credit                                      20.0
Head of household filing status                        3.9
Dependent care credit                                  2.4
Employer-provided child care                           0.7
TOTAL                                                 91.6
Sources: Dependent exemption and head of household filing status is based on authors’
calculations from 1995 SOI tax file, inflated to 2001 dollars. The remaining numbers are
from Table 5-1 of Office of Management and Budget (2000). Tax expenditures reflect
impact on federal income tax revenue only (not OASDHI).




                                              34
                                  Table 2
             Tax Benefits Associated With Having Two Children
                    Married Couple For Tax Year 1999

  Child Related                               Family Income
  Benefit                    $12,000        $20,000    $35,000           $75,000

  Earned Income Tax
                              $3,816         $2,228          $0             $0
  Credit

  Dependent Child
                                $0            $825          $825         $1,540
  Exemptions
  Child Tax Credit              $0            $270         $1,000        $1,000

  Dependent Care
                               $0             $0            $350          $750
  Tax Credit
                             ______         ______         ______        ______

  TOTAL                       $3,816         $3,332        $2,175        $3,290

Assumes couple spends 5% of income of allowable child care and that both children are
dependent children under 17.




                                             35
                                                                  Table 3
                     Empirical Distribution of Marginal Tax Rates from Federal Income Tax by AGI


                                                                 Percent Distribution Across Marginal Tax Rates
                                                                           Marginal Marginal
                                                 Negative        Zero                             Marginal
Adjusted Gross Income          Number of                                      Rate       Rate                  All Tax
                                                 Marginal       Marginal                            Rate
        Level                   Returns                                   Between 0 Between                     Rates
                                                  Rate           Rate                             Above  .3
                               (Millions)                                    and .2    .2 and .3
Less Than $10,000                 5.2               69.8          29.7         0.2        0.3        0.0        100%
$10,000 - $19,999                 7.7               2.6           28.2        24.8        30.5      13.9        100%
$20,000 - $29,999                 5.9               0.7           8.4         27.8        25.9      37.2        100%
$30,000 - $39,999                 4.7               0.1           10.7        87.3        2.0        0.0        100%
$40,000 - $49,999                 4.1               0.0           3.1         91.8        5.1        0.0        100%
$50,000 - $75,000                 7.6               0.0           0.7         63.3        35.7       0.4        100%
$75,000 - $100,000                3.6               0.0           0.2          5.2        91.1       3.5        100%
Over $100,000                     3.5               0.0           0.1          0.3        30.1      69.6        100%

All Income Levels                   42.6             9.2           11.9           38.6           26.4           13.8    100%

   Source: Authors’ calculations from 1995 Statistics of Income Public Use Data File aged to represent tax year 1999.




                                                                          36
                                   Table 4
                 1999 Total Marriage Rewards and Penalties
  and Marriage Rewards and Penalties from Child Tax Benefits (in parentheses)*



Couple's Total                         Percentage of Income Earned By Woman
   Income                    0%                25%                50%               75%             100%

                            4,559              2,814              1,092              -14               0
     $12,000                ( 3,816)           ( 2,521)           ( 1,092)           (-14)           (-435)



                            4,171              1,421              -1,163           -1,400               0
     $20,000                ( 3,323)           ( 1,323)            (-646)           (-1,190)         (-540)



                            2,959             -2,140              -2,707            -1,543            540
     $35,000                ( 1,825)           (-1,675)           (-2,190)          (-1,026)           ( 0)



                            4,909             -2,399              -1,693             -518             651
     $50,000                ( 1,825)           (-2,493)           (-1,175)            ( 0)           (-715)



                            6,536             -1,370              -1,694            -1,382           2,113
     $75,000                ( 2,540)           (-1,399)            ( 715)             ( 0)            ( 0)



Notes:
Positive numbers indicate marriage reward, negative numbers are marriage penalties. Calculation of total
tax rewards or penalties equals the change in total tax liabilities. Calculation of child benefit rewards or
penalties are the change in the combined value of EITC, dependent exemption, child tax credit. No
dependent care benefits are included. Assumes that each persons income will remain unchanged if couple
is unmarried, children will go with wife, all persons use standard deduction.




                                                          37
                                                          Table 5
                                          Summary Of Impacts For Five Possible Options
                                                                            % Of Families         Marriage
                                                             Estimated     with AGI<$40,000      Penalty for
                                                                                                                     Proportion of
                                                              Annual       Whose Marginal      Couple with Two
                                                                                                                     Benefits Going
                                                                Cost       Income Tax Rate     Children Where
                                                                                                                      to Families
Plan                      Description                        In Billions        Is Above         Each Adult
                                                                                                                         Below
                                                               of 2001              .30         Earns $17,500
                                                                                                                        $50,000
                                                              Dollars              [.20]          [$10,000]
                                                                                                                       [$35,000]

                                                                                 19.4                $2,707                .62
 -     Current law                                                -
                                                                                [38.2]              [$1,163]              [.51]
       $1270 per child refundable tax credit replaces                            12.0                $1,992                .56
 1                                                             $15.8
       existing child tax credit and dependent exemption.                       [33.0]              [$1,028]              [.30]
       Raise the existing child credit to $1000 per child.     $20.2             10.4                $1,707                .41
 2
                                                                                [31.2]              [$1,163]              [.19]
       A $1770 per child partially refundable tax credit
                                                               $33.9              6.3                  $992                 .47
 3     for working families replaces existing child tax
                                                                                 [18.4]               [$812]               [.25]
       credit and dependent exemptions.
       No EITC phase-out until AGI reaches $110,000.
                                                               $53.0              4.3                  $518                 .50
 4     Replaces existing child tax credit and dependent
                                                                                 [10.9]               [$536]               [.26]
       exemptions.
       A three step refundable working families tax credit
                                                                                  5.3                 $1,334                .56
 5     replaces the child credit, dependent credit, and        $27.5
                                                                                 [25.5]               [$736]               [.32]
       EITC.
  Sources: Columns 1, 2 and 4 are based on simulations using the 1995 Statistics of Income Public Use File aged to represent tax year 1999.
  The cost estimates in column 1 additionally incorporate projections of income and population growth through 2001. Column 3 is based on
  calculations which assume that all income is earned income, taxpayers take the standard deduction, and earnings do not change when a
  married couple splits up.



                                                                           38
                                              Table 6
                             1999 Total Marriage Rewards and Penalties
                                     Under Alternative Options

Couple's                                       Percentage of Income Earned By Woman
 Total                    Option
Income                                       0%          25%      50%      75%      100%
           Current Law                      4,559         2,814    1,092     -14      0
           1: $1270 flat credit             4,559         2,814    1,092     -14      0
           2: $1000 existing child credit   4,559         2,814    1,092     -14      0
$12,000    3: $1770 flat credit             4,559         2,814    1,092     -14     435
           4: Extend EITC                   4,559         2,814    1,092     -14     435
           5: Three step tax credit         4,559         2,814    1,092     -14     435
           Current Law                      4,171         1,421   -1,163   -1,400     0
           1: $1270 flat credit             4,171         1,421   -1,028   -1,400     0
           2: $1000 existing child credit   4,171         1,421   -1,163   -1,400     0
$20,000    3: $1770 flat credit             4,388         1,638    -812    -1,183    217
           4: Extend EITC                   4,664         1,914    -536     -557     540
           5: Three step tax credit         4,464         1,714    -736     -757     540
           Current Law                      2,959        -2,140   -2,707   -1,543    540
           1: $1270 flat credit             3,674        -1,425   -1,992   -1,543    540
           2: $1000 existing child credit   3,959        -1,140   -1,707   -1,291    540
$35,000    3: $1770 flat credit             4,674         -425     -992     -631     540
           4: Extend EITC                   4,950         -149     -518     -631     540
           5: Three step tax credit         4,134         -965    -1,334    -631     540
           Current Law                      4,909        -2,399   -1,693    -518     651
           1: $1270 flat credit             5,624        -1,684   -1,538    -518    1,366
           2: $1000 existing child credit   5,909        -1,399   -1,253    -518     651
$50,000    3: $1770 flat credit             6,624         -684     -538     -518    1,366
           4: Extend EITC                   6,900          94      -518     -518    1,366
           5: Three step tax credit         6,084         -723     -634     -518    1,366
           Current Law                      6,536        -1,370   -1,694   -1,382   2,113
           1: $1270 flat credit             6,536        -1,370   -2,409   -1,382   2,113
           2: $1000 existing child credit   7,536         -370    -1,694   -1,382   2,113
$75,000
           3: $1770 flat credit             7,536         -370    -2,409   -1,382   2,113
           4: Extend EITC                   7,812          29     -2,409   -1,382   2,113
           5: Three step tax credit         6,996         -713    -2,409   -1,382   2,113

    Notes: see Table 4.




                                                    39
                                                 Figure 1
                            1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having One Child
                                    Married Couples Under Current Law
                              Assuming Child Care Expenses of 5% of Income
$2,500
                                        Child Care Credit
                                        Child Tax Credit
$2,000                                  Exemption
                                        Net EITC Benefit


$1,500




$1,000




 $500




   $0
         $0   $15,000   $30,000    $45,000    $60,000    $75,000   $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                     Family Income



                                                 Figure 2
                           1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having Two Children
                                    Married Couples Under Current Law
                               Assuming Child Care Expense of 5% of Income

$5,000


$4,500                            Child Care Credit
                                  Child Tax Credit
$4,000
                                  Exemption

$3,500
                                  Net EITC Benefit


$3,000


$2,500


$2,000


$1,500


$1,000


 $500


   $0
         $0   $15,000   $30,000    $45,000    $60,000    $75,000   $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                     Family Income




                                                                   40
                                                    Figure 3
                             1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having Three Children
                                       Married Couples Under Current Law
                                  Assuming Child Care Expense of 5% of Income

$5,000
                         Child Care Credit
$4,500                   Child Tax Credit
                         Exemption
$4,000
                         Net EITC Benefit
$3,500

$3,000

$2,500

$2,000

$1,500

$1,000

  $500

    $0
          $0   $15,000     $30,000      $45,000   $60,000    $75,000    $90,000 $105,000 $120,000 $135,000 $150,000

                                                         Family Income




                                                Figure 4
                            Tax Benefits Assocated with Having Two Children
                   Unmarried Adult Under Current Law -- Ignoring Change in Filing Status
                             Assuming Child Care Expense of 5% of Income

$4,500

                                     Child Care Credit
$4,000                               Child Tax Credit
                                     Child Exemption
$3,500
                                     Net EITC Benefit

$3,000


$2,500


$2,000


$1,500


$1,000


 $500


   $0
         $0    $15,000     $30,000      $45,000   $60,000     $75,000   $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                          Family Income




                                                                        41
                                               Figure 5
                         1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having Two Children
              Unmarried Adult Under Current Law Including Value of Head of Household Filing
                       Status and Assuming Child Care Expenses of 5% of Income
$7,000

                Child Care Credit
$6,000          Child Tax Credit
                Child Exemption
                HOH Tax Schedule
$5,000
                Net EITC Benefit


$4,000



$3,000



$2,000



$1,000



   $0
         $0    $15,000   $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000    $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                   Family Income




                                                                  42
                                                                                                     Figure 6

                               Distribution of Tax Returns with Children by AGI

                                                                                                     M a r rie d C o u p le s

            0 .0 0 0 0 4



          0 .0 0 0 0 3 5



            0 .0 0 0 0 3



          0 .0 0 0 0 2 5
Density




            0 .0 0 0 0 2



          0 .0 0 0 0 1 5



            0 .0 0 0 0 1



          0 .0 0 0 0 0 5



                       0
                           0     1 0 ,0 0 0   2 0 ,0 0 0    3 0 ,0 0 0    4 0 ,0 0 0    5 0 ,0 0 0     6 0 ,0 0 0   7 0 ,0 0 0   8 0 ,0 0 0   9 0 ,0 0 0   1 0 0 , 0 0 0 1 1 0 , 0 0 0 1 2 0 ,0 0 0 1 3 0 , 0 0 0 1 4 0 , 0 0 0
                                                                                                                            AG I




                                                                                            H e a d o f H o u s e h o ld

           0 .0 0 0 0 4



          0 .0 0 0 0 3 5



           0 .0 0 0 0 3



          0 .0 0 0 0 2 5
Density




           0 .0 0 0 0 2



          0 .0 0 0 0 1 5



           0 .0 0 0 0 1



          0 .0 0 0 0 0 5



                      0
                           0    10000         20000        30000         40000         50000         60000      70000        80000       90000       100000 110000 120000 130000 140000
                                                                                                                       AG I




                                                                                                                        43
                                                                                    Figure 7
                                                Average Tax Benefits from Children by AGI

                                                                     All Taxpayers with Children

          3000
                                                                                                       Child Care Credit
                                                                                                       Child Credit
                                                                                                       Exemption
          2500                                                                                         EITC




          2000
Dollars




          1500




          1000




           500




                     0
                         0         12,000 24,000 36,000 48,000 60,000 72,000 84,000 96,000 108,000 120,000 132,000 144,000
                                                                              AGI




                                                                Figure 8
                                        Distribution of Dollars Spent on Child Benefits by AGI

                                                         Distribution of Dollars from Child Benefits

                         0.00003




                     0.000025




                         0.00002
           Density




                     0.000015




                         0.00001




                     0.000005




                              0
                                10 0
                                15 0
                                20 0
                                25 0
                                30 0
                                35 0
                                40 0
                                45 0
                                50 0
                                55 0
                                60 0
                                65 0
                                70 0
                                75 0
                                80 0
                                85 0
                                90 0
                                95 0
                               10 00
                               10 00
                               11 00
                               11 00
                               12 00
                               12 00
                               13 00
                               13 00
                               14 00
                               14 00
                                    00
                                     0
                                    0
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                  00
                                 50




                                 00
                                 50
                                 00
                                 50
                                 00
                                 50
                                 00
                                 50
                                 00
                                 50
                                  0




                                                                          Adjusted Gross Income




                                                                                              44
                                                             Figure 9
                                  Marginal Income Tax Rate For Married Couple With Two Children
                                   Under Current Law As Compared to a Couple With No Children
                                                (No allowable child care expenses)
                    40%
                                              Marginal Rates With Two Children
                    30%

                    20%                                                               Marginal Rates With No Children
Marginal Tax Rate




                    10%

                     0%
                           $0   $15,000   $30,000   $45,000   $60,000   $75,000   $90,000 $105,000 $120,000 $135,000 $150,000
                    -10%

                    -20%

                    -30%

                    -40%

                    -50%
                                                                  Family Income




                                                                           45
                                                                          Figure 10
                                                   1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having Two Children
                                                      Married Couples Under Option 1 and Current Law
                                                        ($1270 Partially Refundable Child Tax Credit)

$5,000                                                                                                                                   5000

                                                                     Child Tax Credit
$4,500                                                                                                                                   4500
                                                                     Net EITC Benefit
$4,000                                                                                                                                   4000
                                                                     Total Child Benefit-Current Law
$3,500                                                                                                                                   3500


$3,000                                                                                                                                   3000


$2,500                                                                                                                                   2500


$2,000                                                                                                                                   2000


$1,500                                                                                                                                   1500


$1,000                                                                                                                                   1000


    $500                                                                                                                                 500


                      $0                                                                                                                  0
                           $0        $15,000    $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000   $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                                         Family Income



                                                                           Figure 11
                                                   Marginal Tax Rate For Married Couple With Two Children
                                                               Under Option 1 and Current Law
                                                         ($1270 Partially Refundable Child Tax Credit)
                       40%
                                                          Current Law Marginal Rates
                       30%


                       20%
 Marginal Tax Rates




                       10%
                                               New Marginal Rates
                           0%
                                $0       $15,000    $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000    $90,000 $105,000 $120,000 $135,000 $150,000
                      -10%


                      -20%


                      -30%


                      -40%


                      -50%
                                                                               Family Income




                                                                                         46
                                                                         Figure 12
                                                   1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having Two Children
                                                      Married Couples Under Option 2 and Current Law
                                                          ($1000 Non-Refundable Child Tax Credit)

$5,000                                                                                                                                   5000

                                                                     Child Tax Credit
$4,500                                                                                                                                   4500
                                                                     Exemption
$4,000                                                               Net EITC Benefit                                                    4000
                                                                     Total Child Benefit-Current Law
$3,500                                                                                                                                   3500


$3,000                                                                                                                                   3000


$2,500                                                                                                                                   2500


$2,000                                                                                                                                   2000


$1,500                                                                                                                                   1500


$1,000                                                                                                                                   1000


    $500                                                                                                                                 500


                      $0                                                                                                                  0
                           $0        $15,000    $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000   $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                                         Family Income




                                                                          Figure 13
                                                   Marginal Tax Rate For Married Couple With Two Children
                                                               Under Option 2 and Current Law
                                                           ($1000 Non-Refundable Child Tax Credit)
                       40%
                                                          Current Law Marginal Rates
                       30%


                       20%
 Marginal Tax Rates




                       10%
                                               New Marginal Rates
                           0%
                                $0       $15,000    $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000    $90,000 $105,000 $120,000 $135,000 $150,000
                      -10%


                      -20%


                      -30%


                      -40%


                      -50%
                                                                               Family Income




                                                                                         47
                                                                          Figure 14
                                                   1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having Two Children
                                                      Married Couples Under Option 3 and Current Law
                                                        ($1770 Partially Refundable Child Tax Credit)

$5,000                                                                                                                                   5000

                                                                     Child Tax Credit
$4,500                                                                                                                                   4500
                                                                     Net EITC Benefit
$4,000                                                                                                                                   4000
                                                                     Total Child Benefit-Current Law
$3,500                                                                                                                                   3500


$3,000                                                                                                                                   3000


$2,500                                                                                                                                   2500


$2,000                                                                                                                                   2000


$1,500                                                                                                                                   1500


$1,000                                                                                                                                   1000


    $500                                                                                                                                 500


                      $0                                                                                                                  0
                           $0        $15,000    $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000   $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                                          Family Income



                                                                           Figure 15
                                                   Marginal Tax Rate For Married Couple With Two Children
                                                               Under Option 3 and Current Law
                                                         ($1770 Partially Refundable Child Tax Credit)
                       40%
                                                          Current Law Marginal Rates
                       30%


                       20%
 Marginal Tax Rates




                       10%
                                               New Marginal Rates
                           0%
                                $0       $15,000    $30,000    $45,000    $60,000   $75,000    $90,000 $105,000 $120,000 $135,000 $150,000
                      -10%


                      -20%


                      -30%


                      -40%


                      -50%
                                                                               Family Income




                                                                                          48
                                                                         Figure 16
                                                   1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having Two Children
                                                      Married Couples Under Option 4 and Current Law
                                                                       (Extend EITC)

$5,000                                                                                                                                   5000

                                                                     Net EITC Benefit
$4,500                                                                                                                                   4500
                                                                     Total Child Benefit-Current Law
$4,000                                                                                                                                   4000


$3,500                                                                                                                                   3500


$3,000                                                                                                                                   3000


$2,500                                                                                                                                   2500


$2,000                                                                                                                                   2000


$1,500                                                                                                                                   1500


$1,000                                                                                                                                   1000


    $500                                                                                                                                 500


                      $0                                                                                                                  0
                           $0        $15,000    $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000   $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                                         Family Income



                                                                          Figure 17
                                                   Marginal Tax Rate For Married Couple With Two Children
                                                               Under Option 4 and Current Law
                                                                       (Extend EITC)
                       40%
                                                          Current Law Marginal Rates
                       30%


                       20%
 Marginal Tax Rates




                       10%
                                               New Marginal Rates
                           0%
                                $0       $15,000    $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000    $90,000 $105,000 $120,000 $135,000 $150,000
                      -10%


                      -20%


                      -30%


                      -40%


                      -50%
                                                                               Family Income




                                                                                         49
                                                                         Figure 18
                                                   1999 Tax Benefits Associated With Having Two Children
                                                      Married Couples Under Option 5 and Current Law
                                                           (Three step working families tax credit)

$5,000                                                                                                                                   5000


$4,500                                                               Working Family Tax Credit                                           4500


$4,000                                                               Total Child Benefit-Current Law                                     4000


$3,500                                                                                                                                   3500


$3,000                                                                                                                                   3000


$2,500                                                                                                                                   2500


$2,000                                                                                                                                   2000


$1,500                                                                                                                                   1500


$1,000                                                                                                                                   1000


    $500                                                                                                                                 500


                      $0                                                                                                                  0
                           $0        $15,000    $30,000    $45,000   $60,000   $75,000   $90,000   $105,000   $120,000   $135,000   $150,000

                                                                          Family Income



                                                                          Figure 19
                                                   Marginal Tax Rate For Married Couple With Two Children
                                                               Under Option 5 and Current Law
                                                            (Three step working families tax credit)
                       40%
                                                          Current Law Marginal Rates
                       30%


                       20%
 Marginal Tax Rates




                       10%
                                               New Marginal Rates
                           0%
                                $0       $15,000    $30,000    $45,000    $60,000   $75,000    $90,000 $105,000 $120,000 $135,000 $150,000
                      -10%


                      -20%


                      -30%


                      -40%


                      -50%
                                                                               Family Income




                                                                                          50
                                           Figure 20
               Distribution of Dollars Spent Under Each Reform Option by AGI

                                                                  Options 1, 2, and 3

          0.000025




           0.00002




          0.000015

                                                                                                                                      Option 1
Density




                                                                                                                                      Option 2
                                                                                                                                      Option 3

           0.00001




          0.000005




                0
                     0   12,000   24,000   36,000    48,000    60,000    72,000   84,000   96,000 108,000 120,000 132,000 144,000
                                                                 Adjusted Gross Income




                                                                   Options 2, 4, and 5

          0.000025




           0.00002




          0.000015

                                                                                                                                        Option 2
density




                                                                                                                                        Option 4
                                                                                                                                        Option 5

           0.00001




          0.000005




                 0
                     0   12,000   24,000    36,000    48,000    60,000     72,000   84,000   96,000 108,000 120,000 132,000 144,000
                                                                              AGI




                                                                                    51
