 

   

  

  


  !
""#$$%%%&'&$($% !



) ** +
 
,!((-(""(.-
/'012, 
3/'2

                
  !"""#$    % & ' (  ) *  
   &   
      +%, (  '    #- '  
  %          %% .
 + #
/!""".   #& #0           '  
1% ' %        %   % /     
 % #

(("("

  & !
3/'2
4) &+ 1 ,
$%675$&7
(  (0( " ,5526  ((  " - " ("/  7" 8 "(
//"(-(((&"(0%(0((8"90((("
((""'""7/./"(00/("8787"70/""7(&-"-"
88"(8"(-(((/'7"(8""7//"(((/-("0
"/0"88"(8""70-("76-"."8"(0""7./"
88-778"7/'7"&:)00"/07(;("-"0-(0"8/"<-70
"(87-(%"0(-(70='":'(";%--"(
(-880-("'7",5526 17"-"(/07(7(""%"%(0("".'-"
"-(&

3"/"8/(
*.("878
!>5.(77
715>?26 
0 
@&'7&0-

The Mexican crisis was not the first currency and financial crisis of the 1990s. Two years
earlier, Europe had endured an equally dramatic crisis of its own. In September of 1992, the lira
and sterling were driven from the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System.
The peseta, the escudo, and krona (not officially a member of the EMS but pegged to the Ecu)
suffered the same fate two months later. Early in 1993, Spain and Portugal, together with Ireland,
were forced to devalue again due to another surge of speculative pressure. By the summer, when
market participants turned their attention to France, the fate of the EMS and of Europe’s
monetary unification project hung in the balance.
Europe is different from Latin America, a point so obvious that it hardly bears stating.
Europe’s developed, diversified economies are less volatile. Its financial markets are deeper. Its
governments and firms have the reputation and capacity to borrow at long term in their own
currencies. Above all, there is a commitment to political integration and monetary cooperation
unlike any which exists in other parts of the world. The credibility of this commitment — while it
could and was doubted in 1992 — is of an entirely different sort than any which has so far
developed in Latin America or, for that matter, Asia.
Despite these differences, many of the debates provoked by the EMS crisis will resonate

1

with those acquainted with its emerging-market successors. There is the debate over
fundamentals (real overvaluation, excessive deficits, excessive rates of money and credit growth)
versus destabilizing shifts in investor sentiment in the outbreak of the crisis. There is the debate
over the importance of imbalances in the crisis countries themselves versus shocks from outside
(in the European case the German unification shock, in the Mexican case the U.S. interest rate
shock). There is the debate over the role of capital-account liberalization in heightening financial
risks (most of Europe’s capital controls having been removed in the years leading up to the crisis).
There is the role of highly-leveraged institutions. And there is the importance of banking-sector
problems in limiting resort to interest-rate increases to defend the currency. Replace “Europe”
with “Latin America” (or, for that matter, “Asia”), and the same debates can be seen to apply.
Above all there are the lessons of the EMS crisis for monetary and exchange-rate policies.
My own reading, it will not surprise those who know me, is that Europe’s experience underscores
the difficulty of pegging exchange rates in a world of high capital mobility and establishes the
existence of but two viable options for countries seeking to reconcile financial stability with
financial openness: monetary unification, which was achieved in Europe through the creation of a
new currency and a transnational central bank but will more likely be achieved in Latin America
through dollarization; and a more freely floating exchange rate anchored by a clear and credible
monetary policy strategy, namely, inflation targeting. While the 11 founding members of what is
now the euro area gradually hardened their exchange rate pegs before taking the leap to monetary
unification, other European countries, notably the UK and Sweden, continue to float and to target
inflation. Europe’s experience thus suggests that both floating and dollarization may have a
future in Latin America as well.
2

1. The Context
Every crisis has its context. What was distinctive about Europe’s was the depth of the
commitment to stabilizing exchange rates. The “quest” for exchange rate stability (as Giavazzi
and Giovannini 1989 put it) was rooted in a desire for monetary and financial stability, which is
hardly unique to Europe, but also in a commitment to economic and political integration. From
the 1950s, integration was the organizing principle for Europe’s international relations. The
integrationist agenda always had an economic component, starting with the creation of a
European customs union in the 1960s and culminating with the agreement to forge a Single
Market in 1986. It always had a political component, as reflected in the creation of the European
Parliament, the European Court of Justice, and the European Commission.
Monetary integration was tied to both of these elements. It was integral to economic
integration, for exchange rate volatility threatened to wreak havoc with competitive advantage
and to erode political support for the customs union.2 Exchange rate changes disrupted the
operation of the Common Agricultural Policy, the European Community’s first concrete
achievement.3 With the move from customs union to Single Market, arbitrary and capricious
exchange-rate changes threatened to produce even larger shifts in the direction of trade and to

2

This refers to the “competitive-devaluation problem,” which was of singular concern in
Europe, owing to the association of currency devaluation with political strife in the 1930s.
3

While the European Coal and Steel Community was the first achievement of “The Six,” it
predated the Treaty of Rome. In any case, the CAP was essential for maintaining political
support, notably in France, for the Common Market in whose construction the Coal and Steel
Community was the first step. And, as Buiter, Corsetti and Pesenti (1998) argue, it is hard to
imagine that the technical features of the CAP would have been designed as they were unless
there had been a presumption that intra-European exchange rates would remain fixed. Even so,
one can readily see how with the passage of time those technical features could themselves
become an obstacle to exchange rate variability.
3

provoke an even larger backlash. More even than in NAFTA, where integration largely stops at
the border, European initiatives extending well beyond the removal of border controls to the
creation of a single labor market and a single financial market caused exchange rate fluctuations
and economic integration to be seen as incompatible.4
Monetary integration was also the vehicle for pushing forward political integration. The
formulation and implementation of a single monetary policy required new institutions and
deliberative bodies, facilitating the institutionalization of cooperation. Starting with the Werner
Report in 1970, monetary policy was the lever used to pry open the door to political integration,
and, predictably, the strongest opposition to the monetary project (as in the United Kingdom)
came from committed anti-federalists. To say that monetary integration was a concomitant of
political integration may be too simple, but it is impossible to imagine a European monetary
project which took the form it did in the absence of the political motor.
The collapse of the Bretton Woods System in 1971-3 and the resulting volatility in
financial markets heightened the urgency of efforts to create a zone of monetary stability.
Europe’s first attempt, the Snake, was less than successful. The success of the next initiative, the
EMS, a multilateral parity grid established in 1979, surprised even the optimists. In retrospect,
the ingredients of this success are clear. Compared to the Snake, the EMS provided for more

4

To be sure, NAFTA includes a number of non-trade-related provisions that extend
beyond the border — those affecting environmental standards and practices, for example — but
these are limited compared to the commitments entailed in the Single Market program.
4

liberal credit lines.5 It was supported by a firmer political commitment.6 The global environment
was more favorable; none of the shocks of the 1980s was as severe as the first oil shock and the
productivity slowdown of the 1970s.7 France’s commitment to price stability having come under
a cloud as a result of President Mitterrand’s abortive Keynesian experiment in 1981-3, Germany
emerged as the anchor for exchange rate and inflation expectations. Moreover, there was a
greater willingness to harmonize policies once governments absorbed the lessons of the
Mitterrand’s failed effort to go it alone.8 And since there was provision for realigning ERM
currencies, policy harmonization did not consign governments to a macroeconomic strait jacket.
There was a readiness to coordinate those realignments, which could be negotiated in advance
courtesy of the breathing space provided by capital controls. These were the elements that
sustained the EMS through its first seven years of operation.
Then came the Single Market agreement in 1986. An essential step toward creating a
single capital market was the removal of controls on cross-border capital flows. The implications
of doing so for the narrow-band EMS were not fully appreciated. With the removal of capital
controls over the subsequent five years, realigning became problematic. The merest hint that the
authorities were contemplating a change in parity could prompt the markets to launch a

5

The maturity of credits that could be obtained through the Very Short Term Financing
Facility was extended, the conditions under which they could be accessed was liberalized, and
provision was made for renewing maturing loans.
6

Where the Snake had included non-EC members, the EMS was exclusively an EC affair.

7

Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1994) document this point with estimates of the supply and
demand shocks affecting the European economy in the 1970s and 1980s.
8

Italy, Denmark and Ireland, among others, followed France’s lead, turning to monetary
and fiscal retrenchment.
5

preemptive strike. Hence the option could no longer be discussed in polite company. Where
there had been 11 realignments between the birth of the EMS and January 1987, there were none
from that point to the crisis in 1992.9 Commentators (e.g. Giavazzi and Spaventa 1990) began to
distinguish between the Old (flexible) and New (rigid) EMS.
The EMS was then buffeted by far-reaching changes to the global economy. There was
the growth of international financial transactions, most notably after the Brady Plan allowed banks
to write down and sell off their nonperforming loans to developing countries. There was the
deregulation of financial markets, the surge in bank lending, and the growth of financial
institutions that fed on this credit, notably macro hedge funds that lacked long-term relationships
with the governments of the countries whose currencies they traded. There was the Soviet
collapse and German unification. The impact of German unification on the European economy
was not hard to anticipate. Early analysts like Begg et al. (1990) hit the nail on the head,
forecasting strong domestic demand fueled by deficit spending and high interest rates as the
Bundesbank sought to limit the inflationary consequences.10 But if the macroeconomic effects
were foreseen, the consequences for the EMS were not.

9

The band for the lira was adjusted on January 8, 1990 but without changing the central
parity and therefore posing no threat to the stability of expectations.
10

Because Chancellor Kohl had campaigned on a pledge not to levy additional taxes to
defray the costs of unification, forecasting large budget deficits and their consequences was not
rocket science.
6

2. The Crisis
Those consequences showed up first in Finland, not a member of the EMS (since Finland
was not yet a member of the EU) but an Ecu pegger. Finland’s exports were hit by the
disintegration of the Soviet economy. Its banks and firms were heavily exposed as a result of the
credit boom that had followed financial liberalization in the mid-1980s, and rising German and
European interest rates then made it more difficult for them to fund their operations. The
magnitude of the problem became apparent in late 1991, when the Bank of Finland devalued the
markka by 12 per cent but this adjustment turned out to be woefully inadequate to restore the
health and vigor of the Finnish economy.
Similar problems afflicted other European countries. There were questions about the
competitive position of Italy and the UK. Italy, like a number of other EU member states with
recent histories of inflation, had used the EMS as a way of importing the Bundesbank’s antiinflationary credibility. As in any exchange-rate-based stabilization, not just current inflation but
also the cumulative effects of past inflation were built into the price level, creating problems of
overvaluation. Since inflation stabilized less rapidly than the exchange rate, interest rates were
also slow to come down. Investors borrowed in low-interest-rate markets (Japan and the United
States) and invested where interest rates were high on the assumption that ERM pegs were firm.11
These inflows fueled bank lending and domestic credit expansion; they papered over problems.
The label attached to this process may have been “the convergence play” rather than “the carry
trade” (the 1990s variant to gain infamy as a result of the Mexican and Asian crises), but the

11

And that these investments would deliver capital gains as interest rates came down in the

future.
7

mechanism was fundamentally the same.12 And if doubts arose about the stability of exchangerate pegs, these convergence plays could be quickly unwound.
In Britain, the problem was having entered the EMS at an unsustainably high exchange
rate. The pound had appreciated, despite inflation, with the country’s macroeconomic boom, and
recession and unemployment loomed just as sterling went into the EMS.13 Indeed, concern over
unemployment was continent wide: together with the weakness of banking systems, it raised the
question of whether central banks and governments had the will to defend their exchange rates if
they came under attack.
If governments chose to stay the course, this would be for political reasons and in the
belief that defending the EMS was essential to the survival of the monetary union project. The
Delors Report, accepted by the Council at the Madrid Summit in June 1989, and the Maastricht
Treaty, negotiated in 1991 but not yet ratified, raised the stakes. The Maastricht Treaty made
participation in the EMS, with no involuntary devaluations, a precondition for qualifying for
EMU.14 Countries displaying an inadequate commitment to defending their currencies might be
barred from joining the monetary union, thereby jeopardizing their standing as good Europeans.

12

Thus, the Spanish peseta, like the Indonesian rupiah five years later, was pushed to the
top of its band by these copious capital inflows before the bottom suddenly fell out.
13

It is revealing that, at the time of writing, sterling is some 15 per cent higher against the
DM than it was when it entered the ERM (and even higher against the synthetic euro). This is
consistent with the emphasis in the text on the influence of the business cycle conjuncture on the
level of the exchange rate, in the sense that Britain’s relatively robust expansion in the second half
of the 1990s is the obvious explanation for its currently high exchange rate.
14

Exchange rate stabilization and EMS participation was one of the four convergence
criteria included in the Maastricht Treaty although how strictly they would be interpreted was
disputed. For understanding the crisis, it is important to recall that the consensus interpretation
was stricter then than it tends to be today.
8

When Danish voters narrowly rejected the treaty in their June 2nd referendum, this
presumption was shattered. If there might be no monetary union to aspire to, there was less
incentive to pursue painful policies of austerity. Financial markets quickly recognized the
implications. Italy, the where competitiveness problems had built up as a result of chronic
inflation, became an obvious target. Despite not straying from its EMS band since it had been
narrowed from 6 to 2 1/4 per cent in January 1990, the lira now fell to its lower limit.15 The Bank
of Italy hiked interest rates, but to no avail; the markets were more alarmed by the implied
increase in debt service than they were reassured by the signal of commitment.16 The three
currencies still operating the wide band (sterling, the peseta and the escudo), whose credibility
was least, weakened in response.17
The pressure mounted with the approach of the French referendum scheduled for
September 20th, since another rejection of the treaty would leave monetary unification dead in the
water. On August 26th the pound fell to its ERM floor despite Bank of England intervention.
Within 48 hours it was joined there by the lira. The effort to negotiate a coordinated response (a
devaluation of the weak ERM currencies -- essentially all of them except the DM and the Dutch
guilder -- the Netherlands being regarded by the markets as just another German lander -together with a reduction in German interest rates) at an ECOFIN meeting in Bath in early

15

Despite intramarginal intervention. The Bank of Italy’s reserves fell by 13 ½ per cent in
the month of June.
16

Connolly (1995), p.136.

17

New entrants to the EMS, following a precedent set by Italy, were initially permitted to
operate wide bands of plus-or-minus six per cent (rather than the conventional 2 1/4 per cent
band), reflecting their continued problems of high inflation. Italy moved from the wide band to the
narrow band on January 8, 1990, as noted above.
9

September went badly wrong. Germany, preoccupied by inflation, refused to reduce interest
rates, while France, Britain and Spain, fearing the consequences of association with Italy, avoided
all discussion of a general realignment of ERM currencies as a precondition for looser German
monetary policy. The prospects for cooperation dimmed.
The consequences became apparent on September 8th, when Finland abandoned its peg
and the markka depreciated by 15 per cent. The size of the drop implied large potential profits if
other weak European currencies responded similarly, prompting traders to turn to neighboring
Sweden, which superficially resembled its Nordic neighbor. Over the subsequent week the
Riksbank, to defend the Ecu peg, raised its marginal lending rate to triple digits. The Bank of
Norway supported the krone with very extensive intervention. Despite raising short-term interest
rates to more than 30 per cent, the Bank of Italy found its reserves on the verge of exhaustion.
The formula presented at Bath -- a general realignment coupled with a German interest-rate cut -was run up the flagpole again, but once more ERM members failed to salute. Following bilateral
negotiations with Germany, Italy devalued the lira by 7 per cent on September 13th, and the
Bundesbank lowered its Lombard rate by 25 basis points.18
This tale of mounting tensions, culminating in the inevitable tragedy, is told with benefit of
hindsight. Europe’s exchange rate pegs were fragile, reflecting a combination of macroeconomic
imbalances and structural weaknesses. Governments and central banks had a limited political
capacity to defend their currencies. And the monetary union project had uncertain prospects. It
is no surprise, in retrospect, that currency speculators trained their attention on the EMS or that
18

Technically, the adjustment was a 3.5 devaluation of the lira and a 3.5 per cent
revaluation of other ERM currencies. The Bundesbank also cut the discount rate by 50 basis
points, but it was the Lombard rate that mattered for international transactions.
10

their campaign ultimately succeeded.
The aura of inevitability surrounding this account makes it important to recall that this
outcome seemed far from assured at the time. Many years had passed since ERM parities had
been changed. The commitment to monetary union continued to shape official decisions, Danish
referendum or not. Measures of market expectations, whether the forward exchange rate (as in
Eichengreen and Wyplosz 1993), trend-adjusted measures of realignment expectations (as in Rose
and Svensson 1994), or realignment probabilities derived from options prices (as in Campa and
Chang 1996) suggest that no significant likelihood was attached to realignment until the weeks
immediately preceding the crisis.
September changed this. The first realignment in five years reminded observers that the
devaluation of European currencies was still possible. The refusal of other countries to agree on a
simultaneous realignment against the DM and the Bundesbank’s reluctance to cut interest rates by
more than a small margin intensified the pressure on Europe’s weak currencies. This was the point
at which George Soros’ positions against sterling became known (Muehring, 1992). The news on
Tuesday, September 15th that the German newspaper Handelsblatt would the next day publish an
interview with Bundesbank President Schlesinger saying that “further devaluations could not be
excluded” and the absence of a firm rebuttal by the German central bank ratcheted up the
pressure. The British government and the Bank of England hesitated to raise interest rates,
apparently fearing that further hikes would aggravate unemployment and incite a rebellion in the
Conservative bank benches.19 At the height of the speculative attack, on Wednesday 16
19

As Stephens (1996, p.217) writes, “...officials believed an increase would have served
only to heighten the tension between the domestic economy and the ERM. The financial markets
would have recognized an increase as an act of desperation. In the words of one Bank official,
11

September, the Bank raised its base lending rate from 10 to 12 per cent and announced the
intention of raising it by a further 300 basis points the following day. But the first increase was
delayed by more than an hour following the opening of the markets and was in any case a feeble
response by the standards of, say, the Riksbank. It had no discernible impact on the currency.20
Doubts took hold even before the second increase was implemented; it was quickly rescinded.
That evening EC Monetary Committee accepted Britain’s request to take the pound out of the
ERM (and did the same for Italy and the lira) but rejected London’s request to suspend the ERM
entirely.21 In addition, the Monetary Committee then authorized a five per cent devaluation of the
peseta.
From this point, no ERM currency (other than the deutschmark and the Dutch guilder)
was immune. The Bank of France was forced to raise interest rates, despite French voters’
ratification of the Maastricht Treaty. The French central bank spent $32 billion on the franc’s
defense in the week ending September 23rd. Sweden abandoned its Ecu peg on November 19th,
following reserve losses of $26 billion (more than 10 per cent of Swedish GNP) in the preceding 6
days.22 Denmark was forced to raise interest rates, followed by Spain and Portugal, and after
three days the peseta and escudo were devalued by (in the Spanish case, a further) 3 per cent.

‘There was a huge overkill even with base rates at 10 per cent. Increasing rates would have been
incredible.’” See also Lamont (1999), p.200 and passim.
20

As Norman Lamont put it, when the increase was announced “the pound did not move at
all. From that moment, I knew the game was up. I later told a journalist I felt like a TV surgeon
in Casualty watching a heart monitor and realizing that the patient was dead...” (Lamont 1999,
p.249).
21

Dyson and Featherstone (1999), p.685.

22

BIS (1993), p.188.
12

Norway abandoned its Ecu peg on December 10th, and Ireland devalued by 10 per cent within the
ERM on January 30th.
While the Danish krone and Belgian franc also came under attack in early 1993, the center
of attention was now Iberia. Spanish unemployment had risen to 20 per cent. The release in midFebruary of disappointing unemployment figures for the final quarter of 1992 ignited selling
pressure, and the calling of elections for April 12th created uncertainty about the intentions of the
government. Reserve losses forced another 8 per cent devaluation on May 13th, and the spillover
to neighboring Portugal forced that country to devalue by another 6 ½ per cent.
Investors now had France in their sights. French unemployment had been a concern
throughout the period. It placed the French government under pressure not to raise interest rates
to defend the franc and the German government under pressure to lower them to support its
Gallic neighbor. On June 24th the French economy minister, Edmond Alphandery, demanded a
meeting with his German counterpart, Theo Waigel, for the purpose of coordinating reductions in
German and French interest rates; Waigel, citing pressing business, declined. When INSEE
released a gloomy report on the French economy, the franc crumbled. On July 14th it approached
its maximum permissible divergence against the DM, forcing the Bundesbank to intervene. But
on the last Thursday of the month, at its final regular meeting of the summer, the Bundesbank
Council declined to lower the discount rate (citing recent German money supply figures which
showed that money supply targets had again been overshot).23 Massive market sales of francs
prompted equally massive purchases by the Bank of France (which expended more than $32
billion of reserves in the last week of July -- 80 per cent of this on July 29th, the last trading day of
23

The Bundesbank cut repurchase and lombard rates but this was regarded as inadequate.
13

the month). The Bundesbank’s reserves, meanwhile, rose by DM 40 billion (some 33 per cent),
again foreshadowing a sharp increase in the money supply.
By now the writing was on the wall. The Bank of France lacked the reserves to continue
intervening, and for the Bundesbank to do so threatened its anti-inflationary objectives. For the
same reasons, neither central bank was prepared to alter interest rates. In a crisis meeting over
the last weekend of July, Europe’s central bank governors and finance ministers widened the
ERM’s bands to 15 per cent. Only time would tell whether this decision was compatible with the
Maastricht blueprint, but the impending opening of the Tokyo market (in just minutes when the
decision was taken) left them no choice.
Turmoil in foreign exchange markets then subsided. Eliminating the one-way bet reduced
speculative activity: since other currencies could now rise as well as fall against the DM within the
wide band, the costs of losing a speculative bet were greatly increased. Eventually, reductions in
German interest rates helped to reduce the pressure. And, perhaps most importantly, EU
members reiterated their commitment to move ahead with monetary unification, Danish
referendum or not; this mean that the disciplining effects on fiscal policy of the Maastricht
convergence criteria would increasingly bite. So reassured, the markets settled down, and the
crisis receded.

3. Two Interpretations
The debate over the causes of the crisis is typically framed in terms of first- versus second-

14

generation models.24 In first-generation models (e.g. Krugman 1979), excessively expansionary
macroeconomic policies pointing to the eventual exhaustion of reserves precipitate the speculative
attack. In second-generation models (e.g. Flood and Garber 1994, Obstfeld 1986), the reverse is
true: the attack precipitates the change in policies that validates the expectations of the exhaustion
of reserves. The first generation can be thought of as modeling a current-account crisis.
Excessively expansionary policies generate current account deficits that cannot be financed
indefinitely; when financing becomes a constraint, the crisis erupts. In contrast, the second
generation can be seen as modeling a capital-account crisis in which swings in the capital account
first allow current-account deficits to be financed and then require them to be eliminated all at
once through an uncomfortably large shift in relative prices.
The first interpretation points to the reluctance of the authorities to pursue policies
consistent with the maintenance of their currency pegs. Budget deficits were large, and
governments and central banks were reluctant to match the level of interest rates prevailing in
Germany, against whose currency they were de facto pegging. The role of hedge funds and other
currency speculators was to identify this problem, to foresee the eventual exhaustion of reserves,
and to anticipate the inevitable exchange-rate adjustments.
The second interpretation, by comparison, attributes a more active role to the markets.
Currency traders, in this view, “ganged up” on Europe’s central banks and governments. They
forced the authorities to raise interest rates in order to defend their ERM parities. While
maintaining those parities might have been tolerable under normal market conditions, this was no

24

I deserve the blame for having coined this terminology (in Eichengreen, Rose and
Wyplosz 1995), which seems to have produced as much confusion as clarity.
15

longer true once confidence was lost and interest rates had to be jacked up disregard of existing
economic difficulties. After enduring this battering for a few days, the Italian and British
governments threw in the towel, allowing their currencies to depreciate.
The first round of post-crisis studies did not succeed in deciding between these two
interpretations owing to the difficulty of giving empirical content to these theoretical constructs.
A decade later we are unable to do much better. The gap between theory and empirics remains
large. Any model will be over-determined in the sense that we have only one observation (the
1992 crisis) and any number of coefficients to estimate (each representing an different set of
factors).25 Nonetheless, I will suggest that a decade of discussion and rumination has led to the
emergence of a synthesis combining elements of the current- and capital-account-based
interpretations in something that approaches a consensus view.

4. A Current Account Crisis
The competitiveness interpretation should enjoy the benefit of the doubt if only because a
number of countries (Italy and Spain prominent among them) had been following policies of
exchange-rate-based disinflation.26 Exchange-rate-based stabilization tends to aggravate problems

25

In a sense, this is what has led subsequent investigators to turn from case studies (like
those commissioned by the Bank of Mexico for this conference) to “large n” studies that attempt
to draw generalizations from many crises.
26

This characterization simplifies the situation, to be sure. In the case of the UK, another
country whose subsequent difficulties have been ascribed to competitiveness problems, since 1988
the authorities had been resisting appreciation; in the two years preceding ERM entry they did not
intervene nor use interest rates to target the exchange rate. Still, there is an element of truth in
this characterization insofar as some of the principals in the discussion of alternative entry rates
still saw inflation as more of a problem than competitiveness and therefore recommended a high
rate.
16

of competitiveness. Even if pegging the currency accelerates the transition to price stability,
inflation is still likely to take time to decline to the levels prevailing in the anchor country. And
one or two points of extra inflation will cumulate to 5 to 12 points of overvaluation over a fiveyear period like that from 1987 to 1992.
In Europe’s case, there were, in addition to the problems created by exchange-rate-based
stabilization, the effects of fiscal stimulus, as governments sought to avoid importing recession
from the U.S. and UK. Deficits as a per cent of GDP rose between 1991 and 1992 in 6 of 10
European countries. The exceptions were Germany, Italy, Spain and Portugal, where deficits
were already large.27 [See Table 1.]
In addition, there was the shock to competitiveness from a declining U.S. dollar. The
dollar fell by nearly 20 per cent against the DM between April and August, reflecting interest-rate
cuts by the Federal Reserve intended to jump-start recovery from the 1991-2 U.S. recession. [See
Figure 1.] The lower dollar aggravated problems of competitiveness in Europe that were felt
disproportionately by the continent’s weak-currency countries.28
It is worth emphasizing the contrast between this story and that told of the role of interest
rates in the Mexican crisis. Whereas it was falling U.S. interest rates that aggravated Europe’s

27

The last three countries entered the period with the largest deficits of any member state
other than Greece, not yet an ERM member, and Germany itself, where the deficit had already
soared in 1990-1.
28

Giavazzi and Giovannini (1989), writing before the crisis, refer to the widely-noted
phenomenon of “dollar-deutschmark polarization,” in which the deutschmark seemed to rise
against other European currencies whenever the dollar fell. (See also Frankel 1986.) The popular
interpretation was in terms of closer substitutability between dollars and deutschmarks than assets
denominated in other European currencies. For present purposes, it suffices that a weaker dollar
should have intensified the competitive pressure on all of Europe, which would have created
particular problems for countries where the exchange rate was already weak.
17

crisis, it was rising U.S. interest rates that compounded Mexico’s difficulties. Both stories can be
correct, of course, if one believes that Europe’s was predominately a current-account crisis (lower
U.S. interest rates, leading to a lower dollar, undermined Europe’s competitiveness on current
account), while Mexico’s was predominately a capital-account crisis (higher U.S. interest rates
curtailed capital flows to Mexico, compressing the capital account).29
Uncomfortably for the exponents of this view, widespread overvaluation was not evident
to the naked eye. In part this reflects the limitations of the data. The wholesale and retail price
indices (even the GDP deflators) on which estimates of competitiveness are based show little
movement insofar as they are dominated by the prices of traded goods whose divergence is
minimized by commodity-price arbitrage. Relative unit labor costs are more informative insofar
as labor services are nontraded. [See Table 2.] For Italy, unit labor costs relative to the country’s
ERM partners rose by seven per cent between the advent of the New EMS and the onset of the
crisis.30 For Spain, the movement of relative unit labor costs was roughly the same, although the
economy’s shift in this period into the production of higher value added goods creates indexnumber problems and doubts about the figures. In the UK there was also a significant increase in
relative unit labor costs from their end-1986 trough, though this predated sterling’s 1990 entry
into the EMS.31 For Sweden there is similar evidence for the second half of the 1980s.

29

And, of course, it is precisely over the question of whether the current or capital account
drove the EMS crisis on which the first- versus second-generation debate turns.
30

As constructed by the IMF. Buiter, Corsetti and Pesenti (1998, p.43) note a 1992 Bank
of Italy report estimating that the loss of Italian competitiveness between 1987 and 1991 was
limited to 5 per cent. But this calculation was based on relative producer prices, which as argued
above will be contaminated by a high weight on traded goods.
31

As noted in Section 2.
18

But for no other European country do these indices provide evidence of real
overvaluation. That Italy, Spain, the UK and Sweden were four of the first countries to feel
speculative pressure tells us that the competitiveness story is important. But the absence of
comparable evidence elsewhere is troubling for the first-generation story given the indiscriminate
nature of the subsequent attacks.32
These data may be less than informative, however, due to the German unification shock.
Kohl’s pledge not to raise taxes to finance the costs of unification, and the explosion of spending
on unemployment benefits and pensions for residents of the Eastern lander (with the goal of
limiting politically-sensitive migration to the western states), together with increased spending on
infrastructure repair and environmental clean-up, stimulated demand in Germany. Given the
disproportionate propensity of residents to consume domestically-produced goods, this fiscaldriven surge in demand required a rise in the relative price of German goods. This change in
relative prices could come about in three ways. First, German prices could rise. But here the
Bundesbank’s aversion to inflation froze the mechanism. Second, altering exchange rates against
the deutschmark could accomplish the task. But other countries were reluctant to change their
parities, given the exchange-rate-based disinflation strategies they had been following and the
Maastricht requirement to keep their currencies stable within the ERM. This left only a fall in
price levels relative to the Germany’s (equivalently, an inflation rate lower than Germany’s) to
bring about the requisite adjustment.
32

Of course, in the seminal Krugman model, excess demand did not show up in
overvaluation, since relative prices were given by the assumption of purchasing power parity.
Extensions of the model (e.g. Willman 1988) relaxed this assumption and showed how the run-up
to a speculative attack driven by excess demand would display growing real overvaluation along
with the progressive depletion of reserves.
19

This interpretation has been advanced by authors like Branson (1994) as a way of
reconciling the competitive-imbalance story with the absence of a strong trend in relative inflation
rates. While their logic is impeccable, it is hard to know how much importance to attach to the
argument. In the absence of a fully-specified model, in other words, it is hard to know whether
the observed movement in relative prices was inadequate. Eichengreen and Wyplosz (1993)
consider the quantities affected by these relative prices — the current account deficit and
manufacturing-sector profitability — and find that only in Italy did both variables deteriorate
during the run-up to the crisis, unambiguously suggesting deteriorating competitiveness.33
A second attempt to rescue the interpretation emphasizes the implications of the Danish
referendum. Satisfying the convergence criteria of the Maastricht Treaty required eliminating
excessive budget deficits and matching the inflation and interest rates of Europe’s low inflation
countries.34 If the Maastricht Treaty was not going to be ratified, then the pressure was off,
allowing governments and central banks to revert to their inflationary ways. Even if
competitiveness problems were not yet evident, they would surface soon enough. In particular,
countries where unemployment was high would not want to match the high level of German
interest rates (and, by implication, the low level of German inflation). The normal behavior of
their central banks would have been to reduce rates in the face of this unemployment (Clarida,
Gali and Gertler 1997), and it was only the Maastricht promise of a reward that prevented them
from doing so. As unemployment rose still further, the pressure for interest-rate reductions

33

Unfortunately, large capital inflows like those produced by the convergence play can
render this test less than telling.
34

Or, more precisely, bringing inflation and interest rates down to a point very close to
those of Europe’s low inflation countries.
20

intensified. [See Table 3.] And as German interest rates ratcheted up, this tension ratcheted up
with them. When “plucky little Denmark” (as Norman Lamont referred to the country) rejected
the treaty, it cast doubt over the premise that countries that resisted the temptation to relax would
reap a reward down the road. Traders, anticipating that governments were about to throw in the
towel, sold off the currencies of Europe’s high-unemployment countries.
The problem with this interpretation is that there was no monetary explosion or loss of
fiscal discipline following the Danish “nej.” Deficits may have been excessive, but this had already
been true before the Danish referendum, and there was no change in fiscal stance subsequently.35
[See again Table 1.] Although Denmark’s participation in the Maastricht process was now in
doubt, other member countries remained as committed as ever.
These interpretations are more convincing if they can explain the timing of events. Timing
certainly favors the Maastricht-based interpretation, given how volatility spiked with the Danish
referendum. Yet European governments repeatedly reaffirmed their commitment to the
Maastricht glidepath, and even the most forceful statements to this effect (and unchanging
monetary and fiscal policies) did not make the volatility go away. It can be argued that their
statements were not taken at face value, but only for Italy is there evidence of imperfect credibility
in the behavior of asset prices.36
Can German unification explain the timing? Buiter, Corsetti and Pesenti (1998, p.41)
suggest that the Bundesbank held off raising interest rates in the hope that the German

35

I return to this point below.

36

In addition to the Rose and Svensson (1994) and Campa and Chang (1996) references
cited above, see Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1997) for evidence.
21

government would show fiscal restraint, but by the second half of 1991 it had been overwhelmed
by evidence to the contrary. When German inflation accelerated to four per cent (not an alarming
figure for other countries but truly horrifying by German standards), it raised interest rates
“regardless of the consequences for the domestic real economy and with utter disregard for the
international implications of its policies.”37 Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1997) argue on the basis of
monetary policy reaction-functions that the Bundesbank pushed interest rates above predicted
levels immediately before the EMS break-up; if so, this shock could explain the timing of the
crisis. But their reaction functions under-predict interest rates over the entire preceding five
years, not just in 1992.38 This makes it hard to interpret the forecast errors for months
immediately preceding the crisis.
Thus, this picture the ERM break-up as a current-account crisis (suitably amended for the
German unification and Danish referendum shocks) takes us some way toward understanding the
timing and character of events. Of course, this interpretation benefits from 20-20 hindsight. A
sense of how things looked at the time can be gleaned from the October 1992 World Economic
Outlook (IMF 1992), presented to the IMF Board on September 2-4. The WEO did not warn of
real overvaluation, unsustainable current account deficits, or an impending crisis. Insofar as the
markets and their monitors did not see problems as inevitable, one cannot help but feel that the
preceding analysis is incomplete.

5. A Capital Account Crisis

37

Buiter, Corsetti and Pesenti (1998), p.41.

38

By a relatively small margin in 1990, but by roughly the same amount otherwise.
22

Completing the picture requires adding a role for the capital account. While the first half
of the 1980s had seen EMS members devalue under pressure, the intensity of that pressure had
been limited by controls. 1992 was the first occasion when the capital account was fully open,
with implications for both the pre-crisis and crisis periods.
Recall that the Maastricht Treaty included a requirement that countries bring their inflation
rates down to the levels prevailing in Europe’s low-inflation countries in order to quality for
monetary union. The desire of Europe’s inflation-prone countries not to be left on the platform
when the train left the station encouraged the belief that they would take whatever steps were
necessary for their inflation rates to converge to those prevailing elsewhere on the continent. And
as their inflation rates came down, so would their interest rates.39 This was the logic for the
“convergence play.”40
To be sure, the convergence play was not entirely Maastricht related. Inflows into the
higher-yielding ERM currencies had occurred over the 1987-1991 period that preceded the
negotiation of the Maastricht Treaty (and the first half of which preceded the Delors Report).
The success of countries in bringing down inflation in the context of their ERM-centered
exchange-rate-based-stabilization strategies had set these inflows in train. Thus, capital inflows
into both Italy and Spain tripled between 1986-88 and 1989-91. Interest rate spreads on one-year
Eurocurrency deposits fell from 800 to 200 basis points. When the United Kingdom entered the
ERM in October 1990, it too found itself on the receiving end of these financial flows. Banks and

39

In addition, recall that the convergence of interest rates was another precondition laid
down in the Maastricht Treaty for qualifying for monetary union.
40

Subsequently made famous, in its post-crisis reincarnation, by Long-Term Capital
Management.
23

firms funded themselves abroad, borrowing in deutschmarks and guilders. The IMF reported
estimates of convergence plays as high as $300 billion.41 Many of these were booked by hedge
funds and other institutional investors who saw easy money to be made.
So far, our analysis includes no autonomous role for the capital account. The negative
outcome of the Danish referendum affected the direction of capital flows only because it gave
grounds for anticipating that policy would shift in a more expansionary direction. Capital flows
simply responded to this prospective change in policy in this view; they did not precipitate it.
An autonomous role for capital movements enters if we consider the possibility that this
policy shift was contingent on the level of interest rates. European governments were trading off
the costs of maintaining the exchange rate, in the form of the high level of interest rates needed to
defend it, against the perceived benefits of qualifying for monetary union down the road. The
front-loaded costs increased with the slowing of economic growth.
The most obvious cost of high interest rates and a high exchange rate was the squeeze on
industrial profitability and the high level of unemployment. In Sweden and Finland, in addition,
the high exchange rate and high interest rates compounded the difficulties of a weak banking
system and constrained the government in its pursuit of policies to resolve them. In Italy, a
country with a debt/GDP ratio in excess of 100 per cent, a large portion of which ran short terms
to maturity, a hundred basis point increase in the central bank’s discount rate added 13 trillion lire
to the budget deficit. Hence, high interest rates meant fiscal strains and difficult political choices.
And in Britain, where mortgage interest rates were indexed and higher interest rates threatened to
depress property values, monetary stringency provoked howls of protest as “[t]he bailiffs began
41

IMF (1993), p.10.
24

arriving in the leafy avenues of the Home Counties and in the chic new developments of London’s
Docklands to repossess the homes of Thatcher’s children.”42
Thus, a policy that was optimal in the absence of a loss of investor confidence could
become suboptimal if capital flows reversed direction. If it became necessary to ratchet up
interest rates to counter that loss of confidence, the terms of trade between unemployment now
and EMU membership later would change for the worse. Governments previously prepared to
accept the unemployment associated with the prevailing level of interest rates in return for the
golden ring of EMU membership might no longer regard the game as worth the candle. They
would abandon their ERM parities, reduce interest rates, and allow their currencies to depreciate.
This is, as theorists refer to it, a model with multiple equilibria and contingent policy shifts, where
the policy that is chosen depends on the direction of capital flows. And it is a model with an
autonomous role for the capital account.43
Clearly, not all countries were exposed equally to these pressures. It was those with high
unemployment, weak banking systems, large amounts of short-term debt, and indexed mortgage
rates for whom interest-rate increases were least tolerable, and which were presumably most
inclined to abandon the exchange-rate commitment due to a sudden loss of confidence. In this
sense, this interpretation is not an alternative to the current-account-centered analysis of the
preceding section but a complement to it. The difference is that the fundamentals of interest are
not just those related to international competitiveness (which now matters not just because it

42

Stephens (1996), p.190.

43

It has been set out formally by Ozkan and Sutherland (1994), Jeanne (1997), and
Eichengreen and Jeanne (2000).
25

affects the current account but also because it feeds through into unemployment) but in addition
others that heighten the economy’s macroeconomic and financial fragility and thereby limit the
steps that the politicians are prepared to take to defend the currency.
The role of the Danish referendum, so interpreted, was to move countries into this zone of
vulnerability. The lure of monetary unification was so strong that governments were prepared to
endure significant hardships to qualify for participation. But when the Danish referendum created
a significant likelihood that monetary union would not happen, this bargain became less attractive.
An interest-rate increase policy makers might have accepted previously on the grounds that it
preserved their Maastricht-compliant status might no longer be tolerable now that the expected
value of Maastricht good citizenship had fallen.
This interpretation can explain why countries like the UK, Italy, Sweden and Spain were
first to be attacked: they had the highest unemployment rates, the worst recessions, the weakest
banking systems, and the highest public debts. But it can also explain why speculators targeted
the French franc, since French unemployment was high (and politically sensitive given the
country’s impending election). It can explain the reluctance of some governments (like that of the
UK) to raise interest rates and the unwillingness of others (like that of Sweden) to hold them at
high levels to defend their currencies. It provides a role for the Danish referendum in crystalizing
skepticism about whether European governments were prepared to stay the course.
This interpretation has been challenged (by, e.g. Buiter, Corsetti, and Pesenti 1998) on the
grounds that policy — monetary policy in particular — did not become more expansionary
following the crisis. The Obstfeld (1986) model that is the basis for this tale of self-fulfilling
attacks runs on the assumption that if (and only if) the currency is attacked, the peg will be
26

abandoned and policy will become more expansionary. The exchange rate will depreciate,
providing ex post justification (and profits) for currency speculators. In fact, there is little
evidence that policy in countries that abandoned their pegs shifted in more expansionary
directions. Additional monetary ease was offset by additional fiscal retrenchment, leaving the
thrust of macroeconomic policy unchanged. If speculators expected a significant relaxation of
policy, they were disappointed.
It can be argued that this objection rests on too literal an interpretation of the Obstfeld
model. An expansionary shift in policy was only one of several contingencies that could have
driven the lira and sterling to lower levels after September 1992. Another, analyzed by Flood and
Marion (1998), is a change in the exchange risk premium. Assume that a larger risk premium
requires higher interest rates to maintain the previously prevailing peg. If the authorities refuse to
raise interest rates following an increase in the risk premium, then the exchange rate will fall to
lower levels. If the risk premium is an increasing function of the volatility of the exchange rate
(which rose sharply in September 1992, as shown in Figure 2), then the fact that the exchange rate
has suddenly fallen by a large amount and is now floating validates investors’ expectations of a
larger premium. The speculative attack that precipitated these events is rational and self fulfilling.
And no change in monetary and fiscal policies is required.
This, then, is as close as we have come after a decade to a consensus interpretation of the
crisis. Countries like Italy, the UK, and Spain would not have been so readily attacked had they
not allowed their currencies to become overvalued. France would not have found it so difficult to
defend the franc had its unemployment rate not risen to high levels, while Sweden and Finland
would not have found defending their currencies so difficult had the condition of their banking
27

systems not been so fragile. The Bundesbank’s interest-rate increases aggravated these strains.
Still, there was nothing inevitable about the fact of the attacks, their timing, or their direction.
The Maastricht process gave investors reason to believe that governments and central banks
would strengthen their anti-inflationary resolve and put their houses in order before conditions
became unsustainable. Capital thus flowed into these countries, courtesy of convergence plays.
But if confidence was disturbed and flows reversed direction, countries in the zone of vulnerability
— whose current account deficits were substantial, whose unemployment rates were high, whose
public debts were large, and whose banking systems were weak — would lack the economic and
political capacity to undertake the adjustments needed to reconcile the new financial
circumstances with their prevailing currency pegs. The shock in question, it turned out, was the
Danish referendum. And the rest, as they say, is history.

6. Did It Matter that the EMS was a Collective System of Pegs?
Europe was different in that it operated a system of collective currency pegs, in contrast to
Mexico’s unilateral peg before 1995 or Argentina’s unilateral peg today. Buiter, Corsetti and
Pesenti (1998) argue that a system of collective pegs, cooperatively managed, should be more
stable than a unilateral peg, and that Europe’s tragedy was that it squandered its opportunity to
cooperate. This failure to cooperate was what transformed market pressures into a crisis; had
cooperative policies been pursued, adjustment would have been smoother and the threat to the
EMS would have been less.44
44

The implication is that regions prepared to develop collective exchange-rate
arrangements and to operate them effectively (East Asia? Mercosur?) will be better able to resist
future crises.
28

The logic of the Buiter et al. analysis is the following. While the Bundesbank was aware
that its high interest rates were increasing the strain on the ERM’s weak sisters — for present
purposes, the lira and sterling — German authorities were unwilling to reduce interest rates
unilaterally for fear of aggravating inflation. The resulting tension drove the lira and sterling out
of the ERM, resulting in their substantial depreciation. The cooperative counterfactual is one in
which a larger number of ERM countries — say, all but the Netherlands — realigned by a small
amount against the deutschmark within the ERM, and Germany reduced interest rates.45 This
would have been incentive compatible for Germany, since the lower prices of goods imported
from other European countries would have reduced inflationary pressures.46 It would have
allowed Italy and the UK to remain in the ERM following their realignment, since lower German
interest rates would have strengthened their economies. And it would have been congenial to
other European countries, since it would protected the ERM against the destabilizing shock of
Britain and Italy’s ejection. Thus, this cooperative solution would have averted the crisis that
consigned Europe to another year of exchange market turbulence.
This bargain — a German interest rate reduction in return for a general realignment of
ERM currencies — had been mooted at the Bath Summit, as noted above. John Major reports
that Helmut Schleisinger acknowledged Germany’s willingness to cut interest rates in conjunction

45

The idea that everyone else should have realigned against the deutschmark is compelling
if one believes that German unification, requiring a higher price of German goods, was the
principal shock to the system.
46

For plausible parameter values, the disinflationary effects on Germany and the
corresponding German interest rate cut will be greater when there are a large number of small
devaluations than a large number of small devaluations.
29

with a general realignment of ERM currencies but that France refused to go along.47 The same
formula informed the negotiations between Germany and Italy over the weekend of September
11-12, when Italy agreed to realign within the ERM and German agreed to a modest reduction in
interest rates. But the Bath Summit yielded up no positive result, and the Bundesbank was
prepared to reduce interest rates by only the narrowest margin in the wake of the Italian move,
given that just one country, not seven, had devalued.48
That Europe, where monetary cooperation was more highly developed than anywhere else
in the world, was unable to respond to this crisis cooperatively is revealing of the obstacles to the
collective management of exchange rates under even the most favorable circumstances. Those
countries in the best position to reject the pressure to devalue — France for instance — had noneconomic reasons to resist going along. The French government had been pursuing a “franc fort”
policy intended to establish the franc as an equal partner with the deutschmark; to devalue would
have put paid to the notion that France was the co-leader of the EMS and an equal partner in
EMU — and would have done so at the worst possible time, only days prior to the French
referendum. And if France refused to devalue, so too would other countries, and the prospects
for coordinated realignment would disintegrate.
In addition, Ireland, Spain and Portugal (and even the UK as late as the Bath Summit) had
their own reasons to avoid devaluing. The currency peg was the repository of their anti-

47

Major (1999), p.323.

48

Major (1999), p.327 writes that the Italians encouraged other countries, including the
UK, to accompany it in devaluing but that again it was French resistance that prevented them
from going along.
30

inflationary credibility, and to abandon it would be a heavy blow to confidence.49 The essence of
this problem is the now-familiar inability of countries to develop an “exit strategy” from a peg
adopted as part of an exchange rate based stabilization (Eichengreen and Masson et al. 1998).
Moreover, if countries devalued once, what was to prevent the markets from thinking that
they would devalue again? And in the new control-free environment, what would prevent
currency traders from acting on this expectation? A general realignment, even if formulated
cooperatively, threatened to undermine confidence in the ERM. Inevitably, in this environment of
high capital mobility, the “adjustable peg” became an oxymoron.
Stephens reports that the Major Government had already locked itself into a nodevaluation strategy in June in response to a paper warning that devaluation within the ERM
would deal a terrible blow to confidence. “The conclusion drawn by the Treasury was that if
sterling was devalued — unilaterally or alongside other weak currencies like the lira and the
peseta — the government would lose this essential credibility. A depreciation of, say, 5 or even
10 per cent within the ERM would lead investors to doubt the government’s commitment to a
strong pound and, perversely, to anticipate a further depreciation.”50 The implication was that if
sterling’s level was to be adjusted, it would be better to abandon the Exchange Rate Mechanism
all together and allow the currency to float downward, rather than attempting and possibly failing
to hold a new parity within the ERM. This, of course, was the view that ultimately prevailed on
“Black Wednesday.” Countries with a choice, even as slim a choice as Britain and Spain, thus

49

As John Major told Terry Burns in late August, “We have invested a lot in the ERM...If
we devalue the first time pressure emerges, our anti-inflation policy will lose all credibility.”
Major (1999), p.319.
50

Stephens (1996), p.210.
31

refused to go along with proposals for a joint devaluation. And their strong-currency
counterparts had no way of forcing them.
In addition, even in Europe, where the institutions of monetary cooperation were
singularly well developed, there were practical obstacles to cooperation. It was finance ministers
and central bank presidents who assembled at the Bath Summit but the boards of central banks —
in some cases, independent central banks — that controlled interest rates. Federal Finance
Minister Theo Waigel and Bundesbank President Helmut Schlesinger, while present at Bath, did
not have the power to alter German interest rates; this was a decision that could only be taken by
the Bundesbank Council (the Board together with the Presidents of the Land Central Banks).
Under these circumstances, the pressure placed on Schlesinger by Norman Lamont, who chaired
the Bath meeting, was ineffective if not counterproductive.51
In addition, efforts to arrange a joint realignment over the weekend of September 11-12
were complicated by rules requiring the chairman of the Community’s monetary committee to
communicate Germany’s desire to the other members and to convene the relevant meeting. The
committee chairman was the director-general of the French Treasury, Jean-Claude Trichet.
Although Trichet was kept informed of German desires (German officials having briefed him just
prior to their meeting with the Italians), he did not arrange — nor does it appear that he suggested
51

As Dyson and Featherston (1999, p.683) put it, it broke the cardinal rule of international
negotiations, that “no one should be asked to deliver what they do not have the domestic power
to commit themselves to.” The British view (Major 1999, Chapter 14; Lamont 1999, Chapter 9)
is that in placing pressure on German officials Lamont was simply voicing the preferences and
concerns of other European governments. In his 1999-2000 article, the then Chancellor observes
that exchange rate policy, as distinct from monetary policy, was a matter for the federal
government, not the Bundesbank, although it is not clear that a change in German monetary
policy designed to sustain the exchange rate of a particular foreign currency is properly seen as
falling under this heading.
32

— a meeting of the committee.52 The suspicion is that the French feared that a meeting would
create pressure for the franc to be included in a general realignment, something the government,
the referendum looming, wished to avoid.
In sum, incentive institutional problems prevented ERM members from responding to
pressures in a coordinated fashion. If Europe could not finesse these difficulties, it is hard to
imagine that East Asia or Latin America could do better.

7. The EMS Crisis in Light of its Emerging Market Successors
A standard way of gauging what is distinctive about a crisis is to take early-warning
indicators constructed on the basis of previous crises and see whether they predict out of sample.
This is the approach used by Bussiere and Mulder (1999), for example, to see whether the models
estimated by Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996) for the Tequila predict the Asian crisis, and
whether the models estimated by Berg and Patillo (1998) and Tornell (1999) for the Tequila and
the Asian crisis accurately forecast the financial upheavals of 1998-9.53 In this section I undertake
the same exercise in reverse.
In what follows I utilize the preferred model of Bussiere and Mulder, which fits the data
for the Tequila and Asian crises and does a reasonably good job of forecasting which countries

52

Instead, it is said by Stephens (1996) and Frowen (1999-2000) that Trichet
communicated aspects of what he had learned from German officials to other European ministers
in bilateral telephone conversations, which substituted for rather than instigating a meeting of the
Monetary Committee.
53

One need not be a believer in early-warning indicators for these exercises to be useful;
for those for whom diversity rather than uniformity is the most impressive feature of the different
crises, the forecast errors are useful precisely for highlighting what is different about each event.
33

got into trouble in 1998-9. Since this model appears to be the best performer terms of ability to
summarize the macroeconomic and financial causes the financial crises of 1994-9, it is a logical
point of departure for analyzing what, if anything, was different about the European crises of
1992-3.
Bussiere and Mulder derive their index of crisis risk by regressing exchange market
pressure (a weighted average of exchange rate changes and reserve changes) on five indicators:
the current account as a percent of GDP, export growth, the percentage change in international
reserves, the deviation of the real exchange rate from trend, and short-term foreign debt relative
to reserves (all lagged one year).54 This spare list of variables does a surprisingly good job of
predicting which countries experienced exchange market pressure in 1998-9. But does it do as
well at predicting Europe’s crises in 1992? The first column of Table 4 shows the predicted levels
of exchange market pressure for European countries in 1992, using the coefficients estimated by
Bussiere and Mulder on data for Latin America and East Asia in 1994-7. Strikingly, Finland, the
UK and Sweden, three of the first countries whose currencies were attacked, are at the top of the
list. For Finland, the only country in the European sample to experience a Latin-American-style
terms-of-trade shock 1990-1, the predicted level of exchange market pressure is similar to that
forecast by same the model for Brazil and Argentina in 1998. The levels of pressure predicted for
the next countries on the list, the UK and Sweden, are considerably lower, roughly analogous to
that experienced by Mexico in 1998. These results suggest considerable similarity between the
1992 crisis in Europe and its emerging market successors.

54

Real appreciation is calculated as the deviation from trend over the course of the
preceding 48 months.
34

On the other hand, certain countries, notably Italy, rank surprisingly low on the list. The
explanation is Italy’s low level of short-term external debt, by emerging-market standards. The
difference of course is not that Italy, and European countries generally, issued less short-term debt
— to the contrary — but that the debt in question was domestic, not international.55 When both
domestic and international obligations are added into the debt ratio, the same model generates the
ranking in the second column of Table 4. Italy, whose debt problem was notorious, moves to the
head of the list. Less reassuringly, this version also predicts a high level of exchange market
pressure in France, a country that did not suffer a crisis in 1992.56
It can be argued that both the level of short-term debt and the percentage change in
reserves are better regarded as consequences than causes of crises. Seeing a crisis looming for
other reasons, market participants will begin drawing down a country’s reserves and shortening
the maturity of their credits, generating spurious forecasts that seem to validate subsequent
events. This is an argument for dropping short-term debt and reserve losses from the forecasting
model. The consequences of doing so are shown in the third column of Table 4.57 In some sense,
this version generates the most plausible predictions: Finland is again the country whose
fundamentals predict the most serious crisis, followed by Spain, Sweden, the UK and Italy, which
come very closely clustered together. The only troubling aspects of this ranking are that Italy,

55

Data from the BIS and World Bank put short-term international debt at 41 per cent of
reserves for our European countries in 1992 but at 96 per cent for Bussiere and Mulder’s
emerging markets in 1997.
56

Although it did in 1993.

57

Since the coefficient on reserves in the forecasting model is very small, dropping this
variable changes almost nothing; the change in ordering is heavily driven by the elimination of
effects related to the presence of short-term debt.
35

which was identified as a target by currency speculators well in advance of the UK, Sweden and
Spain, does not exhibit a higher predicted level of exchange market pressure, and that Ireland and
Portugal, two countries that also experienced serious problems in 1992, are not higher on the list.
This suggests the following implications. First, the three current account related variables
— export market growth, the evolution of the real exchange rate, and the current account deficit
— go a good way toward explaining which countries suffered crises in 1992. Current-accountcentered explanations for their crises cannot be dismissed, in other words. Second, however, to
understand why the crisis was particularly acute in certain countries — Italy in particular — one
must add a role for capital-account-centered problems, which could manifest themselves because
of a heavy load of short-term debt. Third, several countries which experienced speculative
pressure in 1992 — Portugal and to a lesser extent Ireland — should not obviously have done
given their fundamentals, or so this model suggests. Portuguese officials complained of guilt by
association with Spain — that investors were unable to tell the escudo and peso apart. Irish
officials made similar arguments with respect to the UK. There is some support here for their
laments.

8. The Aftermath of the Crisis
How deep was the crisis-induced recession, and how vigorous was the subsequent
recovery? As alternative metrics, I consider the crises in emerging markets and European
countries pursuing different post-crisis monetary policy operating strategies.
European versus Emerging Markets. Conventional wisdom has it that currency crises
are more disruptive in emerging markets, where financial markets are thin, debt is denominated in
36

foreign currency, and confidence is fragile. Table 5 shows that GDP growth falls by 3 percentage
points between the years preceding and following a crisis in the typical emerging market, but not
at all in the typical OECD country.58 For our six European countries in 1991-2, the comparable
figure is 1.6 percentage points. In this respect, our EMS cases look as much like emerging
markets as developed countries (they are almost exactly midway between the two).59
How do the subsequent recoveries compare? The cumulative percentage increase in
output between 1992 and 1995 was 3.3 per cent for our six European countries. [See Table 6.]
The comparable figure for Mexico is 10.5 per cent. Thus, while Mexico’s recession was deeper,
its recovery was faster.60 Mexico’s experience is not atypical of post-1970 emerging markets.
But the 1991-2 EMS cases are atypical of OECD countries, a point to which we return below.
Another perspective is provided by the evolution of demand. Real domestic demand rose
less rapidly than real GDP in all six European countries but also in Mexico, while real external
demand (real exports minus real imports) rose more quickly in each case. [See Table 7.] Just as

58

Calvo and Reinhart (2000), using a different sample, estimate that growth typically falls
by 2.0 percentage points between the year preceding a currency crisis and the year following in
emerging markets, but by only 0.2 points in developed countries.
59

This may not feel right to readers impressed by the Asian crisis, in which the initial
output losses were immense (depending on how it is dated, the swing in growth can be as large as
14 per cent -- from plus 7 preceding the crisis to negative 7 following). The comparison with the
Table 5 averages underscores how unusual this experience was. The comparisons in Table 5 are
for 1991-93 for all countries except Finland, where we compare 1990 with 1992. Note that the
apparent mildness of the Mexican crisis reflects its v-shape and the difficulty of dating it. Table 5
takes 1995 as the year of that crisis, although strictly speaking it broke out in December of 1994.
If we take 1994 as year t, then the drop in the growth rate is a dramatic ten percentage points.
60

Of course, Mexico, being an emerging market, should be expected to display a faster rate
of growth, other things equal, until its levels of income and productivity converge to those of
other OECD members.
37

in Mexico two years later, in other words, external demand provided much of the stimulus for
recovery. In terms of the shift in the current account (as a share of GDP) between the pre- and
post-crisis periods, the six Europeans again lie in between the OECD countries and emerging
markets. [See Table 8.]
To be sure, the factors underlying this pattern were not the same. In Mexico, the
weakness of domestic demand was attributable to private consumption and investment, reflecting
the financial fragility of firms and the incapacity of the troubled banking sector. In Italy, Portugal,
Sweden and the UK, domestic demand was limited by the slow growth of government
consumption as countries sought to eliminate budget deficits and meet the Maastricht
convergence criteria for monetary union. [Again, see Table 7.] As Gordon (1999) emphasizes,
this contractionary fiscal impulse is part of the explanation for why growth in the European crisis
countries was relatively sluggish in the immediate post-crisis years, as shown in Table 6 above.
Every crisis is different, as emphasized at the beginning of Section 1. What is striking
about Europe’s in from this perspective is that the macroeconomic consequences resemble those
in the typical emerging market as much as they do other developed-country cases. One can
imagine several explanations. First, the EMS crises were the first postwar industrial-country
events of their kind to take place in an environment of fully free capital mobility, increasing the
scope for reserve losses and financial dislocations. Second, Europe’s crises were clustered in time
to a greater extent than was typical of the industrial countries prior to 1992. This too is plausibly
a function of the integration of capital markets insofar as contagion is greater in a world of high
capital mobility. This meant that no one country could export its way out of its difficulties by
selling products into other EU member states that also succumbed the crisis, magnifying the
38

output effects. And, third, banking and financial systems were hit to an extent unusual for
developed-country crises. Banking systems were already in a delicate state when the crisis struck.
Again, this is plausibly a function, in part, of financial deregulation and capital account
liberalization in the preceding period, a combination which allowed European banks to fund
themselves externally and lever up their bets.
Peggers versus Targeters. Our six European countries pursued several different postcrisis monetary strategies. Portugal and Spain remained in the Exchange Rate Mechanism at
substantially lower parities. Finland and Italy floated before eventually reentering the ERM in
October and November of 1996. (Finland didn’t “reenter,” to be precise, but substituted ERM
membership for its earlier Ecu peg.61) Sweden and the UK continued to float.
Viewed analytically, these alternatives were really only two: floating and hard currency
pegs. The middle ground of shadowing the deutschmark in the manner of pre-1992 Sweden and
Finland was no longer attractive or, it would appear, viable.62 By the time Italy and Finland
(re)joined the ERM, the participating countries had affirmed their intention of completing the
transition to monetary union in short order -- precisely because the crisis had shown that even
collective pegs could be unstable. With EMU looming closer, Italy and Finland, for whom

61

Following its accession to the European Union.

62

To be sure, ERM members differed in the degree to which they utilized the exchange
rate flexibility permitted by their plus-or-minus 15 per cent bands. For example, whereas the
Netherlands continued to hold the guilder very stable against the DM, Ireland utilized all the
flexibility that the newly-widened bands permitted. Spain adopted an explicit monetary policy
operating strategy — inflation targeting — to stabilize expectations and the fluctuation of the
exchange rate within the newly widened bands. (I will have more to say about inflation targeting
below.) While such qualifications are important, they do not undermine the general point that
countries moved away from narrow bands and unilateral pegs in the wake of the 1992-3 crisis.
39

participation in the monetary union was of particular value, became still more committed to
defense of their currency pegs than before.63 And as public debt ratios and unemployment rates
began to decline, reflecting countries’ efforts to satisfy the convergence criteria (and the
fortuitous fact of Europe’s recovery from its 1992-3 recession), their capacity to defend their pegs
was enhanced. With the inauguration of monetary union on January 4th, 1999, this process of
hardening exchange rate pegs was complete. The first two years of the euro have not been
without their blemishes, but one thing monetary union has done is to banish from Europe the
problem of currency crises that bedeviled the continent in the early 1990s.
The UK and Sweden, meanwhile, have continued to float. Their relatively happy
experiences can be attributed to the speed with which they substituted an alternative monetary
policy operating strategy for the exchange rate target. Both embraced inflation targeting as a way
of anchoring expectations and communicating to the markets the intentions of the monetary
authorities. In Britain’s case, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced an inflation target of
one to four per cent three weeks after Black Wednesday.64 Three weeks after that the Chancellor
and the central bank worked out the details of their new monetary policy operating strategy. The
Bank of England began publishing a quarterly Inflation Report containing its inflation forecast,
the new yardstick of the policy. While the Chancellor still controlled the instruments of monetary
policy (the Bank of England not being independent), he committed to doing so in a manner

63

These two cases were very different. While Italy attached exceptional value to being
accepted for EMU due to its incomplete monetary credibility and correspondingly high interest
rates, for Finland EMU was attractive because of its proximity to Russia and consequent desire to
build a firmer bridge to the European Union.
64

A lengthier description of the UK’s adoption of inflation targeting is Mishkin and Posen

(1997).
40

consistent with the new inflation-targeting regime and the Bank’s forecasts. The Bank, for its
part, took it upon itself to evaluate the conduct of monetary policy, not just in meetings with
Treasury officials but publicly.
Thus, barely six weeks after the crisis, the UK had in place the rudiments of an inflationtargeting regime.65 The authorities selected the retail price index net of mortgage payments as
the measure of inflation, and the Office of National Statistics was made responsible for calculating
the series. After early experience made clear that the authorities were capable of controlling the
inflation rate quite closely, the target range was replaced by a single target of 2.5 per cent but
with thresholds on either side. The practice of monthly meetings between the Chancellor of the
Exchequer and the Governor of the Bank of England was formalized. Beginning in 1994, the
minutes of these monthly meetings were released two weeks after the next meeting.66 The final
step was the Labour Government’s decision in 1997 to grant operational independence to the
Bank of England and the creation of a Monetary Policy Committee responsible for policy
decisions. In the event the target was missed, the Bank was required to explain why, what policy
actions would be taken to correct the discrepancy, and when inflation was expected to return to
target.

65

Departing from some models of inflation targeting, the authorities did not specify an
explicit model of how monetary policy affects the economy. A more important departure from
the standard model was that the Bank of England was not independent. The Chancellor
effectively made interest-rate decisions, although in the context of institutionalized consultation
with the Bank. As Mishkin and Posen put it, the Bank became the Chancellor’s “institutional
counterinflationary conscience.”
66

The Chancellor did not have to provide detailed explanations, however, for his reasons
for going against the Bank’s recommendations, either through these minutes or independent
channels, which was a limitation of the pre-1997 British system.
41

Sweden’s adoption of inflation targeting was almost as quick, coming just two months
after the floating of the krona.67 The new regime was announced following consultations between
Riksbank staff and outside experts. However, the requirement for the Riksbank to orient policy
toward its new target was deferred to the beginning of 1995, reflecting the desire to avoid an
overly stringent monetary policy while the effects of the krona’s depreciation fed through to
domestic prices and unemployment remained high. The hope was that even a deferred
commitment would stabilize expectations, despite the fact that no guidelines were articulated for
the conduct of monetary policy in the interim.
The government retained legal control of the Riksbank, making its Governing Board
effectively an extension of the parliament, although the Board set both the inflation target and
monetary policy instruments in practice, avoiding the problems of divided accountability that
characterized British inflation targeting. The central bank targets a two per cent interval for
inflation centered on 2 per cent. It publishes an Inflation Report quarterly, in which it relates its
policies to the inflation target.68 It targets headline rather than core inflation, this being the
measure relevant to unions and employers associations. The tolerance interval around the
inflation target of 2 per cent is narrower than the British at plus or minus one per cent. Bernanke
et al. (1999) interpret this in terms of greater concern for the credibility of the inflation target,
reflecting the delay in implementation and persistent political battles over the conduct of monetary

67

Good sources on its experience are Svensson (1995) and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin
and Posen (1999).
68

Initially, the report was published three times annually. At first, it did not publish its own
inflation forecast, although in late 1997 it began doing so in graphical form.
42

policy.69
It can be argued that the UK and Sweden were in a relatively favorable position to adopt
inflation targeting. In both cases, adoption of the new policy followed a period successful
disinflation, which made it relatively easy to hit the new target. Because unemployment was
rising in both countries, wage pressure was subdued. Both countries had long-established central
banks with accurate models of inflation, and the advanced development of their financial markets
implied stable links between the instruments of monetary policy and the level of prices. Neither
had debts or deficits on a scale that threatened to undermine the credibility of monetary policy.
Thus, what was possible for the UK and Sweden may be more difficult to achieve in other
countries.
Moreover, neither the UK nor Sweden provides a totally clean experiment with inflation
targeting. The fact that the two countries were still in recession when the new regime was
adopted complicates interpretation of their experiences. Their central banks were not
independent. In Britain, the Exchequer set the instruments of monetary policy until May 1997 (as
noted above), while the Bank of England provided the inflation forecasts and used public
statements to apply anti-inflationary discipline to the Chancellor. In Sweden, the independence of
the central bank similarly remained limited for most of the 1990s. Four of the seven members of
Governing Board of the Riksbank, who were responsible for operational matters in monetary

69

The opposition Social Democrats have consistently advocated more aggressive monetary
expansion than the governing Liberal-Conservative coalition. Thus, when the Social Democrats
formed a minority government following the September 1994 election, they appointed a new
central bank board predisposed toward their agenda, something which did not enhance the
credibility of Swedish inflation targeting.
43

policy, were appointed by the governing party or parties, the other three by the opposition.70 The
Governor was chosen by the Board for a five-year term.71 Finally, at the beginning of 1999 a new
Riksbank Act (adopted in November 1998) mandated three important changes in these
procedures. First, policy instruments were no longer formally determined by the Governing
Board appointed by the Parliament. The Governing Board instead appointed six members of an
Executive Board (one of whom is chairman and Governor of the Riksbank) with wide
responsibility for policy.72 Second, the goal of price stability was written into the Riksbank Act
(although the law also stated that the central bank shall “promote a safe and efficient payments
system”). And third, the requirement of a written report on monetary policy to the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Finance, at least twice a year, was written into the law.73
For what it is worth, the comparison with Finland and Italy (where, helpfully for the
analysis, recession and unemployment were of roughly comparable magnitude) is shown in Figure
3 (for interest rates) and Figure 4 (for inflation). Interest rates did not decline immediately, as has
been noted by previous researchers (by e.g. Laubach and Posen 1997). There is, however, some
evidence in Figure 3 that interest rates fell more quickly in the two inflation targeters.
What about the speed of recovery? The cumulative percentage increase in real GDP
between 1992 and 1995 was 8.4 per cent for the two inflation targeters (Sweden and the UK), 8.0

70

They serve for the duration of the Parliament (of which most appointees are in practice
members).
71

Although the Board could dismiss him at any time.

72

The six members have staggered contracts, with one new appointment being made per

73

See Berg (2000).

year

44

for the two ERM “re-entrants” (Italy and Finland), and 6.0 per cent for the two exchange rate
targeters (Spain and Portugal) when we take simple arithmetic averages. While this conclusion
will hearten the proponents of inflation targeting, it is important to bear in mind the small sample
from which it is derived.
In sum, the evidence from Europe does not obviously favor inflation targeting over a hard
currency peg. It suggests that both are viable monetary strategies. In addition, it is consistent
with the notion that intermediate arrangements — soft pegs and managed floats not backed by a
credible, transparent alternative monetary policy operating strategy — are not viable in a world of
high capital mobility. As a result of its crisis, Europe moved from a hybrid exchange-rate-cummonetary regime to hard pegs (leading ultimately to monetary unification) and relatively free
floating backed by inflation targeting. Its experience supports the presumption that this is the
direction in which other regions, like Latin America, are also heading.

8. Conclusion
It was Michele Camdessus who dubbed the Mexican crisis “the first financial crisis of the
21st century.”74 If by this is meant a crisis occurring in an environment of financial deregulation
and capital account liberalization, in which both capital movements and domestic financial fragility
are implicated, then the EMS crisis can claim precedence. The 1992 crisis was different from the
typical industrial-country crisis that preceded it. It was more virulent. It was more contagious. It
was more disruptive to output. Both capital flows and financial fragility played more prominent
roles. In these senses it was a harbinger of the Tequila and the Asian flu.
But however impressive the 1992 crisis by the standards of industrial countries, the
74

Camdessus (1995).
45

associated output losses and financial distress were more limited than in Mexico in 1995 or Korea
in 1998. There may be parallels between the EMS crisis and its emerging-market successors, in
other words, but these should not be pushed too far.
Two lessons follow. First, with financial deregulation and capital account liberalization,
the crisis problem has grown more severe. Crises can erupt less predictably, and their effects can
be more virulent. Second, to defend themselves, emerging economies need to develop the liquid
capital markets, reputations for following sound and stable policies, and capacity to regulate their
financial markets and institutions that distinguish their developed-country counterparts. Progress
in financial deepening and development will enable them to rationalize their exchange rate systems
-- to float independently of their larger neighbors, or to peg their currencies once and for all -thereby further reducing crisis incidence. At that point they will be able to confidently assert that
the benefits of financial liberalization exceed the costs.

46

References
Bank for International Settlements (1993), 63rd Annual Report, Basle: BIS.
Bayoumi, Tamim and Barry Eichengreen (1994), “Macroeconomic Adjustment Under Bretton
Woods and the Post-Bretton Woods Float: An Impulse-Response Analysis,” Economic Journal
104, pp.813-827.
Begg, David et al. (1990), Monitoring European Integration: The Impact of Eastern Europe,
London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Berg, Andrew and Catherine Patillo (1998), “Are Currency Crises Predictable? A Test,” IMF
Working Paper WP/98/154.
Berg, Claes (2000), “Inflation Forecast Targeting : The Swedish Experience,” Sveriges Riksbank
Working Paper no. 100 (February).
Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin and Adam Posen (1999), Inflation Targeting:
Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Borensztein, Eduardo, Andy Berg, Gian-Maria Milesi-Feretti and Catherine Patillo (1998),
“Anticipating Balance of Payments Crises: The Role of Early Warning Systems,” IMF Occasional
Paper (forthcoming).
Branson, William (1994), “German Unification, the Breakdown of the EMS, and the Transition to
Stage III,” in David Cobham (ed.), European Monetary Upheavals, Manchester: Manchester
University Press, pp.16-31.
Buiter, Willem, Giancarlo Corsetti and Paolo Pesenti (1998), Financial Markets and European
Monetary Cooperation: The Lessons of the 1992-93 Exchange Rate Mechanism Crisis,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bussiere, Matthieu and Christian Mulder (1999), “External Vulnerability in Emerging Market
Economies: How High Liquidity Can Offset Weak Fundamentals and the Effects of Contagion,”
IMF Working Paper WP/99/98.
Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart (2000), “Fixing for Your Life,” Brookings Trade Policy
Forum 2000 (forthcoming).
Camdessus, Michele (1995), “Drawing Lessons from the Mexican Crisis: Preventing and
Resolving Financial Crises — The Role of the IMF,” Address at the 25th Washington Conference
of the Council of the Americas, Washington, D.C., 22 May.
Campa, Jose and Kevin P.H. Chang (1996), “Arbitrage-Based Tests of Target Zone Credibility:
Evidence from ERM Cross-Rate Options,” American Economic Review 86, pp.726-740.
47

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1997), “Monetary Policy Ruyles in Practice: Some
International Evidence,” NBER Working Paper no. 6254 (November).
Clarida, Richard and Mark Gertler (1997), “How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary Policy,” in
Christina Romer and David Romer (eds), Reducing Inflation, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 363-412.
Connolly, Bernard (1995), The Rotten Heart of Europe: The Dirty War for Europe’s Money,
London: Faber and Faber.
Dyson, Kenneth and Kevin Featherstone (1999), The Road to Maastricht, Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Eichengreen, Barry and Olivier Jeanne (2000), “Currency Crisis and Unemployment: Sterling in
1931,” in Paul Krugman (ed.), Currency Crises, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Eichengreen, Barry and Paul Masson et al. (1998), “Exit Strategies: Policy Options for Countries
Seeking Greater Exchange Rate Flexibility,” IMF Occasional Paper 168 (June).
Eichengreen, Barry and Charles Wyplosz (1993), “The Unstable EMS,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1, pp.51-144.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz (1995), “Exchange Market Mayhem: The
Antecedents and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks,” Economic Policy 21, pp.249-312.
Flood, Robert and Peter Garber (1984), “Gold Monetization and Gold Discipline,” Journal of
Political Economy 92, pp.90-107.
Frankel, Jeffrey (1986), “The Implications of Mean-Variance Optimization for Four Questions in
International Macroeconomics,” Journal of International Money and Finance 5, pp.S53-75.
Frowen, Stephen (1999-2000), “Unjustified British Critique of the Bundesbank,” Central Banking
X, pp.40-45.
Giavazzi, Francesco and Alberto Giovannini (1989), Limiting Exchange Rate Flexibility: The
European Monetary System, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gordon, Robert (1999), “The Aftermath of the 1992 ERM Breakup: Was There a
Macroeconomic Free Lunch?” NBER Working Paper no. 6964 (February).
International Monetary Fund (1992), World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C.: IMF
(October).
International Monetary Fund (1993), International Capital Markets, Part I. Exchange Rate
Management and International Capital Flows, Washington, D.C.: IMF.
48

Jeanne, Olivier (1997), “Are Currency Crises Self-Fulfilling? A Test,” Journal of International
Economics 42, pp.263-286.
Krugman, Paul (1979), “A Model of Balance of Payments Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 11, pp.311-325.
Lamont, Norman (1999), In Office, London: Little, Brown & Co.
Lamont, Norman (1999-2000), “Black Wednesday — the Controversy Continues,” Central
Banking X, pp.65-69.
Laubach, Thomas and Adam Posen (1997), “Some Comparative Evidence on the Effectiveness of
Inflation Targeting,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research Paper no. 9714 (May).
Major, John (1999), John Major, the Autobiography, London: Harper Collins.
Meuhring, Keith (1992), “Currency Chaos: The Inside Story,” Institutional investor (October),
pp.11-15.
Mishkin, Federic and Adam Posen (1997), “Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries,”
NBER Working Paper no. 6126 (August).
Obstfeld, Maurice (1986), “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance of Payments Crises,” American
Economic Review 76, pp.72-81.
OECD (1997), OECD Economic Surveys: Sweden 1996-1997, Paris: OECD.
Ozkan, F. Gulcin and Alan Sutherland (1994), “A Model of the ERM Crisis,” CEPR Discussion
paper no. 879 (January).
Rose, Andrew and Lars Svensson (1994), “European Exchange Rate Credibility Before the Fall,”
European Economic Review 38, pp.1185-1216.
Sachs, Jeffrey, Aaron Tornell and Andrews Velasco (1996), “Financial Crises in Emerging
Markets: The Lessons from 1995,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.147-215.
Stephens, Philip (1996), Politics and the Pound: The Conservatives’ Struggle with Sterling,
London: Macmillan.
Svensson, Lars (1995), “The Swedish Experience of an Inflation Target,” NBER Working Paper
no.4985 (January).
Tornell, Aaron (1998), “Common Fundamentals in the Tequila and Asian Crises,” unpublished
manuscript, Harvard University.

49

Willman, Alpo (1988), “The Collapse of the Fixed Exchange Rate Regime with Sticky Wages and
Imperfect Substitutability Between Domestic and Foreign Bonds,” European Economic Review,
pp.1817-1839.

50

Table 1. Performance of ERM Members Relative to the Deficit and Debt Criteria
DEFICIT/GDP (%)

DEBT/GDP (%)

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Austria

2.4

2.0

4.1

4.4

5.5

56.6

56.1

63.0

65.2

68.0

Belgium

6.5

6.6

6.6

5.3

4.3

132.6

134.4

141.3

140.1

138.3

Denmark

2.1

2.9

4.5

3.9

2.1

60.9

63.1

66.8

68.7

68.8

Germany

3.3

2.9

3.3

2.5

2.3

42.7

47.3

51.8

54.6

62.5

Finland

1.5

5.8

7.9

5.5

5.0

23.2

42.7

56.2

62.7

69.1

France

2.2

4.0

6.1

6.0

5.0

41.1

45.6

52.9

56.8

59.5

Greece

11.5

12.3

13.2

12.5

11.4

81.7

88.6

117.1

119.8

120.2

Ireland

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.2

2.5

95.3

90.7

92.7

87.9

83.3

Italy

10.2

9.5

9.6

9.0

7.8

103.9

111.4

120.2

122.6

122.1

Luxembourg

1.0

2.5

2.1

2.3

1.4

6.0

7.0

7.0

7.0

8.0

Netherlands

2.8

3.8

3.2

3.0

3.3

76.4

77.1

78.5

79.0

79.4

Portugal

6.5

3.3

7.1

5.7

5.4

62.2

63.2

67.8

70.4

70.8

Spain

4.9

4.2

7.5

6.6

6.2

49.9

53.0

59.4

63.5

66.5

Sweden

1.1

7.5

13.4

10.4

9.2

53.7

69.8

74.6

79.4

84.5

6.5

4.2

35.5

41.4

47.4

51.6

53.4

United
2.6
6.1
7.9
Kingdom
Source: Buiter, Corsetti and Pesenti (1998).

51

Table 2. Indicators of Cumulative Competitiveness Changes(a)
(in per cent)
Relative to other EC countries(b)
Country

Producer
Prices

Unit Labour
Costs(c)

Relative to industrial countries
Producer
Prices

Unit Labour
Costs(c)

Relative to other EC countries(b)
Producer
Prices

Unit Labour
Costs(c)

Relative to industrial countries
Producer
Prices

Unit Labour
Costs(c)

1987-December 1992(e)

1987 - August 1992
Belgium

4.0

5.6

1.3

2.7

0.9

1.9

-0.3

0.3

Denmark

3.6

6.4

-0.5

3.8

-1.9

4.1

-4.9

1.9

Germany
(western)

1.7

0.5

-3.8

-5.5

-4.3

-6.6

-5.5

-8.6

Greece

n.a.

n.a.

-10.2

-15.6

n.a.

n.a.

-10.8

-13.4

France

7.9

13.3

3.3

7.2

3.1

8.1

1.7

5.1

Ireland

6.4

35.7

1.3

27.9

-0.6

26.6

-1.9

23.6

Italy

-3.0

-7.0

-6.4

-9.8

11.1

5.7

8.2

4.6

Netherlands

1.5

5.2

-1.4

1.9

-2.6

2.1

-3.9

0.1

From ERM entry(d) - August 1992

From ERM entry(d) - December 1992(e)

Spain

-2.1

-7.5

-8.1

-13.8

4.2

-2.2

0.5

-6.2

Portugal

n.a.

-4.6

n.a.

-6.9

n.a.

-9.5

n.a.

-9.5

United
Kingdom

-1.7

-0.4

-4.0

-1.7

8.3

13.2

8.7

13.2

Source: BIS, except for the Spanish and Italian data, which were provided by the respective central banks.
(a) Negative numbers indicate losses. (b) Excluding Greece. (c) Manufacturing sector. (d) Spain: June 1989; Portugal: April 1992; United Kingdom: October 1999. (e)
Estimates.

52

Table 3. Unemployment Rates(a)
Percentage of Civilian Labor Force
Country

1987-89
average

1990

1991

1992(b)

Belgium

10.0

7.6

7.5

8.2

Denmark

6.6

8.1

8.9

9.5

Germany (western)(c)

6.1

4.8

4.2

4.5

Greece

7.5

7.0

7.7

7.7

Spain

19.1

16.3

16.3

18.4

France

9.9

9.0

9.5

10.0

Ireland

17.0

14.5

16.2

17.8

Italy

10.9

10.0

10.0

10.1

Luxembourg

2.1

1.7

1.6

1.9

Netherlands

9.2

7.5

7.0

6.7

Portugal

5.9

4.6

4.1

4.8

United Kingdom

8.7

7.0

9.1

10.8

Average

9.7

8.3

8.7

9.5

Dispersion(d)

2.7

2.6

3.3

3.7

Average

8.1

7.2

7.1

7.4

Dispersion(d)

2.2

2.2

2.8

2.9

United States(e)

5.7

5.5

6.7

7.3

Japan(e)

2.5

2.1

2.1

2.2

EEC:

ERM Original Narrow Band:

Source: Eurostat.
(a) Standardised definition. (b) Estimates. (c) For 1992, unemployment rates (national definition) 14.3% for eastern Germany
and 7.7% for the whole of Germany. (d) Weighted standard deviation. (e) Percentage of total labour force.

53

Table 4. Predicted Levels of Exchange Market Pressure,
European Countries, 1992
Five Variable Index

Five Variable Index, Total Debt

Three Variable Index

29.12 Finland

Italy

Finland

9.34 United Kingdom

France

Spain

6.21 Sweden

Finland

Sweden

0.29 Denmark

United Kingdom

United Kingdom

-1.01 Netherlands

Belgium

Italy

-5.39 Austria

Sweden

Austria

-5.61 Ireland

Spain

Germany

-6.03 France

Denmark

France

-9.15 Spain

Germany

Ireland

-10.49 Italy

Ireland

Netherlands

-13.90 Norway

Netherlands

Norway

-14.87 Germany

Austria

Denmark

-17.87 Belgium

Norway

Belgium

-21.36 Portugal

Portugal

Portugal

Source: see text.

54

Table 5. GDP Growth Before and After Currency Crises, 1970-98
Country Group

T-1

T (Crisis
Year)

T+1

Change
from T-1 to
T+1

LDC Crises except Mexico 1995 Crisis
3.95
2.06
0.61
-3.34
Mexico 1995 Crisis
4.41
-6.17
5.15
0.74
OECD Crises except EMS 1991-2
3.16
2.91
3.16
0.00
Crises
EMS 1991-2 Crises
0.44
-0.88
-1.19
-1.63
Source: World Bank, author’s calculations.
Note: Values are country-group averages (except for Mexico 1995, which shows actual value). First row includes
45 emerging market crises (excluding Mexico 1995). Third row includes 22 industrial-country crises (other than
the 1991-2 EMS crises). Fourth row includes the following crises: Finland 1991, Italy 1992, Portugal 1992, Spain
1992, Sweden 1992, and UK 1992.

55

Table 6. Cumulative Percentage Increase in GDP over 3 Years Following Currency Crises,
1970-98
Country Group

T
(Crisis Year)

T+1

T+2

T+3

Sum from
T to T+3

LDC Crises except Mexico 1995 Crisis
2.06
0.61
3.14
4.38
10.19
Mexico 1995 Crisis
-6.17
5.15
6.76
4.80
10.54
OECD Crises except EMS 1991-2
2.91
3.16
3.44
2.08
11.59
Crises
EMS 1991-2 Crises
-0.88
-1.19
2.19
3.29
3.41
Source: World Bank, author’s calculations.
Note: Values are country-group averages (except for Mexico 1995, which shows actual values). First row
includes 38 emerging market crises (other than Mexico 1995). Third row includes 22 industrial-country crises
(other than the 1991-2 EMS crises). Fourth row includes the following crises: Finland 1991, Italy 1992, Portugal
1992, Spain 1992, Sweden 1992, and UK 1992.

56

Table 7. Growth of Real Domestic Demand and its Components Following Crises
(percentage changes)
Year
Immediately
Following
Crisis

t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

Total Domestic Demand
Italy

-5.5

1.9

1.7

2.9

3.7

UK

2.1

3.3

1.9

2.5

2.8

Finland

-6.4

-6.4

2.9

5.8

5.0

Sweden

-5.6

1.4

1.7

1.7

1.5

Portugal

-0.9

1.2

3.2

3.4

3.6

Spain

-4.2

1.1

3.2

2.4

3.0

-13.9

6.5

8.3

6.4

5.9

Italy

4.6

0.3

1.5

-0.1

-0.5

UK

0.1

0.4

0.7

-0.1

-0.1

Finland

2.1

4.3

0.8

-0.5

-0.7

Sweden

2.9

0.9

1.9

0.9

0.6

Portugal

-0.1

-0.5

-1.3

-1.0

-1.5

Spain

3.3

1.0

-0.4

-0.2

-0.5

Mexico

8.5

-1.2

-1.4

-0.9

-0.9

Italy

-2.5

1.6

1.2

2.2

2.5

UK

2.6

3.0

2.0

2.3

2.6

Finland

-4.9

-3.9

2.0

5.1

4.8

Sweden

-3.7

0.5

0.5

0.9

1.7

Portugal

0.4

0.2

1.2

1.9

2.4

Spain

-2.2

0.8

1.8

2.3

3.0

Mexico

-9.5

2.3

5.0

4.4

4.3

Mexico
Net External Demand

Private Consumption

57

Capital Formation
Italy

-13.1

-0.1

5.6

7.5

7.2

0.6

3.7

2.2

4.8

4.7

Finland

-16.9

-18.6

2.8

14.7

13.9

Sweden

-17.6

-0.4

12.4

9.0

4.5

Portugal

-4.8

3.5

7.5

8.0

7.5

Spain

-10.6

1.4

8.4

6.1

5.3

Mexico

-29.0

17.7

19.2

15.4

13.3

Italy

0.7

0.0

-0.4

0.3

0.3

UK

0.3

2.0

0.7

1.4

1.4

Finland

-2.2

-5.3

-0.4

-1.0

-1.5

Sweden

-0.6

-1.0

-1.1

-0.7

-1.1

Portugal

0.6

1.4

2.0

1.5

1.3

Spain

2.3

-0.3

0.9

-0.9

0.0

Mexico
-1.3
3.7
Source: OECD Economic Outlook (various issues).

4.2

3.2

3.1

UK

Government Consumption

58

Table 8. Current Account Adjustment Before and After Currency Crises, 1970-98
Country Group

T-1

T (Crisis
Year)

T+1

Change
from T-1 to
T+1

LDC Crises except Mexico 1995 Crisis
-5.26
-3.90
-1.17
4.09
Mexico 1995 Crisis
-7.05
-0.55
-0.70
6.35
OECD Crises except EMS 1991-2 Crisis
-1.33
-1.66
-1.70
-0.37
EMS 1991-2 Crises
-2.56
-2.87
-1.48
1.08
Source: World Bank, author’s calculations.
Note: Values are country-group averages (except for Mexico 1995, which shows actual value). First row includes
36 emerging market crises (other than Mexico 1995). Third row includes 17 industrial-country crises (other than
the 1991-2 EMS crises). Fourth row includes the following crises: Finland 1991, Italy 1992, Portugal 1992, Spain
1992, Sweden 1992, and UK 1992.

59

Source: Datastream.

60

Jan-93

Oct-92

Jul-92

Apr-92

Jan-92

Oct-91

Jul-91

Apr-91

Jan-91

Oct-90

Jul-90

Apr-90

Jan-90

Exchange Rate
Figure 1. Deutschmark-Dollar Exchange
Rate

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1

Figure 2.
Volatility of the Deutschmark-Sterling
Exchange Rate

05/31/1993

03/31/1993

01/31/1993

11/30/1992

09/30/1992

07/31/1992

05/31/1992

03/31/1992

01/31/1992

11/30/1991

09/30/1991

05/31/1993

03/31/1993

01/31/1993

11/30/1992

09/30/1992

07/31/1992

05/31/1992

03/31/1992

01/31/1992

11/30/1991

09/30/1991

07/31/1991

Volatility of the Deutschmark-Lira
Exchange Rate

05/31/1991

30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
-60
-70
-80

07/31/1991

05/31/1991

0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06

Note: The first vertical line denotes the Danish referendum in June 1992, the second Black Wednesday in September.
Source: Datastream.

61

Figure 3. Interest Rates in Re-Entry and
Inflation Targeting Countries

Re-entry countries
Source: IFS.

62

Inflation-targeters

1999Q4

1999Q1

1998Q2

1997Q3

1996Q4

1996Q1

1995Q2

1994Q3

1993Q4

1993Q1

1992Q2

1991Q3

1990Q4

1990Q1

18.00
16.00
14.00
12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
0.00

Figure 4. Inflation Rate

Re-entry countries
Source: IFS.

63

Inflation-targeters

1999Q4

1999Q1

1998Q2

1997Q3

1996Q4

1996Q1

1995Q2

1994Q3

1993Q4

1993Q1

1992Q2

1991Q3

1990Q4

1990Q1

0.04
0.035
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
-0.005
-0.01

