                                      ! "   




                                   


                                           


                                         #$%&
                                 '(()**+++,-,*.*+#$%&



                                     / /                  /
                                     0$1$..2'.((. 3
                                       /-45 $60%#
                                          2-6$$$




('/'./(7(5.('758.(-54 (.-47'72(.
44.2...,'3+.9..4('.('.7('('4(2..:('.
7(' ( 722 .2',

                      
 !                     
'(((7994(.

     ,#$%&
2-6$$$
8  ,60


                                               $%675$&7

           '.:.('((((7(994(.,(43.((9
4+'434.43((:7.4;2(-(<4.2'.2'(-
3,'2(-(4'..-24772(434.('2:,'
3(..(9..4('2(-(4..(9+7,
'3(:.7242(:('2(-(4(7(93,((94
.-.4:(..4('2(-(49..4(.72:.(-
(.4('4.(-(3(.(.7('3(,'(.-.4:('2(-(
4.2.('.7('2.(2(:72(-(.5('.7('2+4=(772(
7 -2 2(-(.  3( 2(-(.5 4 (' . 7 (' -2 4 772( 7 ('
2(-(4, 2.(..'+('(('(.-.4:2(-(..7:
..(3(('.7('.(.-(('(5.(2..5(.'4-+('('.(9
(,



((722.
343.(:
 ((
/-45 $60%#
4  
.>7.,'34,4
1 Introduction
The U.S. government encourages a number of economic activities or consumption patterns
through tax incentives. Individuals are allowed to deduct expenses such as charitable con-
tributions or mortgage interest payments from their taxable income. In 1995, itemized
deductions reported on excess of the standard deduction represented around 12% of tax-
able income and cost the federal government over $80 billion in tax revenues (which is
around 15% of total individual federal income taxes collected in that year). Charitable
giving represent about 15% of itemized deductions, and mortgage interest payments about
35%. Unsurprisingly, the use of these tax expenditures has been the subject of substantial
controversy and the focus of debate among tax policy analysts.
   Supporters of tax expenditures point out that it is eÆcient to encourage certain kinds
of economic behaviors instead of using direct expenditures to achieve similar objectives.
They argue that tax expenditures such as charitable giving or home ownership have posi-
tive external e ects and are very responsive to tax incentives. Therefore, the government
should promote these types of activities by providing a tax break. A common argument1
is that if the elasticity of charitable contributions with respect to its tax price if higher
than one, allowing the deduction of these expenditures from taxable income generates
more contributions than what is lost in tax revenue because of the subsidy. This narrow
\eÆciency" concept is often mentioned to argue in favor of the use of tax expenditures
by empirical studies that nd large elasticities (see e.g. Feldstein and Clotfelter (1976)).
   Opponents emphasize that the external e ect of such tax expenditures is too small
to justify a complete tax exemption. Moreover, as tax expenditures are likely to be
much more responsive to taxation than labor supply, they point out that allowing tax
expenditures may both reduce the size of the tax base and increase signi cantly the
elasticity of taxable income, thus increasing signi cantly the total deadweight burden
from the income tax.2 Finally, tax expenditures are often criticized on redistributive
  1 This   argument was rst made by Vickrey (1962). See Feldstein (1980) for a detailed exposition.
  2 Hall   and Rabushka (1985) who advocate a switch to a low rate at tax with no tax expenditures


                                                  2
grounds. For example, high incomes both contribute to and bene t disproportionately
from some forms of charitable contribution such as gifts to the arts or higher education.
    The economic literature has devoted considerable attention to the empirical analysis
of the behavioral responses to tax incentives. Many studies have analyzed the e ect
of tax subsidies on home ownership3 and charitable giving.4 The distribution e ect of
these tax expenditures, though less systematically investigated, has also attracted some
attention.5 However, in order to illuminate the policy debate on the desirability of tax
expenditures, it is necessary to develop theoretical models that incorporate formally the
pro and cons elements that are brought into the debate. Such models should allow to
determine quantitatively how the di erent considerations intervene and should provide
optimal tax or subsidy formulas expressed in terms of magnitudes empirically estimable.
No study has provided precise policy recommendations using estimates from the empirical
literature and very few studies have investigated the normative side of the tax treatment
of charitable contributions or other potential tax expenditures. Three exceptions to the
lack of normative analysis are Atkinson (1976), Feldstein (1980), and Roberts (1987).
    Atkinson (1976) develops an altruistic model where high income individuals care about
the needy. Using a simple log functional form speci cation for the utility function, he
obtains fairly simple optimal tax credit formulas. Feldstein (1980) develops a represen-
tative individual tax model to compare the cost of increasing the level of a public good
through government expenditure versus private giving. Roberts (1987) follows upon Feld-
stein (1980) and analyzes under what conditions it is preferable to nance a public good
through tax revenue rather than subsidies to voluntary contributions. Roberts analyzes
in detail the role of crowding out of private contribution by public provision. The present
paper builds upon these previous contributions and proposes a general model which en-
allowed develop these points informally.
    3 See e.g. Rosen (1985) for a survey.
    4 Clotfelter (1985) provides an extensive survey of empirical analyzes on charitable giving. Steinberg

(1990) updates this survey.
   5 See for example Clotfelter (1992) for an extensive analysis of the redistributive e ects of the nonpro t

sector.


                                                     3
compasses most of the situations previously analyzed.
   This paper considers a model with three goods: private consumption, earnings, and a
\contribution" good to which individuals may choose to contribute voluntarily and which
also has a positive external e ect. This contribution good can be for example charitable
contributions, or home ownership. The government has redistributive goals and may also
 nance the contribution good out of general tax revenues. The paper derives optimal
tax rates on labor income and the contribution good. Optimal tax rates are equal to
standard Ramsey tax rates plus a Pigovian corrective tax depending on the size of the
externality.6 A number of simplifying assumptions on behavioral responses to taxes are
made to obtain simple optimal tax and subsidy formulas directly expressed in terms of
observable magnitudes. Four important elements enter optimal tax and subsidy formulas.
   First and obviously, the size of the subsidy is closely related to the size of the external
e ect. Everything else equal, goods with low external e ects (such as for example sec-
ondary residences) should be subsidized less than goods with high external e ects (such as
charitable giving to social services or education). When the government has redistributive
tastes, it is important to assess the redistributive bene ts of each type of contribution
good to estimate the social external e ect. If the government can also nance directly
the public good with tax revenue, then it can choose the total level of public good so
as to equate the external e ect to the marginal value of public funds. When the contri-
bution good is socially overprovided by the private sector, the government cannot undo
this overprovision. For a number of goods, such as religious services, the government is
constrained by law not to contribute and there may be either over or under provision even
when taxes are set optimally.
   Second, the optimal subsidy is positively related to the price elasticity of the contri-
bution good. Inelastic contribution goods should be heavily taxed even if they generate
a large external e ect. However, in contrast to the \eÆciency" principle described above,
  6 This   theoretical model is closely related to the optimal tax model of Sandmo (1975) who considers
an optimal commodity tax model where a particular good generates an externality.



                                                   4
the price elasticity is not the unique factor entering optimal subsidy formulas.
   Third, as voluntary contributions arise out of individual utility maximization, they
can be seen as equivalent to \consumption". Therefore when redistribution is valued,
contribution goods to which high incomes contribute disproportionately, such as the arts,
culture or higher education, should be subsidized less than those to which contributions
are less concentrated at the top income end, such as religious organizations contributions.
   Fourth, when the government can freely contribute to the public good, the more private
contributions are crowded out by public contributions, the higher should be the subsidy
on voluntary contributions. In the extreme case with complete crowding out, voluntary
contributions should be made free. The intuition is the following. When crowding out is
high, it requires more than one dollar of direct public contributions to increase the total
level of the contribution good by one dollar. Therefore the marginal cost of an extra dollar
of contribution good is higher when crowding out is important. As a result, the subsidy
should be higher in those cases.
   It is interesting to note the relation between the optimal subsidy rate and the optimal
tax rate on earnings. There is no theoretical reason to link the subsidy rate on the
contribution good to the income tax rate as is currently done in the U.S. income tax
code. In the model developed here, the optimal tax rate on earnings is fairly independent
from the price elasticity of the contribution good and can be high if earnings are not very
responsive to taxation and redistributive tastes are strong. However, tying the subsidy
rate to the income tax rate, as is done in the U.S. income tax system, may increase
substantially the elasticity of taxable income because contributions are much more price
elastic than earnings. In the case where the optimal subsidy rate is far from the optimal
tax rate on earnings, tying the subsidy rate to the tax rate may weaken substantially the
redistributive power of the government and reduce substantially total welfare.
   The present paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model and derives the
optimal tax and subsidy conditions of the government. Section 3 introduces additional
assumptions to simplify the optimal tax formulas and discusses in detail the di erent


                                             5
e ects that come into play. Section 4 proposes a calibration exercise to assess the size
of optimal subsidies using a range of empirical estimates on responses to taxation and
distributional e ects of tax expenditures. Finally, Section 5 o ers a brief conclusion.


2 The Model
2.1    The individual Program


I consider a model with three goods, private consumption c, earnings z and a \contri-
bution" good g . The contribution good will stand for either charitable contributions or
general tax expenditures such as mortgage interest payment or health expenditures. The
utility of each individual is increasing in consumption c and decreasing in earnings z (la-
bor supply is costly). Individuals may also derive utility from personal contributions g .
Therefore, individual utility functions depend directly on the individual \consumption"
choices of the three goods (c; z; g ). As a potential public good, contributions may also
provide indirect utility to the individuals in the economy. For example, contributions
to a particular religious organization improve the service provided to members of this
organization. To model the public good nature of contributions, I assume that the level
of contributions per capita, which I denote by G, is an additional argument in the utility
functions of individuals. Therefore, each individual has a utility function u = u(c; z; g; G)
which is non-decreasing in c, g , and G, and decreasing in z .
   Note that contributions are modeled both as a private good, through the argument g
in u(:), and as a public good, through the argument G in u(:). This warm glow model of
giving, developed by Andreoni (1990), captures accurately the actual situation because
it is impossible to account for actual levels of contributions without assuming that most
contributors derive direct utility from giving.
   The government sets a at tax rate  on earnings, a tax rate t on contributions, and
provides a lump-sum payment R to all individuals in the economy. The government
may also nance directly an amount G0 of the contribution good per capita. Thus the

                                             6
total per capita amount of the contribution good is G = G0 + GP where GP denotes
average individual voluntary contribution. Consumption c is the untaxed good. It is
useful to adopt this normalization as we want to investigate how contributions should be
taxed relative to earnings.7 For example, the case t =  corresponds to fully deductible
charitable contributions. Individuals are indexed by h               2 H where H is an index set.         I
normalize the total population to one and I denote by d (h) the density of individuals
over H . The integration sign denotes summation over all individuals in H . Individual
h maximizes uh(c; z; g; G) subject to the budget constraint, c + g (1 + t)  z (1                  ) + R.
Note that utility functions may di er from individual to individual.
      I assume that the number of individuals is large enough so that all individuals take G as
    xed when choosing their optimal contribution level g . I denote by v h (1              ; 1 + t; R; G)
the indirect utility of individual h, z h = z h (1             ; 1 + t; R; G) his earnings level, and
g h = g h(1 ; 1 + t; R; G) his contribution level given the tax parameters. The individual
welfare e ects of changes in t and  can be obtained using the Roy's identity conditions,
v1h  = z h vRh and v1+
                     h
                        t = g h vRh , where subscripts denote, from now on, derivatives.

2.2         Crowding Out

                                                  R
I denote by Z = Z (1             ; 1 + t; R; G) = z h d (h) and GP = GP (1 ; 1 + t; R; G) =
R
  g h d (h) the average earnings and private contributions. Note that the argument G in
Z (:) and GP (:) is equal to G0 + GP and is therefore endogenous. Consequently, it is con-
ceptually useful to introduce Z = Z (1 ; 1+ t; R; G0 ) and G = G (1 ; 1+ t; R; G0 ) which
denote the average earnings and voluntary private contribution for given tax parameters
and a given level of government contribution G0 . Note that G G0 = @ G=@G
                                                                          0
                                                                             is the total
crowding out resulting from a one dollar increase in public contribution. This parame-
ter has been extensively studied in the empirical literature.8 Presumably, G G0  0, and
G G0 = 1 when there is complete crowding out.
     7 As   usual in optimal tax models, the normalization choice has no real e ect on the optimal outcome.
     8 This   is discussed in detail in Section 4.



                                                       7
2.3        The Government Program


As in standard optimal income tax models, the government sets the tax rates  and t, the
lumpsum level R, and possibly G0 so as to maximize a social welfare function,

                                    Z
                             W=         hv h (1 ; 1 + t; R; G + G0 )d (h);
where h is the weight associated to individual h, subject to the aggregate budget con-
straint,


                                          Z + tG  R + G0 + E;                                 (1)

where E denotes government consumption per capita and is taken as exogenous. The
government budget constraint states that total taxes collected must nance the lumpsum
amount R, government contributions G0 , and government consumption E . This model
is an extension of the optimal tax model of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971). This model is
formally close to the environmental externality model of Sandmo (1975) who considers a
Diamond-Mirrlees model with a good producing an externality such as the contribution
good g of this model.9 The present model is also related to the model of Atkinson and
Stern (1974) where the government nances a public good through linear commodity
taxation but where individuals do not voluntary contribute.


2.4        General Optimal Tax Formulas


I denote by  the multiplier of the government budget constraint (1). The multiplier is
equal to the marginal value of public funds. The rst order conditions with respect to  ,
t, and R, for the optimal tax structure can be written as,
                      Z
                          h[v1h  + vGh G 1  ]d (h) + [Z    Z1      tG 1  ] = 0;       (2)
   9 In   contrast to the present paper, in the Sandmo model, the government cannot directly a ect the
quantity of the good producing the externality.


                                                      8
                  Z
                                  h                             
                      h[v1+
                          h
                             t + vG G1+t ]d (h) + [G +  Z1+t + tG1+t ] = 0;                 (3)

                      Z
                          h [vRh + vGh G R ]d (h) + [ 1 +  ZR + tG R ] = 0:             (4)

Finally, in the case where the government can choose to contribute to the public good,
the rst order condition for G0 is,

                  Z
                       h[vGh + vGh G G0 ]d (h) + [ 1 +  ZG0 + tG G0 ] = 0:              (5)

    As the government cannot possibly contribute negative amounts to the public good,
there is an additional constraint G0        0.     This constraint binds when the left-hand-side
of (5) is negative at G0 = 0. In that case, the public good is socially over-provided by the
private sector and the government cannot undo directly this overprovision.
    In some cases, the government may not be able to contribute to the public good.
For example, in the U.S., religious organizations cannot receive government funding and
can only be nanced by private contributions. In that case, G0 = 0 and the amount of
contributions may be either above or below the social optimal level and the rst order
condition (5) does not hold in general.

    I denote by   h
                      = h vRh = the social marginal value of consumption by individual h
in terms of public funds. These social weights summarize the redistributive tastes of
the government. For example, if the government values redistribution, then              h
                                                                                            is high
for poor individuals and low for well-o individuals. If the government does not value
redistribution at all, then the weights         h
                                                    are equal across individuals. I note, (R) =
R
    d (h), the average social value (in terms of public funds) of giving one additional
    h


dollar to all individuals (i.e., increasing the lumpsum R by one dollar). Similarly, I
                     R
denote by, (Z ) = z h h d (h)=Z , the average social weight weighted by earnings and
        R
 (G) = g h hd (h)=G , the average social weight weighted by contribution levels. If the
government has no redistributive tastes, then obviously, (R) = (Z ) = (G). If the

                                                     9
government values redistribution, then             h
                                                       is negatively correlated to income z h and thus
 (Z ) < (R). If private contributions g h are even more concentrated toward the high end
of the income distribution than earnings, as it is the case with charitable contributions in
the U.S., then (G) < (Z ).10
   Finally, I de ne by,

                                     Z h v h d (h) Z                  vGh
                                  e=       G
                                                    =               h
                                                                            d (h);                (6)
                                                                       vRh
the social marginal value of the contribution good in terms of public funds. The parameter
e, which measures the external e ect of a marginal increase in the level of the contribution
good, is a key element to determine the optimal tax rate on contributions. Using (6), the
Roy's identities and the de nitions of (R), (Z ), and (G), equations (2), (3), (4), and
(5) can be rewritten as,


                                 [1       (Z )]Z =  Z1      + (t + e)G 1  ;                  (7)


                                 [1       (G)]G =  Z1+t         (t + e)G 1+t ;                 (8)


                                      1      (R) =  ZR + (t + e)G R ;                           (9)


                                       e = 1  ZG0         (t + e)G G0 :                       (10)

   Equations (7), (8), and (9) are close to the standard optimal tax formulas of Diamond
and Mirrlees (1971). There are two important points to note relative to the standard
case. The rst di erence is the external e term. The tax rate t on the right-hand-size of
equations (7), (8), (9), and (10) is replaced by t0 = t + e which I call the shadow tax rate on
contributions. Therefore, the optimal tax rates can be computed in two steps. First, as in
the standard case, the tax rates (; t0 ) can be derived ignoring the external e ect. Second,
  10 The   calibration of the 's is discussed in Section 4.


                                                       10
the real rate t on contributions is obtained by substracting from the shadow tax rate t0
the social external e ect e. The tax subsidy e due to the external e ect is conceptually
equivalent to the classical Pigouvian tax or subsidy.11 This additivity property has been
noted by Sandmo (1975). Second, when the government can set G0 freely, it sets the total
level of public good such that the size of the external e ect e is given by the rst order
condition (10). In the case where earnings are not a ected by G (i.e., ZG0 = 0) and with
no crowding out (i.e., G G0 = 0), equation (10) shows that the external e ect e is equal to
one at the optimum.


3 Specializing the Model
Equations (7), (8), (9), and (10) are too general to allow the derivation of quantitative tax
policy recommendations. Therefore, in this section, I specialize the supply side response
of the model to the case where simple optimal tax formulas can be obtained and discussed
in the light of empirical estimates on behavioral responses to taxation.


3.1        Simplifying Assumptions


In this subsection, I introduce three simplifying assumptions. I assume rst that there are
no income e ects on earnings at the individual level. That is, increasing the lumpsum R
has no e ect on labor supply. Most empirical studies have found that income e ects are
small relative to substitution e ects (see e.g., the surveys by Pencavel (1986) and Blundell
and MaCurdy (1999)). Therefore, this assumption is justi ed as a rst approximation to
the actual situation.

Assumption 1 There are no income e ects on earnings at the individual level, zRh = 0
for all h.
  11 It   is straightforward to extend this model to the the case with many goods. Each tax rate should
be equal to the standard Diamond-Mirrlees tax rate minus the social external e ect produced by that
particular good.


                                                    11
   The large empirical literature on charitable giving in the U.S. (see e.g., Clotfelter
(1985) for a comprehensive survey) has focused on the e ect of the tax price subsidy and
the income level on the level of charitable contributions. Those studies make in general
two implicit important assumptions on the structure of behavioral responses to taxation.
   They rst assume implicitly that earnings are not a ected by the tax rate t on contri-
butions. It is very likely that individuals decide about the level of their charitable givings
once their earnings are realized and that their labor supply decisions are not much af-
fected by their prospective charitable contributions levels and hence by the tax rate t on
charitable givings. Therefore, in order to simplify the model of the previous section, it
seems natural to assume the level of the contribution good G and tax rate t do not a ect
earnings and thus that ZG0 = 0 and Z1+t = 0.
   This assumption might be violated in the case of charities providing income support
for the poor. Such organizations, similarly to public welfare programs, might reduce
labor supply of bene ciaries. At the other end of the income distribution, better art
museums funded by contributions might increase average time spent in the museums and
thus reduce labor supply accordingly. Very little is known about these e ects. Therefore,
assuming zero e ects seems to be a reasonable starting point.

Assumption 2 Aggregate earnings are not a ected by the level of the contribution good
G and by the tax rate on contributions, ZG0 = 0 and Z1+t = 0.

   Second, most empirical studies assume that a change in tax rate  on earnings a ects
contributions only to the extent that it a ects disposable earnings z h (1  )+R. Therefore,
it is reasonable to assume that a compensated change in  has no e ect on the level of
contributions. In other words, @g h =@ (1    )ju = 0 where the subscript u means that the
derivative is taken keeping the utility level constant.

Assumption 3 For all individuals, the compensated supply of contributions does not
depend on the tax rate on earnings, @g h =@ (1  )ju = 0.


                                             12
Using the Slutsky equation, Assumption 3 implies,

                                 @g h                   @g h                    @g h      @g h
                               @ (1  )
                                               =
                                                   @ (1        )
                                                                  j  u +z
                                                                          h
                                                                                @R
                                                                                     = zh
                                                                                          @R
                                                                                               :         (11)

Summing equation (11) over all individuals, we obtain,


                                                     G 1       = Z G^ R ;                             (12)

where G^ R is the average response weighted by earnings of contributions to a uniform one
dollar increase of the lumpsum R.12
      Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 allow to rewrite the optimal tax equations (7) and (8) in a
much simpler form. I de ne the elasticity of aggregate earnings with respect to (one minus)
the tax rate by, Z = (1  )Z1  =Z . Under assumption 1, there are no income e ects,
and thus, uncompensated and compensated elasticities are identical. Hence, there is no
need to distinguish the two concepts. Note that Z is an average of the individual earnings
                                                                            R                    R
elasticities hz weighted by earnings levels, Z = hz z h d (h)= z h d (h). I introduce the
parameter  = G 1+t =G to measure the size of the price response of aggregate private
contributions. As we expect a decrease in contributions when the price 1 + t increase, we
assume from now on that  > 0. Note that (1 + t) is the (uncompensated) elasticity of
total contributions with respect to the price 1 + t. I discuss below in detail why using 
is preferable to using the elasticity concept. We can state the following proposition,

Proposition 1 Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, the optimal tax rates formulas can be
expressed as,

                                                                 1
                                               t = e + [1                       (G)];                    (13)
                                                      

                                                  1
                                               =        [1           (Z )       (t + e)G^ R ];           (14)
                                   1              Z
 12   G^ R and G R are not identical in general because G^ R is weighted by earnings while G R is unweighted.



                                                                 13
                                    (R) = 1     (t + e)G R :                            (15)

Finally, if the government can freely choose G0 and that G0 > 0 at the optimum,

                                                      1 tG G0
                              e = 1 (t + e)G G0 =              ;                        (16)
                                                      1 + G G0
and the optimal tax rate t is then given by,

                                        1
                              t = 1 + (1 + G G0 )[1        (G)]:                        (17)
                                     
   Proof: The proof follows from a direct manipulation of (7), (8), (9), and (10) using
the assumptions. It is perhaps useful to give a direct proof of equation (17) using a
methodology closer to Roberts (1987). Suppose that the government increases the tax rate
on the contribution good by dt and modi es the level of government provided public good
G0 so that the total level of public good G + G0 stays constant. Therefore dG + dG0 = 0.
                                                                          . Increasing
   This tax rate increase has a mechanical e ect on tax revenue equal to Gdt
the tax rate has also a negative welfare e ect on each individual equal to duh = v1+
                                                                                  h
                                                                                     t dt =

  g h vRh dt. So using the de nition of (G), the aggregated welfare e ect, expressed in
terms of tax revenue, is equal to             .
                                          (G)Gdt
    Increasing the tax rate by dt reduces private contributions by dG = G 1+t dt + G G0 dG0
through the price e ect and the crowding out e ect. Using the fact that dG0 = dG , we
have, dG = G 1+t dt=(1 + G G0 ). The tax loss due to behavioral responses is equal to tdG
and the cost for the government of adjusting G0 is equal to dG0 = dG .
    At the optimum, the sum of these four e ects must be zero, therefore, we have, G
  (G)G + (t + 1)G 1+t =(1 + G G0 ) = 0 which is equivalent to equation (17).

   Interpretation




                                               14
    Formula (13) shows that the optimal rate t is equal to a subsidy equal to the external
e ect e plus a standard commodity tax component.13 The standard component is de-
creasing in (G). A low (G) means that the well-o contribute disproportionately. In
that case, taxing contributions is valuable from a redistributive view point. Note that,
in the model, contributions are voluntary and thus are equivalent to a consumption good
for the donors. This is exactly the opposite of the common sense view that considers con-
tributions as a sacri ce. Assuming that (G) < 1, the standard component is inversely
proportional to the size of the price response of contributions  = G 1+t =G . This is the
standard inverse elasticity rule of optimal taxation: elastic goods should be taxed less
than inelastic goods. In the case where contributions are in nitely elastic, the optimal
rate t is negative and the subsidy rate is exactly equal to the external e ect e. However,
when the price response of contributions is small, the tax rate t can be large even in the
presence of substantial external e ects.
   When the government can contribute directly to the public good, e is given by (16).
Crowding out of private contributions by public contributions implies that G G0 < 0. As
equation (13) implies that t + e > 0, (16) shows that e > 1. The intuition is the following:
when crowding out is high, it requires more than one dollar of direct public contributions
to increase the total level of the contribution good by one dollar and therefore the marginal
value of the contribution good is higher.14 In that case, the expression for e can be used
to rewrite the optimal tax rate t as in (17). Equation (17) shows that the optimal t is
decreasing in (G), the size of the price response of contributions , and in the absolute size
of crowding out G G0 . The intuition for the latter result is the following. When crowding
out is important, direct government funding of the public good is more expensive. As
  13 Because   the individual labor supply decisions z h are independent of the level of the contribution good
and the tax rate on contributions t, the optimal rate on contributions t does not depend explicitly on
labor supply behavioral responses.
  14 This equation is a generalization of the famous Samuelson rule for the optimal level of public good.

Atkinson and Stern (1974) who consider an optimal tax model with a public good exclusively provided
by the government obtain a formula close to (16).



                                                      15
a result, it is better to rely more on private contributions, and the subsidy to private
contributions should be increased accordingly. Note that in the extreme case of complete
crowding out, G G0 = 1, the optimal rate should be t = 1, implying that contributions
should be made free.15
   As mentioned above, equations (13) and (17) are not expressed in terms of the elasticity
G = (1 + t)G 1+t =G . It is possible to rewrite (17) in terms of the elasticity G as follows,

                                     G = (1 + G G0 )[1      (G)]:                                 (18)

The interpretation of (18) is the following. When the elasticity G is larger than the
right-hand-side expression, the subsidy rate should be increased up to the point where
the elasticity is driven down to the value of the right-hand-side. Formula (18) is a gen-
eralization of the \eÆciency" concept: when there is no crowding-out (G G0 = 0) and the
welfare of the contributors is not taken into account ( (G) = 0), equation (18) becomes
G = 1 which states precisely that subsidies to contributions should be increased when
the elasticity is above unity and should be reduced when the elasticity is below unity.16
    However, equation (18) does not provide an explicit expression for the optimal subsidy
rate and is better used to assess whether the current tax system provides too much or too
little subsidies. Previous studies by Feldstein (1980) and Roberts (1987) focused mostly
on this type of issues because they used formulas of the type (18) specialized to particular
cases. If the elasticity G is treated as an immutable parameter, then formula (18) states
that the tax rate t should be either in nite or equal to minus one. In practice, we expect
the elasticity G to be a ected by large changes in t. As a result, to cast light on optimal
subsidy rates, it seems much preferable to use the form (17) whose interpretation requires
to assume implicitly that the parameter  is the immutable parameter.17 The optimal tax
  15 This   particular case has been studied in detail by Roberts (1987).
  16 The    more general case where G G0 < 0 and (G) = 0 has been analyzed by Roberts (1987) along
these lines.
  17 There is no general reason to consider the elasticity parameter  rather than the parameter  as the
                                                                      G
\exogenous" parameter. Both parameters may potentially vary with the tax parameters.


                                                   16
simulations presented in Section 4 specify a model with constant parameter  calibrated
using the actual elasticity and actual subsidy rate.18

    The optimal tax rate  on earnings is given by formula (14). This formula is similar
to the usual optimal linear income tax formula (see e.g., Dixit and Sandmo (1980)).
Unsurprisingly,  is decreasing with the elasticity of earnings Z and with the average
social weight (Z ). As e+t is positive (equation (13)), the optimal rate  is also decreasing
with the size of income e ects on contributions G^ R . The intuition is the following. If the
tax rate  increases, then not only are tax revenues reduced because of the supply side
response of earnings but also because lower disposable income leads to lower contributions
G and thus further reductions in social welfare as the shadow tax rate t0 = t + e on
contributions is positive.

    Two important lessons from the previous analysis should be nally noted. First, there
is no a-priori reason to tie the subsidy            t to the tax rate  as this is currently done in
the U.S. income tax system. Second, in the case where the government cannot directly
contribute optimally to the public good, it is critical to assess the value of the external
e ect e in order to implement the optimal tax rates.


3.2     Extensions


3.2.1 Allowing Tax expenditures versus Broader Base Taxation
As mentioned in the introduction, a very important provision of the U.S. income tax law
states that a number of expenditures can be fully deducted from taxable income. As a
result, these expenditures are e ectively subsidized at the income tax rate (that is, in the
notation of the model t =             ). This tax expenditure allowance has generated heated
controversy. The main criticism is that, because tax expenditures are far more elastic
  18 These   simulations might be misleading if the parameter  is in fact very sensitive to the subsidy rate
because in that case, the parameter  in the optimal tax formulas might be di erent from the the current
parameter  estimated with the actual tax system in place.


                                                      17
than earnings, the elasticity of taxable income, and hence the deadweight burden of the
income tax, are substantially increased by this provision. In this subsection, I derive the
optimal tax rate  when the government is constrained to set t =  .
      I denote by y h = z h        g h taxable income. The budget constraint of individual h is
ch  (1  )(z h g h) + R. The program of the government is the same as in Section 2.3,
except that t =  . The general rst order condition for  becomes,



      [1     (Z )]Z   [1     (G)]G =  Z1      + (  + e)G 1      +  Z1+t + (  + e)G 1+t :   (19)

      I denote by Y (1     ; R; G0 ) = Z
                                         G aggregate taxable income, Y = (1  )Y1  =Y
                                                        R            R
the aggregate taxable income elasticity,19 and (Y ) = h y hd (h)= y hd (h) the average
 h
   weighted by taxable income. Routine computations show that (Y ) = (Z )(Z=      Y )
       Y ) and Y = Z (Z=
 (G)(G=                    Y ) + G (1  )=Y G^ R Z (1  )=Y .

Proposition 2 Under assumptions 1,2, and 3, the optimal tax rate on taxable income 
is given by,
                                           "                 !#
                                      1           G ^ Z
                             =      1   (Y ) + e   GR  :                                            (20)
                      1  Y                       Y       Y
If the government can freely choose G0 and that G0 > 0 at the optimum,

                                                    1 +  G G0
                                               e=               :                                      (21)
                                                     1 + G G0
      Proof: The proof follows from a direct manipulation of (19) using the assumptions
and the de nitions of Y and (Y ).

      Interpretation
      There are three important di erences between the optimal tax rate on taxable income
given by (20) and the optimal tax rate on earnings given by (14).
 19   Y is average of the individual taxable income elasticities weighted by taxable income.


                                                      18
                          Y )
   First, as (Y ) = (Z )(Z=                     Y ), if we assume that contributions are dis-
                                           (G)(G=
proportionately made by high income earners, then (G) < (Z ), and thus (Y ) > (Z ).
The intuition is the following. As contributions are more concentrated than earnings,
taxable income y is more equally distributed than earnings. As a result, the correlation
between     h
                and y h is weaker than the correlation between      h
                                                                        and z h .
   Second, since contributions are much more responsive than earnings, we expect Y >
Z . These rst two di erences tend to make the tax rate on taxable income given by (20)
lower than the optimal tax rate on earnings given by (14).
   Third, lowering the tax rate on taxable income has a positive e ect on contributions
through the income e ect on disposable income (which was also present in the earnings
tax case) but also increases the price of giving and thus has a direct negative price e ect on
contributions. As displayed in equation (20), the net e ect depends on the relative sizes
of  and G^ R . In particular, the higher the price response of contributions, the higher the
tax rate on taxable income. This new price e ect relative to the situation of Proposition
1 tends to make the tax rate on taxable income higher than the optimal tax rate on
earnings. Note that in the case where the external e ect e is zero, this e ect disappears
and the rst two considerations suggest that the tax rate on taxable income should be
lower than the tax on the broader earnings base.
   It is necessary to turn to simulations to assess quantitatively the di erence between
these two tax rates and how changing parameters a ects each of them. Some parameters
inside formulas (14) and (20) are endogenous and therefore general equilibrium e ects
might be important and should be taken into account. Next section proposes an numerical
calibration that casts light on all these e ects.
   When the optimal rates (; t) on earnings and contributions of Proposition 1 are such
that t is very di erent from  , tying the subsidy on contribution to the income tax rate
as in Proposition 2 lowers welfare.20 In particular, when there are little external e ects
  20 Obviously,   when the optimal rates of Proposition 1 are such that t =      , then the optima of
Proposition 1 and Proposition 2 are identical and there is no welfare loss of imposing the constraint
t = .

                                                 19
and that, at the optimum t > 0, then imposing t =              is suboptimal. Next section
discusses this point in detail.

3.2.2 Leaky Private Contributions
In the model, we have assumed that contributions from individuals are exactly equivalent
to government contributions. This is obviously a strong simpli cation assumption and
there are many reasons why this might not be the case in practice.
   First, private contributions maybe less eÆcient than direct government contributions
because costly advertising campaigns are necessary to raise private contributions. This
can be simply modeled, as in Feldstein (1980), by assuming that a dollar of private
contribution translates into only s < 1 dollars of public good G and that 1               s are
dissipated in advertisement costs.
   Second and more generally, private and public contributions are not perfect substi-
tutes. For example, private and public schools do not provide exactly the same services
and are not attended by the same public. In principle, this should be modeled directly
using a multi-good setting. However, assuming as above that a dollar of private con-
tribution translates into only s < 1 dollars of government provided public good G is a
parsimonious and perhaps reasonable way of modeling imperfect substituability.
   In that case, the e ective total level of contribution good is G = sG + G0 but the
government budget constraint (1) is unchanged. The external e ect e measures the e ect
of one additional dollar of government provided public good (or equivalently, 1=s dollars
of privately provided public good). It is easy to see that, the only di erence is that, in
equations (7), (8), (9), and (10), on the right-hand-side, t + e is replaced by t + s  e.
     Proposition 1 should be modi ed such that in (13), (14), and (15), e is replaced by
s  e. Equation (16) becomes, e = 1 (t + s  e)G G0 = (1 tG G0 )=(1+ s  G G0 ), and equation
(17) becomes,

                                       1
                             t = s + (1 + s  G G0 )[1      (G)]:                         (22)
                                    

                                              20
Similarly, in equation (19),    + e should be replaced by  + s  e. In Proposition 2,
in equation (20), e is replaced by s  e and equation (21) becomes e = (1 +  G G0 )=(1 +
s  G G0 ). When s = 0, private contributions are of no value for the government and
the contribution good should be treated as a standard Ramsey consumption good. The
simulations presented in Section 4 display the quantitative e ect on tax and subsidy rates
of changing s.


4 Numerical Application
4.1    Empirical Estimates


4.1.1 Behavioral Responses to Taxes
The empirical literature on responses of charitable giving to taxes has found in general
elasticities with respect to price in excess of one (often around 1.3) and elasticities with
respect to disposable income around 0.8. Clotfelter (1985) provides an extensive review
of the empirical literature on charitable giving.21 However, a recent study by Randolph
(1995) using panel data and decomposing responses into short-term versus long-term
responses has found smaller long-term price elasticities (around 0.5) and larger disposable
income elasticities (around 1.3). There is therefore still substantial controversy about the
size of these parameters. In general, the estimates from the literature are unweighted
elasticities. We have seen that the relevant parameters are elasticities weighted by the
level of contributions. There is evidence in the literature that both price and disposable
income elasticities of contributions are increasing with income (see, e.g., Table 2.15 in
Clotfelter (1985)). This suggests that the relevant elasticities are somewhat higher than
the unweighted estimates reported in the literature.
   The price response parameter  = G 1+t =G that enters optimal tax formulas can
be obtained from the empirical estimate of the price elasticity of contribution G as,
 21 Steinberg   (1990) updates this survey of empirical ndings.



                                                   21
 = G =(1 + t), where 1 + t is the average current price of contributions. I assume that
1 + t = 0:7, that is, that the average marginal income tax rate of contributors is 30%. In
the simulations, I consider three di erent values for the elasticity G , namely 0:5, 1, and
1:5. The income e ect on contributions G^ R which enters formula (13) can be deduced
from the disposable income elasticity of contributions reported in empirical studies, which
I denote by R , using the approximation formula, G^ R = R G=((1  )Z + R). The factor
G=((1  )Z + R) is the average contribution level over average disposable income which is
around 0.025 for charitable giving but higher and around 0.15 for all itemized deductions
bundled together. I assume in the simulations that R = 1 or R = 0:5 .
   There is an extensive empirical literature on the behavioral responses of earnings to
taxation. The labor supply literature that has mostly focused on hours of work has in
general found small elasticities of hours with respect to (net-of-tax) wages (see e.g., the
surveys of Pencavel (1986), and Blundell and MaCurdy (1999)). Elasticities are in general
smaller than 0.25 and often very close to zero. However, as pointed out by Feldstein (1995),
the response of earnings may not be limited to changes in hours of work but may also
include intensity of work, occupational changes or labor force participation. As a result,
the full elasticity of earnings may be substantially higher. Feldstein (1995) estimates very
large elasticities, in excess of one, of Taxable Income and Adjusted Gross Income with
respect to (one minus) the tax rate. A number of studies have followed upon Feldstein
(1995) and have found much smaller elasticities ranging from 0 to 0.8. This literature
is summarized in Gruber and Saez (2000) who nd that taxable income, from which
tax expenditures have been deducted, is much more responsive than gross income before
deducting tax expenditures. They nd a taxable income elasticity around 0.4 and a broad
income elasticity around 0.15. It seems reasonable to assume that the earnings elasticity
Z is substantially lower than the price elasticity of contributions. In the simulations, I
consider two possible values for this elasticity: 0:25 and 0:5.




                                            22
4.1.2 External E ects
As we saw in the previous sections, to derive optimal tax rates, it is crucial to assess
whether the government can freely contribute directly to the public good. If this is the
case, then the government sets the total level of public good optimally and the external
e ect is given by equation (16). In many instances, public goods are nanced by both the
government and private contributions. This is the case, for example, for Health Services,
Education, and Social Services. However, it is often the case that private and public
contributions are not perfect substitutes. As discussed in Section 2.3, this is modeled
by assuming that a dollar of private contribution is worth only s dollars of government
contributions. In most simulations, I assume that s = 0:75 and do some sensitivity
analysis with s = 0:5 and s = 1.
   In other instances, the government cannot contribute to the public good or there is
overprovision by the private sector. An example of the former is contribution to reli-
gious organizations. It is a matter of debate to assess whether some public goods are
overprovided by the private sector. In those cases, the external e ect is no longer given
by equation (16) and should in principle be computed directly using equation (6). To
compute e, it is necessary to assess, by income level, who bene ts from the contribution
good.
   Relatively few studies have tried to assess the redistributive e ects of the nonpro t
sector. A notable exception is Clotfelter (1992) which nds that the redistributive e ect is
in general modest but with variations by sectors. Non-pro t health providers serve more
low income patients than for-pro t but less than public institutions suggesting that non-
pro t institutions are not a perfect substitute to public institutions and thus less valuable
from a government perspective. Similarly non-pro t education institutions serve on av-
erage more auent families than public institutions, especially at the university level. In
the U.S., religious organizations are fully privately funded. Sacramental activities con-
stitute around 70% of congregational spending and redistribution to the needy less than
10%. Religious organizations have therefore little redistributive impact. Arts and Culture

                                             23
are disproportionately consumed by the auent but are also to a large extent funded by
public money. Social and Human services are clearly the most redistributive non-pro t
organizations. However, the higher federal funding, the higher the agencies orientation
toward the poor, suggesting again that these agencies are not perfect substitutes to public
money.22

4.1.3 Crowding Out
It is well known (see Warr (1983)) that for a privately provided pure public good, there is a
case for expecting in theory 100% crowding-out. However, the pure public good case fails
to capture many important aspects of the problem.23 When there is warm glow of giving,
as modeled in the present paper, crowding-out is substantially reduced and might well be
negligible for large populations. There is a very large empirical literature on crowding-out
for many public goods. Findings are very diverse, ranging from zero crowding-out (see
e.g., Reece (1979)) up to complete crowding out (see e.g., Roberts (1984)). However,
most studies nd modest crowding out, less than 20% in general (see e.g., Schi (1985)).
Therefore, in the simulations, the crowding out parameter takes two values: 0 and 25%.


4.2        Numerical Results


4.2.1 Calibration
Simulations are presented using the model described in Section 3. Government consump-
tion E per capita is taken equal to $6,000 which corresponds to the actual tax revenue
raised by the federal plus state income tax. In order to simplify the computations, I do
not fully specify all individual utility functions and I assume simple functional forms for
  22 It   is obviously impossible to assess precisely the redistributive e ects of the non-pro t sector. For
example, many advances in medicine or in agriculture have been funded by private foundations and have
had large positive impacts both in the US and in less developed countries.
  23 Even in an experimental set-up which reproduces as closely as possibly the pure public good case,

Andreoni (1993) nds less than 70% crowding-out.



                                                      24
the aggregate supply functions. The appendix presents the technical details of the sim-
ulations. I assume that the aggregate earnings elasticity Z is constant. The aggregate
contribution level G is speci ed so that the price response , the income elasticity R ,
and the crowding-out e ect G G0 are approximately constant. I consider two scenarios for
the level of the contribution good. The rst scenario models the contribution good as
charitable giving only. In that case, using current tax parameters, the level G matches
the current level of charitable giving, namely 2.0% of Adjusted Gross Income. In the
second scenario the contribution good represents a broader set of itemized deductions
that are allowed in the individual income tax code. In that case, the level G matches
approximately the current level of itemized deductions, namely 12.0% of Adjusted Gross
Income.24
    The external e ect of contributions on welfare is modeled such that it depends only
of the total e ective level of contribution good s  G + G0 with decreasing returns. I
consider again two scenarios. In the rst scenario, the contribution has a strong external
e ect so that it is optimal for the government to supplement private contributions with
public contributions (G0 > 0). In the second scenario, the external e ect is smaller and
thus the contribution good is overprovided by the private sector and thus government
contributions are zero. In this case, the external e ect is calibrated to be around 0.5.
   I assume that the marginal welfare weights              h
                                                               depend on disposable income only and
thus are speci ed as,       h
                                = 1=(z h (1  )+ R) , where  is the multiplier of the government
budget constraint and  is a (constant) parameter measuring the redistributive tastes of
the government.  = 0 corresponds to no redistributive tastes and  = +1 corresponds to
the Rawlsian criterion.  = 1 means that the government values twice as much a marginal
increase in consumption of a taxpayer with disposable income I=2 relative to a marginal
increase in consumption of a taxpayer with disposable income I . In the simulations, 
takes 3 values, 0:25, 1, and 4.
  24 More   precisely, 12.0% is the projected level of itemized deductions (if there were no standard deduc-
tion) and excluding state income tax deductions.



                                                     25
   Computing (R), (Z ), and (G) requires to know the individual distribution of z h
and g h. These distributions are calibrated using individual tax return data for year 1995
so that when using the actual tax parameters, the distributions of z h and g h match the
actual distribution of Adjusted Gross Income and Charitable Giving. Complete details
are provided in appendix.

4.2.2 Results
The results are presented in Tables 1, 2, and 3. In each Table, I consider, in Panel A, the
basic speci cation where G = 1 (price elasticity of contributions), Z = 0:25 (earnings
elasticity),  = 1 (redistributive tastes), s = 0:75 (relative value of private contributions),
G G0 = 0 (crowding-out parameter), and R = 1 (income elasticity of contributions). Panel
B displays simulation results for alternative values of the elasticities G and Z (keeping
the other parameters as in Panel A) and Panel C considers alternative values of the
other parameters. For each speci cation, the rst ve columns display simulation results
when the government can set di erentiated tax rates on earnings and contributions as
in Proposition 1. The optimal tax rate on earnings  , the optimal tax rate t on the
contribution good (a negative number is a subsidy), the guaranteed income level R, the
                                              Z , and the level of public contributions
level of private contributions over earnings G=
G0 =Z are reported. The last ve columns display simulation results in the case where
the government sets a unique tax rate on earnings minus contributions as in Proposition
2. The optimal rate  , the guaranteed income level R, the level of private contributions
 Z , the level of public contributions G0 =Z , and the elasticity of taxable income Y are
G=
reported.
   Table 1 considers the scenario where the contribution good level matches the level of
charitable contributions (around 2.0% of AGI using actual tax parameters) and where
the external e ect is high enough so that government contributions are positive at the
optimum. As private contributions are a small share of earnings, the earnings tax rate
(column (1)), the taxable income tax rate (column (6)), and the guaranteed income levels


                                              26
(columns (3) and (7)) are hardly a ected by contribution parameters.25 The optimal rate
 is 60% and R around $10,000 when Z = 0:25 and  = 1. Unsurprisingly, increasing Z
to 0.5, decreases  to 48% and R to $5,300. Changing the redistributive taste parameter
 has also the expected e ects on  and R.
    The optimal subsidy rate t (column (2)) is very sensitive to most parameters. In
the basic speci cation, t = 40%,26 showing that contributions should be extensively
subsidized. In Panel B, we see that if G = 1:5, the subsidy should be increases to 52%
but if G = 0:5, the subsidy is reduced to a negligible 5%. Note also the increasing Z also
reduces the optimal subsidy rate through general equilibrium e ects. In Panel C, we see
that the subsidy rate is negatively related to the redistributive tastes of the government
because contributions are more concentrated than earnings. The subsidy rate is very
strongly positively related to the relative value of private contributions s. It increases to
65% with s = 1 and drops to 15% with s = 0:5. A crowding out rate of 25% increases to
optimal subsidy to 54%. The income elasticity of contributions has a negligible impact
on t. In all cases, the government contributes directly to the public good (see columns
(5) and (9)). Note that government contributions are adjusted to the level of private
contributions so that the total level of e ective public good is optimal. This shows that
the spending policy of the government is closely linked to its tax policy and subsidy policy.
   Table 2 repeats the same set of simulations but assumes that the contribution good is
overprovided by the private sector. Government contributions are zero and columns (5)
and (9) display the (sub-optimal) external e ect instead of government contributions as
in Table 1. Relative to Table 1, the optimal tax rate t on contribution is substantially
higher and becomes positive in a number of cases. For example, in the basic speci cation,
t=       5% instead of       40% in Table 1. Note that in the case where the subsidy rate
is tied to the tax rate, the contribution level is much higher due to stronger incentives
and the external e ect becomes correspondingly smaller. However, the optimal tax rate
and guaranteed income levels are almost identical to the case where t may di er from
 25 Note   in column (10) that the taxable income elasticity Y is almost identical to Z .
 26 As    = 60%, this is equivalent to a deduction of two thirds of contributions from earnings.

                                                    27
  because the level of contributions relative to earnings is just too small to a ect the
general income tax rate.
   Table 3 repeats the situation of Table 2 but with a much higher equilibrium level of
contribution calibrated to the total level of itemized deductions (excluding state income
taxes paid) instead of charitable giving only. I assume, as in Table 2, that the contribution
good is overprovided by the private sector so that G0 = 0 and e is suboptimal. The tax and
subsidy rates, and the guaranteed income levels are strikingly similar to those displayed
in Table 2. In particular, even though the elasticity of taxable income Y (column (10))
is sometimes substantially di erent from the earnings elasticity, the tax rate on taxable
income (column (6)) is almost identical to the optimal tax rate on earnings (column (1)).
These simulations therefore suggest, somewhat strikingly, that even if itemized deductions
are a large share of gross income and are substantially more elastic than gross income,
the optimal tax rate on taxable income should be very close to the optimal rate on gross
income. Note however that the level of private contributions is much higher (around 15-
20% of earnings) in the full deduction case than in the di erentiated tax case because
contributions are much more subsidized in the former case and respond to price incentives.
It is interesting to note, however, that the guaranteed income level in the di erentiated
tax rates case is noticeably higher than in the single tax rate because for a given income
tax rate, the former raises much more revenue than the latter because the earnings base
is substantially higher than the taxable income base.


5 Conclusion
This paper has analyzed the optimal tax treatment of tax expenditures. Optimal tax and
subsidy rates formulas have been derived in terms of empirically estimable parameters and
numerical simulations have been presented using a range of realistic parameters. There
are a number of important lessons to take away from this exercise.
   First, a fairly simple formula for the optimal subsidy rate which generalizes previous


                                             28
 ndings has been obtained. This optimal subsidy rate is expressed in terms of the price
response of contributions, the size of crowding out of private contributions by public
contributions, and the redistributive tastes of the government. Second, it is critical to note
that this formula is correct only in the case where the contribution good is underprovided
by the private sector and when the government can complement private contributions with
direct funding. If these conditions are not satis ed, the optimal subsidy rate depends
directly on size of the external e ect of marginal private contributions, which can be
measured by assessing who bene ts from contributions. Third, numerical simulations
show that the optimal tax rate on earnings is fairly independent from the contributions
supply side parameters even when contributions are a large share of earnings. Fourth,
tying the subsidy rate to the income tax rate as this is the case in the U.S., generates in
most simulations more generous subsidies than optimal. However, simulations show that
the tax rate on income is almost always identical in the full deduction case and in the case
where the tax rate on earnings and the subsidy rate on contributions can be di erentiated.
This suggests that, even though the elasticity of income net of contributions is higher than
the elasticity of broad income, it is not necessarily the case that the former should be
taxed less than the latter.
   There is still substantial uncertainty on many of the parameters entering tax formulas.
Though the supply side parameters have been extensively studied in the empirical litera-
ture, the size of these central parameters is still controversial. It is also critical to assess
the value of private contributions relative to direct government contributions (through
the parameter s). This parameter is impossible to measure explicitly and depends criti-
cally on the views of the government. Finally, the clean theoretical distinction between
cases where the government can and cannot contribute directly to the public good, and
which is so important to assess optimal contribution rates, is blurred in practice because
government and private contributions are rarely perfect substitutes. Investigating these
issues in more depth is necessary to cast further light on the controversial policy issue of
tax expenditures.


                                              29
   Appendix
   This appendix describes the details of the numerical simulations.

    Aggregate Functions
   I assume that the earnings elasticity Z is constant and thus aggregate earnings are
speci ed as,

                                            1  Z
                                        
                                    Z = Z0              ;                             (23)
                                             1 0
where Z0 is baseline aggregate earnings and 0 is the current average marginal income tax
rate taken as equal to 30%.
   Aggregate contributions G are speci ed as follows,
                                         "                #
                                    e       Z (1  ) + R R
                                        (1+t)
                          G = G 0                           G0 ;                  (24)
                                    e
                                (1+t0 )  Z0 (1 0 ) + R0
where G 0 is baseline aggregate private contributions,  = G 1+t =G is the (constant
parameter) measuring the price response of contributions, R is the (constant) income
elasticity of contributions, and is the (constant) crowding-out parameter G G0 . Note
that because of the crowding out term,  and R are not exactly equal to G 1+t =G and
the income elasticity. However, as is small in the simulations, this approximation is
acceptable.27 The baseline level G 0 is calibrated from tax return data. There are two
scenarios. In the rst, G 0 is calibrated on charitable contributions and in the second, G 0
is calibrated on total itemized deductions (less state income tax deductions).
   Finally, the external e ect of contributions on individual utilities is taken as homoge-
neous and such that,

                                        vGh
                                            = B  (s  G + G0 ) l ;                    (25)
                                        vRh
where B and l are constant parameters. Therefore, using equation (6), the external e ect
is given by e = B  (s  G + G0 ) l (R). In the simulations, l = 0:5 and B takes two values:
 27 This   approximation is exact in most simulations where    = 0.

                                                    30
a high value so that, at the optimum, the government contributes a positive amount G0
and a low value where the public good is overprovided by the private sector and the
government contributes zero.

    Individual Functions
   I assume that individual earnings are equal to,

                                             1  Z
                                     z = z0
                                      h      h
                                             1 0
   where z0h is the baseline earnings level for individual h, and  0 is the average marginal
tax rate. Therefore, it is assumed that the elasticity is constant and equal across individu-
als. As only linear taxation is considered, this assumption is innocuous. The distribution
z0h is computed using the actual distribution of Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) from tax
returns data for year 1995 assuming that everybody faces a constant marginal tax rate
equal to  0 = 0:3. The distribution of incomes is summarized by 30 representative indi-
viduals whose income range from $0 to $200,000. As only linear taxation is considered,
the simulations are hardly sensitive to the number of representative individuals.
   The marginal welfare weights        h
                                           depend on disposable income only and thus are
speci ed as,    h
                    = 1=(z h (1    ) + R) , where  is a (constant) parameter measuring
the redistributive tastes of the government. Finally, the distribution of contributions is
calibrated so that, with a at tax of 30%, it is distributed as the current distribution of
charitable contributions in the rst scenario and as the current distribution of itemized
deductions in the second scenario. Note again that the price and income elasticities of
individual contributions are considered as constant and equal across individuals. It would
have been strictly equivalent to assume that the probability of contributing varies by
income level.

    Computations
   The exogenous government consumption level E is taken equal to $6,000 so that the
simulated tax schedule raises as much revenue (net of government direct contributions

                                                 31
and subsidies) than the actual federal plus state income tax system.
   In the case of di erent rates on earnings and contributions, the non-linear system of
equations (1), (13), (14), (15), and (16) is solved in the unknowns  , t, R, G0 , and . If
G0 < 0 then G0 is set equal to zero and the system is solved discarding equation (16).
   When t =  , the system of equations (1), (15), (20), and (21) is solved in the
unknowns  , R, G0 , and . Again, if G0 < 0 then G0 is set equal to zero and the system
is solved discarding equation (21).
                                           Z , G0 =Z , (e when G0 = 0), and Y are
   The values at the optimum of  , t, R, G=
reported in Tables 1,2, and 3.


References
 [1] Andreoni, James. \Impure Altruism and Donation to Public Goods: A Theory of
    Warm Glow Giving.", Economic Journal, 100, 1990, pp. 464-477.

 [2] Andreoni, James. \An Experimental Test of the Public Goods Crowding-Out Hy-
    pothesis.", American Economic Review, 83(5), 1993, pp. 1317-27.

 [3] Atkinson Anthony B. \The Income Tax Treatment of Charitable Contributions." in
    Public and Urban Economics: Essays in the Honor of William S. Vickrey, ed. R.
    Grieson. New York: D.C. Heath, 1976.

 [4] Atkinson Anthony B. and Nicholas Stern \Pigou, Taxation and Public Goods." Re-
    view of Economic studies, 1974, 41, pp. 119-128.

 [5] Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy \Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
    Approaches", in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
    Volume 3, 1999.

 [6] Clotfelter, Charles T. Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving, Chicago: The Uni-
    versity of Chicago Press, 1985.


                                            32
 [7] Clotfelter, Charles T. ed. Who Bene ts from the Nonpro t Sector, Chicago: The
    University of Chicago Press, 1992.

 [8] Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees. \Optimal Taxation and Public Production."
    American Economic Review, 61, 1971, pp. 8-27 and pp. 261-278.

 [9] Dixit, Avinash K and Agnar Sandmo. \Some Simpli ed Formulae for Optimal Income
    Taxation.", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 79(4), 1977, pp. 417-23.

[10] Feldstein, Martin. \ A Contribution to the `Theory of Tax Expenditures': The Case
    of Charitable Giving." The Economics of Taxation, ed. H. Aaron and M. Boskin, pp.
    99-122, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1980.

[11] Feldstein, Martin. \The E ect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel
    Study of the 1986 Tax Reform Act." Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103(3), pp.
    551-572.

[12] Feldstein, Martin and Charles T. Clotfelter. \Tax Incentives and Charitable Contri-
    butions in the United States: A Microeconomic Analysis." Journal of Public Eco-
    nomics, 5, 1976, pp. 1-26.

[13] Gruber, Jonathan and Emmanuel Saez, \The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence
    and Implications.", NBER Working Paper No. 7512, 2000.

[14] Hall, Robert E. and Alvin Rabushka. The Flat Tax, Hoover Institution Press: Stan-
    ford University, 1985.

[15] Pencavel, John. \Labor Supply of Men." in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.),
    Handbook of Labor Economics, 1986, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3-102.

[16] Randolph, William. \Dynamic Income, Progressive Taxes, and the Timing of Chari-
    table Contributions." Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103, pp. 709-738.



                                          33
[17] Reece, William S. \Charitable Contributions: New Evidence on Household Behav-
    ior." American Economic Review, 69(1), 1979, pp. 142-151.

[18] Roberts, Russell D. \A Positive Model of Private Charity and Public Transfers."
    Journal of Political Economy, 1984, 92, pp. 136-148.

[19] Roberts, Russell D. \Financing Public Goods." Journal of Political Economy, 1987,
    95(2), pp. 420-437.

[20] Rosen, Harvey. \Housing Subsidies: E ects on Housing Decisions, EÆciency, and
    Equity.", in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein eds. Handbook of Public Economics, 1985,
    Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 375-420.

[21] Sandmo, Agnar. \Optimal Taxation in the Presence of Externalities.", Swedish Jour-
    nal of Economics, 77, 1975, pp. 86-98.

[22] Schi , Jerald. \Does Government Spending Crowd Out Charitable Contributions.",
    National Tax Journal, 38, 1985, pp. 535-546.

[23] Steinberg, Richard. \Tax and Giving: New Findings.", Voluntas, 1, 1990, pp. 61-79.

[24] Vickrey, William S. \One Economist's View of Philanthropy." in F. G. Dickinson
    (ed.), Philanthropy and Public Policy. New York: NBER, 1962.

[25] Warr, P. \The Private Provision of a Pure Public Good is Independent of the Dis-
    tribution of Income." Economic Letters, 13, 1983, pp. 207-211.




                                             34
                                   Table 1: Numerical Simulations with large external effects and positive government contributions



                               Differential Earnings and Contribution Tax Rate                            Unique Taxable Income Tax Rate

                      Earnings    Contribution Guaranteed      Private       Public       Taxable Inc. Guaranteed      Private         Public     Taxable Inc.
                      Tax Rate     Tax Rate      Income     Contributions Contributions    Tax Rate     Income      Contributions Contributions    Elasticity
                         τ              t           R            G/Z           G0/Z            τ           R             G/Z           G0/Z           εY
                         (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)             (9)          (10)

PANEL A: Basic Specification ε Z = 0.25, ε G = 1, ν = 1, s = 0.75, ε R= 1, and GG0 = 0

                         60            -40       $10,000        2.0%          3.3%            60        $10,000         2.7%           2.6%          0.26
PANEL B: Varying earnings elasticity ε Z and contributions price elasticity ε G
εΖ = 0.25, εG = 1.5      60            -52       $10,100        2.9%          2.6%            59        $10,000         3.4%           2.0%          0.27

εΖ = 0.25, εG = 0.5      60            -5        $10,100        1.5%          3.9%            60        $10,100         2.2%           3.1%          0.25

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 1         48            -31        $5300         1.8%          4.1%            48         $5300          2.3%           3.6%          0.51

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 1.5       48            -45        $5300         2.5%          3.4%            47         $5300          2.6%           3.3%          0.52

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 0.5       48            14         $5300         1.3%          4.5%            48         $5400          2.0%           3.7%          0.50

PANEL C: Varying redistributive tastes ν , value of private contributions s, income elasticity of contributions ε R, and crowding out GG0

ν= 4                     71            -23       $11,600        1.6%          4.2%            71        $11,600         3.2%           2.5%          0.26

ν = 0.25                 41            -56       $5,900         2.6%          2.4%            41        $5,900          2.1%           2.9%          0.26

s= 1                     60            -65       $10,000        3.0%          2.4%            60        $10,000         2.7%           2.6%          0.26

s = 0.5                  60            -15       $10,000        1.5%          4.0%            60        $10,000         2.7%           2.6%          0.26
εR = 0.5                 60            -39       $10,200        3.0%          2.5%            59        $10,000         4.0%           1.5%          0.27

GG0 = -0.25              60            -54       $10,400        4.1%          0.6%            60        $10,300         4.5%           0.4%          0.26


Notes: Simulations are calibrated on current level and distribution of charitable contributions. Government consumption is E=$6,000.
                                                        Table 2: Numerical Simulations with low external effects



                               Differential Earnings and Contribution Tax Rate                            Unique Taxable Income Tax Rate

                      Earnings    Contribution Guaranteed        Private     External     Taxable Inc. Guaranteed      Private         External   Taxable Inc.
                      Tax Rate     Tax Rate      Income      Contributions     Effect      Tax Rate     Income      Contributions       Effect     Elasticity
                         τ              t           R             G/Z             e            τ            R            G/Z              e           εY
                         (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)             (9)          (10)

PANEL A: Basic Specification: ε Z = 0.25, ε G = 1, ν = 1, s = 0.75, ε R= 1, and GG0 = 0

                         59            -5        $11,100         1.3%            0.51         59        $10,700         2.8%             0.34        0.26
PANEL B: Varying earnings elasticity ε Z and contributions price elasticity ε G
εΖ = 0.25, εG = 1.5      59            -15       $11,100         1.4%            0.50         60        $10,600         3.5%             0.31        0.27

εΖ = 0.25, εG = 0.5      59            28        $11,200         1.3%            0.52         60        $10,800         2.3%             0.38        0.25

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 1         47            1         $6,400          1.2%            0.55         47         $6,100         2.4%             0.39        0.51

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 1.5       47            -12       $6,300          1.3%            0.53         47         $6,000         2.7%             0.37        0.52

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 0.5       47            43        $6,500          1.2%            0.56         47         $6,200         2.2%             0.41        0.50

PANEL C: Varying redistributive tastes ν , value of private contributions s, income elasticity of contributions ε R, and crowding out GG0

ν= 4                     71            8         $12,900         1.1%            0.57         71        $12,200         3.3%             0.33        0.26

ν = 0.25                 41            -16       $6,800          1.5%            0.45         41         $6,700         2.1%             0.38        0.26

s= 1                     59            -14       $11,100         1.5%            0.47         59        $10,700         2.8%             0.34        0.26

s = 0.5                  59            6         $11,200         1.2%            0.55         59        $10,700         2.8%             0.34        0.26
εR = 0.5                 59            1         $11,200         1.7%            0.45         60        $10,500         4.0%             0.29        0.27

GG0 = -0.25              59            -6        $11,100         2.2%            0.39         60        $10,400         4.6%             0.27        0.26


Notes: Simulations are calibrated on current level and distribution of charitable contributions. Government consumption is E=$6,000.
                                            Table 3: Numerical Simulations with low external effects and high contribution levels



                               Differential Earnings and Contribution Tax Rate                            Unique Taxable Income Tax Rate

                      Earnings    Contribution Guaranteed         Private      External   Taxable Inc. Guaranteed      Private      External   Taxable Inc.
                      Tax Rate     Tax Rate        Income     Contributions     Effect     Tax Rate      Income     Contributions    Effect     Elasticity
                         τ              t             R            G/Z            e             τ           R            G/Z           e           εY
                         (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)

PANEL A: Basic Specification ε Z = 0.25, ε G = 1, ν = 1, s = 0.75, ε R= 1, and GG0 = 0

                         59            -6          $10,900        9.4%           0.55          59         $8,100       17.0%          0.37        0.28
PANEL B: Varying earnings elasticity ε Z and contributions price elasticity ε G
εΖ = 0.25, εG = 1.5      59            -17         $10,600        9.9%           0.54          60         $7,600       20.9%          0.35        0.36

εΖ = 0.25, εG = 0.5      57            33          $11,600        8.9%           0.54          60         $8,800       14.6%          0.37        0.23

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 1         46            1            $6,200        8.7%           0.58          47         $4,400       15.2%          0.41        0.54

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 1.5       46            -13          $6,000        9.3%           0.57          46         $4,200       16.7%          0.40        0.62

εΖ = 0.5, εG = 0.5       44            49           $7,000        8.2%           0.56          49         $4,900       13.8%          0.37        0.48

PANEL C: Varying redistributive tastes ν , value of private contributions s, income elasticity of contributions ε R, and crowding out GG0

ν= 4                     70            6           $12,900        8.1%           0.61          69         $9,000       19.2%          0.34        0.29

ν = 0.25                 40            -18          $6,300        10.6%          0.50          41         $5,200       14.0%          0.43        0.28

s= 1                     59            -15         $10,600        10.6%          0.51          59         $8,100       17.4%          0.37        0.28

s = 0.5                  59            5           $11,100        8.1%           0.59          59         $8,100       17.3%          0.37        0.28
εR = 0.5                 59            0           $11,000        12.3%          0.49          60         $6,800       25.5%          0.32        0.41

GG0 = -0.25              58            -5          $10,800        15.3%          0.42          59         $6,600       26.1%          0.28        0.28


Notes: Simulations are calibrated on current level and distribution of itemized deductions less state income tax deduction. Government consumption
is E=$6,000.
