                                   ! 




                                           


                                              
                                                


                                            "#$%
                                    &&'(()))**(()"#$%



                        ++ ,-  .--/
                                0#1#. 2&&32
                                  -4 5.#60$"
                                     7 46###




 3 &&4  2 ) & 8 -4573  5 .2 & 5
  &2) &5) 2445892* 3 ): & 
& & 2& &  9& & & 22 4  *

                   
       !  !     !   !  
   ! 
&93& 
     
 *"#$%
7 46###
8* 005 065 0;


                                              $%675$&7

        &29&   49) 4 3&  9 9& & &
&9432 & &)& &9 &  & 34 *
 224&  49& &)2&&9  &&  & &92&
&95& && & 4&9)  43&42 ) &  &&9 43&
 &&5& &  3&2&9)  &) &  44 &
2&& * 9&   &&)< <2& & 544 
& & 39 &4&24 5 49& &&944&24&& )  &*
224&   &492== &2& &*


                                                      
  2& 2                                      7&4& 4 
+ 3 &9-                                              /3+ 3 &9
00#0&1"WK&&                                            &&2-&
- 5>#>$?                                                 -4 5.#60$"
                                                        
@ *2     *2                                    @ 3*2
1 Introduction
One of the clearest elements of human thought is classi cation: the grouping of objects
into categories. We group countries into democracies and dictatorships based on features
of political systems within each group. We classify occupations as blue collar or white
collar based on whether people work primarily with their hands or with their heads. We
put foods into categories such as proteins and carbohydrates based on their nutritional
characteristics. Such categorization simpli es our thinking, and enables us to process vast
amounts of information reasonably eÆciently. Mullainathan (2000) provides an innovative
analysis of the implications of categorization for decision making.
    Classi cation of large numbers of objects into categories is pervasive in nancial markets.
Investors classify assets as liquid securities such as stocks and bonds or illiquid ones, such
as real estate and venture capital. They classify stocks as domestic or international, small
or large, growth or value, \old economy" or \new economy", cyclical or non-cyclical. Such
groups of securities are often called \asset classes" or \styles." Portfolio allocation based on
selection among styles rather than among individual securities is known as \style investing."
    When classifying securities into styles, investors group together assets that appear to be
similar, in the sense that they are perceived to have a common characteristic.1 In some
cases, the characteristic is an obvious one: the country in which the security is traded, the
industry in which the rm operates, or a permanent legal characteristic. In other instances,
a less obvious characteristic is used as the basis for a style, often because securities with
that characteristic are found to have performed well historically. \Value investing" in equi-
ties emerged as a distinctive style over the last century following the work of Graham and
Dodd (1934) on high dividend yield stocks, and the spectacular performance of some of the
investors who followed their advice. Academic work documenting the superior performance
of securities with a common characteristic can accelerate the formation of a style, as hap-
pened with the discovery of the \small rm" e ect by Banz in the late 1970s. Over time,
new styles appear and old styles die o . Railroad bonds were a very important asset class a
century ago, forming the foundation of many institutional portfolios; they are no longer an
identi able asset class today (Swensen 2000).
    Some of the characteristics used to de ne styles bear on fundamental values, and are
thus of clear relevance to rational investors. For instance, U.S. government bonds are backed
by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government, and hence as an asset class provide
a good guarantee against nancial trauma. Other styles are de ned by characteristics of
more dubious relevance to rational valuation. For example, it is not clear why stocks of
companies with comparable market capitalizations should be grouped together in an asset
   1 See Rosch and Lloyd (1978) and Wilson and Keil (1999) for a discussion of the importance of similarity
in the formation of categories.

                                                    1
class de ned by \size," since the rms these stocks are claims on have little in common
fundamentally. Likewise, it is far from clear for what fundamental reason closed end funds,
which might hold di erent securities trading in di erent countries, represent a meaningful
asset class called \closed-end funds," but they do.
    The importance of style investing has grown in recent years, as institutional investors,
such as pension funds, foundations, and endowments, have come to dominate nancial mar-
kets. The focus on styles is particularly attractive to institutional investors, because it
enables them to organize and simplify their portfolio allocation decisions, as well as to mea-
sure and evaluate the performance of professional managers relative to standardized style
benchmarks. From these agency perspectives, as well as from the viewpoint of diversi cation,
style investing is preferred to the less disciplined and more qualitative approaches. Not sur-
prisingly, the nancial services industry has responded to this demand for \style investing."
Most pension fund managers, as well as some mutual fund managers catering to the needs of
individual investors, now identify themselves as following particular investment styles, such
as growth, value, or technology.2 Indeed, recent authoritative guidebooks to institutional
portfolio management are organized squarely around asset classes, and issue recommenda-
tions for prudent investment management in the form of portfolio allocation among styles
(Bernstein 1995, Swensen 2000).
    The growing importance of style investing points to the usefulness of assessing its e ect
on nancial markets and security valuation. In this paper, we present a simple model that
allows for such an assessment. The model combines style-based portfolio selection strategies
of investors with a plausible mechanism for how these investors choose among styles. Specif-
ically, we assume that many investors get into styles that have performed well in the past
and out of styles that have performed badly, and that these fund ows a ect prices. We use
the model to shed light on a number of puzzling historical episodes in nancial markets, to
interpret a broad range of empirical ndings already available in the literature and also to
suggest some new empirical predictions.
    Style investing has a number of implications for asset prices. Fundamentally unrelated
securities will move together simply because they have been grouped into the same asset
class: since style investors allocate funds at the level of a style, they generate coordinated
demand shocks across all assets in the style, leading to comovement in prices even if there is
none in fundamentals. This might explain why closed end mutual funds listed on the same
exchange but holding completely di erent securities move together (Lee et al. 1991), or why
identical securities listed on di erent exchanges move out of sync with each other (Froot
and Dabora 1999). It might also explain why broad groups of securities categorized into
the same style, such as small stocks or value stocks, comove more than can be explained by
   2 Goetzmann   et. al. (2000) present data on mutual fund investors moving their funds among di erent
styles.

                                                   2
the comovement of their fundamentals (Fama and French 1995). Some of the most striking
predictions of the theory emerge from the analysis of comovement.
    Beyond that, our framework suggests that superior returns on a group of securities may
lead to the formation of an asset class that includes these securities, and therefore cause them
to move together in the future. There can thus be a positive association between superior
returns and common movement in prices, which has nothing to do with risk. Even if this
comovement is interpreted as a source of risk, it is a risk arising from resources moving in
and out of styles, and is therefore investor-induced rather than fundamental risk (see De
Long et. al. 1990b).
    In our model, style investing generally produces life cycles of investment styles. The birth
of a style is often triggered by good fundamental news about the securities in a style. The
style then matures as its good performance recruits new funds, further raising the prices of
securities belonging to the style. Finally, the style collapses, either because of arbitrage or
because of bad fundamental news. Over time, the style may be reborn.
    In many ways, this description of the life-cycle of investment styles is closely related
to Kindleberger's (1978) view of bubbles, and leads to similar predictions. For example,
returns on styles are positively autocorrelated at short horizons and mean revert in the long
run. Individual securities also exhibit these properties, but in our model, this is simply a
re ection of style level phenomena. Recent evidence that industry e ects explain much of
the momentum in individual stocks is consistent with this view (Moskowitz and Grinblatt
1999). Our model shows that fund ows between styles are one plausible source of such
style-wide momentum e ects.
    Another important consequence of style investing is a negative externality among styles,
which arises as fund recruitment by one style drives resources out of competing styles, and
depresses prices of securities in them. This negative externality from successful styles explains
some puzzling historical experiences, such as the poor performance of value stocks during
1998-1999 despite good earnings (Chan, Karceski, Lakonishok, 2001). One way to explain
this episode is to point to the extraordinarily good performance of growth stocks during
this period, and to recognize that this may have generated a substantial ow of resources
out of value investing and into growth investing. More generally, this negative externality
predicts insuÆcient comovement between securities belonging to di erent styles relative to
the comovement of their fundamentals, as well as negative short run cross-autocorrelations
between styles.
    The e ects that we study result from one of three factors: from investors' policy of allo-
cating funds at the style level rather than at the individual asset level; from trend-chasing,
where investors allocate more resources to styles with strong prior records; and nally, from
the externality, whereby investors nance a shift into successful styles by withdrawing re-

                                               3
sources from poorly performing ones.
    Of these three factors, only one, trend-chasing, has received much prior attention in
the literature. De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1990a) consider a model with
trend-chasing investors, but their focus is on how prices are a ected when more sophisti-
cated arbitrageurs are added into this mix. Hong and Stein (1999) analyze a model with
\momentum traders," whose demand is based on past performance. They focus on time
series autocorrelations in individual stock returns. None of these papers studies the e ect
of classifying assets into styles, nor of the externality between styles. In part this is because
these issues arise in multi-asset economies, while earlier research has typically worked with
only a single asset.

2 A Model of Style Investing
We consider a model with two kinds of investors, \switchers" and \fundamental traders."
Switchers exhibit two features that are becoming increasingly important in nancial markets.
First, their demand for assets is expressed at the level of a style. We think of a style as a
group of securities with a common characteristic. For example, large stocks are a style, as
are value stocks, small stocks, or all stocks within a particular industry, country, or index.
    The second feature of switchers is that the amount they allocate to a style depends on the
style's past performance relative to other styles. Each period, switchers allocate more funds
to styles with better than average performance and nance these additional investments by
taking funds away from styles with below average performance.
    To formalize these ideas, suppose that there are 2n risky assets in xed supply, and a
riskfree asset, cash, in perfectly elastic supply and with zero net return. Suppose also that
all risky assets belong to one of two styles: the rst n assets are in style X and the remaining
n in style Y ; it may help to think of these styles as \old economy stocks" and \new economy
stocks", say.
    Importantly, we assume that each security belongs to only one style. More generally, a
given security may belong to multiple overlapping styles. A small bank stock with a low
price earnings ratio may be part of a small stock style, a nancial industry style, and a value
style. A model capturing such overlaps can be constructed and would yield similar but less
transparent predictions.
    Following Hong and Stein (1999), we model risky asset i as a claim to a single liquidating
dividend Di;T to be paid at some later time T . The eventual dividend equals
                                  Di;T = Di;0 + "i;1 + : : : + "i;T ;                       (1)
                                               4
where "i;t represents news about the nal cash ow that is released at time t. We assume
                       "t = ("1;t ; : : : ; "2n;t )  N (0; D ); i.i.d over time.

   The price of a share of risky asset l at time t is Pl;t and the return on the asset between
time t 1 and time t is written3
                                       Pl;t = Pl;t Pl;t 1 .                               (2)
As a measure of the value of style X at time t, we use PX;t , de ned as the average price of
a share across all assets in style X :
                                        P =
                                                1 XP :                                     (3)
                                              X;t            l;t
                                                     n lX
The return on style X between time t 1 and time t is
                                 PX;t = PX;t PX;t 1 .                                                      (4)
    To capture the idea that switchers allocate funds at the level of a style, and do so using
relative past performance, we write switcher demand for shares of an asset i in style X at
time t as                      "                 P                #
                        S    1
                      Ni;t = AX + 
                                      t 1
                                      X    k  1     X;t k PY;t k
                                                                         ;                 (5)
                            n         k=1                2
where AX and  are constants, with 0 <  < 1.
    Symmetrically, switcher demand for shares of an asset j in style Y at time t is
                                "                                    #
                              1
                      Nj;t = AY + 
                         S
                                       t 1
                                       X    k  1 (PY;t k PX;t k )
                                                                       :                   (6)
                              n        k=1               2
    In words, when deciding on their time t allocation, switchers compare style X 's and style
Y 's return between time t 2 and time t 1, between time t 3 and time t 2, and so
on, with the most recent past being given the most weight. They then move funds towards
the style with the better prior record, buying an equal number of shares of each asset in
that style, and reduce their holdings of the other style. The parameter  determines how far
back switchers look when comparing the past performance of styles, and hence indirectly,
the persistence of their ows. AX can be thought of as switchers' long run target demand
for style X , from which they deviate based on the relative performance of styles. The fact
  3 For simplicity, we abuse terminology slightly and refer to the asset's change in price as its return.




                                                      5
that the demand for all assets within a style is the same underscores the fact that switchers
allocate funds at the style level and do not distinguish among assets within the same style.4
    The relative performance feature in (5) and (6) can be motivated in a number of di erent
ways. In this paper, we think of it as arising from two underlying factors: rst, adaptive
expectations, whereby investors base their forecasts of future style returns in part on past
returns; and second, a reluctance on the part of investors to let their overall allocation to
equities drift too far from a preset target level. More broadly, this second condition means
that investors are more willing to move between di erent equity styles than they are to
change their overall allocation to stocks. This is indeed true of institutional investors, who
try to maintain their allocations to the broadest asset classes close to predetermined targets.5
To some extent, it may also describe the behavior of individual investors: people sometimes
decide to keep the fraction of their wealth devoted to equities constant over time, even though
they move this money among di erent investment styles.
    In the Appendix, we show more formally that adaptive expectations combined with a
constraint on overall equity holdings lead to a relative performance feature like that in (5)
and (6). The intuition is straightforward. Holding everything else constant, an increase in
PX;t 1 , style X 's most recent past return, leads switchers to forecast higher returns on style
X in the future, and hence to increase their demand for style X at time t. However, since
they want to keep their overall allocation to equities unchanged, they have to sell shares
of style Y in order to nance their additional investment in X . Therefore, PX;t 1 has an
equal and opposite e ect on Ni;tS in (5) and Nj;tS in (6), making demand a function of relative
past performance.
    Adaptive expectations are just one way of motivating the trend-chasing that switchers
engage in. Portfolio insurance strategies generate similar investment patterns. As important,
an institutional investor, such as the sponsor of a de ned bene t plan, may hire money
managers with strong prior records and re those with poor performance simply because
such strategies are easier to justify ex-post to those monitoring their actions. Such agency
considerations therefore lead to trend-chasing too.
    In general, investors have more than two styles to choose from. One possible extension
of (5) to the case of M > 2 styles is to write switcher demand for a risky asset i in style m
as                           "                                              #
                           1
                    N = A +  (P
                      S
                                     t 1
                                     X   k  1               1 XM
                                                                  P ) ;                      (7)
                        i;t          m                 Xm ;t k                Xl ;t k
                               n          k=1                     M l=1
   4 The strategies in (5) and (6) are not self-
                                               nancing. Rather, we assume that at the start of each period,
switchers are endowed with suÆcient resources to fund their strategies. This allows us to abstract from issues
which are not our main focus here { the long run survival of switchers, for example { and to concentrate on
understanding the behavior of prices when switchers do play a role in setting them.
   5 See Swensen (2000) for more discussion of institutional investor behavior.


                                                      6
where PX ;t k is the return on style l, so that the allocation to an asset in style m depends
on how that style does relative to the average performance of all styles.
           l




    Even when there are many styles, the two style formulation in (5) may still be relevant.
Styles often come in natural pairs: stocks with a high value of some characteristic consti-
tute one style, and stocks with a low value of the same characteristic, the other. In these
pair situations, by far the most important competitor for one style is its twin, making the
pairwise comparison in (5) more relevant. Put di erently, if investors tilt towards a growth
style, it seems more likely that they will nance this by withdrawing funds from its natural
competitor, value, than by withdrawing a smaller amount from all other styles, as (7) im-
plies. The formulation in (7) is more relevant for industry styles, when any one industry has
many natural competing styles.
    The second type of investor in our model is a fundamental trader. They act as arbi-
trageurs, and try to prevent the price of an asset from deviating too far from its expected
 nal dividend. To formalize this, suppose that at the start of each period, fundamental
traders are given an amount W F to allocate. We suppose that they have CARA preferences
de ned over the value of their invested funds one period later, and take price changes to be
normally distributed. Since they have no constraints on their allocations, they solve
                         max
                           N
                           t
                              EtF ( exp[ (W F + Nt 0 (Pt+1 Pt ))]);                        (8)
where
                                     Nt = (N1;t ; : : : ; N2n;t )0
is a vector of the number of shares allocated to each risky asset, governs the degree of risk
aversion, EtF denotes fundamental trader expectations at time t, and
                                    Pt = (P1;t ; : : : ; P2n;t )0 :

   Optimal holdings NtF are given by
                                   (V F ) 1 (E F (P )
                             NtF = t                                 Pt );                (9)
                                              t    t+1

where
                                     = varFt (Pt+1 Pt );
                                     VtF
with the F superscript again denoting a forecast made by fundamental traders.
   We summarize switcher demand for the 2n assets by NtS , a 2n  1 vector,
                                     S
                                    NX;t          NS NS               NS
                          NtS = (        ; : : : ; X;t ; Y;t ; : : : ; Y;t )0 ;          (10)
                                     n             n n                 n

                                                   7
with                                                   P                           
                        S
                       NX;t   = AX +
                                       t 1
                                       X
                                             k   1          X;t k       PY;t   k
                                                                                         ;   (11)
                                       k=1                           2
and                                                    P                           
                         S =A
                        NY;t      +
                                       t 1
                                       X
                                             k 1         Y;t k          PX;t   k
                                                                                         ;   (12)
                             Y
                                       k=1                           2
in line with (5) and (6).
    Given fundamental trader expectations about future prices, which we discuss shortly,
prices are set as follows. The fundamental traders double up as market makers and treat
the demand from switchers as a supply shock. If total supply of the 2n assets is given by
the vector Q, equations (9) and (10) imply
                              Pt = EtF (Pt+1 ) VtF (Q NtS ):                             (13)
In contrast to switchers, who form expectations of future prices based on past prices, funda-
mental traders are forward looking and base price forecasts on expectations about the nal
dividend. One way they may do this is to roll equation (13) forward iteratively, setting
                              ETF 1 (PT ) = ETF 1 (DT ) = DT 1 ,
where
                                   Dt = (D1;t ; : : : ; D2n;t )0 :
This leads to                                           TXt 1
                    Pt = Dt VtF (Q NtS ) EtF                       VtF+j (Q NtS+j ):     (14)
                                                              j =1

    We now suppose that fundamental traders conjecture that the equilibrium unconditional
covariance matrix  of returns is V; and that switcher demand NtS has a nite long run mean
N S . They then set
                                         VtF = V , 8t;                                (15)
and
                                       EtF (NtS+j ) = N S :                           (16)
The rst assumption in (15) is innocuous, while (16) has economic importance: it says that
while fundamental traders recognize the existence of a supply shock due to switchers, they
are not sophisticated enough to gure out its time series properties. Our assumptions imply
                     Pt = Dt V (Q NtS ) (T t 1) V (Q N S ):                           (17)
Dropping the non-stochastic terms, we obtain
                                      Pt = Dt + V NtS :                               (18)
                                                      8
    The exogeneous parameters in our model are the cash ow covariance matrix D , switch-
ers' demand parameters AX , AY , and , and fundamental traders' risk aversion . We
study equilibria in which these exogeneous parameters, combined with fundamental traders'
conjecture about the covariance matrix of returns and about switchers' mean demand lead,
through (18), to prices which con rm fundamental traders' original conjecture.
    Note that in a world with only fundamental traders,
                                           Pt = Dt :                                     (19)
We refer to this as the fundamental value of the assets and denote it Pt.
    Equation (18) shows that fundamental traders are not able to push prices back to funda-
mental value. This is consistent with earlier research by De Long et. al. (1990b) and Shleifer
and Vishny (1997) who show that fundamental risk and noise trader risk { the risk that a
mispricing will worsen before it corrects { limit the size of arbitrageur positions and allow
noise traders to a ect prices. It is also consistent with the substantial body of empirical
evidence indicating that uninformed demand shocks in uence security prices (Harris and
Gurel 1986, Shleifer 1986, Froot and Dabora 1999, Kaul, Mehrotra, and Morck 2000, and
Lamont and Thaler 2000).
    Even if we were to include more sophisticated arbitrageurs in our model { in particular,
arbitrageurs who understand the form of the demand function (5) { it is not clear that
they would counteract the mispricing to any greater degree; on the contrary, they might
exacerbate it. This is the nding of De Long et. al. (1990a), who consider an economy with
positive feedback traders { similar in some ways to our switchers { as well as arbitrageurs.
When an asset's price rises above fundamental value, the arbitrageurs do not sell or short
the asset. Rather, they buy it, knowing that the extra upward jolt to the price that this
causes will attract more feedback traders, leading to still higher prices, at which point the
arbitrageurs can exit at a pro t. This suggests that sophisticated arbitrageurs may amplify,
rather than counteract the e ect of switchers, and so for simplicity, we exclude them from
our model.
    With additional assumptions, (18) can be simpli ed further. In this paper, we restrict
attention to simple cash ow covariance structures where all assets have a cash ow news
variance of one, where the pairwise cash ow correlation between any two assets in the same
style is the same, and where the pairwise cash ow correlation between any two assets in
di erent styles is the same:
                     cov("i;t+1; "j;t+1) = 1, i = j;                                     (20)
                     cov("i;t+1; "j;t+1) = r1 , i 6= j , i; j in the same style,
                     cov("i;t+1; "j;t+1) = r2 , i 6= j , i; j in di erent styles.

                                              9
We nd that in this case, there is an equilibrium in which the covariance matrix of returns
has a similar form,
                 cov(Pi;t+1 ; Pj;t+1) = 2 , i = j;                                   (21)
                 cov(Pi;t+1 ; Pj;t+1) = 2 1 , i 6= j , i; j in the same style,
                 cov(Pi;t+1 ; Pj;t+1) = 2 2 , i 6= j , i; j in di erent styles.
In other words, all assets have the same return variance, the pairwise return correlation
between any two assets in the same style is the same, and the pairwise return correlation
between any two assets in di erent styles is the same.
    Substituting this covariance structure into (18), we nd that up to a constant, the price
of an asset i in style X is
                                                                      S
                                                                    NX;t
                       Pi;t = Di;t +  (1 1 + n(1 2 ))
                                          2                                             (22)
                                                                     n
                                                                         
                            = Di;t + 1 k 1 PX;t k 2 PY;t k ;
                                         t 1
                                         X
                                         k=1
where                                            n
                                = 2                              :                     (23)
                                        (1 1 + n(1 2 ))

2.1    Parameter Values


The results in the remainder of the paper are based on a numerical implementation of
(22) in which the exogeneous parameters D , AX; AY , and  are assigned speci c values.
To construct D , we suppose that the cash ow shock to an asset has three components: a
marketwide cash ow factor which a ects assets in both styles, a style-speci c cash ow factor
which a ects assets in one style but not the other, and a completely idiosyncratic cash ow
shock speci c to a single asset. Formally, for iX , q
                    "i;t+1 = M fM;t+1 + S fX;t+1 + (1 M          2
                                                                        S )fi;t+1 ;
                                                                        2
and for jY ,                                           q
                    "j;t+1 = M fM;t+1 + S fY;t+1 + (1 M          2
                                                                       S )fj;t+1 ;
                                                                       2
where fM;t+1 is the market-wide factor, fX;t+1 and fY;t+1 are the style-speci c factors, and
fi;t+1 and fj;t+1 are the idiosyncratic factors; M and S are constants which control the
relative importance of the three components. We suppose that each factor has the same
unit variance and is orthogonal to the other factors. This implies the following cash ow
covariance structure:
                 corr("i;t+1; "j;t+1) = 1, i = j;
                 corr("i;t+1; "j;t+1) = M2 + S2 , i 6= j , i; j in the same style,
                 corr("i;t+1; "j;t+1) = M2 , i 6= j , i; j in di erent styles.
                                            10
    The numerical example that we use for our analysis sets                  M   = 0:25, and       S   = 0:5. In
this case, the cash ow covariance matrix is given by
                                                                !
                                                         A B
                                            D =         B A
                                                                    ,                                       (24)
with              0                                     1      0                            1
                  B  1          0:31       0:31 C           B  0:06           0:06 C
                  B
                  B 0:31        ...     ...    ...      C
                                                        C      B
                                                               B  ...      ...           ... CC
                A=B
                  B  .          ...     ...             C
                                                        C ;B = B .
                                                               B
                                                                                 . . . ... CCC :
                  @ ..
                  B                              0:31   C
                                                        A      @ ..
                                                               B                              A
                     0:31            0:31     1                  0:06         0:06
    The remaining parameters are set equal to
                                       AX = AY = 0;                                         (25)
                                           = 0:95;
                                            = 1:1:
Equation (5) shows that  controls the persistence of switcher ows; we choose  close to 1 so
as to capture the kind of persistence in fund ows we think is important in nancial markets.
Fundamental trader risk aversion is set so that in equilibrium, returns exhibit a level of
excess volatility similar to what has been observed in historical U.S. data. In particular,
for these parameter values, there is an equilibrium in which style returns have a standard
deviation 1:3 times the standard deviation of cash ow shocks, a level of excess volatility that
is reasonable given historical data.6 In this equilibrium, the value of  in (23) is 1.25.7

3 Competition Among Styles
As a rst step to understanding the e ect of switchers on asset prices, we use the price
function in (22) to generate some impulse response functions. We take n = 50, so that there
are 100 stocks, the rst 50 of which are in style X and the last 50 in style Y . The parameters
are set equal to the values in (24) and (25). Figure 1 shows how the prices PX;t and PY;t
of styles X and Y , de ned in (3), evolve after a one time cash ow shock to style X when
   6 For example, the standard deviation of aggregate dividend growth over 1926-1995 is around 12% while
the standard deviation of aggregate stock returns over the same period is around 20%.
    7 The parameter values in (24) and (25) also support other equilibria, including one where returns are only
slightly more volatile than cash ows. The intuition is that if fundamental traders think that returns are not
very volatile, they will trade against switchers more aggressively, with the result that equilibrium returns
will indeed have low volatility. To support the equilibrium described in the main text, we need fundamental
traders to expect returns to be substantially more volatile than cash ows. Reassuringly, all the results in
this paper remain qualitatively valid across multiple equilibria.
                                                        11
t = 1.  In other words, for iX , "i;1 = 1, "i;t = 0, t > 1, and for jY , "j;t = 0, 8t. The initial
expected cash ow is Di;0 = 50, 8i.
    The solid line in the top half of the graph tracks PX;t , the value of style X in the
presence of switchers. The dashed line in the top half is the fundamental value of style X ,
   , de ned through equations (19) and (3) as the value of style X when there are only
PX;t
fundamental traders in the economy and no switchers.
    The gure shows that in the presence of switchers, a cash ow shock to style X leads to a
substantial and long-lived deviation of X 's price from its fundamental value. Intuitively, the
good cash ow news about X pushes up its price; this outperformance catches the attention
of switchers, who increase their demand for X in the following period, pushing X 's price
still higher, drawing in more switchers, and so on. X may continue to have good returns
for some time even if there is bad news about its fundamentals: while fundamental traders
reduce their demand for X after hearing the bad news, this may be more than compensated
for by the persistent in ows from switchers.
     The fact that investment decisions are based on relative rather than absolute past per-
formance leads to a novel prediction which we refer to as an externality. Figure 1 shows
that the cash ow shock to X a ects not only X 's price, but also Y 's, even though there has
been no news about Y . The good news about X draws funds into that style; however, since
switchers want to maintain a constant overall allocation to equities, they nance the extra
investment in X by taking money out of Y . This pushes Y 's price down, making it look
even worse relative to X , leading to more redemptions by switchers, and so on. During this
period, persistent out ows can make Y will do badly even if it receives good news about its
fundamentals.
     In summary, Figure 1 shows that in our model, styles follow a speci c life-cycle. A
style X is set in motion by good fundamental news about itself or alternatively by bad
news about another style Y , which a ects it through the externality. The style then swings
away from fundamental value for a prolonged period, powered by fund ows attracted by
its superior past performance. Finally, the style returns to fundamental value because of
selling by fundamental traders, because of bad news about its own fundamentals, or most
interestingly, because of good news in a competing style Y , which draws attention and
investment dollars away from X .
     Figure 2 illustrates these points in other way by showing how the prices of X and Y
evolve over a 100 period segment of the simulated data. With switchers, the styles experience
prolonged departures from fundamental values that are only gradually reversed.
     In some cases, the cycles we describe may be reinforced by academic work analyzing
the historical performance of a style. It is noteworthy that Banz' (1979) study on the

                                                12
outperformance of small cap stocks was followed by several years of strikingly good returns on
that style. Our model would explain this by saying that Banz' study attracted the attention
of switchers, who diverted funds to small stocks, pushing them higher, thus drawing in yet
more switchers and leading to a long period of superior performance.
    More radically, cycles may be set in motion as a result of data snooping, as analysts
looking through historical data identify abnormal returns. When such analysts succeed in
convincing investors that they have found strategies earning true superior returns, they will
recruit new resources to the strategies, thereby con rming the anomaly, at least over a period
of time. Perhaps the discovery of the size e ect in the 1970's is an example of such creation
of a style out of what might have been a uke in the data.
    The externality from style switching may be helpful in interpreting other recent evidence.
During 1998 and 1999, value stocks performed extremely poorly by historical standards, lag-
ging both growth stocks and the broad index by a signi cant margin. As Chan, Karceski, and
Lakonishok (2001) show, this poor performance occurred despite the fact that the earnings
growth of value stocks over this period was as high as that of growth stocks, and if any-
thing unusually good by historical standards. In other words, the poor performance of value
portfolios cannot be easily linked to their fundamentals. A more natural explanation comes
from our theory: the poor performance of value stocks in 1998-1999 might have been due to
the spectacular performance of large growth stocks which generated large ows of funds {
unrelated to fundamentals { into these stocks and out of value, the obvious competing style.
    Another example comes, once again, from the historical performance of small stocks.
Siegel (1999) argues that one reason for the vastly superior performance of small stocks rela-
tive to large stocks during 1975-1983 was the dismal performance of the seemingly invincible
\Nifty Fifty" large cap stocks in 1973-74. The demise of these high pro le large stocks left
investors disenchanted with the large stock style and generated a ow of funds towards the
competing style, small stocks, triggering a small stock cycle. A competing increase in the
relative demand for large stocks, prompted by the rise of indexation and institutional invest-
ing more generally, may have arrested this wave of high small stock returns. According to
Gompers and Metrick (2001), institutional investors prefer large stocks and their ownership
of these stocks has increased rapidly in the last 20 years. This increase in demand for the
competing style may be one reason for the poor relative performance of small stocks after
1983.

4 The Behavior of Asset Prices
We now present a systematic analysis of the e ect of switcher ows on asset prices. As in
Section 3, we take n = 50, so that there are 100 stocks, the rst 50 of which are in style
                                             13
X  and the last 50 in style Y . For the parameter values in (24) and (25), we use the price
formula (22) to simulate long time series of prices for the 100 assets, and then discuss the
properties of individual asset returns Pl;t and of style level returns PX;t , de ned in (2)
and (4) respectively.

4.1    Comovement within Styles


Since switcher demand for securities is expressed at the level of a style, assets within a style
comove more than their fundamentals do. If style X has had superior past performance,
switchers invest more in all securities in style X , pushing their prices up together. This
coordinated demand generates comovement over and above that induced by cash ow news.
   In our simulated data, the correlation matrix of returns is
                                                                        !
                                                               Ab    Bb
                            corr(P1;t ; : : : ; P2n;t) =     Bb    Ab
                                                                          ,                                (26)
with             0                                1     0                                            1
                 B  1      0:46      0:46 C          B          0:16                 0:16 C
                 B
                 B 0:46    ...    ...    ...      C
                                                  C     B
                                                        B    ...        ...           ...            C
                                                                                                     C
            Ab = B
                 B  .      ...    ...             C
                                                  C , B=B
                                                      b B      ...            ...       ...          C
                                                                                                     C :
                 @ ..
                 B                         0:46   C
                                                  A     B
                                                        @                                            C
                                                                                                     A
                    0:46       0:46     1                       0:16                 0:16
    The average correlation between a pair of assets i and j which are in the same style is
0.46 in the presence of switchers; this is indeed higher than the cash ow correlation of 0.31,
reported in (24). When there are no switchers, return correlation is the same as cash ow
correlation.
    Our model suggests that fundamentally unrelated securities move together simply because
they belong to the same style. There is a common factor in returns to such securities even if
there is no common factor in their fundamentals. More generally, even if the fundamentals
of the securities in the same style are correlated { as in our numerical example { the common
factor in their returns is generally stronger than the common factor in their fundamentals.
    This simple implication of style investing has signi cant consequences for our interpre-
tation of security returns. Fama and French (1995) show that there is a striking common
factor in the returns on value stocks as well as a clear common component in small stock
returns. The rational pricing view of this comovement holds that it must be due to common
factors in the underlying earnings of small stocks and value stocks. The diÆculty with this
explanation is that it is not clear why rms of similar market capitalization should for that
very reason be fundamentally related, and hence why there should be a common component
                                                      14
to their earnings.8 It is more plausible to argue that, to the extent that small rms belong to
a style { either because size is a characteristic de ning a style or because size is a character-
istic de ning exclusion from a competing style such as indexation { they will move together
by virtue of fund ows in and out of that style. Even if there is a common component in the
earnings of small rms for some reason, the common component in their returns should be
much more pronounced. A similar prediction can be made for value stocks: there should be
a style-induced common factor in returns that is clearer than the common factor in earnings.
    The evidence of Fama and French (1995) is consistent with our analysis. Although they
do nd some evidence of a common factor in the fundamentals of small stocks, as well
as in value stock fundamentals, these fundamental factors are weaker than the factors in
returns. More importantly, there is little evidence that the return factors are driven by the
fundamental factors.
    In fact, it is possible to replicate Fama and French's results very closely using the simu-
lated data from our model. Suppose that X represents value stocks and Y , growth stocks.
The regression Fama and French run to illustrate comovement in returns is
                                RX;t = + 1 RM;t + 2 RS;t + uX;t ;
where9
                             RX;t =
                                         1 Xn P ;
                                        n=2          l;t
                                                l=n=2+1

                                = 21n Pl;t;
                                               2
                                               X n
                              RM;t
                                        l=1
                                         n=2
                           RS;t =
                                      1 X     Pl;t
                                                      1 3X n=2
                                                               P :
                                     n=2 l=1         n=2 l=n+1 l;t
Here, RX;t is the return on a portfolio consisting of half the available universe of n value
stocks; RM;t is the market factor, the average return of all 2n stocks; and RS;t is a style
factor, sometimes known as the HML factor, constructed as the return on a portfolio of the
remaining value stocks minus the return on half the available growth stocks. The reason we
sometimes use only half the stocks in a style is to ensure that RX;t and RS;t are constructed
using di erent stocks and hence that spurious correlation is avoided.
    When they run the above regression, Fama and French nd that there is a market factor
and a style factor in the returns of the value stock portfolio; put di erently, they nd that
   8 In principle, changes in discount rates can also generate comovement.  However, changes in interest rates
or risk aversion induce a common factor in the returns of all stocks, and do not explain why a particular
group of stocks comoves. A common factor in news about the risk of the assets in a style may be a source
of comovement, but there is no direct evidence to support this in the case of small and value stocks.
   9 In reading these equations, it may be helpful to recall that stocks numbered 1 through are in style ,
                                                                                             n             X

while stocks + 1 through 2 are in style .
             n               n             Y




                                                     15
the return on the value stock portfolio loads positively on the market and style factors. The
R2 they obtain is over 90%. In our simulated data, we nd
                    RX;t = 0:005 + 1:00RM;t + 0:48RS;t + uX;t , R2 = 92%;
a similar outcome.
    Fama and French then examine whether the common factors in value stock returns are
due to common factors in underlying fundamentals. Speci cally, they construct a market
fundamental factor DM;t and a style fundamental factor DS;t to mimic the return factors:
                             DM;t =
                                         1X 2n
                                        2n l=1 "l;t;
                                             n=2           3X
                                                            n=2
                             DS;t =
                                         1   X
                                                 "
                                                       1        " ;
                                        n=2 l=1 l;t n=2 l=n+1 l;t
and run a regression of RX;t on DM;t and DS;t. Disappointingly, the R2 falls to around 20%:
little of the comovement in returns appears to be due to comovement in fundamentals. Fama
and French ascribe their results to mismeasurement of the fundamental factors. Undoubtedly,
this is part of the problem, but style investing also provides a simple explanation. When we
run this second regression in our simulated data, we obtain
                    RX;t = 0:005 + 1:00DM;t + 0:48DS;t + uX;t , R2 = 50%;
to some extent replicating the large drop in R2 found by Fama and French. In other words,
the style level factor RS;t may be largely due to style level ows of funds between X and Y ,
and not to cash ow comovement.
     Other evidence is also consistent with this analysis. Pindyck and Rotemberg (1990)
show that there is comovement in prices of di erent commodities over and above what can
be explained by economic fundamentals. Lee, Shleifer and Thaler (1991) nd that the prices
of closed end mutual funds move together even when their fundamentals are unrelated. They
interpret this evidence as suggesting that closed end funds are generally traded by individual
investors, and hence that their prices re ect the sentiment of such investors. In the language
of the present model, if enough individual investors have trading styles that lead to the ow
of funds in and out of closed end mutual funds, then the changes in the prices of these funds
will re ect the common component of these investors' styles even when the fundamentals of
the di erent funds have nothing in common.
     Also relevant are the ndings of Froot and Dabora (1999), who study \Siamese twin"
stocks such as Royal Dutch and Shell. These stocks are claims to the same cash ow stream,
but are traded in di erent locations: Royal Dutch in the U.S. and Shell in the U.K. In a
frictionless market, these stocks should move together. Froot and Dabora show, however,
                                             16
that Royal Dutch is more sensitive to movements in the U.S. market while Shell comoves
more with the U.K. market. A style based perspective provides a natural explanation: Royal
Dutch, a member of the S&P 500, is bu eted by the ows of investors for whom the S&P
500 is a style and therefore comoves more with this index. For the same reason, Shell, a
member of the FTSE index, comoves more with that index.
    Our view of comovement has a number of other predictions and implications for the
interpretation of empirical facts. Not only should stocks within a style comove more than
their fundamentals do, but stocks that enter a style should comove more with the style after
they are added to it than before. For example, a stock that is added to an index such as
the S&P 500 should comove more with the index after it is added than before. Changes in
the pattern of comovement after a security is added to a style provide some of the clearest
empirical predictions of the theory.
    Interesting evidence about stocks entering new styles comes from European equity mar-
kets. Rouwenhorst (1999) notes that while money managers have traditionally allocated
funds to European stocks at the country level, a growing number of them have started allo-
cating funds by industry instead. Our model predicts that such a shift would make industry
factors in returns relatively stronger and country factors relatively weaker. This is exactly
the nding of Baca et. al. (2000) and Cavaglia et. al. (2000), who examine the importance of
industry and country factors in European stock returns over time. Moreover, Rouwenhorst
(1999) notes that when the shift to industry-level allocation began, country factors were still
more important that industry factors. This suggests that the shift in allocation strategy
generated the change in the structure of returns, rather than the other way around.
    In the data, portfolio premia are often associated with comovement: small stocks and
value stocks have each had high average returns and they both exhibit comovement. A
frequent interpretation is that the comovement represents some kind of systematic risk which
is then compensated by the observed premium. Our analysis suggests a di erent view. If
an investment strategy is found to earn a premium, it may become labelled a \style", and
mutual fund managers and institutional money managers will create products to facilitate
investing in that style. The resulting ows of funds into the style will generate comovement.
In other words the premia may lead to comovement, rather than the comovement leading to
premia.
    Even if the comovement in small stocks and value stocks does represent a form of sys-
tematic risk which ultimately generates a premium, our analysis suggests that at least part
of this risk is induced by investors themselves through their style-based strategies, rather
than being created by comovement in rm fundamentals. The risk is systematic even if it is
not fundamental (De Long et. al 1990b).
    The risk induced by style-based trading can have broader relevance in nancial markets.

                                              17
For example, several writers have observed that emerging nancial markets often move in
tandem. This correlation rose during the nancial crisis of 1998, when stock prices in nearly
all emerging markets su ered substantial declines, even in countries fundamentally unaf-
fected by the crisis. Such contagion may have been caused by across the board liquidation of
emerging market portfolios by investors switching out of the emerging market style. Kamin-
sky et. al. (2000) nd evidence of precisely such liquidations by mutual fund investors.
The emerging markets crisis vividly illustrates how style investing can become a source of
systematic risk, for both adherents to a style and for arbitrageurs. Precisely because all
investors trading the a ected securities are subject to this risk, price movements resulting in
demand shifts from style investors can be a constant feature of nancial markets, undeterred
by arbitrage.

4.2    Comovement Across Styles


Two assets in the same style, then, will be more correlated than their underlying funda-
mentals. Interestingly, the opposite is true of two assets in di erent styles, asset i in style
X , say, and asset j in style Y . Such assets will be less correlated than their underlying
fundamentals. Comparing the correlation matrices in (24) and (26), we see that the aver-
age correlation between two assets in di erent styles is 0:16 in the presence of switchers,
lower than the 0:06 cash ow correlation. The reason for this is the externality generated by
switchers: a good return for style X leads to a ow out of Y and into X , driving the styles in
opposite directions, and lowering the correlation between them. Figure 2 provides another
view of the same phenomenon: the price paths of styles X and Y tend to move in opposite
directions.
    This result implies, for example, that the returns on small stocks and large stocks and
the returns on value stocks and growth stocks should be pairwise less correlated than their
fundamentals. Reality may be more complicated than this because there is overlap between
styles. Competition between value and growth would suggest that their returns are less
correlated than their fundamentals, but both value stocks and growth stocks are part of the
overall U.S. stock market, itself a style. By the rst result of this section, this would tend
to make value and growth stocks more correlated than their cash ows.
    In view of this complication, it is better to make our prediction in terms of market
adjusted returns, or returns net of market returns. In other words, we predict that the market
adjusted returns on value and growth stocks are less correlated than the fundamentals of
value and growth stocks, in turn adjusted for market fundamentals.
    One potential application of our result that di erent styles exhibit insuÆcient comove-
ment is to stocks and bonds themselves. A number of authors (Barsky 1989, Summers 1983)

                                              18
have noted that these two broad asset classes appear to comove too little when one considers
that any news about future riskfree rates should tend to push them in the same direction:
the 1970's for example, were characterized by low stock market valuations in spite of low
real interest rates, while the 1980's brought a sustained rise in the stock market in spite of
much higher real rates. Another striking example of divergence between bonds and stocks
occurred in Fall 1998 following Russia's devaluation of the rouble and default on outstanding
debt: bond prices rose sharply while the stock market fell.
    Our model sheds light on such puzzling delinkages between the stock and bond markets
through ows of funds from one asset class to another which push them in opposite directions.
When applied to Fall 1998, our model e ectively captures a \ ight to quality" phenomenon,
often discussed in the nancial press.

4.3    Volatility


In our framework, prices of styles are excessively volatile, in the sense that they are more
volatile than they would be in the absence of switchers, or equivalently, more volatile than
news about dividends. In our numerical example,
                                   std(PX;t) = 1:3 > 1:
                                   std(PX;t
                                           )


    The excess volatility in our model comes from two sources. First, and most obviously,
it comes from switchers' use of adaptive expectations. An increase in style X 's price due
to good fundamental news attracts switcher ows which then push prices up more than
fundamentals justify. The second mechanism operates through the externality. Good news
about a competing style Y generates switcher ows into Y and out of X , thus moving X 's
price even if there is no fundamental news about X .
    Shiller (1981) and Le Roy and Porter (1981) nd evidence of excess volatility in the
aggregate U.S. stock market, while Campbell (2000) documents excess volatility in a large
number of international stock markets. Our model is consistent with this evidence. Above
and beyond that, it predicts that speci c equity styles will also exhibit excess volatility: the
prices of small stocks, growth stocks, and of individual industry portfolios should also move
more than is justi ed by their fundamentals.
    Our model also predicts that excess volatility will be higher at the style level than at the
individual stock level. In our numerical example,
                             std(PX;t ) = 1:3 > 1:1 = std(Pi;t ) :
                             std(DX;t )                std(Di;t )
                                              19
This is a direct consequence of our results on comovement: since individual stocks comove
more than is justi ed by fundamentals, the ratio of return volatility to fundamental volatility
will be higher for styles than for individual stocks.

4.4    Own- and Cross- Autocorrelations


The presence of switchers in the market makes returns on a style positively autocorrelated in
the short run, and negatively autocorrelated in the long run: a good return for style X draws
in switchers who push its price up again next period, inducing positive autocorrelation. The
price swing is eventually reversed in the long run, creating mean-reversion.
    The relative performance aspect of our framework, and in particular the externality that
it creates, lead to additional predictions about cross -autocorrelations across styles, namely
that they should be negative in the short run and positive in the long run. A good return on
style X at time t generates out ows from Y into X , pushing Y 's price down at time t + 1.
In the long run, Y 's price recovers, generating positive cross-autocorrelations at longer lags.
    Table 1 shows the magnitude of these own- and cross-autocorrelations for our particular
numerical example. The rst order own-autocorrelation is 0.53, while the correlation of
returns nine lags apart is -0.2. These positive autocorrelations appear large but should be
interpreted carefully. Recall that these gures are computed for the case of just two styles:
at every moment in time, both styles are subject to the e ects of switchers, who are either
adding money to a style, or pulling it out, resulting in strong serial correlation. In reality,
investors choose from many di erent styles, and at any one moment, only a few of them are
subject to the e ect of switchers; the others are relatively untouched. Competition among
multiple styles will attenuate the autocorrelations.
    In making predictions, we again need to keep in mind that in reality, there is likely to be
overlap in styles not captured in our simple model: stocks will be a ected both by ows into
the stock market as a whole, as well as by intra stock market ows between styles. We would
therefore expect aggregate U.S. and international stock markets to be positively (negatively)
autocorrelated at short (long) horizons, and also industry portfolio returns net of market
returns, value and growth portfolio returns net of market returns, and small and large stock
portfolio returns net of market returns to be positively (negatively) autocorrelated at short
(long) horizons.
    The available evidence on autocorrelations is consistent with our analysis. Poterba and
Summers (1988) nd that monthly aggregate U.S. stock returns as well as international stock
indices are positively autocorrelated at horizons up to a year, and negatively autocorrelated
thereafter. Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1991) nd the same e ect in the bond market,
as well as in real estate and commodity markets.
                                              20
   Our simulated data also shows us the autocorrelation structure of individual stocks. For
our particular numerical example, it has the form10
                                                                    !
                                                            Ab   Bb
                                corr(Pt ; Pt+1) =         Bb   Ab
                                                                      ,
with            0                             1         0                             1
                B  0:22    0:22    0:22 C          B      0:22       0:22 C
                B
                B 0:22                  .
                           . . . . . . .. C  C        B
                                                      B   .
                                                          ..      ...           ... C
                                                                                    C
           Ab = B
                B  .       . . . . . . 0:22 CC , B = BB ...
                                             C   b    B
                                                                        . . . ...   C
                                                                                    C :
                @ ..
                B                            A        @                             C
                                                                                    A
                   0:22       0:22 0:22                   0:22       0:22
Note that the positive own -autocorrelation at the style level induces a very substantial
positive cross -autocorrelation of 0.22 between stocks in the same style: a good return on
style X this period is likely to be followed by a good return in the next, making stocks
within a style positively cross-autocorrelated. Meanwhile, the negative cross-autocorrelation
between styles induces negative cross-autocorrelations between stocks in di erent styles.

4.5    Style-level Momentum and Contrarian Strategies


When switchers a ect prices, style-level momentum or \style-chasing" strategies are prof-
itable. A style-level momentum strategy buys into styles with good recent performance and
avoids styles that have done poorly. Such strategies are successful because they take ad-
vantage of the price movements caused by switchers as they move funds across styles: good
performance by a style attracts switcher ows which then drive the price even higher. A
strategy that anticipates this and jumps ahead of the switcher ows is likely to do well.
    A simple way of implementing a style-chasing strategy is through the following share
demands:
                                      1
                              Ni;t = [PX;t PY;t ], iX;                               (27)
                                      n
                                      1
                              Nj;t = [PY;t PX;t ], jY .
                                      n
A straightforward calculation shows that the average pro t from such a strategy can be
decomposed into three components:11
                              X
                           E [ Nl;t Pl;t+1 ]                                           (28)
                               l
                       = [cov(PX;t ; PX;t+1 ) + cov(PY;t; PY;t+1)]
 10 This is a 2n  2n matrix whose (i; j ) element is corr(P ; P +1 ).
                                                         i;t     j;t
 11 By average pro t, we mean average one period change in wealth from implementing the strategy.

                                                  21
                              [cov(PX;t ; PY;t+1) + cov(PY;t; PX;t+1)]
                             +[E (PX;t PY;t)]2 :
    The rst component depends on style own-autocorrelations, the second on cross-autocorrelations,
and the third on cross-sectional dispersion in average style returns. In the previous section,
we showed that in the presence of switchers, short run own-autocorrelations are positive, and
short run cross-autocorrelations are negative. All three components in the decomposition
are therefore positive, making style momentum a pro table strategy.
    To illustrate this, we compute Sharpe ratios for a number of di erent investment strate-
gies: strategy (A) adheres to style X throughout, (B) adheres to style Y throughout, and
(C) follows the momentum strategy in (27), where the investor goes long the style which
outperformed in the previous period, and short the other style. Table 2 reports the Sharpe
ratios, both when switchers are present and when they are not. The table con rms our pre-
diction that when switchers play a role in setting prices, style-based momentum strategies
o er attractive Sharpe ratios.12
    A number of existing studies examine style-chasing strategies. In all cases, their evidence
supports our analysis. Moskowitz and Grinblatt (2000) show that a momentum strategy
based on industry portfolios is pro table; Lewellen (1999) investigates a momentum strategy
using size-sorted portfolios, and nds it to be successful. Richards (1996) and Asness, Porter,
and Stevens (1997) show that a momentum strategy works well when applied to country
portfolios.
    Also consistent with our model, Haugen and Baker (1996) track returns on a large number
of investment styles and show that a strategy which tilts towards styles with good prior
performance earns very high risk-adjusted returns { higher than the returns on any one style.
They successfully replicate their ndings in out-of-sample tests in a number of international
markets.
    Our model also predicts that in many situations, style-based contrarian strategies will
be successful. In a simple contrarian strategy, the investor goes long if a style is trading at
a price P below its fundamental value P , and short otherwise:
                                Ni;t =
                                          1 hP  P i , iX;                                (29)
                                                     X;t
                                          n X;t
                                N =
                                          1 hP  P i , jY .
                                     j;t           Y;t    Y;t
                                              n
These strategies should work because they buy into styles whose prices have been pushed
below fundamental value by switcher out ows, and can be expected to correct in the future.
  12 The Sharpe Ratio we compute is the mean one period change in wealth from implementing the strategy
divided by the standard deviation of the one period change in wealth.
                                                   22
    Table 2 also reports the Sharpe Ratio of the contrarian strategy in (29), which we label
Strategy D. The Sharpe ratio is indeed positive, although not nearly as impressive as that
for the momentum strategy.
    Evidence on the performance of style-based contrarian strategies is more limited. Asness,
Porter, and Stevens (1997) show that a contrarian strategy applied to country portfolios
works well, and our model predicts that an industry-based strategy will also be successful.
    In our model, momentum and contrarian strategies implemented at the individual stock
level are also pro table.13 However, our framework makes the strong prediction that the
success of these individual stock level strategies is driven by style level phenomena. In this
regard, Moskowitz and Grinblatt's work on industry momentum is particularly signi cant
because they show that the well-known evidence on momentum in individual stocks (see
Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993) is largely generated at the industry level, exactly the prediction
of our model.

5 Special Styles
An important style that deserves further discussion is indexation. The ideas in the previous
section apply as much to an index style as they do to a style like \new economy" stocks.
An index may experience long and substantial deviations from fundamental value: investors
may see an index do well, buy into it, push its price up still further and thus attract further
buyers. This can lead to years of superior performance for the index relative to the overall
market, whatever its fundamental news. Moreover, stocks within an index should comove
more than their fundamentals and a stock which is added to an index should comove more
with the index after inclusion than before. Indices should display excess volatility and be
positively (negatively) autocorrelated at short (long) horizons.
    One issue which makes indexation di erent from other styles is that it is not obvious what
investors compare indexation to when they are deciding whether to index. One possibility is
that switchers compare indexers to active managers, who hold a mix of stocks in the index
and outside it. This in turn raises the possibility that active managers may strategically alter
the proportion of stocks within the index that they hold so as to control the key variable
that switchers pay attention to, namely performance relative to the index. For example, if
an index enters a switcher-driven period of high returns, active managers may increase their
holdings of stocks in the index, reducing their tracking error relative to the index in order
to slow down out ows from their funds.
  13 Other explanations for the success of such strategies can be found in Barberis, Shleifer, Vishny (1998),
Daniel, Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong and Stein (1999).

                                                     23
    Another interesting issue arises with price-dependent styles, where the characteristic
de ning the style depends on price. Many common styles such as \small stocks" or \value
stocks" fall into this category. When a style is price-dependent, its composition may change.
Suppose that switchers have kicked o a long upswing in the price of small stocks relative
to their fundamentals: they buy small stocks, pushing up their price, which attracts more
switchers, and so on. After a while, some of the small stocks experience price increases so
large that they cannot be considered small any more, and are no longer part of the small
stock style.
    This change in composition need not brake the evolution of the small stock style itself.
However, it may mean that the degree of misvaluation experienced by any individual asset is
lower than in the case where the style characteristic is not price-dependent: if a small stock
becomes too highly valued relative to its fundamentals, it ceases to be a small stock and the
buying pressure from switchers following the small stock style eases o , halting its ascent.
This argument depends on the correlation between characteristic and price being negative:
the higher a stock's price, the less likely it is to be a small stock. When this correlation is
positive, misvaluation of individual stocks is more severe when the style is price-dependent
than when it is not.

6 Estimating Style Premia
Academics and practitioners are frequently interested in estimating the mean return of a
portfolio of stocks with some particular characteristic, or of a style, in our terminology. This
is not an easy task: even after seeing many years of data, an estimate of the mean based on
the sample average of style returns is typically very imprecise (Merton, 1980).
    In an economy with switchers, using the sample mean to estimate the true mean is even
more hazardous. As we saw in Section 3, fund ows from switchers may generate several
years of strikingly good returns on a style, raising the style's sample mean. These high
returns are not evidence of a high true mean: they are simply due to transitory in ows from
switchers, and as such, are eventually reversed. In the presence of switchers, then, the sample
mean can deviate from the true mean more than usual, making it an even more imprecise
estimator.
    To illustrate the problem, recall that when researchers want to estimate the true mean
 of a style, they take return data for the style over  periods, r1 ; : : : ; r , say, compute the
sample mean r, and then assign this estimate a standard error of p  , where r is the sample
                                                                        r



standard deviation of style returns.
    To see if this is a useful measure of the accuracy of the sample mean in the presence of
                                                24
switchers, we use the price formula (22) together with the parameters in (24) and (25) to
create simulated data for 100 stocks over  periods. We compute the mean return of style
X in this sample { the mean return of the rst 50 stocks, to be precise { and then repeat
the process 1000 times with 1000 di erent data sets, recomputing the mean of style X each
time. Finally, we calculate the standard deviation of these 1000 sample means. Table 3
reports results for sample sizes  = 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50, alongside the usual measure of
sample mean standard deviation p  . In our simulated data, r = 0:75.
                                    r




    Table 3 shows that in the presence of switchers, sample means are generally more volatile
than the p  measure would suggest. Put di erently, the sample mean is less accurate a mea-
          r



sure of the true mean when switchers are around. As a technical matter, the reason for this
is that the p  measure assumes that returns are uncorrelated; however, switchers introduce
              r



bursts of positive serial correlation into returns, making sample means more volatile.
    Fama and French (2000) make essentially the same point in the context of estimating
the equity premium. They point out that changes in the discount rate used by investors
lead to big changes in stock prices which a ect the in-sample average return a lot but carry
little information about the true long run mean return of stocks. In this way, changes in
discount rates reduce the precision of the sample mean estimator. In our model, ows from
switchers that are unrelated to cash ows implicitly change the discount rate, with identical
consequences. Motivated by this point, Fama and French go further and suggest that an
alternative estimator based on the dividend-discount model o ers a more precise estimate of
the true underlying mean.
     As a practical matter, the fact that switchers can reduce the accuracy of sample means
as estimates of true means suggests a more cautious approach to interpreting historical
premia. Suppose that a style experiences several successive years of high returns. A careful
investor will worry that the high returns are simply due to sustained, but temporary, in ows
from switchers, and therefore not representative of a genuinely high underlying mean .
Conversely, if a style experiences a few years of poor returns, it is important to bear in mind
that the lackluster returns may be due to temporary out ows driven by switchers and are
not necessarily an indication of a low true mean .
     To put this in historical context, consider again the case of small stocks. The stellar
performance of this style from 1975-1983 strengthened many observers' belief in the existence
of a small stock premium. A di erent view is that those good years were simply due to in ows
from switchers and therefore not representative of a true premium. Such a theory would
also predict that after those impressive years, small stocks should experience poor returns as
the mispricing is corrected, so that recalculating the sample mean several years later should
give substantially lower numbers. This prediction is consistent with actual experience.
     Along similar lines, the 1995-2000 stretch of high returns on the aggregate stock market

                                              25
might be viewed as yet more evidence that stocks have an underlying mean  that is much
higher than that of bonds. However, if these good years are due to switcher in ows, such
an inference is not warranted. Finally, the poor performance of value stocks in 1998-1999
after several decades of high returns has led some to question whether value strategies really
earn the genuine long term premium many observers believe they do. A switcher-based view
suggests that the bad years may be due to switcher out ows, triggered by the success of the
competing growth style, and hence not necessarily a reason for long term pessimism.
    The fact that sample means may be especially imprecise estimators of true means in
the presence of switchers raises the question of whether there are alternative estimators that
would serve the investor better. One possibility would make use of the externality introduced
by the relative performance feature of our model: the true mean of a style X may be better
estimated using information in the sample mean of a competing style Y , even if the investor
has no reason to believe that the true means are related in any way. To see this, suppose that
the sample mean of style X is X = 10%, and of style Y is Y = 5%. Assume also { and this
is key { that the investor believes that the true means on both styles are positive, perhaps
because risk-aversion typically implies positive risk premia. Seeing that Y has a negative
sample mean, the investor infers that style Y must have experienced negative shocks relative
to its true mean over this sample period. Since he believes in the importance of switchers,
he knows that shocks to the two styles are contemporaneously negatively correlated, telling
him that style X has probably experienced positive shocks relative to its true mean over this
sample period, and hence that its true mean is probably less than 10%.

7 Optimal Investment Strategies in the Presence of
  Switchers
If an arbitrageur believes that switchers play an important role in setting prices, what kind
of strategies will he choose to use? In Section 4.5, we considered two possibilities: a style
momentum or \style-chasing" strategy, which invests in styles which have had good recent
performance; and also a style contrarian strategy, which invests in styles with poor perfor-
mance over an extended prior period of time.
    Table 4 reports Sharpe ratios for these strategies in an economy with switchers. Strategy
(C) is style momentum, while strategy (D) is the contrarian strategy. Strategies (A) and
(B) invest in styles X throughout and in style Y throughout, respectively. For parameters
other than , we use the values in (24) and (25), and for , we consider a range of values. In
Section 4.5, we used a  of 0:95, so the results for that case are identical to those in Table 2;
the results for  = 0:65 and  = 0:35 are new to this section.

                                               26
    As noted in Section 4.5, the momentum and contrarian strategies are pro table relative
to strategies that adhere to only one style. However, the momentum strategy is by far the
most attractive of strategies (A)-(D) across all values of  that we try. This is particularly
true for high , where switcher ows into styles are very persistent, and mispricings take a
long time to correct. In these cases, it makes much more sense for the arbitrageur to ride
with the switchers, rather than to try to bet against them. For lower values of , switcher
  ows are less persistent and prices revert to fundamental value more quickly. This makes
the contrarian strategy more attractive, although it still remains a distant second to the
momentum strategy.
    Our results are consistent with the nding of De Long et. al. (1990a) who use a simple
model to show that when arbitrageurs are included along with trend-chasing investors, they
choose to follow a style-chasing, or momentum strategy. This is important because it suggests
that arbitrageurs will not be e ective in correcting mispricing caused by switchers. If an asset
is overpriced, arbitrageurs prefer to buy the asset in expectation of further appreciation than
to sell or short it. As a result, they exacerbate rather than attenuate the e ect of switchers.
    We can go one step further and compute the optimal strategy for an arbitrageur who
is clever enough to gure out the exact demand function (5) used by switchers. To enable
a direct comparison with the style momentum and contrarian strategies, we restrict the
arbitrageur to style level strategies in which demand for all assets within the same style is
identical:
                                               1
                                      Ni;t = NX;t ; iX;
                                               n
                                               1
                                      Nj;t = NY;t , jY .
                                               n

   Given capital of W A at time t, he solves14
                  max   E A ( exp[ (W A + X N P              +
                                                                X
                                                                    Nj;t Pj;t+1 )])
                 N ;N     t                        i;t i;t +1
                     i;t   j;t
                                               iX              jY
             = N max ;N
                     X;t
                         EtA ( exp[ (W A + NX;t PX;t+1 + NY;t PY;t+1 )]);
                            Y;t



to obtain                                !         0 1
                                                         A (P
                                                                           1
                                   A
                                  NX;t                 E            P    )
                                             = V 1 @ 1 EtA(PX;t+1 P X;t) A ;               (30)
                                   A
                                  NY;t                  t     Y;t+1  Y;t
where V is the covariance matrix of returns.
   Since he knows that prices are determined by (22), he is able to conclude that
                                         1 S  1 (N S
                  EtA (PX;t+1 PX;t ) = NX;t                         S );
                                                                   NX;t                    (31)
                                               +1        X;t +1
 14 The \A" superscript in these expressions stands for arbitrageur.

                                                      27
                   EtA (PY;t+1   PY;t )   =   1 N S
                                                       X;t+1 ;

where from (11),
                        = PX;t 2 PY;t (1                          P           PY;t k ):
                                                        X
                                                        t
               S
               NX;t+1                              )         k 1 ( X;t   k
                                                                               2              (32)
                                                        k=1


    In the simple case where both styles have equal return variance, equation (30) reduces to
                                       A = cN S
                                    NX;t                                                   (33)
                                                    X;t+1 ;
                                       A =       cNX;t  +1 ,
                                     NY;t             S


where c is a constant that depends on the covariance matrix of returns.
    In other words, the optimal strategy involves going long a certain number of shares in one
style, and short an equal number in the other. Looking at (32) and (33) more closely shows
that the optimal strategy essentially combines a momentum and a contrarian strategy. The
 rst term in (32) is a momentum component, because it pushes the arbitrageur to allocate
more to style X if style X did well in previous period. The second set of terms in (32) form
a contrarian component, pushing the arbitrageur to allocate less to style X if X has done
well over an extended recent period of time.
    Table 4 reports the Sharpe ratio for this optimal strategy, labelled strategy (E). For high
, the momentum strategy and the optimal strategy have almost identical Sharpe ratios.
This makes sense given (32): when  is close to 1, the second set of terms is downweighted,
making the optimal strategy essentially a momentum strategy. As  falls, the second set
of terms in (32) becomes more important, giving the optimal strategy more of a contrarian
 avor. This is consistent with the improved performance of contrarian strategies for low .
    In reality, even an investor who believes in the existence of switchers is unlikely to be
able to gure out their exact demand function. This observation raises the central problem
for rational arbitrage. On the one hand, a rational arbitrageur might wish to style-chase,
recognizing that such \re exive" trading, in the language of Soros (1987), might bring high
returns. On the other hand, re exive trading calls for taking long positions in overpriced
securities and short positions in underpriced securities, and hence runs the substantial risk
that prices return to fundamentals faster than one expects. Similarly, while the contrarian
strategy can also earn high abnormal returns in the long run, it has short run risks as well.
Speci cally, the arbitrageur must be able and willing to sustain the short run losses as the
trend continues, which he might not be able to do if his resources or horizon is limited
(De Long et. al., 1990b, Shleifer and Vishny 1997). Whatever the strategy the rational
arbitrageur chooses, it is fraught with risks, which suggests that the phenomena we describe
in this paper may in uence nancial markets over long periods of time.
                                              28
8 Conclusion
The model of nancial markets discussed in this paper is in many ways similar to that
proposed by Black (1986). On the one hand, nancial markets are not eÆcient. Prices deviate
substantially from fundamental values as styles become extremely popular or unpopular.
Such price deviations can easily look like bubbles. If an observer knows what is going on,
there are substantial, though risky, pro ts to be made from a combination of contrarian and
momentum trading. On the other hand, despite the fact that markets are ineÆcient, prices
are extremely noisy. Patterns in security prices are complex, and may change signi cantly
over time. Without knowing which style or model is favored, arbitrage is very risky and
there are no consistent pro ts to be had. Moreover, the analysis is fraught with the danger
of nding patterns where none exist. To some people such markets might even appear to be
eÆcient.
   Such markets are not entirely anarchic, however. They do exhibit long run pressures
toward fundamentals. Moreover, there are empirical predictions that one can make about
security prices in such markets, including excess comovement. In this paper, we have only
begun to scratch the surface of such markets. It is possible that further predictions will
emerge as we look at nancial markets from the perspective of style investing.




                                            29
9 References
Asness, C., Liew J., and R. Stevens (1997), \Parallels Between the Cross-sectional Pre-
dictability of Stock Returns and Country Returns," Journal of Portfolio Management 23,
79-87.
Baca, S., Garbe B., and R. Weiss (2000), \The Rise of Sector E ects in Major Equity
Markets," Financial Analysts Journal 56, 34-40.
Banz, R. (1979), \The Relationship between Return and Market Value of Common Stocks,"
Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3-18.

Barberis, N., Shleifer A., and R. Vishny (1998), \A Model of Investor Sentiment," Journal
of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.

Barksy, R. (1989), \Why Don't the Prices of Stocks and Bonds Move Together?," American
Economic Review 79, 1132-1145.

Bernstein, R. (1995), Style Investing, New York: Wiley.
Black, F. (1986), \Noise," Journal of Finance 41, 529-43.
Campbell, J.Y. (2000), \Asset Prices, Consumption, and the Business Cycle," in J. Taylor
and M. Woodford eds. Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, North Holland.
Cavaglia S., Brightman C., and M. Aked (2000), \The Increasing Importance of Industry
Factors," Financial Analysts Journal 56, 41-54.
Chan L., Karceski J., and J. Lakonishok (2001), \A New Paradigm or the Same Old Hype?
The Future of Value Versus Growth Investing," forthcoming, Financial Analysts Journal.
Cutler, D., Poterba J., and L. Summers (1991), \Speculative Dynamics," Review of Economic
Studies 58, 529-46.

Daniel, K., Hirshleifer D., and A. Subrahmanyam (1998), \Investor Psychology and Security
Market Under- and Overreactions," Journal of Finance 53, 1839-85.
De Long, B., Shleifer A., Summers L., M. Waldmann (1990a), \Positive Feeback Investment
Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation," Journal of Finance 45, 375-95.
De Long, B., Shleifer A., Summers L., and M. Waldmann (1990b), \Noise Trader Risk in
Financial Markets," Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-38.
                                            30
Fama, E., and K. French (1992), \The Cross-section of Expected Stock Returns," Journal
of Finance 47, 427-465.

Fama, E., and K. French (1995), \Size and Book-to-Market Factors in Earnings and Re-
turns", Journal of Finance 50, 131-155.
Fama, E., and K. French (2000), \The Equity Premium," Working Paper, University of
Chicago.
Froot, K., and E. Dabora (1999), \How are Stock Prices a ected by the Location of Trade?,"
Journal of Financial Economics 53, 189-216.

Goetzmann, W., Massa M., and K. Rouwenhorst (2000), \Behavioral Factors in Mutual
Fund Flows," Working Paper, Yale School of Management.
Gompers P., and A. Metrick (2001), \Institutional Investors and Equity Prices," forthcoming,
Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Graham, B., and D. Dodd (1934), Security Analysis, New York: McGraw Hill.
Harris, L., and E. Gurel (1986), \Price and Volume E ects Associated with Changes in
the S&P 500: New Evidence for the Existence of Price Pressure," Journal of Finance 41,
851-860.
Haugen, R., and N. Baker (1996), \Commonality in the Determinants of Expected Stock
Returns," Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401-439.
Hong H., and J. Stein (1999), \A Uni ed Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading and
Overreaction in Asset Markets," Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman (1993), \Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Stock Market EÆciency," Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Kaminsky, G., Lyons R., and S. Schmukler (2000), \Managers, Investors, and Crises: Mutual
Fund Strategies in Emerging Markets," NBER Working Paper 7855.
Kaul, A., Mehrotra V., and R. Morck (2000), \Demand Curves for Stocks Do Slope Down:
New Evidence from an Index Weights Adjustment," Journal of Finance 55, 893-912.
Kindleberger, C. (1978), Manias, Panics, and Crashes, New York: Basic Books.
Lamont, O., and R. Thaler (2000), \Can the Market Add and Subtract? Mispricing in Tech
Stock Carveouts," Working Paper, University of Chicago.
                                            31
Lee, C., Shleifer A., and R. Thaler (1991), \Investor Sentiment and the Closed-end Fund
puzzle," Journal of Finance 46, 75-110.
LeRoy, S., and R. Porter (1981), \The Present Value Relation: Tests Based on Variance
Bounds," Econometrica 49, 555-577.
Lewellen J. (1999), \Momentum Pro ts and the Autocorrelation of Returns," Working Pa-
per, Sloan School of Management.
Merton R. (1980), \On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market: An Exploratory
Investigation," Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323-361.
Moskowitz, T., and M. Grinblatt (1999), \Do Industries Explain Momentum?," Journal of
Finance 54, 1249-1290.

Mullainathan, S. (2000), \Thinking Through Categories," Working Paper, MIT.
Pindyck R., and J. Rotemberg (1990), \The Excess Comovement of Commodity Prices,"
Economic Journal 100, 1173-1189.

Poterba, J. and L. Summers (1988), \Mean Reversion in Stock Returns: Evidence and Im-
plications," Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27-59.
Richards, A. (1996), \Winner-Loser Reversals in National Stock Market Indices: Can They
Be Explained?," Journal of Finance 52, 2129-2144.
Rosch, E., and B. Lloyd (1978), Cognition and Categorization, New Jersey: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates.
Rouwenhorst, G. (1999), \European Equity Markets and the EMU," Financial Analysts
Journal 55, 57-64.

Shiller, R., (1981), \Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justi ed by Subsequent Changes
in Dividends?," American Economic Review 71, 421-36.
Shleifer A. (1986), \Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?," Journal of Finance 41,
579-590.
Shleifer A. (2000), IneÆcient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance, Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Shleifer A., and R. Vishny (1997), \The Limits of Arbitrage," Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.

                                            32
Siegel, J. (1999), Stocks for the Long Run, New York: McGraw Hill.
Soros G. (1987), The Alchemy of Finance, New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Summers, L. (1983), \The Nonadjustment of Nominal Interest Rates: A Study of the Fisher
E ect," in J. Tobin, ed., Macroeconomic Prices and Quantities: Essays in Memory of Arthur
Okun, Brookings Institution.

Swensen, D. (2000), Pioneering Portfolio Management, The Free Press.
Vuolteenaho, T. (1999), \What Drives Firm-level Stock Returns?," Working Paper, Harvard
University.
Wilson, R., and F. Keil (1999), The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences, Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press.




                                           33
10 Appendix
Deriving relative performance
    In this section, we show that adaptive expectations combined with a desire to maintain
overall equity holdings at some target level, lead to demand functions that are based on
relative performance. Suppose that at the start of each period, switchers are instructed to
oversee the investment of an amount W S . TheseSinvestors want to keep their overall  risky
asset allocation close to a preset target level of W with the remainder, WS W , allocated
                                                                           S    S

to cash. They see their main task as deciding how the xed amount W should be divided
between the two risky styles that are available. Once the overall allocation to a style has
been determined, the funds are split equally between the assets in that style. We suppose
that switchers have CARA preferences de ned over the value of their invested funds one
period later. In other words, they solve
                      max EtS ( exp[ W S ( nX Rl;t+1 + 1 n X Rl;t+1 )])
                                              X             X
                                                                                       (34)
                      X
                                                   lX                   lY
                = max ( exp[
                      X
                          EtS          W   S
                                               (    X RX;t+1     + (1          X   )RY;t+1)]);
where
                                               = n1 Rl;t+1 ;
                                                    X
                                  RX;t+1
                                                    lX
                                  RY;t+1       =  1 X
                                                        R :      l;t+1
                                                         n lY
Here X is the fraction of W S allocated to style X , controls switcher risk aversion, EtS
denotes their expectations at time t, and Rl;t+1 is the gross return on asset l between time
t and t + 1, de ned as PP +1 . If switchers take style returns RX;t and RY;t to be normally
                          l;t



distributed, this leads to an allocation of
                           l;t




                                  
                     XW
                         S
                             = X W S + 1 EtS (RX;t+1 RY;t+1 );                        (35)
                                   
                     YW
                         S
                             = 1 X W S + 1 EtS (RY;t+1 RX;t+1 );
where Y is the fraction allocated to style Y and where
               X = VarSt (RY;t+1) CovSt (RX;t+1 ; RY;t+1);
                 = VarSt (RX;t+1 ) + VarSt (RY;t+1 ) 2CovSt (RX;t+1 ; RY;t+1):
    Consistent with the intuition given in the main text, these demand functions depend on
relative expected returns, EtS (RX;t+1 RY;t+1 ): the expected return on style X a ects the
allocation to style X but also has an equal and opposite e ect on the allocation to style Y .
                                                    34
   Suppose now that switchers form adaptive expectations of future returns, so that
                      EtS (RX;t+1 ) = EtS 1 (RX;t ) + (1 )RX;t 1 ;
which implies                                     t 1
                                                  X
                          Et (RX;t+1 ) = (1 ) k 1 RX;t k .
                            S
                                                      k=1
Substituting into (35) gives
                              
                                            +1
                                                  t 1
                                                 X
                XW
                     S
                         =  
                               X
                                    W   S
                                     k=1        k      k 1 (RX;t   RY;t   k   );            (36)
                             
                         = 1 X W S + 1  k 1(RY;t
                                          t 1
                                          X
                YW
                     S
                                                                     k   RX;t        k   ):
                                          k=1


    To obtain the allocation for an individual asset in style X or Y , simply divide these
quantities by n. We think of the demand functions in (5) and (6) as approximations to
the policies in (36) that preserve the feature most relevant for our analysis, namely the
dependence on relative past performance. The approximations are useful because they lead
to simpler expressions for prices.




                                                 35
Table 1: Own autocorrelations of returns on style X and cross autocorrela-
tions between returns on styles X and Y in two economies, one with switchers
and the other without.

                                    No switchers   With switchers
           corr(PX;t ; PX;t k )
               k=1                  0              0.53
               k=2                  0              0.40
               k=3                  0              0.25
               k=4                  0              0.09
               k=5                  0              -0.01
               k=6                  0              -0.08
               k=7                  0              -0.13
               k=8                  0              -0.16
               k=9                  0              -0.20
           corr(PX;t ; PY;t k )   0
               k=1                  0              -0.51
               k=2                  0              -0.34
               k=3                  0              -0.22
               k=4                  0              -0.07
               k=5                  0              0.02
               k=6                  0              0.09
               k=7                  0              0.16
               k=8                  0              0.17
               k=9                  0              0.19




                                      36
Table 2: Sharpe ratios of various strategies in two economies, one with switch-
ers and the other without. Strategy (A) always invests in style X; strategy
(B) always invests in style Y; strategy (C) is a style chasing strategy which
invests each period in the style which did better in the previous period;
strategy (D) is a style contrarian strategy which invests each period in styles
trading below fundamental value at the start of the period. The parameter
 controls the persistence of switcher ows.



                     Strategy           = 0:95 no switchers
                     A                 0        0
                     B                 0        0
                     C                 0.59     0
                     D                 0.11     0


Table 3: Standard deviation of sample mean estimators in repeated samples
for two economies, one with switchers and the other without.  is the number
of sample observations. p  is the standard deviation of the sample mean in
                          r

the absence of switchers.

                               pr       With switchers
                         10   0.23         0.38
                         20   0.17         0.22
                         30   0.14         0.15
                         40   0.12         0.12
                         50   0.11         0.11

                                           37
Table 4: Sharpe ratios of various strategies in an economy with switchers.
Strategy (A) always invests in style X; strategy (B) always invests in style Y;
strategy (C) is a style chasing strategy which invests each period in the style
which did better in the previous period; strategy (D) is a style contrarian
strategy which invests each period in styles trading below fundamental value
at the start of the period; strategy (E) is the optimal strategy for an arbi-
trageur who knows the form of switcher demand. The parameter  controls
the persistence of switcher ows.

                  Strategy      = 0:95       = 0:65      = 0:35
                  A          0             0            0
                  B          0             0            0
                  C          0.59          0.50         0.44
                  D          0.11          0.21         0.31
                  E          0.61          0.58         0.57




                                      38
        52.5



         52
                                                  X’s price with switchers present


        51.5



         51

                              X’s price without switchers
price




        50.5
                       Y’s price without switchers

         50



        49.5
                                                     Y’s price with switchers present

         49



        48.5
               0   5                 10               15               20               25   30
                                                     period




Figure 1. Impulse responses to a cash ow shock to style X in period 1. Prices of
both X and Y are initially 50. Dashed lines indicate fundamental values, or prices
without switchers. Solid lines indicate prices with switchers.




                                             39
        70


                 X’s price with switchers
        65


        60


        55


        50
                                                                             X’s price without switchers
price




        45                                       Y’s price with switchers

                                                                       Y’s price without switchers
        40


        35


        30


        25
             0         10         20        30      40       50             60      70         80          90   100
                                                            period




Figure 2. Price paths for two styles X and Y. Dashed lines indicate fundamental
values, or prices without switchers. Solid lines indicate prices with switchers.




                                                      40
