                                             '%%   




                              
                     


                                             
                                                !
                                              !"


                                           #$%"&()*)
                                   &++,,, - $+&"&+,()*)



                             .                               
                                /)0).""1232
                                   "!-4$5.)6/7(
                                     1!-6)))




                
 ! "# $" %& &'    "( )  )  ))   )
        *   +%  *    
,&)&-&$../0123 " 4 4+%5      
         ,    - " +

63222*7 &  8+% ( 9+( )  5 +&    
 ) *:       5      )
6  ) 5  +
              
          
  !  "#$%$
&'( )$$$
* ")+,&-+,-)


                                           $%#%

         !!       .         (             ,
  !!      '.   (   ( '    "/  
      (   '    !             
          "  (    '   '  ' 
 0   '&' ,. . (  '      
( 1   '        ' ( 2+3#45"
             ,.( '!  .      
  !      '!            ."'       
 6     "7     !!        ! !      (  
  '!     !    .         (   "


89 0                                            "'
     :  '0                       ;  0   /'   
<   0  '                                  .0 
06+$=3+0  '                                       6> <  
0&                                                   ( , /+?)+-
                                                  " ' @'"
    @ " " 

/' A 
 0 
<     
))?=0 ( 6& B
 !, /+3+$%

 @ ". "!"
1    Introduction
The notion that an important macroeconomic policy objective should be the mitiga-
tion of business cycles is a familiar one, both in academic and non-academic circles.
In his in uential monograph, Lucas (1987) challenged this orthodoxy by demonstrat-
ing, in a representative agent environment, that the welfare gains associated with
eliminating variation in aggregate consumption are miniscule. Subsequent work has
challenged Lucas' nding on a number of grounds, ranging from statistical assump-
tions regarding aggregate consumption, to assumptions about preferences, to the basic
assumptions underlying the representative agent paradigm. Our paper follows along
this latter tack. The main idea is that there are important distributional e ects
associated with aggregate variation and that these distributional e ects lie at the
heart of why individuals care about business cycles. The primary e ects we focus
on are cyclicality in the cross-sectional variance of idiosyncratic risk | the idea that
individual-speci c shocks become more volatile during aggregate downturns | and
how this interacts with life-cycle consumption and savings decisions. What we mean
by a `business cycle,' therefore, goes beyond aggregate productivity shocks to include
shocks to the cross-sectional distribution.
    We nd large welfare gains from eliminating business cycles | approximately an
order of magnitude larger than what Lucas (1987) found. About a half of the overall
welfare gain is attributable to how much agents value the removal of countercyclical
heteroskedasticity in the idiosyncratic shocks they face. The remainder is due to the
removal of aggregate productivity shocks. The costs associated with these shocks are
signi cantly ampli ed by the presence of the cyclical variation in idiosyncratic shocks
and rise non-linearly with risk aversion.
    The speci cs of our analysis are as follows. We begin by providing evidence that
the focal point of our study | persistent idiosyncratic risk in the labor market, dis-
tinguished by countercyclical heteroskedasticity | is a robust feature of U.S. data.
Borrowing from previous work, we provide both qualitative evidence as well as quan-
titative estimates of a speci c time series process. Next, we embed these estimates
in an overlapping generations (OLG) model in which agents face both aggregate and
idiosyncratic sources of uncertainty. The latter arises in the form of persistent shocks
to individual labor market productivity. The model's nancial market structure, in
conjunction with the stochastic process for idiosyncratic shocks and the fact that lives
are nite, limits the extent to which agents can collectively pool idiosyncratic risk.
As a result, the cyclical component in each individual's earnings process | an in-
crease in volatility during aggregate downturns | is manifested in their consumption
process, thereby leading to potential welfare bene ts associated with the elimination
of business cycles.
    The methodology with which we measure welfare e ects, and the quantitative
results we nd, are as follows. Our welfare calculations explicitly incorporate the

                                           2
transition from a world with business cycles to a world without business cycles. Such
calculations are important because they ensure that the welfare results are not driven
by the new economy's lower steady state level of capital stock. Our baseline model
is an economy with both aggregate productivity shocks as well cyclical variation in
the variance of idiosyncratic shocks. To begin with we eliminate only the aggregate
productivity shocks. The welfare e ects of doing so are large, being equivalent to a
1.44% increase in an agent's consumption. Next, we eliminate the variation in the
variance of the idiosyncratic shocks, reformulating the process so that it has the same
unconditional variance as in our baseline economy. The welfare costs in this case are
also large, especially in light of previous work. We nd that an unborn agent is better
o by 5.09% and that, on average, the population is better o by 1.03%. Finally,
we ask to what extent \general equilibrium e ects" | changes in market clearing
prices due to changes in aggregate savings | are the driving force. By conducting
experiments in which prices are not allowed to change we conclude that the bulk of
our results are not attributable to these general equilibrium e ects.
    Two channels are the key for the sizable welfare gains we nd. First, idiosyncratic
earnings shocks and aggregate productivity shocks interact in a way that ampli es
the costs associated with cyclical variation in idiosyncratic risks. Experiencing larger
idiosyncratic risks during downturns in aggregate productivity | a key feature of
our economy { is e ectively much more costly than experiencing the same cyclical
variability in idiosyncratic risks absent any aggregate productivity shocks. Thus the
welfare bene ts of removing aggregate shocks are larger than the sum of the welfare
gains of removing aggregate uctuations in an economy without idiosyncratic shocks
plus the welfare gains of removing the cyclical variation in idiosyncratic shocks in
an economy without aggregate productivity shocks. This feature of our economy |
\when it rains it pours" | captures the notion that agents who already face larger
idiosyncratic risks during downturns really dislike having things magni ed by a decline
in aggregate output.
    The second channel is due to the stochastic properties of the regime shifting pro-
cess for idiosyncratic shocks. Our estimates for the magnitude for the increase in
idiosyncratic risk during downturns are quite large and imply an unconditional dis-
tribution of idiosyncratic shocks that is leptokurtic (i.e., the regime shifting nature
of the conditional distribution leads to a fat-tailed unconditional distribution). Be-
cause agents in our economy dislike kurtosis, and because the elimination of business
cycles leads to normally distributed idiosyncratic shocks, this represents an avenue
for welfare gains. Finally, it is important to note that, in contrast to Lucas's welfare
measure which rises linearly in agents' risk aversion, both of the channels described
above depend in a highly non-linear fashion on risk aversion, thereby generating quite
large welfare gains even for moderate levels of risk aversion.
    Our study follows a long line of papers on the welfare costs of business cycles.
Most closely related are studies which focus on the interaction between business cy-

                                           3
cles, heterogeneous agents and uninsurable labor market risk, including Atkeson and
Phelan (1994), Beaudry and Pages (1999), I_ mrohoroglu (1989), and Krusell and Smith
(1999). What distinguishes us is an OLG framework and the way in which we model
and calibrate the process which drives heterogeneity. We focus on earnings as opposed
to unemployment, and calibrate our model using microeconomic data from the Panel
Study on Income Dynamics (PSID). The latter leads to substantially more volatile
and persistent idiosyncratic shocks with a greater dependence on aggregate variation.
Finally, our approach is similar in spirit to I_ mrohoroglu (1989), but departs from the
approach of Atkeson and Phelan (1994) and Krusell and Smith (1999), who assume
that the cyclical distribution of idiosyncratic risk is impervious to changes in the ag-
gregate technological process. The dependence between aggregate and idiosyncratic
shocks in our framework leads to the distinct result that the welfare gains we identify
are due to the elimination of both of these shocks.
    The paper continues as follows. In section 2 we present empirical evidence on
idiosyncratic risks and how it varies over business cycles. Section 3 presents our
model and section 4 describes our calibration strategy. Section 5 presents quantitative
results and section 6 provides some concluding remarks.

2    Evidence
Our question is inherently one about how income and consumption variation across
households is related to aggregate, time series variation. In order for this question
to have empirical content, we require that the cross-sectional distribution of labor
income exhibit the following three properties. First, there must be an interesting
cross-sectional distribution to begin with. In our framework this translates to the
requirement that individual-speci c income must contain an idiosyncratic component
which is of suÆcient variability. Second, the innovations associated with this pro-
cess must be quite persistent. Without persistence our theory turns out to closely
resemble a theory in which heterogeneity is absent, thereby rendering our question
moot. Finally, for the reasons outlined above, the volatility of these innovations must
increase during aggregate downturns. In this section we summarize previous work
which argues that these are robust features of U.S. data.
    Our data correspond to the years 1969-1992 and are obtained from the Panel Study
on Income Dynamics (PSID). We examine data at the household level and de ne an-
nual labor market earnings to equal wages and salaries plus various transfer payments
(e.g., unemployment insurance, workers compensation, transfers from non-household
family members, and so on). Transfers are included so as to provide measures of
idiosyncratic risk net of the risk sharing mechanisms which these payments implicitly
represent, mechanisms which are absent from our model. We construct a sequence of
22 overlapping panels each with a three year time horizon. For example, our `1975
panel' features three time series observations on each household, covering the years
                                           4
1975, 1976 and 1977. This feature of our dataset | its departure from the standard
longitudinal approach of requiring that all households be represented in all years | is
distinct and has a number of important advantages. It provides suÆcient time series
information and at the same time features a relatively large sample size, a limited
degree of survivorship bias and, most importantly, a stable cross-sectional distribu-
tion of age across time. The latter is particularly important for our questions, which
relate aggregate shocks to idiosyncratic shocks in a life cycle context (i.e., one cannot
learn much about labor market shocks from a group of retirees). This comes at a cost,
of course, which in our case is primarily related to measurement error and the loss
of information associated with restricting ourselves to three time series observations.
For more explicit details and more information on the pros and cons of our empirical
methodology, we refer the reader to Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (1999).
    The time series process we are interested in is as follows. De ne uht as the id-
iosyncratic component of the earnings process of an h year old household, at date t.
We specify the process for u as a mean zero ARMA process | a process with both
a transitory and a persistent component | with heteroskedastic innovations in the
persistent component:

                                uhit   = zith + "it                                 (1)
                                zith   = zi;t 1 + it ;
                                             h 1


where household age, h, is made explicit only when the conditional distribution of
a variable depends upon it. We assume that "it  Niid(0; "2 ), it  Niid(0; 2 (Yt ))
and,
                  2 (Yt ) = H2
                                   if aggregate expansion at date t
                            = L2 if aggregate contraction at date t ;
where Yt denotes aggregate income. Our methodology will admit any de nition of
what constitutes an aggregate expansion and contraction. For the results we present,
we will use National Income and Product Account (NIPA) data, and de ne an ex-
pansion (contraction) as a year in which growth in real U.S. GNP per capita is above
(below) its average over our sample.
    Before presenting estimates of the parameters of equation (1) an informal graphical
analysis is helpful. Figure 1 reports cross-sectional moments by age and time based on
our PSID panel. The top panel | which reports the age pro le of the cross-sectional
variance | is informative for the magnitude of the parameter . The graph demon-
strates that over the working years earnings dispersion increases, loosely speaking,
linearly. Given the process in equation (1), linearly increasing cross-sectional vari-
ance is associated with the value  = 1. In Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2000) we
examine this relationship in more detail including, among other things, ` xed-e ects'
                                           5
in equation (1) and information contained in the autocovariances of u. We argue that
values for rho close to unity are a very robust implication of our PSID data.
    The bottom panel of Figure 1 pools our data across ages instead of time and,
at a very informal level, suggests that countercyclical heteroskedasticity is a striking
feature of the data. The correlation of the detrended mean and the standard deviation
is 0:74. The obvious weakness here is inference based on a very limited number of
business cycles, with at most ve occurring between 1969 and 1992. The econometric
methodology to which we turn next attempts to overcome this by exploiting the
interaction between age, time and cross-sectional variance, and the fact that we can
condition on the macroeconomic history of the U.S. over a much longer time span.

2.1   Estimation

Figure 1 suggests that what we are after | evidence that idiosyncratic shocks are
both persistent and countercyclically heteroskedastic | may be consistent with data
from the PSID. We now turn to a more formal econometric interpretation of the data,
which is a summary of results in Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (1999).
    The essence of our methodology is that we make assumptions about initial con-
ditions and interpret the process in equation (1) as being nite. This allows us to
exploit the fact that we can associate an age, h, with each observation in our pan-
el and, conditional on macroeconomic data from the National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA), estimate the parameters conditional on an agent-speci c `macroe-
conomic history.' A simple example helps to illustrate this point.
    Ignoring the transitory shocks, "it , suppose that there were only three generations:
young, middle aged and old. Suppose also that the economy is in an expansion at the
current time, but was in a recession during the previous two years. Finally, suppose
that we only observe data dated at the current time, period t. The population cross-
sectional variances of the idiosyncratic processes, u, for each generation are,
                         young : E (u1it )2 =    H
                                                  2


                    middle aged : E (u2it )2 =   H
                                                  2
                                                    + 2 L2
                            old : E (u3it )2 =   H
                                                  2
                                                    + 2 L2 + 4 L2
    Thus, given suÆciently many observations on u for each generation, we can iden-
tify all three parameters without any time series observations on individual agents.
The key piece of information we are exploiting is how the cross-sectional variance
at date t varies across age cohorts and how this interacts with what is essentially a
cohort-speci c macroeconomic history which is known at date t. Note also that our
methodology is perfectly well de ned for any values of , including those greater than
unity. That is, we do not su er from the litany of issues which arise in the context

                                           6
of inference with potentially non-stationary time series processes. This comes at a
cost, of course, in the form of assumptions regarding initial conditions. In Storeslet-
ten, Telmer, and Yaron (1999) and Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2000) we argue
that our results are robust to a number of variations along these lines, including rst
di erencing, quasi di erencing and the incorporation of ` xed e ects.'
    In Exhibit 1 we reproduce GMM-based estimates from Storesletten, Telmer, and
Yaron (1999) which are based on a generalization of this methodology, applied to
our 1969-1992 panel. The analog of the above example | which exploits 3 years
of macroeconomic information using only 1 year of microeconomic information | is
that we incorporate data going back to 1910 in spite of having PSID data which only
begins in 1969.
Exhibit 1 : Idiosyncratic Risk: Parameter Estimates


                                              H
                                                2
                                                              L2           "2


      Estimate                 0.916          0.037         0.181          0.025
      Standard Error           0.009          0.007         0.033          0.007


Our estimates con rm what is suggested by Figure 1. Idiosyncratic shocks appear
to be quite persistent, with an estimated autocorrelation coeÆcient of 0.92. The
evidence in favor of countercyclical heteroskedasticity is also striking. Our estimates
imply that the conditional standard deviation of the persistent shocks increases by
126% from expansion to contraction.
    There are a number of reference points which are suggestive of the robustness of
these ndings. In relation to persistence and the relative magnitude of the persistent
and transitory shocks, papers by Abowd and Card (1989), Hubbard, Skinner, and
Zeldes (1994) and MaCurdy (1982) nd results which are quite similar to ours. In
addition, in Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2000) we estimate  using a variety
of alternative methods, including an examination of the implications for the cross-
sectional distribution of consumption, and nd convincing evidence in support of
values of  between 0.95 and unity. In relation to the countercyclical heteroskedas-
ticity, comparable studies are more diÆcult to nd. Heaton and Lucas (1996) nd
evidence of much smaller e ects than we do but, as we argue in Storesletten, Telmer,
and Yaron (1999), this is to some extent predictable given di erences in statistical
methodology and data. One corroborating piece of evidence which we nd convincing
involves how changes in the conditional variance manifest themselves in changes in
the unconditional cross-sectional variance. In Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (1999)
                                          7
we show that the implications of Exhibit 1 | relatively large cyclical changes in the
conditional variance | are not necessarily inconsistent with the relatively modest
changes in the cross-sectional variance documented in Figure 1. That is, given the
aggregate dynamics and the demographic structure of our economy, the variance in
the variance which we observe in Figure 1 implies, to some extent, the striking results
presented in Exhibit 1.
    To make this last point more concrete, it is instructive to consider the above
three-generation example. Given generations of equal size, and given the process for
aggregate dynamics which we employ below, the estimates in Exhibit 1 imply a (time
series) standard deviation in the percentage changes in the conditional standard devi-
ation of the cross-sectional distribution of 52 percent. The volatility in the percentage
changes in the associated unconditional cross-sectional standard deviation is only 27
percent. Moreover, this e ect will be strengthened by additional generations because
the older a cohort is, the less the cross-sectional variance associated with that cohort
will vary over time (i.e., with age, there is more `averaging' within the distribution).
The three-generation example, therefore, understates what is relevant for our data
and our model, where there are 43 working-age generations.

3    Theory
We now embed the evidence of the previous section into a stationary overlapping
generations (OLG) model. The motivation for a life cycle framework arises from pre-
vious work where we've argued that nite lives and a life-cycle pattern in idiosyncratic
risk are important for understanding the mapping between income and consumption.
The main idea is that the in nite horizon abstraction a ords theoretical agents far
greater ability to use nancial markets to self-insure against idiosyncratic risk than
actual agents seem to enjoy. Given this, a life cycle framework seems important for
our current question, which presumes that idiosyncratic risk is an important aspect
of consumption outcomes.
    Our model is essentially a one-asset version of the framework developed in S-
toresletten, Telmer, and Yaron (1999), which is itself a variant of Ros-Rull's (1994)
model, designed to incorporate idiosyncratic risk. Agents are indexed by their age, h,
where h 2 H = f1; 2; : : : ; H g. Each of the H age cohorts consists of a large number
of atomistic agents who face uncertain lifetimes with maximum length of H years.
Each year a new cohort of agents are born and some positive fraction of each existing
cohort dies. We use h to denote the unconditional probability of surviving up to
age h, with 1 = 1, and use h = h =h 1 , h = 2; 3; : : : ; H , to denote the probability
of surviving up to age h, conditional on being alive at age h 1. The fraction of
the total population attributable to each age cohort is xed over time at 'h and the
population grows at rate #.

                                            8
    Each individual agent is characterized by a preference ordering over consumption
distributions, an endowment process, and an asset market position. Preferences for
an unborn agent are represented by,
                                            H
                                            X
                                        E          h
                                                        h u(ch ) ;                  (2)
                                            h=1


where denotes the utility discount factor, ch denotes the consumption of an h year
old agent, u is the standard twice di erentiable, strictly concave utility function and
the expectation is assumed to be conditional on the state of the economy prior to
birth.
    Agents begin working at age 22 (or h = 1) and, conditional on surviving, retire
at age 65 (or h = 43). After retirement they must nance consumption entirely from
an existing stock of assets. Prior to retirement an agent of age h receives an annual
endowment, nh, of an age-speci c amount of labor hours (or, equivalently, productive
eÆciency units) which they supply inelastically to an aggregate production technology.
Individual labor income is then determined as the product of hours worked and the
market clearing wage rate.
    We adopt the following process for the logarithm of hours worked,

                                        log nh = h + zh               ;             (3)
where
                  zh = zh   1   + h    ; h  N(2 (Z )=2; 2 (Z )) ;
Z is an aggregate productivity shock and h is a parameter used to match the cross
sectional distribution of mean age-earnings pro le. Idiosyncratic shocks, therefore,
are comprised of both a transitory and a persistent component, following the time
series model in section 2. Countercyclical heteroskedasticity arises in the form of time
variation in the variance of the innovations to the persistent process. More speci cally,
                             2 (Z )       =     H2
                                                          if   Z  E (Z )
                             2 (Z )       =     L2    if    Z < E (Z ) :

The notion of countercyclical heteroskedasticity is simply the condition that H < L .
   Output in this world is produced by an aggregate technology to which individuals
rent their labor services and capital. The production function takes the form,

                                        Y   = Zf (K; N )           ;                 (4)

                                                        9
where K and N represent per capita capital and labor, respectively, Y represents per
capita output, and Z is a technology shock restricted to lie in a nite set Z . Given
aggregate consumption, C , and the rate of depreciation on aggregate capital, Æ, the
law of motion for aggregate capital can be written,

                              K0 = Y      C + (1   Æ)K :                            (5)
     The nancial market structure allows agents to trade in only one asset, shares
of ownership in the risky aggregate technology. Each agent's choice problem is one-
dimensional: given knowledge of their idiosyncratic status, they simply choose an
amount of assets to accumulate, which we label ah . Asset holdings are restricted to
lie in a set A.
     The state of the economy can now be represented as a pair (; Z ), where  is a
measure de ned over an appropriate family of subsets of S = (H Z~ A), where Z~ is
the product space containing all possible idiosyncratic shocks. In words,  is simply a
distribution of agents across ages, idiosyncratic shocks, and capital holdings (wealth).
The aspect of  which is somewhat non-standard is that, because of the aggregate
uncertainty in our economy, it must evolve stochastically over time (i.e.,  belongs
to some family of distributions over which there is de ned yet another probability
measure). We therefore use G to denote the law of motion of , the cross sectional
distribution of the economy,
                                      0 = G(; Z ):                                 (6)
    This characterization of the state of the economy implies that prices for the risky
rate of return on capital and wages can be expressed as R(; Z ) and W (; Z ) respec-
tively. The timing convention we use is that consumption-saving decision decision are
made at the end of the period and market returns are paid the following period at the
realized capital rental rate. Thus, the decisions of an agent of age h are constrained
by

                    ch + a0h+1 h+1      ah R(; Z ) + nh W (; Z )                (7)
                              a0h+1      a and aH +1  0 ;

where ah denotes beginning of period asset (or capital) holdings and a0h+1 denotes end
of period asset holdings. The term h+1 | the conditional probability of surviving
to age h + 1 given that one survives to age h | is a convenient way to represent
perfect annuity markets, something we incorporate so as to focus on labor market
risk only. The idea is simply that, because one may not survive to capture the bene t
of saving, the sacri ce in terms of current consumption is reduced in a manner which
is actuarially fair.

                                           10
   Denoting the value function of an agent of age h as Vh, an agent's choice problem
can be represented as,
                                                                                                               
                                                          h+1  0
                                                              E Vh+1 (zh0 +1 ; a0h+1 ; Z 0 ; G(; Z )) j zh ; Z
                                                                                                                
          Vh (zh ; ah ; Z; )   = max u(ch ) +                                                                      (8)
                                  a0 h+1                   h
subject to equations (7):
  An equilibrium can now be represented as a collection of stationary price functions,
R(; Z ) and W (; Z ), aset of cohort speci c value functions and decision rules,
fVh; a0h+1 gHh=1, and a law
                         of motion for , 0 = G(; Z ), such that the rm's pro t
maximization problem is satis ed,

                                R(; Z )
                                     = Zf1 (K; N ) Æ + 1
                                W (; Z )
                                     = Zf2 (K; N ) ;
aggregate quantities result from individual decisions,
                                                    Z
                                        K       =        a d
                                                    ZS
                                        N       =        n d ;
                                                     S

agents' optimization problems are satis ed given the law of motion for (Z; ) (so
that fVh ; a0h+1 gHh=1 satisfy problem (8)), and the law of motion, G, is consistent with
individual behavior.

4    Calibration
We interpret one period in our model as corresponding to one year of calendar time.
The aggregate production technology is Cobb-Douglas:

                                        Y   = ZK  N 1      
                                                                :

We set  equal to 0.4 (which corresponds to capital's share of national income being
40%, cf. Cooley and Prescott (1995)) and allow for a 7.8% annual depreciation rate
on the aggregate capital stock. The average growth rate in GNP per capita is chosen
to be 1.5% per year. The technology shocks, Z , follow a rst-order Markov chain
with parameter values chosen so that theoretical aggregate consumption matches the
volatility and autocorrelation of aggregate U.S. consumption. The end-result is a
                                                    11
two-state Markov chain for the aggregate shock with Z 2 f 0:045; 0:045g and a
probability of remaining in the current state of 2/3. The latter implies an expected
duration of a business cycle of 6 year.1
    Turning to the characteristics of individual agents, preferences are identical (up
to age-dependent mortality risk) and are described by equation (2). We parameterize
the period utility function with the standard isoelastic speci cation,
                                    u(c) =
                                           c1      1 :
                                             1
In our benchmark economy we set the risk aversion parameter, , to 4 and the utility
discount factor, , to 0.95. The latter is chosen to generate an aggregate capital to
output ratio of 2.9, which is within the range of standard estimates based on U.S.
data (cf. Cooley and Prescott (1995)). The choice of is motivated by Storesletten,
Telmer, and Yaron (1999) who nd that with = 4 this type of an economy generates
a sizable market price of risk (the Sharpe ratio).2 The market price of risk is important
for evaluating the cost of business cycles. It is well known that the welfare costs of
eliminating business cycles can be sensitive to whether an economy is calibrated to
match `real quantities' or `asset pricing moments'. Otrok (1999) demonstrates this
point for the case of habit formation. Alvarez and Jermann (1999) also exploit the
link between business cycle costs and asset prices. The fact that our framework is, for
the most part, consistent along both the asset pricing and business cycle dimensions
is an important feature governing our choice of for the benchmark economy.
    The demographic structure of our economy is calibrated to correspond to several
simple properties of the U.S. work force. Agents are born at age 22, retire at age 65
and are dead by age 80. Retirement is de ned as having one's labor income drop to
zero and having to nance consumption from an existing stock of assets. Mortality
rates are chosen to match those of U.S. females in 1991 and population growth is set
to 1.0%.
    The process for idiosyncratic labor supply, equation (3), is implemented as a dis-
crete approximation to the autoregressive time series model and is parameterized
using our point estimates from Exhibit 1. The age dependent intercept terms, h , are
chosen so that, on average, our theoretical age-earnings pro le matches that of the P-
SID. The persistent process, a regime-shifting autoregression for zh with H = 0:425,
L = 0:192 and  = 0:916, is approximated with a 19-state Markov chain where the
conditional heteroskedasticity is generated by variation in the transition probabili-
ties, as opposed to the potential realizations of zh . Further details are provided in
    1 Using the HP lter to detrend the data results in lower volatility and a model implied autocor-
relation for consumption somewhat lower than the data. Our choice of deterending, however, seems
to be the natural one given the simple two-state process for aggregate productivity.
    2 Speci cally, in Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (1999) we nd that with  = 1 for individual
earnings shocks and risk aversion set at = 4, this economy replicates the observed market price of
risk. Our choice of is therefore on the conservative side.

                                                12
Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (1999). Finally, in our baseline economy we disallow
short-selling of the risky technology (i.e. there is no borrowing) | thereby setting
a = 0.
    To compute equilibrium we use methods developed in Storesletten, Telmer, and
Yaron (1999), which are nite-lived extensions of work by Casta~neda, Daz-Gimenez,
and Ros-Rull (1998), den Haan (1994) and, in particular, Krusell and Smith (1998).
Speci cally, we approximate , the distribution of capital across agents and age,
with a nite number of moments and characterize the transition function G(; Z )
corresponding to these moments. Given such a parameterization, agents decisions
rules are derived from a nite dynamic programming problem. Using the decision
rules we simulate the economy and derive an empirically determined distribution
of agent-speci c capital which can then be compared to the conjectured functional
form for that distribution. An equilibrium is reached when the empirical process
coincides with the parameterized process. We verify that in such an equilibrium
agent's perceptions about  and G(; Z ) are very precise in the sense that Euler
equation errors are very small.
    We derive the stochastic stationary equilibrium for our benchmark economy and
for each of the alternative economies we study. In computing the welfare gains of mov-
ing from our benchmark economy to one of the alternative economies, we solve for an
equilibrium transition path. Having characterized the stochastic stationary equilib-
rium in each economy, we conjecture the matrices characterizing the cross-sectional
distribution of capital and age G(; Z ) during the transition and a time period by
which the economy settles into the alternative economy's stochastic stationary equi-
librium. These parameters are iterated upon until the equilibrium transition path is
attained. Further details on the computations are available in Storesletten, Telmer,
and Yaron (1999).

5    Quantitative Results
We start by describing the basic features of our baseline economy. We then describe
how we compute welfare gains: \how much will individuals be willing to pay in order
to move to an alternative economy?" Finally, we describe our welfare results as well as
various experiments designed to isolate some of the economics underlying our results.
    Our baseline economy is broadly consistent with several key features of the ag-
gregate U.S. economy. Consumption is roughly 70% of the magnitude of output
(which equals 50% for the private sector plus 20% for government sector which is not
explicitly modeled). Table 1 demonstrates that our parameterization for technologi-
cal shocks generates realistic stochastic behavior for various (endogenous) aggregate
quantities. The variability in theoretical aggregate consumption and output is ap-
proximately the same as in the data. The autocorrelation of consumption matches

                                          13
the high autocorrelation found in the data. For output the model generates slightly
smaller autocorrelation than that of output in the data. The lower autocorrelation in
output, however, is a necessary implication of our two-state aggregate shock process
averaging one `cycle' every 6 years. In other words, given our simple process for ag-
gregate variation, we can match either autocorrelation or some notion of `cyclicality,'
but not both. We choose the latter, largely because of the methodology used in the
last section to measure countercyclical, cross sectional variation.
    Our baseline economy is also consistent with several key moments of individual
earnings and consumption. There are two sources for potential discrepancy between
the calibrated theoretical income process, equation (3), and the PSID-based estimates
from Exhibit 1. The rst is the error induced by approximating an in nite-state
autoregression with a nite-state Markov chain. The second is that we calibrate the
process for hours worked to data on income received, where in the model labor income
is an endogenous process | the product of the exogenous supply of hours worked and
the endogenously determined wage rate. We nd, however, that the combined e ects
of these sources of discrepancy are of negligible importance for the moments we focus
on. Speci cally, the mean, standard deviation and autocorrelation are very similar
when comparing population moments from our model with sample analogs. We nd
that if we use our theoretical economy to generate an arbitrary long sequence of 3
year panel data sets (which correspond to our PSID sampling method), our GMM
estimator (section 2.2) yields estimates which closely match those from Table 1; our
simulated point estimates are 0.902, 0.029,0.172, and 0.028 for , H2 , L2 , and 2 ,
respectively. The overall implication is that the population moments for our model's
labor income process closely match the sample moments underlying the estimates
presented in Exhibit 1.
    Our benchmark model is also consistent with several stylized facts on the cross-
sectional distribution on consumption. The annual cross-sectional variance of con-
sumption growth in our model is 0.029, which is close to what is observed in the
CEX (e.g., Souleles (1999) nds the cross-sectional variance of consumption growth
to have a mean of .023). The changes in this quantity do not uctuate very much.
The mean and variance are 0.0001 and 0.0007 respectively, both on the order of what
Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2000) nd in calibrating their economy. More-
over, a key channel by which these authors calibrate their economy is the time series
regression of returns onto the variance of idiosyncratic risk in consumption growth.
The corresponding regression result in our model is -0.157, which is consistent with
the parameter range they nd in their analysis. Finally, in Storesletten, Telmer, and
Yaron (2000) we remove business cycles from our analysis by explicitly controlling
for cohort e ects. We show that a model without business cycles, but otherwise with
essentially the same features as those here, accounts for the empirical rise in consump-
tion inequality across age. Hence, in spite of endowing our economy with substantial
income shocks, the resulting distribution of consumption is quite consistent with the
limited amount of evidence.
                                          14
  5.1      Welfare Comparisons Across Alternative Economies

  We denote the value function for an h-year-old agent living in economy A as VhA ().
  Similarly, VhB () denotes this agent's value function, should they live in an economy
  with an alternative stochastic process for income shocks, say economy B . The welfare
  gain associated with moving from economy A to economy B is measured as the
  proportional compensation required to increase consumption permanently in economy
  A, in a way that will make the agent indi erent between the two economies.
      With a slight abuse of notation, a few auxiliary de nitions will help describe
  our procedure for calculating welfare gains. Based on , de ne (~z ; aj; Z ) as the
  conditional density of idiosyncratic shocks (in economy A) and asset holdings given
  aggregate shock Z and the cross-sectional measure . Also, let P (jZ ) be the prob-
  ability density of  given Z and let F () be the density function for aggregate shocks
  Z . The welfare gain for age-cohort h can now be expressed as the number h which
  results in average utility being equated:
Z Z Z           n                                   o
   [            VhA (; Z; ;   h   )   VhB (; Z; )   (~z ; aj; Z )dz~da]P (jZ )dF (Z )dZ = 0
        Z~ A
         where VhA (; Z; ; h ) solves                                                      
                                                                 h+1
            VhA (; Z; ; h ) = max      u(c[1 + h ]) +               EVhA+1 (; Z; ;   h   )    ;   (9)
                                 a0      h+1                      h

  subject to the budget constraint (7), and the proportional change h in consumption
  being held equal across all agents of age h. Our overall measure for welfare, denoted
     is just the weighted sum of h weighted by 'h the cohorts size of those who are
  alive.
      Our benchmark economy varies over time. Any comparison to an alternative econ-
  omy, therefore, involves integrating over the welfare gains starting from alternative
  states in the benchmark economy. This is re ected in the integration over  and Z in
  equation (9). Our analysis takes explicit account of the equilibrium transition path
  to any of the alternative economies under considerations. Therefore, when we report
  average welfare gains they actually pertain to a weighted average of the welfare gains
  during the transitions for the di erent cohorts. The welfare gains reported for the
  new-born re ect the gain that would be associated without considering the transition.

  5.2      The Cost Of Business Cycles

  Overall, we nd large welfare gains from removing aggregate productivity shocks and
  business cycle variation in idiosyncratic shocks. The welfare gains, reported in Exhibit
  2, are 2.49% for the `average' agent and 7.37% for new-borns.
                                                         15
    Understanding the economics behind our results involves understanding the inter-
action of several competing forces. The primary candidates are (i) aggregate produc-
tivity shocks, (ii) cyclical variation in the variance of idiosyncratic shocks (iii) `general
equilibrium e ects:' the impact of aggregate savings on market clearing prices, and
(iv) the role of nite lives. In order to decompose our overall results into components
attributable to each of these e ects, we conduct a number of additional experiments,
each involving an economy in which progressively fewer of the e ects are at work. In
simple terms, we rst eliminate aggregate productivity shocks Z , then business cycle
variation in the variance of idiosyncratic shocks, and then general equilibrium e ects.
The di erences we nd each step of the way constitute the contribution associated
with the factor most recently removed. We conduct these successive experiments for
our OLG economy as well as for an otherwise identical in nitely lived agent economy.
Di erences across the in nitely lived agent economy and the OLG economy shed light
on the role played by nite lives.
    Exhibit 2 summarizes our experiments, and the corresponding welfare gains asso-
ciated with each successive step:
Exhibit 2 : Summary of Experiments Underlying Welfare Decompo-
sitions



Notation for Gain (%) in OLG Economy Gain (%) in 1 Eliminated                       Comments
Welfare Gain                           Lived Economy E ects
                  =2           =4            =2
             Avg. N. Born Avg. N. Born

 A;B            0.34   0.66   1.44   2.43      0.44      Zt = E (Z ) 8t Comparison includes transition

 B;C
                0:24   0:90   1.03   5.09      0:22      H = L =  Comparison with prices of economy B

 B;D      B;C
                0:01   0:06   0:02   0:15      0:12      H = L =  General Equilibrium e ects

                0:59   1:50   2.49   7.37      0:54      |             Total Welfare Gain
                                                                         = A;B + B;D



    Consider rst the welfare gain of moving from our benchmark economy (denot-
ed economy A) to an economy in which there are no aggregate productivity shocks
nor are there any cyclical variation in idiosyncratic shocks (denoted economy D). For
each column in Exhibit 2, represents the overall welfare gain we wish to decompose.
The mechanics are as follows. The rst row, A;B , represents the welfare gain of mov-
ing from the benchmark economy A to an economy in which aggregate productivity
                                             16
shocks, Z , have been removed (denoted economy B). In this economy the aggregate
productivity shock is set to its unconditional mean. Nonetheless, in the background
we maintain the heteroskedasticity of idiosyncratic shocks. Hence, A;B provides in-
formation on the direct e ect of eliminating aggregate productivity shocks without
the compounding e ect of altering the cyclical structure of idiosyncratic shocks. In
a similar fashion, B;C denotes the welfare gain of moving from economy B to an al-
ternative economy C { one without variation in the variance of idiosyncratic shocks.
That is we set the variance of the idiosyncratic shocks to the unconditional level. In
this alternative economy we also maintain the prices agents face in economy B. The
idea is straightforward. Eliminating business cycle variations in idiosyncratic shocks
will cause a reduction in precautionary savings which in turn will a ect market clear-
ing prices. B;C provides a measure without any such compounding e ects. Finally,
  B;D     B;C is essentially a residual e ect, describing the general equilibrium e ects
of savings on prices.
    The results in Exhibit 2 indicate that removing only aggregate productivity shocks
leads to substantial welfare gains (i.e., the row A;B ). These welfare gains are larger
then what Lucas (1987) found by an order of magnitude. These large gains re ect an
interaction between aggregate uctuations and the cyclicality in idiosyncratic risk. To
better understand this point it is instructive to view an analytical expression for these
welfare gains in a simple autarkic environment. Imagine an economy where aggregate
consumption is i.i.d and can either be (1 + Z ) in a boom or (1 Z ) in a recession.
Conditional on these aggregate regimes, the variance of idiosyncratic shocks to log-
consumption is 22 =( + 1) and 22 =( + 1) respectively (where  > 1). It is shown
in Appendix A that the welfare gain of removing aggregate productivity shocks in
this case is
            "                                                               #   1
            (1     Z )1 exp( 2 (1      )2 ) + (1 + Z )1 exp( 2 (1 )2 ) 1 1
      A;B =
                         exp( 2 (1      )2 ) + exp( 2 (1 )2 )
The numerator is the expected utility in the economy with aggregate productivity
shocks and cyclical variation in idiosyncratic shocks. The denominator is the expected
utility in an economy with only business cycle variation in idiosyncratic risk. As the
formula suggests, when > 1 the regime in which the variance of idiosyncratic shocks
is large (i.e., recession) gets a larger weight in computing expected utility. Thus
the variation in aggregate productivity enhances the expected disutility associated
with the increased idiosyncratic risk in downturns. It is important to note that
the dependency between aggregate productivity and idiosyncratic risk is essential for
this result. If idiosyncratic risk does not vary over the business cycle (i.e.,  = 1) the
resulting welfare gain is the same as when there is no idiosyncratic risk and e ectively
reduces to Lucas's welfare measure. Moreover, note that this welfare measure rises
exponentially with risk aversion, a feature that is consistent with our numerical results
when comparing the = 2 and = 4 case.
                                           17
    The welfare gains of reducing business-cycle variation in the variance of idiosyn-
cratic shocks (i.e., row B;C ) are large. In our benchmark economy they amount to
1.03% for the average consumer and 5.09% for new-borns. Again, our simple autarkic
example will serve as a useful benchmark. In this example we derive an analog of B;C ,
the welfare bene ts of moving from an economy with heteroskadastic idiosyncratic
shocks to an economy with homoskedastic shocks. To ensure that the comparison
is meaningful we scale 2 by  so that the mean and variance in the homoskadastic
economy are the same as in the economy with heteroskedastic idiosyncratic shocks.
The welfare gain in this case, for which a complete derivation is available in Appendix
A, is given by
                                                                                    1
        =       1 exp( (   1) (  +2 1
                              2                 1
                                           )) + exp( (     1) ( 2+ 1
                                                                2
                                                                            ))
                                                                                          1
                                                                                              1
  B;C
                2     2                         2    2
     Since by construction these two economies have equal unconditional means and
variances, the di erence in expected utility must come from higher moments in the
distribution of idiosyncratic risk. In Appendix A we show that the welfare gains
of removing counter-cyclical variation in consumption depend on the skewness and
kurtosis of the processes. Both skewness and kurtosis are larger in the heteroskedastic
economy than the homoskedastic economy. Agents dislike kurtosis but prefer positive
skewness. This tradeo between the skewness and kurtosis is captured by the terms
( +1
   2
          ) and ( 2+1
                         ). For low risk aversion the skewness factor dominates and
negative welfare gains arise. For slightly larger risk aversions ( > 2) the kurtosis
channel dominates which results in large positive gains. Again, these welfare gains
rise non-linearly with risk aversion. Our computational results re ect this as well as
the fact that welfare gains should be quite small with risk aversion equal to 2.
     In Appendix A we also provide some numerical values for the analytical analogs
to A;B and B;C which are based on our estimated values for idiosyncratic earnings.
Beyond providing additional intuition this also sheds light on how much of the welfare
gains we have found are attributable to our models' speci c income process. The
welfare measures we report in the appendix are consistent for the most part with
our computational numbers. Di erences arise because consumption in our numerical
model is neither i.i.d nor exogenous and various agents are borrowing constrained.
Overall, the analytical analysis points to the fact that risk aversion is quantitatively
important in our analysis but that the endogeneity of consumption can yield larger
welfare gains than the ctious experiments based on exogenous consumption.
     Finally, the general equilibrium e ects, B;D B;C , turn out to be negative and
quite small on average. In general, these negative e ects are larger for the young.
The reason is due to the reduction in precautionary savings in the economy without
  uctuations, where aggregate capital is smaller, wages are lower, and the return on
capital is higher. Since the young have a lot of human capital but very little nancial
wealth these price e ects work against them.
                                           18
    In summary, our results thus far suggest that eliminating business cycle shocks is
quantitatively important for agents' welfare. The key to these results is the interaction
between aggregate productivity shocks and the stochastic properties of the cyclical
variation in idiosyncratic shocks.

5.2.1   Welfare Gains over the Life Cycle


Figure 2 decomposes the welfare gains in Exhibit 2 by age. The dashed line decom-
poses the gains of removing aggregate productivity shocks (corresponding to A;B ).
The solid line provides the age pro le of welfare gains of removing also the cyclical
variation in idiosyncratic risk, but without accounting for the general equilibrium
e ects (prices are those of the economy with cyclical variation in idiosyncratic risk
but without aggregate productivity shocks). Thus, the latter line corresponds to B;C .
Finally, the solid-starred line in Figure 2 presents B;D , the age pro le of welfare gains
stemming from removing business-cycle variation in idiosyncratic risk in an econo-
my without uctuations in aggregate productivity, but where the general equilibrium
e ects of changing prices during the transition are incorporated.
    It is clear that for each experiment the welfare gains are substantially larger for
those who have many years left to live. The graph also shows that the large welfare
gains attributable to eliminating aggregate productivity shocks decline monotonically
with age. The welfare gains of eliminating business cycle variation in idiosyncratic
risk are very large for the young and approach zero by retirement. The intuition
for this is simple. The young hold most of their wealth in terms of human capital
and are susceptible to large shocks relative to their wealth. The old on the other
hand have zero human capital risk and have accumulated nancial wealth with which
they can e ectively bu er shocks. The uctuation in the old's wealth is solely due to
  uctuation in the risky return on capital which is relatively small. Hence moving to
the alternative economy is not a big attraction for them.
    The di erence between the solid line and the solid-starred line in Figure 2 repre-
sents the age pro le of the general equilibrium e ects ( B;D B;C ), and reveals that
these e ects are quite di erent for di erent age groups. In particular, the general
equilibrium e ects are negative for the young and are positive for the old. The expla-
nation for these age-speci c e ects lies, again, in the respective composition of agent's
wealth and the direction in which average prices have changed. In the economy with
homoskedastic conditional variance agents save less and the resulting equilibrium is
one with a higher average return on capital and lower wages. These changes in prices
a ect the old and the young di erently. The old who hold large nancial wealth gain
from the rise in the return on capital, while the young lose, on average, due to the
decline in wages.
    In order to assess the importance of nite lives for the welfare calculations we
report, we also analyze an economy which has in nitely lived agents but otherwise is
                                           19
similar to the OLG economy with risk aversion equal to 2. The di erence between
the welfare gains from the in nitely lived agent economy and the corresponding gains
from the nitely lived agent economy can be attributed to the role of nite lives. In
particular, to make the comparison across economies meaningful, we calibrate the
in nite-lived agent economy so that the cross-sectional dispersion is the same as the
cross-sectional dispersion in the OLG economy.3 The average welfare gain under
the in nitely lived economy is 0.05% smaller than the corresponding number in the
OLG economy. More generally, di erences across welfare experiments are relatively
small. At rst blush this result may appear to contradict our intuition that the gains
from eliminating business cycles ought to be larger for nitely lived agents. However,
because in the OLG economy retirees do not work and, therefore, are not subject
to idiosyncratic risk and because they constitute a sizable cohort, the welfare gains
are downward biased. If one, more appropriately, compares the welfare gains in the
in nitely-lived agent economy to the average welfare gains for those who work in the
OLG economy larger di erences arise.

6     Conclusions
Our main nding is that agents value the elimination of business cycles by a signi cant
amount. The primary forces driving these welfare gains are (i) the direct elimination
of aggregate productivity shocks and the way in which these shocks interact with
variation in the variance of idiosyncratic shocks, and (ii) the elimination of cyclical
  uctuations in the distribution of idiosyncratic risk. Both of these channels are dif-
ferent than alternative explanations put forth in the literature. In the rst case, the
dependency of the variance of idiosyncratic shocks on aggregate productivity shocks
enhances the costs associated with the latter. The heteroskedastic nature of idiosyn-
cratic shocks has a direct e ect. Due to standard motives of consumption smoothing,
agents prefer the homoskedastic economy since there is a smaller chance for extreme
bad events that occur in downturns.
    A drawback of our analysis lies in the exogenous way we introduce idiosyncratic
risk over the business cycle. The issue of whether business cycle variation in the
distribution of idiosyncratic risk will be eliminated once aggregate shocks are removed
can not be answered structurally within our context. In our analysis we measure the
gains were such variations to be eliminated. At a minimum, the large welfare gains
we nd suggest that elaborating on this issue is an important future research agenda.
Along these lines, Beaudry and Pages (1999) and Gomes, Greenwood, and Rebelo
(1999) explicitly model and analyze unemployment. Beaudry and Pages (1999) nd
signi cant welfare gains although smaller than what we have found. Reconciling our
earnings process within such a framework and asking policy questions seems a natural
avenue for further study.
    3 This amounts to reducing the conditional variances in recessions and booms by 15%.

                                                20
References
Abowd, J. and D. Card, (1989), On the covariance structure of earnings and hours
      changes, Econometrica 57, 411{455.
Alvarez, F. and U. Jermann, (1999), Using asset prices to measure the cost of business
      cycles, Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.
Atkeson, A. and C. Phelan, (1994), Reconsidering the costs of business cycles with
      incomplete markets, in Stanley Fischer and Julio Rotemberg eds., NBER Macroe-
      conomics Annual 1994.
Beaudry, P. and C. Pages, (1999), The cost of business cycles and the stabilization
      value of unemployment insurance, manuscript, University of British Columbia.
Brav, A., G. M. Constantinides, and C. Geczy, (2000), Asset pricing with heteroge-
      neous consumers and limited participation: Empirical evidence, Working paper,
      The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Casta~neda, A., J. Daz-Gimenez, and J. V. Ros-Rull, (1998), Exploring the income
      distribution business cycle dynamics, Journal of Monetary Economics 42, 93{
      130.
Cooley, T. F. and E. C. Prescott, (1995), Economic growth and business cycles, In
      Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, edited by Thomas F. Cooley. Princeton
      University Press: New Jersey.
Deaton, A. and C. Paxson, (1994), Intertepmoral choice and inequality, Journal of
      Political Economy 102, 437{467.
den Haan, W., (1994), Heterogeneity, aggregate uncertainty and the short term in-
      terest rate: a case study of two solution techniques, Working paper, University
      of California at San Diego.
Gomes, J., J. Greenwood, and S. Rebelo, (1999), Equilibrium unemployment,
      Manuscript, University of Rochester.
Heaton, J. and D. J. Lucas, (1996), Evaluating the e ects of incomplete markets on
      risk sharing and asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy 104, 443{487.
Hubbard, R. G., J. Skinner, and S. P. Zeldes, (1994), The importance of precaution-
      ary motives in explaining individual and aggregate savings, Carnegie Rochester
      Conferance Series on Public Policy 40, 59{126.
I_ mrohoroglu, A., (1989), Cost of business cycles with indivisibilities, Journal of Po-
      litical Economy 97, 1364{1383.

                                           21
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith, (1998), Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroe-
     conomy, Journal of Political Economy 106, 867{896.
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith, (1999), The welfare e ects of eliminating business cycles,
     Review of Economic Dynamics 2, 245{272.
Lucas, R. E., (1987), Models of Business Cycles , Basil Blackwell.
MaCurdy, T. E., (1982), The use of time series processes to model the error structure
     of earnings in a longitudinal data analysis, Journal of Econometrics 18, 83{114.
Otrok, C., (1999), On measuring the welfare cost of business cycles, Manuscript,
     University of Virginia.
Ros-Rull, J. V., (1994), On the quantitative importance of market completeness,
     Journal of Monetary Economics 34, 463{496.
Souleles, N., (1999), Household securities purchases, transactions costs, and hedging
     motives, Working paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron, (1999), Asset pricing with idiosyncratic
     risk and overlapping generations, GSIA working paper no. 1998-E226, Carnegie
     Mellon University.
Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron, (2000), Consumption and risk sharing
     over the life cycle, Unpublished working paper, Carnegie Mellon University.




                                          22
Appendix A
Welfare Gains in Autarkic Economies
In this appendix we provide intuition for some of the sources underlying the welfare
gains from removing uctuations in aggregate productivity and counter-cyclical vari-
ation (CCV) in idiosyncratic earnings. We follow Lucas (1987) calculations assuming
an endowment economy, no risk sharing, and consumption equals to income. We show
that the welfare gains are closely related to probabilities of facing extreme events and
depend on the skewness and kurtosis of the distribution of idiosyncratic consumption.
We also illustrate the dependency of these results on the process for uctuations in
aggregate productivity. It should be noted, however, that in spite of the fact that
our analysis below is realistically calibrated to income process, the welfare gains we
compute analytically do not provide a bound on the welfare gains that can arise in
our model. This is due to the fact that the welfare gains are a relative statement
about expected utilities when consumption is endogenous. Also, in the computa-
tional experiments in the main text there are people who are borrowing constrained,
something we abstract from in this appendix.

A.1    Higher Moments and Welfare Gains

In order to provide some intuition for the role di erent moments in the distribution
of consumption have on welfare gains we start by abstracting from uctuations in
aggregate productivity. Let f (c) and g(c) be the probability density function for
consumption under the heteroskedastic and homoskedastic economies respectively. For
our analysis to be meaningful we impose the following conditions across the two
economies,

                                     c      Ef (c) = Eg (c)
                             V arf (c)    =   V arg (c)                            (10)
where the subscript in the mean and variance denotes the distribution (p.d.f) with
which expectations are taken. These two restrictions imply that the unconditional
mean and variance of the level of consumption are equal across the two economies.
   The welfare gains to removing CCV are based on comparing the expected utilities
across the two economies. The expected utility under the two economies can be
approximated by a Taylor expansion around c as follows,
                                                   1 00
          Ei (u(c))  u(c) + u0 (c)E (c c) + u (c)Ei (c c)2 +
                                                   2
                         1 u000 (c)E (c c)3 + 1 u0000 (c)E (c c)4 i = f; g
                         6           i
                                                24           i


                                              23
where Ei denotes again expectations with respect to the p.d.f's    f and g. Using our
assumptions above and noting that the terms multiplying u000 and u0000 are simply the
population skewness and kurtosis respectively, it follows that the di erence in welfare
across the two economies depends on
                   1 000                               1
  Eg (c) Ef (c)  u (Skewnessg Skewnessf ) + (Kurtosisg Kurtosisf ) (11)
                   6                                  24
    In the case of CRRA utility function u000 = (      1)c 2 while u0000 = (
1)(      2)c 3 . The rst term is positive while the second term is negative for all
  > 0. Since (Skewnessg Skewnessf ) < 0 and (Kurtosisg Kurtosisf ) < 0 there are
two potential o setting forces { the excess kurtosis in the heteroskedastic economy
being an undesired feature, while the positive skewness contributing positively. As
we show below it turns out that the di erences in skewness are relatively small, and
for > 2 the kurtosis term dominates { which imply positive welfare gains. In
summary, the analysis above should make it evident that once the mean and variance
are equated across the two economies the remaining sources for welfare gains must
show up through di erences in higher moments.

A.2    Welfare Gains Computed Analytically



We continue to abstract from uctuations in aggregate productivity and start our
analysis with the heteroskedstic economy (i.e. the economy with time varying vari-
ance of income). As in the previous section, we assume for simplicity that agents
are in nitely lived and have CRRA utility function. Let 2 denote the unconditional
variance of log-consumption and let the cross sectional variance of log-consumption
be  times larger in a recession than it is in a boom { both events can occur with prob-
ability of 1/2 and are i.i.d across time. It is trivial then to show that the distribution
of consumption follows,
                           8                                             9
                           <   N      1
                                         2 ; +1
                                               2
                                                  2     in a boom         =
                 log (c)  :        +1                                            (12)
                               N        2 ; 2  2
                                     +1      +1         in a recession   ;


where the means for log-consumption are varying across recessions and booms so that
the process satis es E (c) = E (cjrecession) = E (cjboom) = 1. The unconditional
variance of the level of consumption then follows,
                           1
                V ar(c) = [exp(
                                   2 2 ) 1] + 1 [exp( 2 2 ) 1]              (13)
                           2     +1             2     +1

   We now proceed to specify the consumption process in the homeskedastic economy.
As in the previous section for our welfare comparisons to be meaningful we must
                                            24
ensure that the unconditional mean and variance in the homoskedastic economy are
equal to their respective quantities in the heteroskedastic economy. We therefore
specify the following process for consumption in the homoskedastic economy,
                               log (c)  N ( 2 ; 2 )
                                                2
                                                                                   (14)
where  > 1 is a parameter that will scale the unconditional variance of log-consumption
in the heteroskedastic economy to match the variances in levels across the two e-
conomies. That is  is the solution to
                     exp(
                            2 2 ) + exp( 2 2 ) = 2exp(2 ):                    (15)
                          +1               +1
In order to derive the welfare gains of removing counter cyclical variation we need to
calculate the expected utility under the two postulated consumption processes. The
expected utility in the homoskedastic case is given by
              E fu (c)g =
                                1 E exp ((1 ) log(c))                             (16)
                              1                                       !
                         = 1 1 exp 2 (1 ) + (1 )2 2
                                           2                   2



                                                 
                         = 1 1 exp 2 ( 1) 2
since E f(1    ) log(c)g = 2 2 (1 ) and var ((1 ) log(c)) = 2 (1         )2 .


The expected utility in the heteroskedastic case is then given by
                   1                    1
   E fu (c)g = E fu (c) j boomg + E fu (c) j recessiong              (17)
                   2                  2                       
              = 11=2 exp 2 ( 1)  +2 1 2 + exp 2 ( 1) 2+ 1 2



Let the welfare gain of moving from an economy with heteroskedastic process for
consumption to a homoskedastic one be de ned as the multiplicative increase in con-
sumption, 1 + B;C , required to make an agent be equally well o under the two
processes. Thus, B;C is implicitly de ned by
  E fu (c (1 + b;c)) j heteroskedasticg = E fu (c) j homoskedasticg
                                           so that
                                                                          1
                                             E fu (c) j heteroskedasticg
                                           
                                                                             1
                                    B;C = E fu (c) j homoskedasticg            1:

                                          25
Using equations (16) and (17), the welfare gain is computed as,
              2                                                                    3   1
                  1=2
                         exp          (     1) +1
                                                2
                                                   2 + exp 2 (    1) 2+1
                                                                         2
                                                                                1
        =     4   1                 2
                                                                              5   1
  B;C
                                         1
                                           1
                                              exp 2 ( 1) 2
                                                                                                      1
        =         1 exp( (                2              1                 2 2
                                      1) (  + 1  )) + 2 exp( 2 ( 1) (  + 1  ))
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                  1
                  2     2
Following our estimates in Exhibit 1 we set  = 4:8. The welfare gains for di erent
risk aversions, given di erent values for 2 (and therefore di erent values for  solving
(15)) are:
Exhibit A.2.1
Welfare Gains of Removing Counter Cyclical Variation

                                           Welfare Gains (        B;C)
         2                  .1           .2       .3               .4           .5              .621
                           1.022 1.043 1.063    1.085                         1.1055        1.1315
             = 1:5          -.11% -.41% -.89% -1.57%                           -2.42%        -3.75%
             = 2:0            0%    0%     0%     0%                             0%            0%
             = 2:5          0.92% 0.22% 2.06% 3.56%                             5.42%        8.17%
             = 3:0          0.63% 2.51% 5.51% 9.40%                            14.01%        20.68%
             = 4:0          2.09% 7.96% 16.69% 27.72%                          38.41%        52.48%
             = 5:0          4.57% 16.22% 31.75% 48.91%                         67.22%        89.61%
                                                                                        
where the highest value, 2 = :621 follows from :621 = 2 = 1 2 using the param-
eters we estimated in Exhibit 1. The Table show that around = 2 the welfare gain
is very small and initially increases non-linearly with greater than 2, after which
the rise in welfare is dominated by the kurtosis and is pretty much linear in .

A.3     Removing Fluctuations in Aggregate Productivity

We now amend equation (12) to account for uctuations in aggregate productivity
(consumption),
                            8                                                                   9
                            <     N log(1 + Z )        1
                                                          2 ; +12
                                                                    2       in a boom            =
             log (c)  :                             +1                                                      (18)
                                  N log(1 Z )          
                                                      +1  2
                                                              ;  2
                                                                +1  2
                                                                              in a recession      ;


where the means for log-consumption are varying across recessions and booms so that
the process satis es E (cjrecession) = 1 Z and E (cjboom) = 1 + Z . The expected
                                                       26
utility in the heteroskedastic case is then given by
                            1                     1
             E fu (c)g = E fu (c) j boomg + E fu (c) j recessiong                                (19)
                            2                    2              
                        = 1  1 =2
                                    (1 + Z ) exp 2 ( 1)  +2 1 2 +
                                            1

                                                           
                                                     2
                            + (1 Z ) exp 2 ( 1)  + 1 
                                       1                2



Let the welfare gain of moving from an economy with uncertainty in Z to one without
any uncertainty in Z (although both economies exhibit heteroskedastic process for
idiosyncratic consumption) be de ned as the multiplicative increase in consumption
in the economy with Z > 0 economy, 1 + A;B , required to make an agent be equally
well o as when Z = 0. Thus, A;B is implicitly de ned by
                   E fu (c (1 + a;b )) jZ > 0g = E fu (c) jZ = 0g

Based on equation (19), the welfare gain is computed as,
                   2                                                             3   1
                                  (2(
                                exp         +1  )
                                            2 2
                                           + (1 Z )
                                        1)          exp   (2(      2 2 )
                                                                 1)  
                                                                    +1                   1
                   6                        1                 7      1
               =   6
                   4
                          
                              (1+Z )
                                                           7
                                                          2 5
                                                                                             1   (20)
         A;B
                       exp 2 ( 1) +12
                                       2 + exp 2 ( 1) 2+1
Using the same parameters as in exhibit A.1 and letting                   Z   = 3:80%, we get the
following numerical results,
Exhibit A.3.1
Welfare Gains of Removing Fluctuations in Aggregate Productivity
                                  Welfare Gains ( A;B ) in %
                           2
                                    0     .1     .2      .3 .621
                             1 .07        .07 .07 .07 .07
                            =2        .15 .39 .64 .88 1.61
                            =3        .22 .95 1.63 2.21 3.36
                            =4        .29 1.68 2.72 3.33 3.89
                            =5        .36 2.47 3.48 3.81 3.95
Finally, note that if the idiosyncratic process for consumption is homoskedastic that
is  = 1 , equation (20) simpli es to,
                                                           1
                                1              1               1
                    A;B =         (1 + Z)   +    (1   Z)           1;
                                         1               1
                                2              2
                                                27
which is also equal to the welfare gain of removing aggregate uctuations in an econ-
omy without any idiosyncratic risk (i.e., the column where  = 0 ) and reduces to
Lucas's welfare measure.
   In summary, the welfare gains of removing uctuations in aggregate productivity
are magni ed by the presence of CCV. These welfare gains are rising non-linearly
in . The interaction cyclicality in idiosyncratic risk is what's important for these
welfare gains as having homoskedastic idiosyncratic risk does not change the standard
measures for the bene ts of removing aggregate uctuations.




                                         28
Table 1
Aggregate Moments: Baseline Economy




           Panel A: Population Moments, Baseline Theoretical Economy

                      Std Dev     Autocorrelation      Correlation with Output

    Output             0.041            0.62                     1.00
    Consumption        0.038            0.91                     0.87
    Investment         0.067            0.64                     0.93


         Panel B: Sample Moments, Detrended U.S. Economy, 1955-1997

                      Std Dev     Autocorrelation      Correlation with Output

    Output             0.047            0.87                     1.00
    Consumption        0.044            0.91                     0.96
    Investment         0.111            0.59                     0.81


U.S. sample moments are based on annual NIPA data obtained from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis, 1955-1997. Each series was detrended by using a linear trend
for the log of each series. Theoretical moments are also based on logarithms and are
computed as sample averages of a long simulated time series for an economy where
  = 4.




                                        29
Figure 1
Cross-Sectional Moments by Age and Time

                                 1



                                0.9



                                0.8



                                0.7
              Variance of Log




                                0.6



                                0.5



                                0.4



                                0.3



                                0.2
                                      25        30   35    40   45        50     55        60       65     70        75
                                                                        Age

                   0.08


                   0.06                                                               Standard Deviation



                   0.04


                   0.02


                                 0


              −0.02


              −0.04


              −0.06


              −0.08
                                                                                      Mean

                  −0.1
                                           70             75              80                 85                 90
                                                                     1969−1992


The top panel graphs the age pro le of the cross-sectional variance of earnings, based on
PSID data which has been pooled over the years 1969-1992. This graph controls for `cohort
e ects' using the methods outlined in Deaton and Paxson (1994), and described in more
detail in Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2000). The bottom panel represents the (linearly
detrended) cross-sectional mean and the cross-sectional standard deviation of PSID earnings,
for the years 1969-1992. The standard deviation is additively scaled for graphical reasons.

                                                                 30
Figure 2
Welfare Gains By Age



                                                              Age profile of welfare gains
                                     0.04


                                    0.035


                                     0.03
Welfare gain in % of consumption




                                    0.025


                                     0.02
                                                                        ψa,b
                                    0.015
                                               ψ
                                                   b,d

                                     0.01


                                    0.005


                                        0
                                                                                                  ψb,c

                                   −0.005
                                         20   30         40                50                60          70   80
                                                                          Age

    (h) depicts the age-pro le of welfare gains of removing aggregate productivity
                  a;b
shocks, while keeping the business cycle variation in individual risk.
     b;c (h) depicts the age-pro le of welfare gains of removing business cycle variation
in individual risk, but abstracting from general equilibrium e ects of the transition.
    Finally, b;d (h) depicts the age-pro le of welfare gains of removing business cycle
variation in individual risk when general equilibrium e ects of the transition have
been accounted for.




                                                                     31
