NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH ECONOMICS AND REALITY

William A. Brock
Steven N. Durlauf

Working Paper 8041
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8041

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2000

This paper was prepared for the World Bank Economic Review. We thank the National Science Foundation,
Joim D. And Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Vilas Trust, and Romnes Trust for financial support. We
thank François Bourguignon for initiating this research as well as Cullen Goeimer, Andros Kourtellos, Arthur

Minkin, Eldar Nigmatullin and seminar participants and Carnegie-Mellon and Pittsburgh for helpful
comments. Chih Ming Tan has provided superb research assistance. Special thanks go to William Easterly
and Ross Levine for sharing data and helping with replication of their results. The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

2000 by William A. Brock and Steven N. Durlauf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.

Growth Economics and Reality
William A. Brock and Steven N. Durlauf
NBER Working Paper No. 8041
December 2000

JELNo. 04, Cl, C5
ABSTRACT
This paper questions current empirical practice in the study of growth. We argue that much of
the modern empirical growth literature is based on assumptions concerning regressors, residuals, and

parameters which are implausible both from the perspective of economic theory as well as from the
perspective of the historical experiences of the countries under study. A number of these problems are

argued to be forms of violations of an exchangeability assumption which underlies standard growth

exercises. We show that relaxation of these implausible assumptions can be done by allowing for
uncertainty in model specification. Model uncertainty consists of two types: theory uncertainty, which

relates to which growth determinants should be included in a model, and heterogeneity uncertainty,
which relates to which observations in a data set comprise draws from the same statistical model. We

propose ways to account for both theory and heterogeneity uncertainty. Finally, using an explicit
decision-theoretic framework, we describe how one can engage in policy-relevant empirical analysis.

William A. Brock
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
wbrock@ssc.wisc.edu

Steven N. Durlauf
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
sdurlauf@ssc.wisc.edu

1. Introduction
"There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy"
Hamlet, act I, scene V

This paper has an ambitious objective — to outline a new perspective on
empirical growth research which will both address some of the major criticisms to
which research has been subjected and facilitate policy-relevant empirics. It is no

exaggeration to say that the endogenous growth models pioneered in Romer
(1986,1990) and Lucas (1988) have produced a sea change in the sorts of questions
around which macroeconomic research is focused. In terms of empirical work, efforts
to explain cross-country differences in growth behavior since World War II have
become a predominant area of empirical work. Beyond the predominance of growth

research within the academic community, the implications of this work for
policymakers is immense. For example, there exist strong links between national
growth performance and international poverty and inequality. Differences in per
capita income across countries is substantially larger than those within countries,
Schultz (1998) concludes that two-third's of (conventionally measured) inequality
across individuals internationally is due to intercountry differences, so that efforts to
reduce international inequality are naturally led to focus on cross-country growth
differences. In turn, the academic community has used this new empirical work as the
basis for very strong policy recommendations. A good example of this is Barro (1996)
who concludes, based on a linear cross-country growth regression of the type that is so
standard in this literature, that
"The analysis has implications for the desirability of exporting democratic institutions
from the advanced western economies to developing nations. The first lesson is that
more democracy is not the key to economic growth.. .The more general conclusion is
that advanced western countries would contribute more to the welfare of poor nations
by exporting their economic systems, notably property rights and free markets, rather
than their political systems..." (pg. 24)

At the same time, it seems clear that there is widespread dissatisfaction with
conventional empirical methods of growth analysis. Many critiques of growth
1

econometrics have appeared in recent years. Typical examples include Pack (1994)
who described a litany of problems with cross-country growth regressions:

"Once both random shocks and macroeconomic policy variables are recognized as
important, it is no longer clear how to interpret many of the explanations of cross-

country growth... Many of the right hand side variables are endogenous. . .The
production function interpretation is further muddled by the assumption that all
countries are on the same international production frontier.. .regression equations that
attempt to sort out the sources of growth also generally ignore interaction effects.. .The
recent spate of cross-country growth regressions also obscures some of the lessons that
have been learned from the analysis of policy in individual countries." (pg. 68-69)
and Schultz (1999):
"Macroeconomic studies of growth often seek to explain differences in economic growth

rates across countries in terms of levels and changes in education and health human
capital, among other variables. However, these estimates are plagued by measurement
error and specification problems." (pg. 71)

In fact, it seems no exaggeration to say that the growth literature in economics is
notable for the large gaps which continue to exist between theory and empirics. A
recent (and itself critical) survey of the empirical literature, Durlauf and Quah (1999),
concludes

new empirical growth literature remains in its infancy. While the literature has

shown that the Solow model has substantial statistical power in explaining crosscountry growth variation, sufficiently many problems exist with this work that the
causal significance of the model is not clear. Further, the new stylized facts of growth,
as embodied in nonlinearities and distributional dynamics have yet to be integrated
into full structural econometric analysis." (pg. 295)

The purpose of this paper is twofold.

First, we attempt to identify some

general methodological problems which we believe explain the widespread mistrust of
growth regressions. While the factors we identify are certainly not exhaustive, they do

in our judgment represent the most serious criticisms of conventional growth
econometrics of which we are aware. These problems are serious enough to qualify and

even invalidate many of the standard claims made in the new growth literature
concerning the identification of economic structure. In particular, we argue that causal
inferences as conventionally drawn in the empirical growth literature require certain.
2

statistical assumptions that may easily be argued to be implausible. This assertion

holds, we believe, both from the perspective of economic theory and from the
perspective of the historical experiences of the countries under study. We further show

that these problems are interpretable in terms of model uncertainty and outline
methods of reporting the level of uncertainty in our conclusions that more accurately
reflect the "true" level of uncertainty consistent with the data.
Second, we argue that the use of empirical growth work for policy analysis
should be reconceptualized along explicit decision-theoretic lines, Other authors,
notably Levine and Renelt (1992), Fernandez, Ley, and Steel (1999), and Doppelhofer,
Miller and Sala-i-Martin (2000) have each addressed some of the aspects of the model
uncertainty which we believe underlies the mistrust of conventional growth regressions.
At the same time, there has yet to be a treatment which is "policy-relevant" by which
we mean an analysis of how model uncertainty impacts on the evaluation of alternative
policies. Specifically, we are interested in understanding how one may employ crosscountry growth data to compute predictive distributions for the consequences of policy
outcomes, distributions which can then be combined with a policymaker's welfare
function to assess alternative policy scenarios.
The methods we describe can, we believe, provide a better measure of the level
of the evidence inherent in the available data, especially for the construction of policyrelevant predictive structures through empirical growth analyses. As will be clear from
our discussion, this paper only begins to scratch the surface of a policy-relevant growth
econometrics. Our hope is that the ideas in the paper will facilitate new directions in
growth research.

The title of this paper intentionally echoes Sims' classic (1980) critique of
macroeconometric models. The growth literature does not suffer from the exact type
of "incredible" assumptions (Sims (1980)) which were required to identify economic
structure through 1960's-style simultaneous equations models and whose interpretation
Sims was attacking. Yet this literature does rely on assumptions that may be argued
to be equally dubious and whose implausibility renders the inferences typically claimed
by empirical workers to be equally suspect.1

1A number of the issues we raise echo, at least in spirit, Freedman (1991,1997)
who has made a number of important criticisms of the use of regressions to uncover
causal structure in the social sciences.
3

At the same time, our purpose is not to argue that statistical analyses of crosscountry growth data are incapable of providing insights. In our judgment, there are
several critical roles for regression and other forms of statistical analysis in the study of
growth. One role is the identification of interesting data patterns, patterns which can

both stimulate economic theory and suggest directions along which to engage in
country-specific studies. Quah's work (1996a,1996b,1997) is exemplary in this regard.

Our focus, on the other hand, will explicitly be on the role of empirical work in
formulating policy recommendations. In particular, the second goal of this paper is to
explore how one can, by casting empirical analysis in an explicitly decision-theoretic
framework, develop firmer insights into the growth process.
In our discussion, we will take an eclectic stance on how one should go about

data analysis. As will be apparent, many of our ideas will be derived from the
Bayesian statistics literature. Yet we think the basic arguments we make are relevant

to frequentist analyses. Our view of data analysis is essentially pragmatic. Data
analyses of the sort which are conventional in economics should, in our judgment, be

thought of as evidence gathering exercises based on the goals of facilitating the
evaluation of hypotheses and the development of policy-relevant predictions for future
trajectories of variables of interest. For example, one starts with a proposition such as
"the level of democracy in a country causally influences the level of economic growth."
Once this statement is mathematically instantiated (which means that ceteris paribus

conditions are formalized, a more or less convincing theoretical model (or set of

models) of causal influence is formulated in a form suitable for econometric
implementation, etc.), the purpose of an empirical exercise is to see whether the
statement is more or less plausible after the analysis is conducted. The success or
failure of an empirical exercise rests on whether one's prior views of the proposition
have been altered by the analysis and by whether the level of uncertainty around a
conclusion is low enough to be of policy relevance. Our position is really that one
should evaluate various statistical procedures on the basis of whether they successfully
answer the questions for which they are employed; we are unconcerned, at least in this
paper, with abstract issues which distinguish frequentist and Bayesian approaches, for
example. Because of this perspective, our criticisms of the empirical growth literature

have no necessary implication for other empirical enterprises, although they are

4

certainly potentially germane in similar cases.

2. A baseline regression

The bulk of modern empirical work on growth has focused on cross-country
growth regressions of the type pioneered by Barro (1991) and Mankiw, Romer, and
Weil (1992). While recent work has extended growth analysis to consider panels
(Evans (1998), Islam (1995), Lee, Pesaran, and Smith (1997)), the arguments we make
concerning conventional empirical growth practice as well as our proposed alternative
approach are equally relevant to that context as well, so we will focus on crosssections.

A generic form for cross-country growth regressions is
(1)

where g is real per capita growth in economy i over a given time, period (typically
measured as the change in per capita income between the beginning and end of the
sample divided by the number of years which have elapsed), y.0 is the logarithm of
per capita income of country i at the beginning of the time period under study, X1 is a
vector of country-specific savings and population growth rate controls, Z1 is a vector of
country-specific control variables, and is the error term. This decomposition of the
possible control variables in a cross-country growth regression corresponds to different
substantive aspects of modern growth theory. The variables yjç and X represent
those country-specific controls whose presence is predicted by the Solow (1957) growth
model. The Solow model is very often treated as a baseline from which to build up
more elaborate theories, hence these variables tend to be common across studies.
captures any additional controls which a particular researcher believes are important
and so generally differs across analyses. The singling out of
as a determinant of
growth is done in order to allow for assessment of the convergence hypothesis, i.e. the
proposition that for two countries with identical levels of the X and Z controls, the
one with lower initial output will on average grow faster than the other, so long as

5

saving and population growth rates are equal.2

While this regression is typically applied to national aggregates, it is worth
noting that it can in principle be applied to regions or sectors, once is reinterpreted
as a vector of growth rates within a country. This is particularly important for policy
analysis when a given policy may impact different regions, or population groups
differently. Our conjecture is that such decompositions are important when evaluating
growth policies with significant distributional consequences.

3. Econometric issues

In this section, we discuss three basic problems with the use of the basic
equation (1). These problems each, at one level, occur because of violations of the
assumptions necessary to estimate (1) using ordinary least squares and interpret the

estimated equation as the structural model of growth dynamics implied by the
augmented Solow model. Each of these criticisms ultimately reduces to questioning

whether growth regressions as conventionally analyzed can provide the causal
inferences which motivate such analyses.
1. openendedness of theories

A fundamental problem with growth regressions is the determination of what
variables to include in the analysis. This problem occurs because growth theories are
openended. By openendness, we refer to the idea that the validity of one causal theory
of growth does not imply the falsity of another. So for example, a causal relationship
between inequality and growth has no implications for whether there exists a causal
relationship between trade policy and growth. As a result, one finds that well over 90
different variables have been proposed as potential growth determinants (Durlauf and
Quah (1999)), each one of which has some ex ante plausibility. As there are at best
approximately 120 different countries available for analysis in cross-sections (the

2See Galor (1996) for a discussion of the implications of different growth
theories for convergence and Bernard and Durlauf (1996) for an analysis of the
economic versus statistical meaning of convergence.
6

number may be far fewer due to missing observations on some covariates), it is far

from obvious how to formulate firm inferences about any particular growth
explanation.

This issue of openendness has not been directly dealt with in the literature.
Rather, a number of researchers have proposed ways to deal with the robustness of
variables in growth regressions. The basic idea of this approach is to identify a set of
potential control variables for inclusion in (1) as elements of Z. Inclusion of a variable
in the final choice of Z1 requires that its associated coefficient proves to be robust with
respect to the inclusion of other variables. Levine and Renelt (1992) first introduced

this idea, employing Learner's (1978,1983) extreme bounds analysis. In extreme
bounds analysis, a coefficient is robust if the sign of its OLS estimate stays constant
across a set of regressions which represent different possible combinations of other
variables.

Sala-i-Martin (1997), arguing that extreme bounds analysis is likely to lead
to the rejection of variables which actually do influence growth, proposed the standard

that a coefficient is robust if it is statistically significant in 95% of the alternative
regressions run.

These proposals for dealing with the plethora of growth theories are, in our
judgment, useful, but neither is definitive as a way to evaluate model robustness.3
The reason is simple. In these approaches, a given coefficient will prove to not be
robust if its associated variable is highly collinear with variables suggested by other
candidate growth theories. This is obvious in the case of the Sala-i-Martin approach,
since collinearity easily can produce statistical insignificance. This is also true for
extreme bounds analysis, in the sense that a given coefficient is likely to be highly
unstable when alternative collinear regressors are included along side it's corresponding
regressor. Hence, these procedures will give sensible answers only if lack of collinearity
is a "natural" property for a regressor which causally influences growth. Yet when one

3This remark is not meant to be patronizing. As we see it, Leamer's work on
model uncertainty falls into two parts: a powerful demonstration of the importance of
accounting for such uncertainty in making empirical claims, and a specific suggestion,
extreme bounds analysis, for determining when regressors are fragile. The forrner we
regard as fundamental and unassailable. The latter is a particular way of instantiating
the deep idea of accounting for model uncertainty and is more easily subjected to
criticism. By analogy, Rawl's controversial use of minimax arguments to infer what
rules are just in a society does not diminish the importance of his idea of the veil of
ignorance.
7

thinks about theories of how various causal determinants of growth are themselves
determined, it is clear that collinearity is a property one might certainly expect will

hold for important causal determinants of growth.4 This is easiest to see if one
considers a block model for growth. Suppose that growth is causally determined by a

single regressor, d, and that this regressor in turn depends causally on a third
regressor c, so that

gi = d +
(2)

It is easy to construct cases (which will depend on the covariance structure of c1, Ej and
q) in which adding c to the growth equation will render d fragile.
Finally, we note that important recent papers by Doppelhofer, Miller arfd Salai-Martin (2000) and Fernandez, Ley and Steel (2000) have proposed to deal with
regressor choice and hence at least indirectly with model openendedness through the
use of Bayesian model averaging techniques. As this approach is very closely related
to, and indeed helped to inspire our own views, we defer discussion of these papers
until Section 6.

ii. parameter heterogeneity

A second problem with conventional growth analyses is the assumption of
parameter homogeneity. The vast majority of empirical growth studies assume that
the parameters which describe growth are identical across countries. This seems to be
a very implausible assumption. Does it really make sense to believe that the effect of
a change in the level of a civil liberties index on growth in the United States is the

same as that for Russia? While the use of panel data approaches to growth has
addressed one aspect of this problem by allowing for fixed effects (Evans (1998) is
particularly clear on this point), it has not addressed this more general question.
In some sense, this criticism might seem unfair as it presumably applies to any

4Leamer is in fact quite clear on this point. See Leamer (1978) pg. 172 for

further discussion.

8

socioeconomic data set. After all, economic theory does not imply that individual
units ought to be characterized by the same behavioral functions. That being said,
any empirical analysis necessarily will require that there exists a set of interpretable
statistical properties that are common across observations; it is a matter of judgment
when homogeneity assumptions are or are not to be made. Our contention is that the
assumption of parameter homogeneity seems particularly inappropriate when one is
studying complex heterogeneous objects such as countries.
Evidence of parameter heterogeneity has been developed in different contexts,

examples include Canova (1999), Desdoigts (1999), Durlauf and Johnson (1995),
Durlauf, Kourtellos, and Minkin (2000), Kourtellos (2000) and Pritchett (2000). While
these studies use very different statistical methods, each suggests that the assumption
of a single linear statistical growth model which applies to all countries is incorrect.5
To put it a different way, the reporting of conditional predictive densities based on the

assumption that all countries obey a common linear model may understate the
uncertainty present when the data are generated by a family of models.6

iii. causality versus correlation

A final source of skepticism with conventional growth empirics concerns a
problem endemic to all structural inference in social science — the question of causality

versus correlation. Many of the standard variables which are used to explain growth
patterns — democracy, trade openness, rule of law, social capital, etc. are as much
outcomes of socioeconomic relationships as growth itself. Hence there is an a priori
case that the use of ordinary least squares estimates of the relationship between growth
and such variables cannot be treated as structural anymore than coefficients which are
produced by OLS regressions of price on quantity. Yet, the majority of empirical
growth studies treat the various growth controls as exogenous variables, and so rely on
ordinary or heteroskedasticity corrected least squares estimation. What is particularly

5Durlauf and Johnson (1995) provide substantial evidence of parameter
heterogeneity between countries based on differences in initial literacy and initial
income. Recently, conventional growth analyses have begun to pay some attention to
differences between rich and poor countries; Barro (1996), for example allows the
effects of democracy on growth to differ between rich and poor.
6See Draper (1997) for discussion of this idea.
9

ironic about the lack of attention to endogeneity is that it was precisely this lack of
attention in early business cycle models that helped drive the development of rational
expectations econometrics.

To be clear, recent econometric practice in growth has begun to employ
instrumental variables to control for regressor endogeneity. This is particularly
common for panel data sets where temporally lagged variables are treated as legitimate
instruments. However, in our judgment, this trend towards the use of instrumental
variables estimation has not satisfactorily addressed this problem. The reason is that
the first criticism we have made of conventional growth econometrics —the failure to
account properly for the openendness of growth theories — has important implications
for validity of instrumental variables methods.
What we mean by this is the following. For a regression of the form

yj=Rj/3+€j

(3)

the use of some set of instrumental variables I as instruments for R requires, of
course, that each element of I is uncorrelated with c. In the growth literature, this is
not the condition that is actually employed to motivate instruments choice. Rather,

instruments are typically chosen on the basis that they are exogenous, which
operationally means that they are predetermined with respect to €. Predetermined
variables, however, are not necessarily valid instruments.

A good example of this pitfall may be found in Frankel and Romer (1996)
which studies the relationship between trade and growth.7 Frankel and Romer argue
that since trade openness is clearly endogenous, it is necessary to instrument the trade
openness variable in a cross-country regression if one is to consistently estimate the

trade openness coefficient. In order to do this, they use a geographic variable, i.e.
area, as an instrument and argue, perfectly sensibly, that area is predetermined with
respect to growth. Is it plausible that country land size is uncorrelated with the
omitted growth factors in their regression? The history and geography literatures are
replete with theories of how geography affects political regime, development, etc. For
example, larger countries may be more likely to be ethnically heterogeneous, leading to
7This discussion borrows from Durlauf (2000).
10

attendant social problems. Alternatively, larger countries may have higher per capita

military expenditures, which means relatively greater shares of unproductive
government investment and/or higher distortionary taxes. Our argument is not that
any one of these links is necessarily empirically salient, but that the use of land area as
an instrument presupposes the assumption that the correlations between land size and
all omitted growth determinants are in total negligible. It is difficult to see how one
can defend such an assumption when these omitted growth determinants are neither
specified nor evaluated.

It is interesting to contrast the difficulties of identifying valid instruments in
growth contexts with the relative ease with which this is done in rational expectations

contexts. The reason for this difference is that rational expectations models are
typically closed in the sense that a particular theory will imply that some combination
of variables is a martingale difference with respect to some sequence of information
sets. For the purposes of data analysis, the theory identifies instrumental variables,
namely any variables which are observable at the time expectations are formed.

4. Exchangeability

Inferences from any statistical model can only be made, of course, conditional
on various prior assumptions which translate the data under study into a particular
mathematical structure. One way to evaluate the plausibility of inferences drawn from
empirical growth regressions is by assessing the plausibility of the assumptions which
are made in making this translation. In the empirical growth literature, it is easy to
find examples where the assumptions employed to construct statistical models are

clearly untenable. For example, it is typical to assume that the errors in a crosssection regression are jointly uncorrelated and orthogonal to the model's regressors.8
Does one really wish to argue that there literally exist no omitted factors which induce
correlation across the innovations in the growth regressions associated with the model?

51n the subsequent discussion, we will focus on OLS estimation of growth
regressions.

In the empirical growth literature, one can find examples of

heteroskedasticity corrections to relax assumption of identical residual variances and
instrumental variables to deal with violations of error/regressor orthogonality. Our
discussion is qualitatively unaffected by either of these alternatives to OLS.
11

More generally, it is easy to see that parameter heterogeneity and omitted variables,
which we argued in the previous section are endemic to growth regressions, can each

lead to a violation of the error uncorrelatedness assumption and/or the regressor
orthogonality assumption.
Estimation, inference, and the various uses of a statistical model such as (1) can
still be conducted under weaker assumptions than uncorrelatedness and orthogonality.

Econometrics has a long tradition of identifying minimal sets of conditions under
which coefficient estimates and standard errors may be consistently estimated.
Examples of this include the emphasis on orthogonality conditions between regressors

and errors as the basis for ordinary least squares consistency (as opposed to the
interpretation of the OLS estimators as the maximum likelihood estimates for a linear

model with nonstochastic regressors and i.i.d. normal errors) or the use of mixing
conditions to characterize when central limit theorems apply to dependent data (rather
than the modelling of the series as a known ARMA process). Hence, any critique of

cross-country growth analyses which is based upon the plausibility of particular
statistical assumptions needs to argue that the violations of the assumptions actually
invalidate the objectives of a given exercise.

In this section, we argue that of the three econometric issues we have raised,
the first two may both be interpreted as examples of deviations of empirical growth
models from a statistical "ideal" that allows for the sorts of inferences one wishes to
make in growth contexts. The purpose for doing this is to establish a baseline for
statistical growth models such that if a model does not meet this standard, then a
researcher needs to determine whether the reasons for this invalidate the goal of the
empirical exercise. Hence the baseline does not describe a necessary requirement for
empirical work per se, but rather helps define a strategy which we think empirical
workers should follow in formulating growth models. As we see it, when a model does
not meet this standard, a researcher must be prepared to argue that the violations of
the standard do not invalidate the empirical claims he wishes to make. This standard
is based on a concept in probability known as exchange ability.9

9Bernardo and Smith (1994)

provide

a complete introduction to

exchangeability. Draper, Hodges, Mallows and Pregibon (1993) develop a detailed
argument on the importance of exchangeability to statistical inference. Our analysis is
very much indebted to their perspective.
12

i. basic ideas

A formal definition of exchangeability is the following.

Definition. Exchangeability

A sequence of random variables q is exchangeable if, for every finite collection
of elements of the sequence,

= a1,...,K = aK) =

=
where

1''7)p(K)

= ax)1°

(4)

p(-) is any operator which permutes the K indices.

Exchangeability is typically treated as a property of the unconditional
probabilities of random variables. In regression contexts, however, it is often more
natural to think in terms of the properties of random variables conditional on some
information set. For example, in a regression, one is interested in the properties of the
errors conditional on the regressors. We therefore introduce an additional concept,
which we call ¶1 — conditional exchangeability."

Definition. '5— conditional exchangeability

For a sequence of random variables q and collection of associated random vectors
is ¶1 — conditionally exchangeable if, for every finite collection q1. .
•T'1K of elements of

i

'°Throughout, i4) will be used to denote probability measures.
"if — conditional exchangeability is originally defined in Kallenberg (1982).

Ivanoff and Weber (1996) provide additional discussion. The notion of ¶1-conditional

exchangeability is rarely employed in the statistics literature, and is not mentioned in
standard textbooks such as Bernardo and Smith (1994). We believe this is so because
exchangeability analyses in the statistics literature generally focus on whether the units

under study are exchangeable, rather than the units conditional on certain
characteristics as is the more natural notion in economic contexts.
13

the sequence,

pi =a1,...,q =
=

1''77p(K)

=

= aK

)

(5)

where p() is any operator which permutes the K indices and 'if = {'if}.

Notice that when Vi, ¶ = , the empty set, ¶F — conditional exchangeability reduces to
exchangeability.
Associated with exchangeability and 'if — conditional exchangeability is the idea
of partial exchangeability.

Definition. Partial exchangeability
A sequence of random variables 7k is partially exchangeable with respect to a sequence
of random vectors Y if, for every finite collection q1.. •11K of elements of the sequence,

it(1 =aj,...,q= aKY = Y Vi e{l..X}) =
=

"'71(K)

= UK

=? V i E {l...K})

(6)

where p() is any operator which permutes the K indices.

The key difference between exchangeability and partial exchangeability is the
conditioning on common values of some random vectors Y's associated with the 1j'5 in
the latter case. If is a discrete variable, then partial exchangeability implies that a

sequence may be decomposed into a finite or countable number of exchangeable
subsequences.

How does exchangeability relate to the assumptions which underlie crosscountry growth regressions? These models typically assume that once the included
growth variables in the model are realized, there exists no basis for distinguishing the
probabilities of various permutations of residual components in country-level growth

14

rates, i.e. these residuals are Cf — conditionally exchangeable, where Cf is the modeller's

information set.

Notice that knowledge of variables outside those included in a

regression or parameter heterogeneity represent components of this information set.
Even though Cf — conditional exchangeability of model errors constitutes a

stronger assumption than is needed for many of the interpretations of ordinary least
squares, this particular exchangeability condition is nevertheless very useful as a
benchmark in the construction and assessment of statistical models. We make this
claim for two reasons. First, this exchangeability concept helps to organize discussions
of the plausibility of the invariance of conditional moments that lie at the heart of
policy relevant predictive exercises. Draper (1987) describes the critical role of
exchangeability in any predictive exercise:

"Predictive modeling is the process of expressing one's beliefs about how the past and

future are connected. These connections are established through exchangeability
judgments: with what aspects of past experience will the future be more or less
interchangeable, after conditioning on relevant factors? It is not possible to avoid

making such judgments; the only issue is whether to make them explicitly or
implicitly." (pg. 458)

Put in the context of growth analysis, the use of cross-country data to predict the
behavior of individual countries presupposes certain symmetry judgments concerning
the countries, judgments which are made precise by the notion of exchangeability.
Second, the conditions under which various types of exchangeability do or do

not hold for growth rates or model residuals can be linked to one's substantive
understanding of the growth process in ways that alternative sets of (purely statistical)
assumptions on errors cannot. In turn, once exchangeability is believed to be violated,
one can naturally link the reasons why exchangeability fails to hold to the question of

whether the estimation methods used in the growth literature nevertheless can be
expected to yield consistent parameter estimates and standard errors.

These considerations are fundamental to questions of model formulation.
Further, exchangeability is separately important in terms of its implications for the
appropriate statistical theory to apply in growth contexts. The reason for this relates
to a deep result in probability theory known as de Finetti's Representation Theorem:12

the sample path of a sequence of exchangeable random variables behaves as if the

15

random variables were generated by a mixture of i.i.d. processes. de Finetti's theorem
establishes that the symmetry inherent in the concept of the exchangeability of errors
leads to a representation of the joint distribution of the errors in terms of an integral of

the joint product of identical marginal distributions against some conditional
distribution function.'3

de Finetti's Representation Theorem.
If

is an infinite exchangeable sequence with associated probability measure P, then
there exists a probability measure Q over g, the space of all distribution functions on
R, such that the joint distribution function F(q — .
+ k) for any finite collection
+ k may be written as

=

f_jF(m+r)dQ(F).

(7)

What is important about de Finetti's Representation Theorem in terms of
empirical practice is that it creates a link between a researcher's prior beliefs about the
nature of the data under analysis, specifically the properties of regression errors, which
permits one to interpret ordinary least squares estimates and the test statistics in the
usual way.14

ii. exchangeability and growth
Various forms of exchangeability appear, in our reading of the empirical growth
literature, to implicitly underlie many of the regression specifications one encounters.

An implicit ( — conditional) exchangeability assumption is made whenever the
empirical implementation of the growth trajectory for a single country from a given
theoretical model is turned into a cross-country regression (typically after linearizing)

'2See Bernardo and Smith (1994) chapters 4 and 6 for a very insightful

discussion of the nature and implications of the theorem and Aldous (1983) for a
comprehensive mathematical development of various forms of the theorem.
13See Bernardo and Smith (1994) pg. 177, for this formulation of de Finetti's
theorem as well as a proof.
16

by allowing the trajectory's state variables to differ across countries and the appending
of an error term. Such an assumption of exchangeability has substantive implications
for how one thinks about the relationship between a given observation and others in a
data set. Suppose that one is considering the effect of a change in trade openness on a
country, e.g. Tanzania, in sub-Saharan Africa. How does one employ estimates of the
effects of trade on growth in other countries to make this assessment? The answer to
this question depends on the extent to which the causal relationship between trade and
growth in Tanzania can be uncovered using data from other countries.

More generally, notice how a number of modelling assumptions which are
standard in conventional growth exercises are conceptually related to the assumptions

that the model errors c are exchangeable and that the growth rates

are partially

exchangeable with respect to available information. Specifically,

1) The assumption that a given regression embodies all of a researcher's knowledge of
the growth process is related to the assumption that the errors in a growth regression
are ¶5 —

conditionally exchangeable.

2) The assumption that the parameters in a growth regression are constant is related
to the assumption that country-level growth rates are partially exchangeable.

3) The justification for the use of ordinary (or heteroskedasticity-corrected) least
squares, as is standard in the empirical growth literature, is related to the assumption
'4One needs to be cautious in the use of di Finetti's theorem to calculate the
distributions of regression estimators. For linear regression models of the form (1)
with normally distributed errors and nonstochastic regressors, Arnold (1979) shows
that

"...many optimal procedures for the model with i.i.d. errors are also optimal

procedures for the model with exchangeably distributed errors.. .in the univariate case

the best linear unbiased estimator and the ordinary least squares estimator are

equal... as long as the experimenter is only interested in hypotheses about (the slope
coefficients of the regression) he may act as though the errors were i.i.d." (pg. 194)

Further, if the errors are nonnormal, then de Finetti's theorem leads one to expect
analogous asymptotic equivalences. Similarly, we believe that analogies to de Finetti's
theorem can be developed for stochastic regressors and f — conditional exchangeability,
although as far as we know no such results have been established.
17

that the errors in a growth regression are exchangeable (or are exchangeable after a
heteroskedasticity correction.)

Our general claim is that exchangeability, in particular,

—

conditional

exchangeability of model errors, is an "incredible" (Sims (1980)) assumption in the

context of the standard cross-country regressions of the growth literature. (By a
standard regression, we refer to eq. (1), in which a small number of regressors are
assumed to explain cross-country growth patterns.15) In order for exchangeability to
hold, it would be necessary for a given regression and modeller's information set that
the likelihood of a positive error for a given country, say Japan, to be the same as that
of any other country in the sample. In turn, for this to be true, it would have to be

the case that no prior information exists about the countries under study which
renders the distribution of the associated growth residuals for these countries sensitive
to permutations.
To repeat, exchangeability is not necessary to justify the estimation methods
and structural interpretations conventionally given to cross-country growth regressions.

Hence our use of the term "related" in the three points we enumerate above. What
exchangeability does is provide a baseline, based on economic theory and a researcher's

prior knowledge of the growth process, by which to assess cross-country regressions.

When a researcher estimates a model for which exchangeability is violated, it is
incumbent on the researcher to explain how the estimation and interpretation of the
model is consistent with these violations.
The failure of exchangeability to hold in cross-country contexts may seem to be
an esoteric objection, but in fact it speaks to a fundamental issue in the interpretation

of cross-country growth regressions, namely, the leap from the identification of
statistical patterns to causal inference. Suppose one runs the baseline Solow regression

and observes that regression errors for the countries in sub-Saharan Africa are
predominately negative (as is the case). How does one interpret this finding? One can
either attribute the finding to chance (the errors are, after all, zero mean with nonnegligible variance), or conclude that there was something about those countries which

'5To be fair, empirical growth papers often check the robustness of variables
relative to a small number of alternative controls, but such robustness checks do not
address exchangeability per se.
18

was not captured by the model. Easterly and Levine (1997), for example, develop a
comprehensive argument on the role of ethnic divisions as a causal determinant of
growth working from this initial fact. Or put differently, Easterly and Levine (1997),
based on prior knowledge about the politics and cultures of these countries, developed
their analysis on the basis that the Solow errors were not exchangeable, i.e. that there
was something about the sub-Saharan African countries which should have been
incorporated into the Solow model.

An important question for the assessment of growth regressions is whether there
can ever exist a point where our knowledge of the history and culture of the countries
involved in cross-country regressions is embedded in the regressions to such an extent
that the exchangeability requirement is met. Notice, this is a deeper issue than asking
whether the covariance matrix of residuals for a model is proportional to the identity

matrix (or even whether it is diagonal).

In the growth context, the failure of

exchangeability means that a modeller has reasons to question whether the countries in
a sample obey the same growth process.
Does the requirement of exchangeability imply the impossibility of structural

inference whenever observational data are being studied? In our view, this would
grossly exaggerate the import of our critique. Exchangeability of errors is conceivable
for a wide range of models with observational data sets. For example, exchangeability

seems to be a very plausible assumption for statistical models based on the use of
individual level data sets such as the PSID or NLSY once relevant information about
the individuals under study is controlled for. One reason for this relates to the units of
analysis. A basic difference between micro data sets of this type and macro data sets

of the type used in growth analysis is the latter observations pertain to large
heterogeneous aggregates for which a great deal of information is known which implies
that exchangeability does not hold. In addition, the large size of individual level data
sets such as the PSID or NLSY means that the range of possible control variables is

much greater than is the case for growth. By this we mean something deeper than
"the more data points the more regressors which may be included." Rather, we would

argue that large data sets of the type found in microeconomics will contain
observations on groups of individuals who are sufficiently similar with respect to
observables that they may be plausibly regarded as representing exchangeable

19

observations.

To summarize, in our view conventional growth econometrics has failed to
consider the ways in which appropriate exchangeability concepts may or may not hold
for the specific models which are analyzed. This failure in turn renders these studies

difficult if not impossible to interpret since one must know whether any
exchangeability violations which are present invalidate the statistical exercise being
conducted. We therefore concur with Draper, Hodges, Mallows and Pregibon (1987),
who argue that

"Statistical methods are concerned with combining information from different
observational units and with making inferences from the resulting summaries to
prospective measurements on the same or other units. These operations will be useful

only when the units to be combined are judged to be similar (comparable or
homogeneous).. judgments of similarity involve concepts more primitive than
probability, and these judgments are central to preliminary activities that all
statisticians must perform, even though probability specifications are absent or
contrived at such a preliminary stage." (pg. 1)
iii. exchangeability and causality

While exchangeability is, we believe, a useful benchmark for understanding
some of the major sources of skepticism in growth regressions, it should be emphasized
that it does not bear in any obvious way on the third of our general criticisms, the lack

of attention to causality versus correlation in growth analysis. The reason for this is
simple: exchangeability relates to the relationship between joint probabilities of
outcomes and not to anything concerning joint probabilities for different variables
under alternative probability distributions for other variables. For example, following
a nice example due to Goldberger (1991), a regression of parental height on daughter
height can have a perfectly well defined set of exchangeable errors, so that parental
heights are partially exchangeable, yet the interpretation of the associated regression
coefficient is obviously noncausal.

Put differently, causality is a different sort of question from the other issues we
have addressed, in that it cannot be reduced to a question of whether the data fulfill a
generic statistical property. As Heckman (2000) notes,

20

"...causaiity is a property of a model. ..many models may explain the same data

and.. .assumptions must be made to identify causal or structural models." (pg. 89)

and
"Some of the disagreement that arises in interpreting a given body of data is intrinsic
to the field of economics because of the conditional nature of causal knowledge. The
information in any body of data is usually too weak to eliminate competing causal

explanations of the same phenomenon. There is no mechanical algorithm for
producing a set of "assumption free" facts or causal estimates based on those facts."
(pg. 91)

In our subsequent discussion, we will not address strategies for dealing with
questions of causality. For our purposes, we will focus on model uncertainty, which
presupposes that causality uncertainty within a given model has been addressed by
suitable assumptions on the part of the analyst. In doing this, we are not in any way
diminishing the importance of thinking about causal inference; rather we believe that

causal arguments require judgments about economic theory and qualitative
information about the problem at hand which represent very separate issues from those
we wish to address.

5. A digression on noneconometric evidence

Regression analyses of the type which are conventionally done are useful
mechanisms for summarizing data and uncovering patterns. These techniques are not,
as currently employed, particularly credible ways to engage in causal inference. Before

proceeding to econometric alternatives, we wish to point out the importance of
integrating different sources of information in the assessment of growth theories. We
do this as these sources are often the basis on which one can question exchangeability
in a particular context.
The economic history literature is replete with studies which are of enormous
importance in adjudicating different growth explanations, yet this literature really only
receives lip service in growth literature.16 An exemplar of the sort of historical study
which speaks to growth debates is Clark (1987). This paper explores the sources of
21

productivity differences between cotton textile workers in New England versus workers
in other countries in 1910. These differences were immense — a typical New England
worker was about 6 times as productive as his counterpart in India or China and over

twice as productive as his counterpart in Germany. Clark painstakingly shows that
these differences cannot be attributed to differences in technology, education, or
management.17 Rather, they seem to reflect cultural differences in work and effort
norms.

This type of study has important implications for understanding why

technology may not diffuse internationally and how poverty traps may emerge, and
should play a far greater role in the empirical growth literature than is done currently.
Further, we believe that historical and qualitative studies play a crucial role in

the development of credible statistical analyses. One reason for this is that such
studies provide information on the plausibility of identifying assumptions which are
made to establish causality. Further, our discussion on exchangeability and growth
analysis may be interpreted as arguing it is necessary, that a researcher be able to do
one of two things in order to argue that a regression provides structural information.
A researcher can make a plausible argument that, given the many plausible growth
theories and plausible heterogeneity in the way different causal growth factors impact
on different countries, the errors in particular growth regression are nevertheless
exchangeable.

Or, a researcher must make the argument that the violations of

exchangeability in the regression occur in ways which do not affect the interpretation

of the coefficients and standard errors from those which are employed. To some
extent, exchangeability judgments must be made prior to a statistical exercise, as
noted by Draper et al (1987) in the quotation which appears above. Where does
information of this type come from? In our judgment, it is qualitative and historical
work which provides such information. Hence, the detailed study of individual
countries which is a hallmark of work by the World Bank, for example, plays an
invaluable role in allowing for credible statistical analysis.

'6There are of course a number of notable exceptions to this remark, such as

Easterly and Levine (1997) and Prescott (1998).

'7See also Wolcott and Clark (1999) which provides detailed evidence that
managerial differences cannot explain the low productivity in Indian textiles.
22

6. Towards a policy-relevant growth econometrics

The main themes of our criticisms of current econometric practice may be
summarized as three claims:

1) The observations in cross-country growth regressions do not obey various
exchangeability assumptions given the information available on the countries under
study.
which implies

2) Model uncertainty is not appropriately incorporated into empirical growth analyses.
and

3) Proposed solutions to these problems have typically been ad hoc.

These problems need to be explicitly dealt with in order for econometric inferences on
growth to be credible. More specifically, we advocate an explicit decision-theoretic

basis for assessing growth data. As we see it, when one attempts to analyze

a

relationship such as that between democracy and growth, one is ultimately interested
in policy-based predictions, i.e. the construction of predictive densities to assess the
effects of changes in policy. The decision-theoretic framework we employ is explicit
about various forms of model uncertainty which are associated with possible violations
of exchangeability, as we have discussed in the previous section.
From the decision-theoretic perspective, one moves away from a specific
concern with a particular hypotheses to an evaluation of the implications of a given set
of data for a particular course of action on the part of the researcher. As argued by
Kadane and Dickey (1980),

"The important question in practice is not whether a true effect is zero, for it is
already known not to do exactly zero, but rather, Flow large is the effect? But then
this question is only relevant in terms of How large is important? This question in

turns depends on the use to which the inference will be put, namely, the utility
23

function of the concerned scientist. Approaches which attempt to explain model
specification from the viewpoint of the inappropriate question, Is it true that...? have a
common thread in that they all proceed without reference to the utility function of the
scientist. And therefore, from the decision theory point of view, they all impose
normative conditions on the utility function which are seldom explicit and often far
from the case" (pg. 247)

When one substitutes "policymaker" for "scientist" in this quotation, it becomes clear
why policy-relevant growth econometrics needs to explicitly integrate policy objectives

and empirical practice. Our particular approach is well summarized by Kass and
Raftery (1994):

"The decision making problem is solved by maximizing the posterior expected utility
of each course of action considered. The latter is equal to a weighted average of the
posterior expected utilities conditional on each of the models, with the weights equal to
the posterior model probabilities." (pg. 784)

In other words, we argue that policy-relevant econometrics needs to explicitly identify
the objectives of the policymaker, and then calculate the expected consequences of a

policy change.'8 Within this calculation, explicit accounting needs to be taken of
model uncertainty. This approach is related to Doppelhofer, Miller and Sala-i-Martin
(2000) and Fernandez, Ley and Steel (1999); explicit links will be described below.
It is important to recognize that there are no panaceas for the interpretation
problems we have described for growth regressions. While our formulation of model
uncertainty can, we believe reduce the dependence of empirical growth studies on
untenable exchangeability or other assumptions, these procedures will still rely on
untestable and possibly controversial assumptions. It may be impossible, for example,
to place every possible growth theory in a common statistical analysis, so critiques

based on theory openendness will apply, at some level, to our own suggestions.
Further, we will not be able to model all aspects of uncertainty about partial
exchangeability of growth rates. However, we do not regard this as a damning defect.
Empirical work always relies on judgment as well as formal procedures, what Draper et

al (1993) refer to as "the role of leaps of faith" (pg. 16) in constructing statistical
models. What we wish to do is reduce the number and magnitude of such leaps.

'8See Chamberlain (2000) for an extensive development of econometric
machinery for facilitating decisionmaking under uncertainty.
24

1. modelling model uncertainty

We will assume that the structural growth process for country i obeys a linear
structure which applies to all countries j which are members of a class (i). Suppose
that this model is described by a set of regressors S which we partition into a subset X
and a scalar z. Our analysis will focus on analyses based on /3, the coefficient which
determines the role of z on country i's growth. Hence we work with models of the
form

=

+

=

Xir +

+ c, j E j(i).

(8)

When a given model represents the "true" or correct specification of the growth
process for country i, then the sequence of residuals

will be J — exchangeable where

constitutes all potential growth regressors (which will include both S and any
variables which capture parameter heterogeneity as described below). The idea that a
model consists of the specification of a set of growth determinants (Si) and the
specification of a set of countries with common parameters (j(i)), which together
render the associated model errors — conditionally exchangeable, parallels our earlier
discussion of the first two sources of criticisms of growth regressions. It is skepticism
over the claim that a particular model is correctly specified which renders many of the
empirical claims in the growth literature not credible.
In order to analyze a model of this type, it is necessary to add some statistical
assumptions. We assume that eJs are jointly normal; the marginal distribution of the

typical element is N(O,o). The variance a is treated as known. Further, we will
assume that conditional on a model, the various regressors in (8) are nonstochastic; the
regressors are also assumed to be linearly independent. These assumptions will allow

us to describe various posterior distributions in a simple fashion; the statistical
literature has many ways of relaxing both assumptions. We denote the ordinary least
squares estimate (as well as classical maximum likelihood estimate'9) of ( for a given
model as (. Finally we assume a noninformative prior on the regression coefficients,2°

25

(9)

Letting S denote the data matrix of regressors in (8), it is well known (eg. Box and

Tiao (1973) pg. 115), that the posterior density t(( D,M) is, for known c.
multivariate N(?,(S'S) — 1a); the posterior density of /3z can of course be calculated

from this vector distribution. One can think of the standard approach to statistical
analysis in the growth literature as using a single model M and given data set D to
analyze model parameters. From a frequentist perspective, this involves calculating an
estimate of the parameter /3 along with an associated standard error for the estimate.
From a Bayesian perspective, this means calculating the posterior density ,t(/3Z D,M).
Under the assumptions we have placed on the errors and using the noninformative

prior (7), the posterior mean and variance of the parameters, which are the natural
objects to compute under the Bayesian approach, will equal the corresponding OLS
parameter and variance estimates. This equivalence will allow us to keep the

interpretation of model uncertainty clear from both Bayesian and frequentist
perspectives.

Now suppose that there exists a universe of models, Mm e A which are
possible candidates for the "true" growth model which generated the data under study.

This universe is generated from two types of uncertainty. First, there is theory
uncertainty. In particular, we assume that there is a set E1 of possible regressors to
include in a growth regression which correspond to alternative causal growth
mechanisms. In our framework, a theory is defined as a particular choice of regressors
for a model of the form (8). Second, there is heterogeneity uncertainty. By this, we

mean that there is uncertainty as to which countries comprise J(i), i.e. are partially

19As was pointed out in footnote 13 above, Arnold (1979) shows that for

regressions of the form (1), with normal errors and nonstochastic regressors, the best
linear unbiased estimator is the same as the ordinary least squares estimator regardless
of whether the errors are i.i.d. or exchangeable. Hence minimum variance estimation
is achieved for the regression parameters for (1).
20We use this noninformative prior exclusively for expositional purposes. This
prior has the disadvantage that it is "improper," i.e. it integrates to : rather than 1.
For this reason, the calculation of certain quantities such as Bayes factors is precluded.

See Raiffa and Schlaifer (1961) for examples of proper priors such as the
normal/Gamma which may be used in analyzing the posterior distribution of linear
regression coefficients. In our empirical work, we use an approximation due to Raftery
(1995) in which the prior coefficient distribution can be ignored.
26

exchangeable with country i.21 In the presence of these types of uncertainty, one will

not be interested in p/9 D,Mm) for a particular Mm but rather in jc(fi D); the
exception, of course, is when the correct model Mm and the set of countries which are
partially exchangeable with i are both known with probability 1 to the modeller.
It is possible to integrate theory and some forms of heterogeneity uncertainty
into a common variable selection framework. To see this, for a given regressor set

suppose that one believes that the countries under study may be divided into two
subsets with associated subscripts
and 2 such that the countries within each subset
are partially exchangeable, but that countries in one subset may not be partially
exchangeable with countries in the other because of parameter heterogeneity. Each of
these subsets is characterized by a linear equation so that

= Xir1 +z/3,i+€ if j E i

and

gj = Xw2 +

(10)

z/32 + i E

(11)

i) + z(fl2 — , ) + c if i E 2

(12)

This last equation can be rewritten as

gj =

+ zfi,i

+

—

Therefore, one can combine the two equations into a single growth regression of the
form

=
where

Xir1 + 3/Z1 +

+

+

'

(13)

= 1 if j E 2' otherwise, and one will have obtained a regression in which

X8,50 and

2 are now defined over all j, they are simply additional regressors.

Notice that it is straightforward to generalize this procedure to multiple groups of
partially exchangeable countries. To be clear, this procedure is not completely general
in that it restricts the sort of possible parameter heterogeneity which is allowed; for
21These two types of uncertainty are not independent.
27

example, each country is not allowed a separate set of coefficients. In order to allow

for this more general type of heterogeneity, it would be necessary to move to an
alternative structure, such as a hierarchical linear model (see Schervish (1995), chapter
8); we plan to pursue this in subsequent work.
In the presence of model uncertainty, the calculation of ,t(/3 D) requires that

one integrates out the dependence of the probability measure i4i D,Mm) on the
model Mm. By Bayes' rule, one can compute the posterior distribution of a given
coefficient conditional only on the observed data,

i4i D) =

D,Mm)f4Mm D)
I

(14)

where p(M D) denotes the posterior probability (given the data) of model Mm.
Further, since

/4Mm D) x 1u(D Mm)/4Mm)
where

(15)

means "is proportional to", 1t(D M) is the likelihood of the data given

model Mm and fL(Mm) is the prior probability of model Mm, this expression may be
rewritten as
D)

L/2(13z D,Mm)p(D Mm)/4Mm)

(16)

When the prior probabilities p(Mm) are equal, then

D) cc L/t(/9z D,Mm),u(D Mm)

(17)

This formulation gives a way of eliminating the conditioning of the posterior density of
a given parameter on a particular model choice.
Calculations of this type originally appeared in Learner (1978) and are reported

in Draper (1995).

Leamer (1978) pg. 118 gives the following derivations of the

conditional mean and variance of /3 given the data D:

28

E(u9 D) = >jt4Mm

D,Mm)

(18)

and

var(/3 D) =

E(

D) (E(/3 D))2 =

D)(var(/32 Mm,D) + (E(i3 D,Mm))2) — (E(j3 D))2 =

D)var(/3 Mm,D) + p(Mm D)(E(P D,Mm) — E(P ID))2
Lu(Mm
In
In
I

As

(19)

discussed in Learner (1978) and Draper (1995), the overall variance of the

parameter estimate

depends on the variance of the within model estimates (the first

term in (19) and the variance of the estimates across models (the second term in
(19)).22

Equation (14) and the related expressions are all examples of Bayesian model
averages. The methodology surrounding Bayesian model averaging is specifically
developed for linear models in Raftery, Madigan, and Hoeting (1997).23 Doppelhofer,

Miller and Sala-i-Martin (2000), focusing on theory nncertainty only, compute a
number of measures of variable robustness based on applying this formula to growth

regressions, and conclude that initial income is the "most robust" regressor.
Fernandez, Ley, and Steel (1999) also employ Bayesian model averaging for theory

uncertainty, with a focus on the explicit computation of posterior coefficient
distributions. Our own development differs from these important papers in two main
respects. First, we treat heterogeneity uncertainty as well as theory uncertainty as
part of overall model uncertainty. Draper, Hodges, Mallows and Pregibon (1993)

provides a general overview of the importance of accounting for heterogeneity
uncertainty in constructing credible empirical exercises. Second, we develop an
explicit decision-theoretic approach to interpreting growth regressions.

225ee Stewart (1984) for the development of some significance tests based on the

posterior distribution of .
23The survey by Hoeting, Madigan, Raftery, and Volinsky (1999) provides a
nice introdnction to model averaging techniques. See also Wasserman (1997).
29

ii. policy assessment: basic ideas

The basic posterior coefficient distribution (14) and associated first and second
moments (18) and (19) represent data summaries and as such have no implications for

either inference or policy assessment. The goal of a policy analysis is not the
construction of such summaries but rather the assessment of the consequences of
changes in the policy. Similarly, such data summaries do not imply the validity of
particular rules for data evaluation or inference. For example, the assessment of
whether regressors are robust such as is done in extreme bounds analysis or the
comparison of models using Bayes factors24, requires the imposition of new evaluative
criteria in order to produce explicit decision rules.
In this section, we explore policy assessment when model uncertainty has been

explicitly accounted for. The purpose of this exercise is twofold. First, it captures
what we believe is the appropriate way for policymakers to draw inferences from data.
Second, we wish to show that various rules for the assessment of regressor fragility,
such as extreme bounds analysis, will arise in such exercises. A critical feature of this
approach to model assessment is that the ignoring of regressors is shown to flow from
particular aspects of the policymaker's objective function.
For expositional purposes, we initially suppose that the goal of an empirical

exercise is to evaluate the effect of a change dz25 in some scalar variable which is
under the control of a policymaker and which is believed to have some effect on
growth. Therefore, the decisionmaker's set of actions .4 is {O,dz}. This decision rule
is based on a vector of observable data D. This means that a decisionmaker chooses a
rule ç() which maps D to A so that

(D) = dz if D E D1
ç(D) = 0 otherwise

24For

any two models Mm and M ,

the

(20)

Bayes factor B m' is defined as

Mmi). Kass and Raftery (Y994) provide an extensiv'e overview of the
use of Bayes factors.
25Without loss of generality, we will generally assume that dz > 0.
30

is therefore the acceptance region for the policy change. Finally, we reiterate that
we assume that the "correct" linear growth model is a causal relationship.
Since we are restricting ourselves to linear models, the analysis of the policy

decision is particularly straightforward, as it(i3 D) will describe the posterior
distribution of the effect of a marginal change in z on growth in a given country.
From this perspective, a marginal policy intervention in country i can be evaluated as
follows. Let z denote the level of a policy instrument in country i. This instrument
appears as one of the regressors in the linear model which describes cross-country

growth. Suppose one has the option of either keeping the policy instrument at its
current value or changing it by a fixed amount dz. Let g denote the growth rate in
the country in the absence of the policy change and let g + /3dz denote the growth
rate with the change. Finally, let 1/(g) denote the utility value of the growth rate to
the policy maker.

An expected utility assessment of the policy change can be based on the
comparison

E(V(g + /3dz) D) — E(V(g) D)

(21)

Calculations of the expected utility differential (19) implicitly contain all information

that is relevant to a policy assessment.

Hence, from the perspective of policy
evaluation the various rules which have been proposed for the evaluation of regressor
robustness should be an implication of this calculation. Notice that this calculation
requires explicitly accounting for model uncertainty, since the conditioning is always
down with respect to the data alone.
iii. policy assessment under alternative payoff functions

a. risk neutrality
Suppose that V is linear and increasing, i.e.

V(g) = a0 +
31

a1 > 0

(22)

For a risk neutral policymaker the relevant statistic is the posterior mean of the
regressor coefficient. In this case, it is straightforward to see that the policy change is
justified if the expected value of the change in the growth rate is positive, i.e.

D)E(j3 D,Mm) > 0

(23)

When the prior model probabilities are equal, then this is equivalent to the condition
I

M)E(/3z D,Mm) > 0

(24)

so the likelihoods p(D Mm) determine the relative model weights.
b. mean/variance utility over possible changes

Suppose that a policy maker prefers higher expected growth, but dislikes
variance in growth. For expositional simplicity, further assume that the payoff
function of the policymaker only depends on the growth effect of the policy change.
One way of expressing this is to assume that
E(V(g + /32dz) D) — E(V(g) ID) =
aoE(/3dz D) + aivar(/3dz D)1"2, a0 > 0,

c <0

(25)

When fao/aiI = , then this payoff specification implies that the policy maker will

only act if the i-statistic (i.e. the expected value of 9 divided by its standard
deviation) is greater than 2. Hence, this specification corresponds to the standard
econometric practice of ignoring regressors whose associated i-statistics are less than 2.
Notice that from a decision-theoretic perspective, the conventional practice of
ignoring "statistically insignificant" coefficients (by which we mean coefficients whose
posterior standard errors are more than twice their posterior expected values) can only

be justified under very special cases. First, it is necessary to assume that the form of

32

risk aversion of the policy maker applies to the standard deviation rather than the
variance of the change in growth. Otherwise, the desirability of the policy will depend
on the magnitude of dz. For example, if the payoff function is

E(V(g + /3dz) D) — E(V(g) D) =
aoE(/3dz D) + aavar(u3dz D), ao > 0, a1 < 0

(26)

with a0/a1 = , then there will be a threshold level T such that for all 0 <dz1 <T a
policy change increases the policymaker's utility.26 Hence the rule of ignoring
regressors with i-statistics less than 2 presupposes a very specific assumption on how
risk affects the policymaker's utility. Second, if (25) is the correct utility function, the

policymaker may still choose to act with the fixed dz level we started with under
(conventionally defined) statistical insignificance, and alternatively may decline to act
when the coefficient is statistically significant. These possibilities can be generated
through appropriate choices of
c. Knightian uncertainty and maximin preferences

In the examples we have studied thus far, we have allowed all uncertainty
concerning the correct model Mm to be reflected in the posterior model probabilities
/4Mm D). An alternative approach to model uncertainty, one that is in the tradition
of Knightian uncertainty, assumes that an additional layer of uncertainty exists in the
environment under study which may be interpreted as a distinct type of risk, as will be
seen below.

Let a = 1 when dz is undertaken, 0 otherwise. As before, let A denote the
universe of possible growth models. One can define a risk sensitive payoff function for
the policymaker as W(a) where

W(a)=
26This is an example of the famous result of Pratt that one will always accept a
small amount of a fair bet.
33

(1 — c)E(V(g +

a/3dz) D) + e(znf Mm .ALE( V(g + a/3dz) D, Mm))

(27)

In this equation, c denotes the degree of ambiguity.
This equation is motivated by recent efforts to reconceptualize utility theory in
light of results such as the classical Ellsberg paradoxes. For example, if experimental

subjects are given a choice between 1) receiving 1 dollar if they draw a red ball at
random from an urn which they know contains 50 red balls and 50 black balls or 2)
receiving 1 dollar if they draw a red ball when the only information available is that it
contains 100 red and black balls, the subjects typically choose the first, "unambiguous"
urn (Camerer (1995) pg. 646). Clearly, if subjects were Bayesians who placed a flat
prior on the distribution of the balls in case 2, they would be indifferent between the
two options.27

Experimental evidence of ambiguity aversion has led researchers including
Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (1999), Epstein and Wang (1994) and Gilboa and
Schmeidler (1989) to consider formal representations of preferences which exhibit such

aversion. One popular representation (cf. Epstein and Wang) is to replace expected
utility calculations of the form f u(w)dP(w) with infp 9Ju(w)dP(w), where 9 is a
space of possible probability measures. When this space contains a single element, this

latter calculation reduces to the standard expected utility formulation. A variant of
this formulation is to assume that the set 9 consists of a set of mixture distributions
(i — e)P0 + eP1, where P0 is a baseline probability measure that a decisionmaker
believes to be true, P1 is the least favorable of all possible probability measures for the
policymaker, and e represents the strength of the possibility that this measure applies.
When the universe of alternative processes for growth is the space of linear models we

have described, one can replace P by Mm and 9 by A and obtain the second part of
(27). In using this particular specification, we do not claim that it is the only sensible
way to model aversion ambiguity by policymakers. Rather, we introduce it so as to
permit an illustration of how recent developments in decision theory may be linked to
econometric practice.

We can explore the effects of this additional uncertainty on our analysis by
considering the two specifications of V studied above. First, assume that V is linear
27We plan to address this for general policy choices in future work.
34

and increasing, that (23) holds. In this case W(1) > W(0) if
(1 — e)E(/3

D) + c(infM E E(/3 D,Mm)) > o

(28)

When e = 1, the policy action will only be taken when E(fl D,Mm) > 0 for all
Mm e A. Recall that under our assumption that the errors in the growth regressions
are normal with known variance, the posterior expectation E(132 D,Mm) equals 13z,rn'
the OLS coefficient associated with the regressor z for model Mm. Hence, when e = 1,
one will only choose to implement dz if the OLS coefficient estimate of fi is positive
for every one of the models in A.
Alternatively, assume that the policyrnaker is risk averse in the sense that (25)
describes his payoff function. In this case, W(1) — W(0) equals
(1 — e)(aoE(dz

I

D) + a1var(2dz D)112) +

e(znfM E A(aQE(/3zdzj D,Mm) + aivar(13dz D,Mm)"2))

(29)

In this case, the policy will be implemented if

(1— e)(aoE(P D) + avar( D)"2) +
e(infM E A(aQE(/3z D,Mm) + aivar(/3 D,Mm)"2)) >0

(30)

= 1/2, then one would not act unless the
Notice in this case, if e = 1 and
regression coefficient /z, m is positive and statistically significant (again, in the sense
that the i-statistic associated with its posterior density is at least 2) for each model in

A.

The policy rules which hold for e = 1 are closely related to the
recommendations made by Learner for assessment of coefficient fragility through
extreme bounds analysis (see Learner and Leonard (1978), Learner (1978), and
especially Learner (1983)). In extreme bounds analysis, recall that when a regressor
"flips signs" across specifications, this is argued to imply the regressor is fragile. From

35

the perspective of policy recommendations, we interpret concern over fragility to mean
that there should not be any policy change made when there is a model of the world
under which the policy change can be expected to make things worse off. This
suggests that extreme bounds analysis is based on a maximin assumption of some type.
Our derivations show that this intuition can be formaiized.
Finally, we would note that this derivation of extreme value analysis appears to

answer a number of the objections raised to it by Granger and Uhlig (1985) and
McAleer, Pagan and Volker (1985). Specifically, both of these papers argue that
extreme bounds analysis can lead to spurious rejections of regressors due to changes in
sign induced by regressions which are, by standard tests, misspecified. We agree that
this is a problem with extreme bounds analysis as conventionally practiced. However,
in our view, issues of model selection are appropriately subsumed in the computation

of the posterior weights ju(Mm D) and state (i.e. model) dependent utilities. As
pointed out by Berger and Pericchi (1999), when one is engaged in Bayesian model
selection between two models, one is in essence comparing the Bayes factors for the
two,28 which, if the prior odds on the models are equal, will equal the ratio of their
respective likelihoods. The claim that a certain model is misspecified is equivalent to
the claim that possesses a relatively lower likelihood relative to some other model that
is correctly specified. In our context, misspecified models will receive lower posterior

weights in the computation of the utility change defined by (30) since
/4Mm D) cc tL(DMm)p(Mm). In this sense, we avoid the criticism of Bayes' factors
in Dickey and Kadane (1980) that the weights do not account for the purpose of the
empirical exercise — a criticism that applies to the criticisms of extreme bounds
analysis we have described.

d. alternative utility functions

In the previous section, we assumed that the policymaker only cares about the
level or change in growth induced by a policy change. It is of course possible to

imagine other plausible payoff functions for a policymaker. One possibility is to
285ee Camerer (1995) for additional examples of ambiguity aversion as well as a
survey of the experimental economics literature's implication for utility theory.
36

assume that a policymaker evaluates a payoff based on changes in the expected value
of growth within regime, i.e. that there exists a function b such that

(E(g + f3dz D,Mm) — E(g D,Mm))

(31)

measures the payoff for a policy change conditional on a particular growth model.
Linearity of the growth process of course implies that

E(g + Pdz D, Mm) — E(g1 D,Mm) =

D,Mm).

(32)

so the expected payoff from a fixed change dz, once one accounts for model
uncertainty, is

E(5(E(/idz D,Mm)) D) = j4Mm D)b(E(/3dz D,Mm))
=

>ii(M1 D)P(/J,7dz)

(33)

recalling that E(i3 D,Mm) = iz,nr When 5(.) is linear, this reduces to the risk
neutral case discussed earlier. On the other hand, alternative payoff functions can
produce very different decision rules. For example, suppose that either (c) = — _ if
c < 0, i4(.) bounded otherwise or 'l(c) = — - if c > 0, &(.) bounded otherwise, then
one will have an implied decision rule which says that a single sign change in the
coefficient estimate $, m as one moves across models is sufficient to imply that the
policymaker should not act. This type of payoff function induces behavior which
mimics that found under Knightian uncertainty.
At first glance, this might appear to be an unreasonable utility function for a
policymaker. We think that this reaction is at least partially incorrect. Suppose each
state of the world is indexed by the growth process that is "true" under it. Then, the
utility of the policymaker will depend both on the growth rate which is expected to

prevail as well as the state of the world under which it transpires. For example,
suppose there is a model of the world in which the expected effect of democracy on
growth is negative. Such a model of the world could be one whose features imply that

37

a policymaker is particularly wary of reducing growth through changing a given policy

instrument. For example, if there is a (positive probability) model of the world in
which democracy is especially fragile and may not survive a growth reduction, a
policymaker might be especially wary of the policy change for fear this would prove to
be the correct model of the world.

This type of argument can be formalized by considering model-dependent
utility specifications. Suppose that conditional on model Mm, the utility from a policy
change is equal to

U(E(j3 D,Mrn)dzi,Mm) = U(z,mdzi,Mm)

(34)

so that the posterior expected utility of the policy change is

E(U(IJz,mdzi,Mm) D) =

p(Mm

D)U($z,mdzi,Mm).

(35)

Manipulating U(.,.) one can produce a result which is consistent with refusing to act
whenever the posterior mean /3 in is negative for at least one Mm, thereby producing
extreme bounds-like behavior in the sense that one would not choose dz > 0, even
though for all other models, /i is positive.

7. An empirical example29

In this section, we reconsider an important growth study, Easterly and Levine
(1997) which examines the role of ethnic conflict in growth. We chose to reexamine

this study because 1) it is generally regarded as quite important in the growth
literature, 2) it has important implications for policy and the sorts of advice and
advocacy an international organization would engage in, and 3) the authors of this
study have done an extremely admirable job of making their data and programs
publicly available.

Easterly and Levine's analysis is designed to understand why in standard cross

291t is a common Bayesian criticism of frequentist methods that the use of

conventional confidence intervals is ad hoc.

38

Table 1. Data
All data are the same as used in Easterly and Levine (1997). The variables
employed are:

GYP: Growth Rate of real per capita GDP.

AFRICA: Dummy variable for sub-Saharan African countries, as defined by the
World Bank. These countries are Angola, Benin, Burundi, Botswana, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoro Islands, Congo, C&te

d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierre Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania,
Togo, Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
ASSASS: Number of assassinations per 1000 population.

BLCK: Black market premium, defined as log of 1 + decade average of black market
premium.

DUM60: Dummy Variable for 1960's.
DUM7O: Dummy Variable for 1970's.
DUM6O: Dummy Variable for 1980's.

ELF6O: Ethnic diversity measure; Index of ethnolinguistic fractionalization, 1960.
This variable measures the probability that two randomly selected individuals from a
given country will not belong to the same ethnolinguistic group.

LATINCA: Dummy variable for countries in Latin America and the Caribbean

LLY: Financial depth, measured as ratio of liquid liabilities of the financial system to
GDP, decade average. Liquid liabilities consist of currency held outside the banking
system plus demand and interest bearing liabilities of banks and nonbank financial
intermediaries.
LRGDP: Log of real per capita GDP measure at the start of each decade.
LRGDPSQ: Square of LRGDP.
LSCHOOL: Log of 1+ average years of school attainment, quinquennial values (19601965, 1970-1975, 1980-1985).

SURP: Fiscal Surplus/GDP: Decade average of ratio of central government surplus to
GDP, both in local currency, local prices.

Table 2 : OLS and BMA coefficient estimates and standard errors using data from Easterly-

Levine (1997)

[1]

INTERCEP1

-

AFRICA

(2]

-

-0.011

-0.0031

0.OOM

(3]

(4]

-

-

-

LATINCA

-0.0191

0.0O5
-00197

0003€

0.0042

DUMGO

-0.2657

-0.22CC

DUM7C

0.099E
-0.2609

0.1761
-0.2154

0.9558
0.3704
-0.0197
0.0035
-0.3643
0.1328
-0.3520

0.1741

0.133

DUM8(

0.0997
-0.2761

-0229€

0099€

0.1751

-0.365(
0.1336

LRGDF

0.087(

0075€

-0.109C

0.0254

0.0444

LRGDPSC

-0.006:

-0005€

LSCHOOL

ASSAS$
LLY
BL.CI(

o.ooir

0.0029

0.0981
0.0070
0.0067

0.0117
0.0042

0.013(

-0.022C

0.005

0.0216
-377.3810
165.5661
0.101(

-12.8169

-3.3629

9.2709

7.8137
0.0111

0.0162
0005€
-0018€
0.0045

-

0.0302
-0.0184

-

0.0037
-0.0028
0.0326

-

-

0.0009

0.008C

0.005C

0.0321
-0.0143
0.0321
0.0218
0.0088
-0.0022
0.0006
0.0130
0.0045

0.0134
-0.003k

0.0079
-0.0024

-30.612C

86.9027
0.0129

0.00&

0.049
-0.013C

0.0075
-0.0207

0.005

0.0098

0.OOC

0.1717
0.0411

0.120C

0.1382
0.0357
-0.1437
0.0279

0.121C

ELFSO

0.0314
-0.0169

-0.0222

0.0060

0006€

0.0674
-0.2020
0.037e

[6]
0.1382
0.0336

0.401
0.3981

0.0761

-0.0219

SURF

(5]

-

0.013

0.005

-0.0691
0.1171

-0.0004
0.0027

0.0041

-0.000C

0008€

0.0002

-0.0131
0-0194
-306.4870
158.4484
0.0774
0.048:
-0.0171

-0.0017

0.0077
-343.4434
181.6948
0.0104

0.010
0.165

0.027
-0.0039

0.0081
0.094E

0.0981
-0151€

-0.159

0.035

0.0327

0.1071

[I] OLS estimates for model "ALL".
[21 BMA estimates for model "ALL".
[3J OLS estimates for model "ALL + ALLI(AFRICA)"; composite coefficient estimates and
standard errors reported, AFRICA, LATENCA and DUM6O dropped fromAFRICA-specific
set of regressors.
[4] SMA estimates for model "ALL + ALLI(AFRJCA)"; composite coefficient estimates and
standard errors reported. AFRICA, LATINCA and DUM6O dropped fromAFRICA-specific
set of regressors.
[5] OLS on AFRICA subsample.
[6] BMA on AFRICA subsample.

country growth regressions, the performance of sub-Saharan Africa is so much worse

than the rest of the world.

Rather than remain content with modelling this

phenomena as a fixed effect (i.e. a dummy variable) for these countries, Easterly and
Levine argue that a major cause of this poor growth performance is the presence of
ethnic conflict in these countries. Easterly and Levine construct a measure of ethnic
diversity to proxy for this conflict. The magnitude of this variable is substantially

higher for sub-Saharan Africa than for the rest of the world.3° Inclusion of this
variable in a cross-country growth regression reduces the size of the African fixed effect
and is itself statistically significant. Easterly and Levine conclude

"The results lend support to the theories that interest group polarization leads to rentseeking behavior and reduces the consensus for public goods, creating long-run growth
tragedies." (pg. 1241)
We examine the influence of accounting for model uncertainty on the Easterly
and Levine results. Table 1 describes the variables we employ, which are taken from

Easterly and Levine (1997).

The data are based upon decade-long average

observations for the 1960's, 1970's and 1980's, except where indicated in the Table 1

description. We focus on a reexamination of their eq. 3, table IV, which by
conventional measures (e.g. the statistical significance of all included variables) is
arguably their strongest regression in support of the role of ethnic diversity in growth.
This regression is reported in column 1 of our Table 2. The key variable of interest is
ELF6O, which is a measure of ethnic diversity in each country in 1960.

We explore the role of model uncertainty in two ways. First, we consider the
impact of theory uncertainty on inferences concerning the determinants of growth.
This is done by constructing a universe of models which consists of all possible
combinations of variables that appear in the Easterly and Levine baseline regression.
Each of these models is assigned equal probability, which means that each regressor
may be thought of as being included in a given regression with probability 1/2; the
probability of inclusion of each regressor is, in addition, independent of all others. The
subsequent calculation of the posterior mean and standard deviation of each regression
30We thank Duncan Thomas for suggesting to us that the findings in Easterly
and Levine (1997) warrant reexamination.
39

coefficient is done using formulas (16) and (17).31 These results are reported in column

2. Interestingly, we find that the evidence of a role for ethnic diversity in the growth
process is slightly strengthened through the model averaging technique. Specifically,
the posterior mean of ELF6O is -.02 under model averaging, as opposed to the -.017

point estimate reported by Easterly and Levine. Our main conclusion from this
exercise is that the Easterly and Levine result is robust to theory uncertainty as we
have characterized it.

As we have emphasized, theory uncertainty is not the only form of model
uncertainty that needs to be accounted for in cross-country analysis. We therefore
next incorporate heterogeneity uncertainty. We do this by constructing, for each
regressor x in the baseline regressors a corresponding variable x5 where 8'A = 1
if country j is in sub-Saharan Africa, and 0 otherwise. This allows for the possibility
that the sub-Saharan African countries possess different parameters than the rest of
the world. Column 3 in Table 2 reports the OLS values and standard errors of the
regressor coefficients for the African countries; column 4 reports the same statistics
when model averaging is done over the augmented variable set. Column 5 reports
OLS estimates of the growth regressions coefficients and standard errors when the
African subsample is analyzed in isolation; Column 6 reports the corresponding model
average results.

Our explorations of the role of heterogeneity uncertainty provide a rather
different picture of the role of ethnicity in the African growth experience as opposed to
world growth as a whole. The coefficient estimates for Africa are on the order of 7-10
times greater than the corresponding estimates for the world as a whole.32 This result

is extremely striking and makes clear that the operation of ethnicity on growth is
different in Africa, not just the levels of ethnicity. Further, a comparison of the other
regressor coefficients for Africa versus the rest of the world makes clear that the
African countries should not be treated as partially exchangeable with the rest of the
world.

These results in no way diminish the importance of the Easterly-Levine
findings. In addition, introduction of potential model uncertainty to check on the
31See Table 1 for a list of the countries which are members of sub-Saharan
Africa.

32The Computational Appendix contains details of the estimation.
40

robustness of the findings associated with their main equation says nothing about the
qualitative evidence they bring to bear. Rather, our results illustrate how additional
insights can be achieved through explicitly controlling for model uncertainty.
Finally, we note that this reexamination is quite narrow. A full scale study, in
our view, should at a minimum include explicit calculations and presentation of the
predictive distribution of the effects of the policy change on growth. Fernandez, Lee,
and Steel (1999) provide a good illustration of how to present results of this type.

More generally, the reporting of results should always include the information
necessary to calculate the posterior expected utility changes of the policymaker. Our
own reporting is useful for mean/variance utility functions, but not for the others we
have discussed.

8. Conclusions

This paper has had two basic aims. First, we attempt to delineate the major
criticisms of cross-country growth regressions and to show how to interpret two of
these criticisms, theory uncertainty and parameter uncertainty, as violations of a
particular assumption — — conditional exchangeability — in the residual components
of growth models. Second, we have outlined a framework for conducting and
interpreting growth regressions.

In terms of conducting regressions, we advocate an

explicit modelling of theory and heterogeneity uncertainty and the use of model
averaging to condition out strong assumptions. In terms of interpreting regressions, we
have argued that the policy objectives associated with a given exercise must be made
explicit in the analysis. A decision-theoretic approach to growth regressions has been
outlined and its relation to conventional approaches to assessing model robustness has
been explored. Finally, in an empirical application, we have shown how attention to
model uncertainty can provide new insights into the relationship between ethnicity and
growth.

To amplify on some earlier remarks, we do not believe that there is a single
privileged way to conduct statistical, or for that matter, empirical analysis in the social
sciences. Persuasive empirical work always requires judgments and assumptions which

41

cannot be falsified or confirmed within the statistical procedure that is being
employed.33 Indeed, this is the reason why we have not included a treatment of how
to provide more robust arguments in favor of causality in this paper. What we hope is
that this paper has provided some initial steps toward the development of a language
in which policy relevant empirical growth research may be better expressed.

33Similar results are obtained when one compares Africa and the rest of the
world. Dropping the African countries from the data set, the OLS estimate for the
ELF6O regressor is -.0115 with a standard error of .006; the associated values when
averaging is done over different regressor combinations are - .013 and .008. By levels,
one would conclude that ethnicity is only marginally statistically significant outside of
Africa.

42

Computational Appendix

All model averaging calculations were done using the program bicreg, which
was written in SPLUS by Adrian Raftery and is available at
www.research.att com/volinsky/bma.html.
Given the large number of possible
models, this program, as is standard in the model averaging literature, uses a search
algorithm which explores only a subset of the model space; the key feature in the
design of the algorithm is to ensure that the search proceeds along directions such that
it is likely to cover those models which are relatively strongly supported by the data.
We follow the procedure suggested by Madigan and Raftery (1994); see Raftery,
Madigan, and Hoeting (1997) and Hoeting, Madigan, Raftery and Volinsky (1999) for
additional discussion and implementation. While the reader is asked to see those
papers for a full description of the search algorithm, Hoeting, Madigan, Raftery, and
Volinsky (1999) provide a nice intuitive description:

"First, when the algorithm compares two nested models and decisively rejects the
simpler model, then all submodels of the simpler model are rejected. The second idea,

"Occam's window," concerns the interpretation of the ratio of posterior model
probabilities pr(M0/D)/pr(M1/D). Here M0 is "smaller" than M1. . If there is
evidence for M0 then M1 is rejected, but rejecting M0 requires strong evidence f or
the larger mode[ M1." (pg. 385).

In implementing the model averaging procedure, this program uses an
approximation, due to Raftery (1994), which is based on the idea that, since as the
number of observations becomes large, the posterior coefficient distribution will be
close to the maximum likelihood estimator, one can use the maximum likelihood

estimates to avoid the need to specify a particular prior. We refer the reader to
Raftery (1994) as well as to Kadane and Tierney (1986) for technical details.
Empirical work by Raftery and coauthors suggests that this approximation works well
in practice. Nevertheless, more research is needed on the specification of priors for
model averaging; an important recent contribution is Fernandez, Ley and Steel (2000).

43

References

Aldous, D., (1983), "Exchangeability and Related Topics," in

d'Ete de

Probabilits de Saint Flour XIII, Lecture Notes in Mathematics Series no. 1117, New
York: Springer-Verlag.

Anderson, E., L. Hansen, and T. Sargent, (1999), "Risk and Robustness in
Equilibrium," mimeo, Stanford University.

Arnold, 5., (1979), "Linear Models with Exchangeably Distributed Errors," Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 74, 194-199.

Barro, R., (1991), "Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106, 2, 407-443.

Barro, R., (1996), "Democracy and Growth," Journal of Economic Growth, 1, 1-27.

Bernard, A. and S. Durlauf, (1996), "Interpreting Tests of the Convergence
Hypothesis," Journal of Econometrics, 71, 161-172.

Bernardo, J. and A. Smith, (1994), Bayesian Theory, New York: John Wiley and
Sons.

Box, G. and G. Tiao, (1973), Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analysis, New York:
John Wiley and Sons. (reprinted in Wiley Classics Library, 2000).
Camerer, C., (1995), "Individual Decision Making," in J. Kagel and A. Roth, eds, The
Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Canova, F., (1999), "Testing for Convergence Clubs in Income Per-Capita: A
Predictive Density Approach," mimeo, University of Pompeu Fabra, Spain.

Chamberlain, G., (2000), "Econometrics and Decision Theory," Journal of
Econometrics, 95, 255-283.

Clark, C., (1987), "why Isn't the Whole World Developed? Lessons from the Cotton
Mills," Journal of Economic History, XLVII, 1, 141-173.

Desdoigts, A., (1999), "Patterns of Economic Development and the Formation of
Clubs," Journal of Economic Growth, 4, 3, 305-330.

Doppelhofer, C., R. Miller, and X. Sala-i-Martin, (2000), "Determinants of Long-Term

Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach," NBER
Working Paper no. 7750.

Draper, D., (1987), "Comment: On the Exchangeability Judgments in Predictive
Modeling and the Role of Data in Statistical Research," Statistical Science, 2,4, 454461.

44

Draper, D., (1995), "Assessment and Propagation of Model Uncertainty," Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society, 57, 1, 45-70.

Draper, D., (1997), "On the Relationship Between Model Uncertainty and
Inferential/Predictive Uncertainty," mimeo, School of Mathematical Sciences,
University of Bath.

Draper, D., J. Hodges, C. Mallows, and D. Pregibon, (1993), "Exchangeability and

Data Analysis," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, series A, 156, 9-28.

Durlauf, 5., (2000), "Econometric Analysis and the Study of Economic Growth: A
Skeptical Perspective," in Macroeconomics and the Real World, R. Backhouse and A
Salanti, eds., Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Durlauf, S. and P. Johnson, (1995), "Multiple Regimes and Cross-Country Growth
Behavior," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 10, 365-384.

Durlauf, S., A. Kourtellos, and A. Minkin, (2000), "The Local Solow Growth Model,"
mimeo, University of Wisconsin at Madison.

Durlauf, S. and D. Quah, (1999), "The New Empirics of Economic Growth," in
Handbook of Macroeconomics, J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Amsterdam: North
Holland.

Easterly, W. and II. Levine, (1997), "Africa's Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1203-1250.

Epstein, L., and T. Wang, (1994), "Intertemporal Asset Pricing Behavior Under
Knightian Uncertainty," Econometrica, 62, 283-322.

Evans, P., (1998), "Using Panel Data to Evaluate Growth Theories," International
Economic Review, 39, 295-306.

Fernandez, C., E. Ley, and M. Steel, (1999), "Model Uncertainty in Cross-Country
Growth Regressions," mimeo, University of Edinburgh.

Fernandez, C., E. Ley, and M. Steel, (2000), "Benchmark Priors for Bayesian Model
Averaging," mimeo, University of Edinburgh.

Frankel, J. and D. Romer, "Trade and Growth: An Empirical Investigation," (1996),
NBER Working Paper no. 5476.

Freedman, D., (1991), "Statistical Models and Shoe Leather," in Sociological
Methodology, P. Marsden, ed., Cambridge: Basil Blackwell.

Freedman, D., (1997), "From Association to Causation via Regression," in Causality in
Crisis, V. McKim and S. Turner, eds., South Bend: University of Notre Dame Press.

Galor, 0., (1996), "Convergence? Inferences from Theoretical Models," Economic
45

Journal, 106, 1056-1069.

Gilboa, I. and David Schmeidler, (1989), "Maximin Expected Utility with Nonunique
Prior," Journal of Mathematical Economics, 18, 141-153.

Goldberger, A., (1991), A Course in Econometrics, Cambridge: Harvard University

Press.

Granger, C. and H. Uhlig, (1990), "Reasonable Extreme-Bounds Analysis," Journal of
Econometrics, 44, 159-170.

Heckman, J., (2000), "Causal Parameters and Policy Analysis in Economics: A
Twentieth Century Retrospective," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 45-97.

Hoeting, J., D. Madigan, A. Raftery, and C. Volinsky, (1999), "Bayesian Model
Averaging: A Tutorial," Statistical Science, 14, 4, 382-401.

Islam, N., (1995), "Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110, 1127-1170.
Ivanoff,

B. and N. Weber, (1996), "Some Characterizations of Partial

Exchangeability," Journal of the Australian Mathematical Society, series A, 61, 345359.

Kadane, J. and J. Dickey, (1980), "Bayesian Decision Theory and the Simplification of
Models," in Evaluation of Econometric Models, J. Kmenta and J. Ramsey, eds., New
York: Academic Press.
Kallenberg, 0., (1982), "Characterizations and Embedding Properties in
Exchangeability, Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und verwandte Gebiete, 60,
249-281.

Kass, R., and A. Raftery, (1994), "Bayes Factors," Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 90, 430, 773-795.

Kourtellos, A., (2000), "A Projection Pursuit Approach to Cross Country Growth
Data," mimeo, University of Wisconsin.

Leamer, E., (1983), "Let's Take the Con Out of Econometrics," American Economic
Review, 73, 31-43.

Lee, K., M. H. Pesaran, and R. Smith, (1997), "Growth and Convergence in a MultiCountry Stochastic Solow Model," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 12, 4, 357-392.

Levine, R. and D. Renelt, (1992), "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions," American Economic Review, 82, 942-963.

Lucas, R., (1988), "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 22, 3-42.
46

Madigan, D. and A. Raftery, (1994), "Model Selection and Accounting for Model
Uncertainty in Graphical Models Using Occam's Window," Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 89, 1535-1546.

Mallows, C., (1998), "The Zeroth Problem," The American Statistician, 52, 1-9.

Mankiw, N. G., D. Romer and D. Weil, (1992). "A Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVTT, 407-437.

McAleer, M., A. Pagan, and P. Volker, (1985), "What Will Take the Con Out of
Econometrics?," American Economic Review, 75, 3, 293-307.

Pack, II., (1994), "Endogenous Growth Theory: Intellectual Appeal and Empirical
Shortcomings," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8, 1, 55-72.

Prescott, E., (1998), "Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity," International
Economic Review, 39, 525-552.

Quah, D., (1996a), "Convergence Empirics Across Economies with (Some) Capital

Mobility," Journal of Economic Growth, 1, 95-124.

Quah, D., (l996b), "Empirics for Growth and Economic Convergence," European
Economic Review, 40, 1353-1375.

Quah, D., (1997), "Empirics for Growth and Distribution: Polarization, Stratification,
and Convergence Clubs," Journal of Economic Growth, 2, 27-59.

Pritchett, L., (2000), "Patterns of Economic Growth: Hills, Plateaus, Mountains, and
Plains," mimeo, World Bank.

Raftery, A., (1995), "Bayesian Model Selection in Social Research," Sociological
Methodology 1995, P. Marsden ed., Cambridge: Blackwell.

Raftery, A., D. Madigan, and J. Hoeting, (1997), "Bayesian Model Averaging for
Linear Regression Models," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92, 437,
179-191.

Raiffa, H. and R. Schlaifer, (1961), Applied Statistical Decision Theory, New York:
John Wiley and Sons.

Romer, P., (1986), "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal of Political
Economy, 94, 1002-1037.

Romer, P., (1990), "Endogenous Technical Change," Journal of Political Economy, 98,
(5 Part 2), 571-5102.

Sala-i-Martin, X., (1997), "I Just Ran Two Million Regressions," American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, 87, 178-83.
47

Schervish, M. (1995), Theory of Statistics, New York: Springer-Verlag.

Schultz, T. P., (1998), "Inequality in the Distribution of Personal Income in the
World: How it is Changing and Why" Journal of Population Economics, 11, 307-344.

Schultz, T. P., (1999), "Health and Schooling Investments in Africa," Journal of
Economic Growth, 13, 3, 67-88.

Sims, C., (1980), "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica, 48, 1., 1-48.

Stewart, M., (1984), "Significance Tests in the Presence of Model Uncertainty and
Specification Search," Economics Letters, 16, 309-313.

Tierney, L. and J. Kadane, (1986), "Accurate Approximations for Posterior Moments
and Marginal Densities," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81, 82-86.
Wasserman, L., (1997), "Bayesian Model Selection and Model Averaging," Technical
Report 666, Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University.

Wolcott, S. and G. Clark, (1999), "Why Nations Fail: Managerial Decisions and
Performance in Indian Cotton Textiles, 1890-1938," Journal of Economic History, 59,
2, 397-423.

48

