                                    !  %&  




                                           


                                             
                                            


                                          !"#$'()*
                                  ++,--.../"$-0-.'()*



                         & &1 &    & 
                                 2()(0030++0&
                                   4/5$6&(*27'
                                       34/*(((




                 
       !"# $% &' "&   & "
()&* + ,&-(.&/ & )0      &1 &
"    * + ,         !*% ,  
           2     -     !

34555) /! +/!  !$   !      ,&  , %
 & )6 % ,       & 3  & 
   !
            
     
 !  "# $%&'
()* '%%%
+,,-..-/0,-/,'-0'

                                             $%#%

         ! )    12   )3    4        -  
5  )         *-  1 *     *              -   1 
  ! 6 78  - 19  " 1   - 
  "  *3  6  8   6)   8 ! )       " 
*3             -        " -  )9      
"  "       ":  3 *1 )      ;
     *3   -   ;      ;   *3 1  "
         ;            3  "  "       ;
     " ;         ;  "   "  < 
         *   1         "             
)   


                                                
                                        =
          ! 0$&                                    
           ->%'0?,                               @      ) 
                                                  + > " -=>A%%$A
         *B*                                  9) B 
                      Stock Options for Undiversified Executives

                                                  by
                                Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy




                                          1. Introduction

      Stock options, which give the recipient the right to buy a share of stock at a pre-
specified exercise price for a pre-specified term, have emerged as the single largest
component of compensation for US executives (Hall and Liebman, 1998; Murphy, 1999). In
fiscal 1998, 97% of S&P 500 companies granted options to their top executives, compared to
only 82% in 1992. Moreover, the grant-date value of stock options accounted for 40% of
total pay for S&P 500 CEOs in 1998, up from only 25% of total pay in 1992.1 Stock-options
have become increasingly important for rank-and-file workers as well: 45% of US companies
awarded options to their exempt salaried employees in 1998, while 12% and 10% awarded
options to their non-exempt and hourly employees, respectively.2

      In addition to conveying compensation, executive stock options provide a direct link
between executive wealth and company stock-price performance, and therefore mitigate
agency problems between shareholders and managers (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). Indeed,
as documented by Jensen and Murphy (1990) and Hall and Liebman (1998), virtually all of
the sensitivity of pay to corporate performance for the typical CEO is attributable to his or
her holdings of company stock and stock options, and not to accounting-based bonuses or
year-to-year changes in other components of compensation.

      Given the emerging dominance of stock options in the provision of both compensation
and incentives, it is important to find ways to measure both the value and the incentives
provided by executive stock options. Virtually all research in the area—including papers
written by both authors and all the “facts” noted in the previous two paragraphs—relies on

1
    Data extracted from Compustat’s ExecuComp database, using grant-date option values based on
    ExecuComp’s Black-Scholes’ calculations.
2
    Prevalence data are based on the American Compensation Association’s 1997-1998 Salary Budget Survey,
    and include survey results from 735 publicly traded corporations.
NOVEMBER 2000                               EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                      PAGE 2



option pricing formulas such as Black-Scholes (1973) to evaluate executive options.3 But
executive stock options differ in critical ways from the options priced in the valuation
formulas. In particular, while option-pricing theory assumes that options are freely tradable
and that option holders can hedge the risk of options by short-selling stock, executive options
are non-tradable and held by risk-averse, undiversified executives who cannot easily hedge.
While researchers and practitioners have routinely noted the shortcomings of using standard
option formulas to value executive options, there have been few attempts to “correct” for the
non-tradability of executive options, or to explore the implications of such a correction. 4

      In this paper, we analyze the cost and value of, and pay/performance incentives
provided by, non-tradable stock options held by risk-averse, undiversified executives. We
show that the company’s cost of granting options typically exceeds the value of the options
to executive-recipients,5 and demonstrate that this simple result has implications for virtually
every issue related to executive stock options—from option design to executive behavior to
stylized facts regarding compensation levels. Many researchers have documented that
executive pay policy is influenced by tax, accounting, political, and agency-theoretic
considerations. While acknowledging the roles of these considerations, we show that simply
recognizing the divergence between cost and value explains, or provides intuition about:

    1.       Why executives often argue that Black-Scholes values are too high,

    2.       Why executives typically demand large premiums to exchange options for cash,
             suggesting that options are an expensive way to convey pay,

    3.       Why virtually all options are granted at-the-money,

    4.       Why premium options, which have strong advocates because they create a
             “tougher” performance standard for executives, are rarely granted in practice,

    5.       Why restricted stock is preferable to options under certain conditions regarding
             the pay-setting process for executives,


3
         For example, every empirical paper in the recent JFE special issue on stock options (a Symposium on
         Executive Stock Options, Journal of Financial Economics, July 2000) uses Black-Scholes to value
         executive stock options.
4
         Exceptions include Lambert, Larcker, and Verrecchia (1991), Kulatilaka and Marcus (1994), Rubenstein
         (1995), Carpenter (1998), Murphy (1999), DeTemple and Sundaresan (1999), Meulbroek (2000) and Hall
         and Murphy (2000).
5
         The loss associated with this value:cost differential, of course, must be weighed against the incentive
         benefits of options in order to determine their net benefits as a compensation instrument. See Hemmer,
         Kim and Verrecchia (2000) for analysis of the conditions under which options represent an optimal
         incentive contract.
NOVEMBER 2000                              EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                   PAGE 3


    6.       Why institutional investors (and other governance activists) nevertheless
             criticize restricted stock,

    7.       Why companies often re-set the exercise price on underwater options, and how
             cost-neutral re-settings can be beneficial to shareholders and executives,

    8.       Why executives often exercise stock options well before expiration (even for
             non-dividend paying stocks), forfeiting substantial option value,

    9.       Why companies allow executives to exercise options prior to expiration, and
             why this policy is generally advantageous to both executives and shareholders,

    10.      Why options are often exercised on the day they become vested,

    11.      Why short vesting periods of two to four years (which have modest effects on
             executive value and company cost) are common, and why long vesting periods
             are almost never observed in practice,

    12.      Why CEO pay levels have increased substantially in recent years (while risk-
             adjusted increases have been relatively modest),

    13.      Why CEO pay levels vary across industries (the riskiness of the pay package
             explains, for example, a large part of the observed differences).

      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops our framework for both valuing
stock options and measuring the incentives created by such options. We distinguish between
the cost to the company and the value to the executive-recipient.6 Ignoring (for the moment)
complications related to early exercise, potential forfeiture, and executive inside information,
option-pricing methodologies such as Black-Scholes are appropriate for measuring the
amount outside investors would pay for an option, and therefore provide an estimate of the
company’s cost of granting an option. We estimate the value of non-tradable options to an
undiversified risk-averse executive using the “certainty equivalence” approach, following
Lambert, Larcker, and Verrecchia (1991), and show that option-pricing formulas such as
Black-Scholes generally overstate the value an executive places on a non-tradable option.

     In addition to introducing our framework, Section 2 explores several implications of
our comparison of the cost and value of executive stock options. We derive “Executive
Value” lines, the analogues to Black-Scholes (“company cost”) lines. This analysis supports
frequent claims by executives that Black-Scholes values are “too high,” and also explains
why executives often demand large premiums to accept options in lieu of cash payments. We
show that these premiums should depend on whether the option is in-the-money or out-of-

6
         Following Lambert, Larcker and Verrecchia (1991), other researchers have also noted or analyzed the
         difference between executive value and company cost. See Abowd and Kaplan (1999) and Meulbroek
         (2000) for examples.
NOVEMBER 2000                          EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                          PAGE 4



the-money, which in turn depends on the probability that the option will expire unexercised.
Finally, our results also have implications for academic research that adds options values to
other risky components of pay to establish “total compensation.” At best, this aggregate
calculation is a measure of the company’s cost of the compensation package, and not an
estimate of the executive’s value of the compensation package. We show that, while the
reported level of total compensation for S&P 500 executives has risen dramatically from
1992 to 1998, the growth in “risk-adjusted pay” has been relatively modest, suggesting that
executive value has increased far less than company cost during the period.

      Section 3 analyzes the pay/performance incentives created by non-tradable executive
options. We define incentives as the derivative of the executive’s value with respect to the
stock price, and consider the incentive effects of setting the exercise price above the grant-
date market price (premium options) or below the grant-date price (discount options), and
repricing options following declines in stock prices. We solve for exercise prices that
maximize incentives holding constant the company’s net cost of granting options, where the
net cost depends on whether the grant is an “add-on” to existing pay or granted with
simultaneous reductions in other forms of compensation. We show that incentives are
maximized at exercise prices at or near the grant-date market price when the grant is an add-
on, but incentives are maximized at exercise prices close to zero (i.e., restricted stock) when
the executive is “charged” for the options through reduced cash compensation. Our results
suggest that common prescriptions in the business press, such as setting higher performance
hurdles by issuing premium options and refraining from repricings following stock price
declines – are not generally in the interest of shareholders, or at least have serious
drawbacks.

      Section 4 relaxes our maintained assumption that options are held for their full term,
and analyzes the timing of exercise decisions by risk-averse executives. Several researchers
have documented that executive (and employee) options are exercised relatively early in their
term, even when the underlying stock pays no dividends.7 Such behavior is entirely
consistent with our framework: risk-averse executives will exercise early following price
run-ups to “lock in” a gain. More importantly, we demonstrate that allowing early exercise
increases option “efficiency” by narrowing the value:cost divergence of option grants. Early
exercise simultaneously increases the value to the executive-recipient (risk-averse executives
value the potential opportunity to lock-in gains) while also reducing the company’s cost of
the option (precisely because the executive will exercise “too early” from an outside

7
    See, for example, Huddart and Lang (1996).
NOVEMBER 2000                           EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                       PAGE 5



investor’s standpoint). Our framework also enables us to analyze vesting policies and helps
explain why vesting periods are typically in the two to four-year range, and almost never
longer.

     Finally, our framework offers some general implications for the design of employee
bonus plans. Section 5 summarizes and generalizes these findings.


                         2. Option Values for Undiversified Executives

      Central to modern option theory is the idea that option holders can fully hedge the risk
associated with holding options by short-selling the underlying stock or taking similar
actions that achieve the same purpose. Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973)
demonstrated that, since investors can hedge, options can be valued as if investors were risk
neutral and all assets appreciate at the risk-free rate. Under these assumptions, the value of
options can be estimated by computing the expected value of the option upon exercise
assuming that the expected return on the stock is equal to the risk-free rate, and then
discounting the expected value to the grant date using the risk-free rate. This risk-neutrality
assumption is central to all option pricing models and methodologies, including the Black-
Scholes model (as amended by Merton to account for dividends), binomial models, arbitrage
pricing models and Monte Carlo methodologies.8

      Compensation consultants, practitioners, and academic researchers have routinely used
Black-Scholes or similar methodologies to value executive stock options. However, while
the assumptions underlying option-pricing methodologies reasonably describe the situation
faced by sophisticated outside investors holding freely traded options, they do not describe
the situation faced by executives (and other employees) holding options on their own
company’s stock. In contrast to outside investors, company executives cannot trade or sell
their options, and are also forbidden from hedging the risks by short-selling company stock;
such actions would obviously defeat a primary purpose of the option grants, which is to align
the financial interests of the managers with those of the shareholders.9 In addition, while
outside investors tend to be well-diversified (holding small amounts of stock in a large
number of companies), company executives are inherently undiversified, with their physical


8
    See Hull (1997) and Merton (1997) for a comprehensive treatment of these issues.
9
    Although executives cannot explicitly short-sell company stock they may engage in related transactions
    (such as zero-cost collars) that reduce their risk. Existing evidence suggests that such transactions are
    observed but are not widespread (Bettis, Bizjak, and Lemmon, 1999).
NOVEMBER 2000                              EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                        PAGE 6



as well as human capital invested disproportionately in their company.10 These substantive
violations of the underlying assumptions suggest that traditional methodologies are not
appropriate in determining the value of executive stock options.

      When defining the “value” of executive stock options, it is critical to distinguish
between two fundamentally distinct option valuation concepts: the economic cost to the
company, and the economic value to the executive-recipient. The economic or opportunity
cost of granting an option is the amount the company could have received if it were to sell
the option to an outside investor rather than giving it to the executive. Ignoring for the
moment complications related to potential forfeiture, early exercise, and executive inside
information, traditional valuation formulas provide an estimate of how much outside
investors would pay for an option, and therefore represent an estimate of the company’s cost
of granting an option. However, traditional valuation methodologies do not measure the
value of a non-tradable option to an undiversified, risk-averse executive.

      We estimate the value of a non-tradable option to an undiversified risk-averse
executive as the amount of riskless cash compensation the executive would exchange for the
option, using a “certainty equivalence” approach similar to that adopted by Lambert,
Larcker, and Verrecchia (1991). In particular, we suppose that an executive has non-firm-
related wealth of w, holds s shares of company stock, and is granted n options to buy n shares
of stock at exercise price X in T years. Assuming that w is invested at the risk-free rate, rf,
and that the realized stock price at T is PT, the executive’s wealth at time T is given by

(1)                               WT ≡ w(1+ rf)T + sPT + n•max(0,PT-X).

     If, instead of the option, he were awarded V in cash that he invested at the risk-free rate,
his wealth at time T would be:

(2)                                      W VT ≡ (w+V)(1+ rf)T + sPT.

     We assume the executive’s utility over wealth is U(W), and define the executive’s
value of n options as the certainty equivalent V that equates expected utilities (1) and (2):

(3)                                 ∫U(W VT )f(PT)dPT ≡ ∫U(WT)f(PT)dPT


10
      Indeed, in addition to being “forced” not to trade or hedge their options, executives are routinely required
      (through ownership guidelines imposed by the board) or pressured (by informal board requirements or
      through the desire to signal to markets) to hold more company stock than dictated from an optimal-
      portfolio standpoint.
NOVEMBER 2000                              EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                          PAGE 7



      Solving (3) numerically requires assumptions about the form of the utility function,
U(W), and the distribution of future stock prices, f(PT). We assume that the executive has
constant relative risk aversion ρ, so that U(W) ≡ ln(W) when ρ=1, and U(W) ≡ 1−1ρ W 1− ρ when
ρ≠1. We adopt the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and assume that the distribution of
stock prices in T years is lognormal with volatility σ and expected value equal to (rf + β(rm-
rf) - σ2/2)T, where β is the firm’s systematic risk and rm is the return on the market
portfolio.11 Unless otherwise noted, the figures and numerical calculations in this article are
derived assuming no dividends, σ = .30 (the median volatility for S&P 500 firms), β = 1 (the
market average beta, by definition), rf = 6%, and an equity premium of rm- rf = 6.5%. The
qualitative results in this paper are not sensitive to reasonable changes in these parameters.


2.1 Executive Value Lines

       Figure 1 illustrates our methodology by showing how the value of a ten-year non-
tradable stock option with an exercise price of $30 varies with changes in stock prices. The
“intrinsic value” is defined as the (positive) spread between the market price and exercise
price, and the Black-Scholes value, C(P), approximates the company’s cost of granting an
option. These two lines, showing option payouts and values, are of course standard in option
analyses. What is new in Figure 1 are the “executive value” lines, which plot the certainty-
equivalent values as a function of stock prices. The figure depicts the per-share values of
non-tradable options to undiversified executives, assuming that executives have $5 million in
initial wealth split between company stock and safe cash, and assuming that executives
receive a grant of options to purchase one share of stock at an exercise price of $30. Four
executive-value lines are drawn, for different pairs of risk aversion and diversification,
representing executives with relative risk aversion of ρ=2 or ρ=3 and holding either 50% or
67% of their wealth in company stock.

      Under traditional valuation methodologies, option values depend on six factors: the
exercise price, stock price, dividend yield, stock-return volatility, risk-free rate, and the time
until expiration. Our numerical analysis of equation (3) shows that the certainty-equivalent
value (that is, the value of a non-tradable option to an executive recipient) depends on these
six parameters, but also depends on the executive’s risk-aversion, initial wealth, and

11
     For tractability, we assume that the distribution of future stock prices is the same whether the executive
     receives options or cash. If the grant provides incentives that shift the distribution, and if the shift is not
     already incorporated into stock prices as of the grant date, we will underestimate both the cost and value of
     the option. Since most of our results hinge on the difference between (rather than the levels of) cost and
     value, this assumption does not affect our main qualitative results.
NOVEMBER 2000                              EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                          PAGE 8



diversification. Figure 1 illustrates these new comparative static results. For example,
executive values are strictly decreasing in risk-aversion: the executive value lines for
executives with relative risk aversion of ρ=3 lie strictly below those for executives with ρ=2.
In addition, executives with large holdings of company stock (relative to their wealth) place
lower values on options: the executive value lines for executives holding 67% of their initial
wealth in company stock (rather than safe cash) lie strictly below those for executives
holding 50% of their wealth in stock.

      The executive value lines in Figure 1 lie below the Black-Scholes line, V(P)<C(P),
indicating that risk-averse executives value non-tradable options at significantly less than
their cost to the company.12 Table 1 shows the ratio of the executive’s value to the
company’s cost, for a variety of stock prices and combinations of risk-aversion and
diversification. The table shows, for example, that an option granted at-the-money is worth
63.5% of its Black-Scholes cost (of $16.55) to an executive with ρ=2 and 50% of his wealth
in company stock, but only worth 21.1% of its cost for an executive with ρ=3 and 67% of his
wealth in stock. The table also shows that the value:cost ratio increases with stock prices
(holding the exercise price fixed at $30). For example, for an executive with ρ=2 and 67% of
his wealth in company stock, an option with a $30 exercise price is worth 55% of its Black-
Scholes cost (of $44.40) when the stock price is $60, but is only worth about 32% of its cost
(of $4.95) when the stock price is $15.

      In addition to reporting value:cost ratios, Table 1 also reports the probabilities that the
ten-year option will be in-the-money at the end of its term.13 For example, an option granted
at $30 when the stock price is $60 will expire in-the-money with probability 93%, while the
same option granted when the stock price is only $5 will expire in-the-money with
probability 13%. These probabilities provide useful intuition in explaining why the
value:cost ratios increase with stock prices: value:cost ratios are higher when the payout
probability is higher. Black-Scholes option values are substantially affected by small

12
     The executive-value line can actually lie above the Black-Scholes line if executives are sufficiently
     diversified and have sufficiently low risk aversion, since stock returns include a risk premium, β(rm-rf),
     characterizing the risk-preferences of the marginal investor and not those of a well-diversified executive.
     (Our results here differ from Lambert, Larcker, and Verrecchia (1991), who ignore the risk premium and
     conclude that the Black-Scholes value is the upper-bound value for undiversified executives.) We ignore
     cases where executive value is higher than the Black-Scholes cost since it is not an equilibrium outcome:
     companies would give more options (and/or executives would purchase more stock) until the executive
     value is driven below the Black-Scholes cost.
13
     The probability that the market price at expiration, PT, exceeds the exercise price, X, is calculated under the
     standard CAPM assumption that Ln(PT/P0) is normally distributed with mean µ≡Ln(rf + β(rm-rf) - σ2/2)T
     and variance σ2T.
NOVEMBER 2000                             EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                        PAGE 9



probabilities of large outcomes, while risk-averse individuals naturally discount small
probabilities of large outcomes.

       This section began by noting that Black-Scholes or similar methodologies are widely
used in valuing executive stock options. Our analysis demonstrates that, at best, the
traditional approach yields an estimate of the company’s cost of granting an option, but will
generally overstate the value of the option to the executive recipient by a substantial margin.
This seemingly obvious, but often overlooked, result has important implications for
understanding executive stock option plans and, more generally executive compensation
practices.


2.2 Implications



2.2.1 Black-Scholes values are too high

      Under current accounting rules, the value of stock options granted to executives and
other employees is not considered compensation expense and is not deducted from corporate
earnings upon grant. In 1993, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) proposed
rule changes that would force companies to deduct the grant-date value of options from
corporate earnings. Although FASB ultimately adopted enhanced footnote disclosure rather
than explicit accounting charges, the proposal created a storm of criticism among business
executives, high-tech companies, accountants, compensation consultants, the Secretary of the
Treasury, and shareholder groups.14 The chief concern offered by the business community,
especially the Business Roundtable and Silicon Valley, was that traditional pricing
methodologies such as Black-Scholes substantially overstate the value of executive stock
options.

      Our analysis of the cost and value of non-tradable options lends support to the claim
that the Black-Scholes formula overstates the value of options from the executive’s
perspective. As reported in Table 1, an executive with risk aversion ρ=3 holding 67% of his

14
     See, for example, Lee Berton, “Business chiefs try to derail proposal on stock options,” Wall Street Journal
     (February 5, 1992); Christi Harlan and Lee Berton, “Accounting Firms, Investors Criticize Proposal on
     Executives’ Stock Options,” Wall Street Journal (February 19, 1992); “Bensten Opposes FASB On
     Reporting Stock Options,” Wall Street Journal (April 7, 1993); “Clinton Enters Debate Over How
     Companies Reckon Stock Options,” Wall Street Journal (December 23, 1993); Lee Berton, “Accounting
     Rule-Making Board’s Proposal Draws Fire,” Wall Street Journal (January 5, 1994); Christi Harlan, “High
     Anxiety: Accounting Proposal Stirs Unusual Uproar In Executive Suites,” Wall Street Journal (March 7,
     1994).
NOVEMBER 2000                          EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                  PAGE 10



wealth in stock will only value an at-the-money option at about one-fifth of its Black-Scholes
value. However, while the executive objections are understandable, they are misplaced: for
financial accounting purposes, what should matter is the company’s cost of granting an
option—not the value of the option to the executive recipient—and Black-Scholes provides a
reasonable estimate of the company’s cost.

      Our assertion that Black-Scholes is appropriate in measuring the company’s cost of
stock options merits a couple of caveats. First, executive stock options typically “vest” over
three to five years following grant, and are subject to forfeiture if the executive ceases
employment prior to vesting. Although estimating the impact of forfeiture requires
information on departure probabilities, the potential forfeiture clearly lowers both the value
and cost of executive options. Second, while executive options are typically exercisable upon
vesting, Black-Scholes valuations are appropriate only for options held until expiration. As
discussed at length below in Section 4, early exercise provisions can simultaneously lower
the company’s cost of granting the option, while raising the value to the executive recipient.

      Third, executives may posses private information about company prospects. This will
certainly affect (either positively or negatively) both the opportunity cost and the perceived
value of the option. While admitting its potential importance, we ignore the effects of inside
information in this paper. Finally, the “net cost” of granting an option is clearly less if the
executive receives the option in lieu of lower cash compensation, or if (as if hopefully the
case) the option improves managerial incentives. We consider both of these factors
“benefits” of options that must be weighed against their cost in determining optimal option
granting practices.


2.2.2 Exchanges of Cash for Stock-Based Compensation

     In recent years, many companies have shifted the pay “mix” away from base salary and
towards stock-based compensation. In most cases, these shifts have been subtle and gradual,
with little or no formal discussion or disclosure. A significant number of companies,
however, have conducted explicit exchanges of cash for stock-based compensation.15
Although the exchanges have taken a variety of forms, most involve exchanging cash
bonuses or current or future increases in base salaries for restricted stock or options.

15
     Companies recently completing such exchanges include Arkla, Avon, Baxter, Black & Decker, Clorox,
     EKCO, General Mills, Harnischfeger, International Multifoods, Mead, Merck, PacifiCorp, Panhandle
     Eastern, Santa Fe Pacific, Sun Company, Teledyne, Toro, Triarc, Union Carbide, United Airlines, and
     USAir.
NOVEMBER 2000                      EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                            PAGE 11



Executives participating in exchanges typically receive a “risk premium” for accepting stock-
based pay rather than cash. For example, consider EKCO’s exchange program as described
in its 1995 proxy statement.
               The 1995 Incentive Plan provides the participants with the option to
        have all or a portion of any bonus and any increase in base compensation
        paid either (i) in cash, (ii) deferred until a specified date or time with
        interest to be paid by the Company at a rate agreed to by the Committee,
        (iii) in shares of restricted stock valued at 130% of the foregone cash
        payment based upon the market price of such Common Stock on the last
        trading day of the year preceding the year to which the payment relates,
        or (iv) stock options valued at 250% of the foregone cash payment
        according to the Black-Scholes method of valuation and calculated as of
        the last trading day of the year preceding the year to which the payment
        relates.


      As our analysis above suggests, risk premiums such as that offered by EKCO are
necessary because risk-averse and undiversified executives will be willing to exchange cash
for stock or options only if the dollar value of the stock or options received substantially
exceed the dollar value of cash foregone. Figure 2 plots indifference curves showing the
amount of stock-based pay required to offset a loss of $300,000 in cash compensation, while
keeping the executive at the same expected utility. That figure shows, for example, that an
executive with ρ=2 and 50% of his wealth in company stock will be indifferent between
receiving $300,000 in cash (representing 6% of his initial wealth), $375,000 in restricted
stock (representing a 25% risk premium), $500,000 in options issued at fair market value
(FMV) (a 67% risk premium), or $750,000 in options with an exercise price double the
current market price (a 150% risk premium). As evident from the graph, the required risk
premiums increase substantially for more risk-averse and less diversified executives, and are
especially large for options issued out-of-the-money with lower payout probabilities.

      Proponents of broad-based stock option plans extending to all company employees
often argue that options are an efficient way to pay employees because there is no accounting
charge and no company cash outlay upon grant. Figure 2 illustrates that options are, in fact,
an unusually expensive and therefore inefficient way to convey compensation to executives
and employees: the economic cost to shareholders of granting options often far exceeds the
value that employee-recipients place on the option. Stock options are efficient only when the
incentive benefits of the options (including both pay-to-performance and retention
incentives) exceed their “inefficiency cost.” In many cases, this suggests focusing (or even
limiting) grants to senior executives and other key employees who have a reasonably direct
NOVEMBER 2000                             EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                       PAGE 12



impact on company stock prices.16 And although some broad-based plans may well be
justified on the basis of (hard-to-model) beneficial effects on employee morale and company
culture, we suspect that many of these plans are driven by the favorable but ultimately
irrelevant accounting treatment of options—not a careful weighing of the benefits of stock
options against their full economic costs.

       Finally, although our analysis suggests a significant value:cost differential for options,
our estimated magnitudes are, in general, consistent with other evidence. For example,
Meulbroek (2000) measures the value:cost “inefficiency” of options using a completely
different (non-utility-based) approach. Her method enables her to make precise estimates of
what she calls the “deadweight cost” of option grants without knowledge of the specific
utility function or wealth holdings of executives. Her approach produces a lower bound
estimate of the value:cost inefficiency since her goal is to isolate the deadweight cost owing
to sub-optimal diversification, while abstracting from any additional deadweight cost from
the specific structure of the compensation contract.17 Applying her methodology to Internet
companies, she finds a very substantial (lower bound of) value:cost inefficiency of more than
50 percent.


2.2.3 Risk-adjusted pay

      Figure 3 illustrates the relative importance of the various components of compensation
for CEOs in S&P 500 Industrials (that is, the S&P 500 companies excluding utilities and
finance firms), and also documents how the level and composition of pay has varied from
1992-1998. The bar height depicts median total compensation in CPI-adjusted 1998-constant
dollars, including salaries, realized bonuses, stock-based compensation, and other pay.
Stock-based pay includes the grant-date cost of stock options (valued using the Black-
Scholes formula), restricted stock grants (valued at year-end stock prices), and performance
shares (valued as the target grant multiplied by the year-end stock price). Pay component

16
     Oyer (2000) argues that broad-based option programs can help keep low-level workers near their
     participation constraints when worker reservation wages vary with firm performance. Himmelberg and
     Hubbard (2000) present a similar argument based on an assumption that marginal productivity varies with
     market-wide stock market shocks. Underlying both arguments is the idea that compensation plans based on
     company performance can affect “retention incentives” as well as effort incentives. Our results suggest that
     such programs may be inefficient relative to less risky deferred compensation plans in providing retention
     incentives to risk-averse undiversified workers.
17
     We require a utility-based approach (which produces estimates of the combined value:cost inefficiency
     from non-diversification and the sub-optimality of the specific compensation contract), since the focus of
     our paper is on analysis of the structure of the compensation package.
NOVEMBER 2000                      EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                            PAGE 13



percentages are derived from Compustat’s ExecuComp data by computing the percentages
for each CEO, and averaging across CEOs.

      As reported in Figure 3, median CEO pay levels in S&P 500 Industrials has nearly
tripled from less than $2.0 million in 1992 to over $5 million in 1998. The increase primarily
reflects a dramatic growth in stock-based compensation, which swelled from 30% to 53% of
total compensation, representing a five-fold increase in dollar terms. Most of the increase in
stock-based compensation, in turn, reflects the growth in stock options grants, which grew
from 23% of compensation in 1992 to 44% of compensation in 1998. (Over the same time
period, the value of restricted stock and performance shares tripled in dollar value, but
increased only slightly, 7% to 9%, as a percentage of total compensation.) The biggest
increase, both in dollar and percentage terms, was from 1997 to 1998, when median pay
increased by nearly $1 million (22%) from its prior-year level.

      The columns in Figure 3 represent an estimate of the company’s cost of the CEO’s pay
package, and not the value of the package as perceived by the CEO recipient. Following our
analysis of option valuation above, risk-averse undiversified executives will value all risky
performance-based elements of their contract lower than their cost to the company. We
extend our option-value methodology to measure executive-specific “risk-adjusted pay,”
defined as the certainty equivalent value of the full CEO pay package, and calculate risk-
adjusted pay levels for S&P 500 CEOs from 1992 to 1998. The details of our methodology
our relegated to Appendix A, but we extend equation (1) and (2) to allow for previously
granted options, and extend (1) to include the full compensation package, including salaries,
bonuses, stock options, restricted stock, and performance shares. Executive-specific data
from Compustat or ExecuComp are available for all but two critical inputs: the executive’s
risk aversion and the executive’s non-firm-related wealth. We compute risk-adjusted pay for
relative risk aversion of ρ=2 and ρ=3, and (somewhat arbitrarily) assume that non-firm-
related wealth is equal to the greater of $5 million or four times cash compensation.

      In addition to showing the cost of the CEO’s pay package, Figure 3 shows the median
risk-adjusted pay for CEOs in S&P 500 Industrials, based on two risk-aversion assumptions.
Assuming that ρ=2 for all executives, median risk-adjusted pay grew from $1.6 million in
1992 to $2.5 million in 1998, increasing by nearly 60% over the period. Assuming that ρ=3,
median risk-adjusted pay grew from $1.4 million in 1992 to $2.1 million in 1998, increasing
by about 50%. In contrast, the cost of the median CEO’s pay package increased by 160%
over this period. Therefore, the growth in risk-adjusted pay is modest relative to the growth
in unadjusted pay. Indeed, from 1997 to 1998 (when the median cost increased by $1
NOVEMBER 2000                           EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                    PAGE 14



million), the median risk-adjusted value of pay remained flat (assuming that ρ=2) or actually
fell (assuming that ρ=3).

      The modest growth in risk-adjusted pay levels (relative to the more-impressive growth
in the cost of compensation) reflects, in part, the growing importance of stock options in
executive pay packages. In addition, the recent “bull market” in the U.S. has made stock-
holding executives less diversified, which in turn has reduced the value of their current
stock-based compensation. For example, the median stock and option holdings of the S&P
500 Industrial executives in Figure 3 has grown from $10 million in 1992 to nearly $30
million in 1998.18

      One of the most widely noted findings in the executive compensation literature is that
CEOs in utilities are paid less than CEOs in other sectors (Joskow, Rose and Wolfram, 1996;
Murphy, 1999). However, it is also well-documented that utility CEOs hold less stock and
receive less of their pay in the form of stock-based pay than do other executives. Table 2
explores the extent to which lower pay in utilities reflects that utility CEOs are better
diversified and have less risky pay than do CEOs in non-utilities. The dependent variables
are the logarithm of the total cost of the compensation package (that is, total pay without risk
adjustments), and the logarithms of risk-adjusted pay with ρ=2 and ρ=3. Independent
variables include logarithm of sales and dummy variables for finance and utility firms.

     The coefficient on “Utility” in column (1) of Table 2 of -0.650 indicates that, after
controlling for company size, the cost of CEO pay in utilities is 48% lower than pay in the
general industry.19 The corresponding coefficients in columns (2) and (3) of -0.364 and
-0.276, respectively, indicate that risk-adjusted pay is 30% (when ρ=2) or 24% (when ρ=3)
lower in utilities. Therefore, controlling for CEO diversification and the riskiness of pay
explains a significant fraction—between a third and one-half—of the observed pay
differences in utilities.

     The regressions in Table 2 include year dummy variables from 1992 to 1997, with
1998 as the omitted category. The coefficient on the 1996 dummy variable in column (1) is
negative and statistically significant, whereas the corresponding coefficients in columns (2)
and (3) are positive but insignificant. Similarly, the coefficient on the 1997 dummy variable
in column (1) is negative but insignificant, whereas the corresponding coefficients in

18
     This comparison is derived from ExecuComp data; stock is measured at year-end prices and options are
     measured as the fiscal-year-end “spread” between the stock price and exercise price of all outstanding
     options (all amounts are in 1988-constant dollars).
19
     Calculated as e-.650-1≈0.48.
NOVEMBER 2000                              EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                        PAGE 15



columns (2) and (3) are positive and statistically significant. These results suggest that, after
controlling for company size and (broad) industry, risk-adjusted pay actually fell rather than
rose between 1996 to 1998. Taken together, the risk-adjustments have dramatic effects on
both the level and growth rates of CEO pay over time.


                             3. Incentives from Executive Stock Options

      Executive stock options provide incentives to the extent that the recipients can affect
the perceived value of their options. As demonstrated in Section 2, executive option values
depend on the usual Black-Scholes parameters (stock price, exercise price, dividend yield,
volatility, risk-free rate, and term) and also on the executive’s risk-aversion, initial wealth,
and diversification. Most of these parameters—including the exercise price, risk-free rate,
term, risk aversion, and initial wealth—are outside management control once the option is
granted. As a simplification, we ignore dividends (as we have throughout this paper) and
treat an executive’s stockholdings as exogenous.20 The effects of options on risk-taking,
while interesting, are beyond the scope of this paper.21 We focus on the main incentive
generated by stock option grants: how options affect the executive’s motivation to increase
the company’s stock price.

      Assuming executives understand how their actions affect share prices, option holdings
provide incentives for executives to take actions that increase share prices, and avoid actions
that decrease share prices. The incentives from a single option will naturally depend on the
slope of the executive-value line, ∂V / ∂P , which defines how the certainty-equivalent value
changes with an incremental change in the stock price. Figure 4 plots the slopes from the
Black-Scholes and executive value lines illustrated in Figure 1 (which depicted the per-share
cost and value of a grant of a ten-year option with an exercise price of $30). The figure
shows that the slope of the executive-value line is less than the slope of the Black-Scholes
line, ∂C / ∂P, for undiversified executives. For example, when the stock price and exercise

20
     Dividends can be easily incorporated into our model, and the results in this paper have been re-calculated
     for various dividend yields. We replicate the standard result that stock options provide incentives to reduce
     dividends (Lambert, Lanen, and Larcker, 1989), but do not generate any additional insights driven by
     diversification considerations.
21
     Lambert, Larcker and Verrecchia (1991) produce the key insight with regard to options and risk-taking
     incentives. They show that, contrary to conventional wisdom, options can give risk-averse executives an
     incentive to reduce rather than increase risk-taking behavior. Although the Black-Scholes value of options
     increases with firm stock price volatility, the certainty-equivalent of options (executive value) can actually
     decrease when executives are risk-averse and undiversified. Similarly, Carpenter (1999) uses a dynamic
     portfolio choice model to show that option grants may reduce managerial risk-taking incentives.
NOVEMBER 2000                       EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                              PAGE 16



price are both $30, the slope of the Black-Scholes function is 0.86 (86¢ per $1 price change),
but the slope of the executive-value line is only 0.63 for an executive with ρ=2 and 50% of
his wealth in company stock, and only .27 for an executive with ρ=3 and 67% of his wealth
in stock. For a premium option granted with P=$15 and X=$30, the Black-Scholes slope is
0.63 compared to an executive-value slope of only 0.38 and 0.10 for executives with ρ=2,
50% in stock or, ρ=3, 67% in stock, respectively.

      Many recent academic studies of executive incentives have followed Jensen and
Murphy (1990) in defining the “pay-performance sensitivity” from stock options as the
derivative of the Black-Scholes value with respect to the stock price. While this construct is
an appropriate measure of how the market value of the executives’ wealth (due to options)
changes with stock prices, it overstates incentives from non-tradable options: at any stock
price, the slope of the Black-Scholes line always exceeds the slope of the executive value
line for risk-averse undiversified executives. As illustrated in Figure 4, measured pay-
performance sensitivities are particularly overstated for more risk-averse and less diversified
executives, and for options that are deeply out-of-the-money.


3.1 Implications



3.1.1 Incentive-Maximizing Exercise Prices

       One of the most striking facts about executive stock options is that the exercise price of
virtually all options is set equal to the current stock price at the grant date. For example, 94%
of option grants to S&P 500 CEOs in 1998 were at-the-money grants. In theory, however,
exercise prices can be set below the grant-date stock price (discount options), above the
grant-date stock price (premium options), or indexed to some industry or market index
(indexed options). Setting the exercise price, like setting the “performance threshold” in any
incentive plan, defines the standard against which performance is measured, and determines
the likelihood of an ultimate payout.

      We define the incentive strength from holding n options as the change in the
executive’s value of those options with respect a change in the stock price, ∂V(n)/∂P. Figure
4 suggests that the incentives from a single option are maximized when the stock price
significantly exceeds the exercise price. But, we know from Figure 1 that discount options
are much more costly to grant than at-the-money or premium options (that is, the Black-
Scholes cost is higher when the stock price significantly exceeds the exercise price). Herein
NOVEMBER 2000                               EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                        PAGE 17



lies the trade-off faced by the board when setting exercise prices for executive options:
increasing the exercise price reduces the incentives of each option granted, but also reduces
the company’s cost of granting each option. Thus, holding the company’s cost of granting
options constant, the company can grant a few options at a low exercise price, or more
options at a higher exercise price.

      Solving for the optimal level of incentives requires information on the production
function linking executive actions to stock prices, and the disutility function for those
actions. Although solving for the optimal contract is beyond the scope of this paper, we can
offer results on a narrower but related question: what exercise price maximizes incentives,
holding constant the company’s cost of granting options? Extrapolating from Grossman and
Hart (1983), we imagine a two-stage process for deriving the optimal contract. In the first
stage, we maximize incentives for an arbitrary company cost. In the second stage, we solve
for the cost that maximizes company expected profits, given the results of the first stage.22
We offer results on the first stage, leaving the second stage to future research.

      The company’s “net cost” of granting options depends on whether the grant allows the
company to reduce other forms of compensation. If the grant is an “add-on” to an existing
compensation package, then the company’s net cost is simply the opportunity cost or (as
developed above) the Black-Scholes value of the grant, nC(P). At the other extreme, suppose
that an executive receives options valued at V(n) while the company simultaneously lowers
other forms of compensation by V(n), leaving the executive with the same certainty-
equivalent compensation. In this case, the net cost to the company of the option grant is
nC(P) - V(n). Bertrand and Mullainathan (2000) report evidence suggesting that the
appropriate cost assumption depends on the effectiveness of the company’s corporate
governance: options are an add-on in firms with weak governance, but are (at least partially)
offset by decreases in cash compensation in firms with stronger governance. In order to
capture both extremes, as well as intermediate cases, we define net cost as nC(P) -αV(n),
where 0>α>1, and solve numerically for

                          MAX    ∂V (n,X,P)
(4)                                         subject to nC(X,P) -αV(n,X,P) = k.
                           X         ∂P

Case 1: Options as an add-on (α=0). Figure 5 depicts the total incentives from a grant with a

22
      In Grossman and Hart’s original formulation, the first stage found the minimum cost way of implementing
      an arbitrary level of executive actions, and the second stage solved for the optimal action given the results
      of the first stage. Our approach is basically the “dual” of their approach, under the assumption of a one-for-
      one correspondence between actions and incentives.
NOVEMBER 2000                             EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                      PAGE 18



Black-Scholes cost of nC = $300,000 award as an add-on to existing compensation, for
exercise prices varying from 0% (restricted stock) to 300% of the grant-date stock price. The
executive is assumed to have $5 million in wealth, split between non-firm-related cash and
company stock.23 The figure shows that the incentives for an executive with ρ=2 and 50% of
his wealth in company stock are maximized by setting an exercise price equal to 130% of the
market price of the stock on the date of grant. Incentive-maximizing exercise prices are
lower for more risk-averse and less diversified executives: for an executive with ρ=3 and
67% of his wealth in company stock, incentives are maximized by setting an exercise price
equal to only 40% of the grant-date market price.

      Importantly, the incentive loci in Figure 5 are relatively flat around the maximum,
suggesting that there is a range of exercise prices that yield “close to” maximum incentives.
In Hall and Murphy (2000), we show that, for a wide range of parameters (including
different Black-Scholes costs of the option grant), setting exercise prices at (or near) the
grant-date market price maximizes pay/performance incentives for risk-averse, undiversified
executives. US accounting rules, however, create a bias in favor at-the-money or premium
options since discounted options and restricted stock create an accounting charge against
earnings. Under the maintained assumptions, our analysis suggests that avoiding the
accounting charge is not likely to be very costly to companies in terms of providing
incentives. That is, even in cases where the optimal grant is a discount option, granting at-
the-money options instead of discount options provides incentives that are nearly as strong.

      In addition to showing how executive incentives vary with changes in the exercise
price, Figure 5 also shows how the Black-Scholes’ slope of options costing nC=k varies with
the exercise price. The figure shows that ∂nC/∂P is monotonically increasing throughout the
depicted range. In fact, ∂nC/∂P is monotonically increasing for all exercise prices. This result
suggests that, if managers valued stock options at their Black-Scholes value,
pay/performance incentives could be increased without limit by giving increasingly more
options at higher and higher exercise prices. This obviously incorrect result underscores the
importance of introducing risk aversion into analysis of stock option incentives.

Case 2: Option Grant with Compensation Offset (α=1). Figure 6 depicts the total incentives
from a grant with a net cost of nC -αV(n) = $100,000 award, where cash compensation is

23
     Given our assumption of constant relative risk aversion, the dollar amounts are arbitrary. What matters is
     the grant size relative to the executive’s initial wealth (in this case, 6%). That is, we will get the same
     qualitative results if we assume (i) a $3000 grant for an executive with $50,000 in wealth; or (ii) a $60
     million grant for an executive with $1 billion in wealth.
NOVEMBER 2000                            EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                     PAGE 19



reduced to keep the executive at the pre-grant expected utility. The figure indicates that in all
cases, the exercise price that maximizes incentives is zero. That is, restricted stock, not
options, provides the strongest incentives. This is not surprising given our earlier results.
Figure 5 shows a relatively flat “incentive line” while Table 1 shows that executives strongly
prefer, and therefore will “give up” more cash pay to receive options with very low exercise
prices. When risk-averse, undiversified executives are “fully charged” for their equity-based
pay through reductions in their cash compensation, restricted stock provides the strongest
incentives. Restricted stock is relatively inexpensive (because executives value it close to its
cost, creating a large offset to cash pay) and companies can therefore grant lots of it (for a
constant cost).

Discussion. Our analysis points to an important connection between incentive-maximizing
exercise prices and the pay-setting process. In the “add-on” case, exercise prices set close to
the grant-date market prices maximize incentives. But, when executives give up cash
compensation to receive equity-based pay, restricted stock provides stronger incentives than
traditional options. Although there is clearly some charge for options in some companies
(e.g., ECKO), the fact that options are almost always granted at-the-money combined with
the fact that restricted stock is much rarer than options is evidence against the view that cash
pay is always carefully offset against option pay in the way implied by (reasonably)
competitive labor markets combined with strong governance.24

      Our analysis may also help explain the views of institutional investors and pay critics
who applaud executive stock ownership, but criticize grants of restricted stock.25 We believe
the criticism reflects that restricted stock is too-often an add-on to an existing competitive
compensation package, and (consistent with our analysis) options provide stronger
pay/performance incentives than restricted stock. However, to the extent that executives pay
for the restricted stock (either through cash outlays or through reductions in other forms of
compensation), restricted stock is a more efficient way to provide pay/performance
incentives than options. Indeed, consistent with this analysis, boards controlled by venture
capitalists and LBO associations—which are not loosely governed and plausibly “charge”
their executives for the equity that is granted to them—very frequently use restricted stock



24
     As before, it is also consistent with the view that the accounting charge created by discount options and
     restricted stock creates a strong bias against such pay, even when it is preferable in terms of
     pay/performance incentives.
25
     See, for example, Graef S. Crystal, “Incentive Pay That Doesn’t Work,” Fortune (August 28, 1989).
NOVEMBER 2000                             EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                       PAGE 20



rather than options in order to pay their executives.26


3.1.2 Option Repricing

      One of the most controversial executive pay practices involves resetting the exercise
price on outstanding options following a decline in the company’s stock price (Saly, 1994).
As shown in Figure 4, options lose incentive value once the stock price falls so far below the
exercise price that the executive perceives little chance of exercising: this “loss of
incentives” is a common justification for option “repricings” following share-price declines.
Since repricing effectively “forgives” executives for dismal performance, companies
adopting repricing policies create perverse incentives for executives holding options.

      A recent twist on standard share-for-share repricing practices is “Black-Scholes
repricing,” in which the executives exchange their options with a high exercise price for a
smaller number of options with a lower exercise price. The exchange is structured so that the
total Black-Scholes value of the option is the same immediately before and after the
exchange. From the executive’s perspective, the exchange is beneficial since both options
have the same expected value but the lower-priced options are less risky (i.e., have a higher
probability of ultimately being exercised). From the shareholder’s perspective, the cost is the
same with or without the exchange. Executive incentives can either increase or decrease,
depending on the specific parameters involved.

      One of the first companies to adopt Black-Scholes repricing was General Dynamics in
1991. As described in Dial and Murphy (1995), the CEO of General Dynamics exchanged
105,000 options with an exercise price of $45 (the market price on the original grant date) for
51,500 options with an exercise price of $25.50 (the market price on the exchange date). The
number of options offered in the exchange was determined to maintain the pre-exchange
Black-Scholes cost of approximately $388,000. Assuming that CEO Anders had risk
aversion of ρ=2 and $4 million in wealth (67% in stock), he valued the 105,000 out-of-the-
money options at $190,000 and the 51,500 at-the-money options at $255,000.27 Clearly
participating in the exchange made sense from Anders’ perspective, while imposing little


26
     In the case pre-IPO companies controlled by venture capitalists, managers often receive deeply discounted
     options (essentially stock).
27
     Details of our calculation are available upon request, but are based on σ = .2425, dividend yield of 4%, β =
     1, rf = 8%, and rm- rf = 6.5%. The $4 million in total wealth is an assumption, but the 67% in stock is
     consistent with Anders’ stock holdings (relative to the $4 million). The new options were granted with a
     ten year term; the old options had nine years remaining.
NOVEMBER 2000                             EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                       PAGE 21



cost on the shareholders. According to our model, Anders’ option incentives fell slightly
from $18,500 (the change in Anders’ value of the old options for a $1 change in the stock
price) to $17,500 (the change in his value of the new options for each $1 change in stock
prices).


                                             4. Early Exercise

      Our valuation analysis in Sections 2 and 3 assumed that executives hold options until
their expiration date. However, in practice, executive options vest and become exercisable
within a few years from grant, and executive (and employee) options are routinely exercised
relatively early in their term (Huddart and Lang, 1996). In this section, we relax our
maintained assumption that executives hold their options until the expiration date and
analyze the decision to exercise early.28 In particular, we analyze how the company’s cost,
the executive’s value, and the incentive strength are affected by allowing early exercise. In
order to isolate how risk aversion and diversification drive executive exercise decisions, we
continue to ignore dividends. While investors holding freely tradable American call options
on non-dividend paying stocks will never exercise early (Merton, 1973), we show that risk-
averse executives holding non-tradable options will exercise early to “lock in” an option
gain.29


4.1 Methodology

       We analyze executive option values and early exercise decisions using a modified
binomial approach, described in detail in Appendix B. Our approach is similar to traditional
binomial option valuation (Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein, 1979) with two major differences.
First, while binomial price “trees” under the traditional model are based on expected returns
equal to the risk-free rate (reflecting that option holders perfectly hedge the risk of options),
price trees under our modified approach are based on CAPM expected returns,
E(r)=rf+β(rm-rf). Second, while under the traditional approach the payout from exercising is

28
     Related analyses of early-exercise decisions include Huddart (1994), Carpenter (1998), and DeTemple and
     Sundaresan (1999). Our framework for analyzing early exercise is closest to Huddart’s (1994), who focuses
     primarily on measuring the cost of options to the firm. Relative to his model, our framework allows the
     executive to hold a richer set of assets prior to exercise—cash, stock and options rather than options only—
     and employs a more flexible utility framework.
29
     For evidence that (non-rational) psychological factors may also play a role in the exercise decisions of
     employees, see Heath, Huddart and Lang (1999).
NOVEMBER 2000                             EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                      PAGE 22



compared to the expected value of holding for another period, under our modified approach
we compare the expected utility from exercising (and holding cash until the final period) to
the “expected” expected utility from holding the option for another period. We estimate the
executive value of the option grant by finding the grant-date cash award (invested until T at
the risk-free rate) that yields the expected utility at the first node of the binomial tree.

      We assume that stock acquired through exercise is sold immediately, with the cash
proceeds invested at the risk-free rate.30 In addition, we assume that options are exercisable
immediately upon grant (alternative vesting schedules are analyzed below in Section 4.4) We
maintain our other assumptions from Sections 2 and 3. In particular, we assume the option is
granted for T=10 years at an exercise price of X=$30 (the grant-date market price), and
assume σ = .30, β = 1 rf = 6%, and rm- rf = 6.5%. We compute executive values for a grant of
5,000 options for executives with constant relative risk aversion of ρ=2 or ρ=3 and holding
either 50% or 67% of their $5 million initial wealth in company stock. Our binomial tree is
calculated for h=50 periods per year, or a total of hT=500 periods and 125,250 individual
nodes. For each node, we record information on the stock price, the expected utility, and an
indicator for whether the option has been exercised.


4.2 Early-Exercise Decisions

      Undiversified executives with exercisable options face a tradeoff. If they exercise early,
they can invest the “spread” between the market and exercise price at the risk-free rate,
thereby locking in the gain. However, by exercising early (and immediately selling the
acquired shares), they sacrifice both upside potential in stock prices and the ability to defer
payment of the exercise price. The exercise decision in each period will naturally depend on
the realized stock price (relative to the exercise price). If the price is sufficiently high, the
expected utility from locking in the gain will exceed the utility from holding the option for
another period. But, at sufficiently low stock prices, even risk-averse, undiversified
executives will not exercise options early.

      We define the “threshold price” as the stock price where the executive is just
indifferent between exercising early or holding the option for another period. Figure 7 shows
how the threshold price varies over the 10-year term of the option for managers with the



30
     Ignoring taxes, which we do throughout, it would be irrational for an executive to exercise an option early
     and to hold the stock.
NOVEMBER 2000                              EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                       PAGE 23



same pairs of risk aversion and diversification as before.31 Several results emerge. First, in
any period, more risk-averse and less diversified executives have lower threshold prices (that
is, they will choose to exercise early at lower realized stock prices). For example, an
executive with ρ = 2 and half of his wealth in company stock has a first-year price threshold
of more than $90. The price would have to more than triple (from its $30 initial value) in the
first year for such an executive to exercise early. However, a more risk averse (ρ = 3) and
less diversified (67% of his wealth in stock) executive has a first-year exercise price
boundary of less than $60.

      Second, Figure 7 reveals that threshold prices decrease over time. As time passes, the
benefits of holding the option (deferring the payment of the exercise price, and missing out
on future price increases) fall, and an executive’s threshold for locking in option gains is
lower. On the expiration date, of course, the threshold price falls to the exercise price (in this
case, $30). But, the day before exercise, the threshold price is above $50 for an executive
with ρ = 2 and 50% of his initial wealth in stock, and about $35 for an executive with ρ = 3
and 67% of his initial wealth in stock.

      Figure 8 shows the cumulative probabilities of early exercise for executives.32 The
figure indicates that there is a relatively high probability of early exercise after the first two
years, although the probabilities differ greatly (consistent with the very different threshold
prices in Figure 7) with differences in risk aversion and diversification. For example, the
likelihood that a (relatively) high-risk-aversion (ρ = 3) and low-diversification (wealth in
stock at 67%) executive will exercise within the first 4 years is about 50%, and within 8
years is 75%. Conversely, an executive with ρ = 2 and 50% of his wealth in stock has only
an 18% chance of exercising within the first 4 years, and 50% chance of exercising within
the first eight years. As of the day before expiration, the cumulative exercise probabilities
range from 65% (for a ρ = 2, 50% executive) to 84% (for a ρ = 3, 67% executive). Since all
in-the-money options are exercised in the last period, the cumulative probabilities of exercise
by the expiration day are quite close for executives with different characteristics, ranging

31
     Within our binomial framework, we estimate the threshold price for each period as the average of the
     lowest price that induces early exercise and the highest price that induces holding the option for another
     period. Because of the discreteness in the binomial model (which considers only “n” possible stock prices
     in the nth period), our estimated threshold prices vary within a range from period to period (depending, for
     example, on whether “n” is even or odd in a period). As an expositional simplification, the threshold prices
     in Figure 7 have been smoothed somewhat by using linear interpolation and a larger number of periods per
     year (h=75 rather than 50) than in the rest of the analysis.
32
     The probabilities are based on a simulation with 100,000 sample price paths (through the tree). At each
     period t, the cumulative probability of early exercise is calculated as the percentage of price paths (out of
     100,000) that surpassed the threshold price at t or earlier.
NOVEMBER 2000                           EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                     PAGE 24



from 78 percent to 85 percent.33

      Early exercise is therefore consistent with our framework: risk-averse executives will
exercise early following price run-ups to “lock in” a gain. This result has important
implications for the value, cost, and incentive strength of executive stock options, discussed
at length in the following section.


4.3 Cost, Value, and Incentives

      Allowing executives to exercise prior to the full term affects both the cost and value of
executive stock options. Allowing early exercise unambiguously increases the value of an
option to an undiversified executive, since executives could always hold the option to full
term but in practice choose not to. In contrast, allowing early exercise actually reduces the
company’s cost of granting an option. As discussed in Section 2, the economic cost of
granting an option is the amount the company could have raised if it were to sell the option to
an outside investor instead of giving it to the executive. If outside investors made the
exercise decision, then the company’s cost would be the usual binomial valuation of an
American option (which, for non-dividend-paying stocks, is simply the Black-Scholes
value). But, in this case, the exercise decision is not made by the investor but rather by an
executive who for a variety of reasons is not expected to make the same exercise decisions as
an unrestricted outside investor. Since the executive exercise decisions are suboptimal from
the standpoint of the outside investor, the amount the investor is willing to pay for the option
is clearly reduced when exercise decisions are made by the executive, rather than by the
investor.

      The cost reduction comes from the fact that early exercise essentially removes the
right-hand tail of payoffs to executive option holders, who truncate the huge payoffs that
would otherwise come from dramatic increases in the company’s stock price. For example,
consider the executives who prematurely exercised their options in the mid-1990s at Cisco,
Microsoft, General Electric and other high-flying companies of the decade. Such early
exercises led to far lower company costs than would have been the case if these executives
had not exercised their options early.

      As before, we measure the value of an immediately exercisable executive option as the
grant-date cash award that yields the expected utility as receiving an option, and measure the

33
     The difference reflects options that were in-the-money earlier in the term (and exercised by high risk-
     averse low diversified executives), but out-of-the-money at expiration.
NOVEMBER 2000                           EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                    PAGE 25



incentives from the option as the slope of the executive-value line, ∂V / ∂P , which defines
how the option value changes with an incremental change in the stock price. We measure the
cost of the executive option as the usual binomial valuation of an American option (under
risk-neutral pricing) but with a catch: the exercise decision is made by an undiversified
executive rather than by the investor. In particular, we measure the cost of the option under
the assumption that the investor is “forced” to exercise when even the stock price exceeds the
threshold prices in Figure 7.34
      Table 3 shows how the company’s cost, the executive’s value, and incentives (defined
as the derivative of value with respect to changes in stock prices) are affected by the
possibility of early exercise for various pairs of risk aversion and diversification. The data
depict the per-share costs, value, and incentives from a grant of 5,000 ten-year stock options
with an exercise price of $30 (the market price on the date of grant). The columns under
“Options Exercisable at Expiration” basically replicate the results in Table 1 (for an at-the-
money grant): the cost is the Black-Scholes cost of $16.55, executive values range from
$3.49 to $10.51, and the incentives range from $0.17 to $0.45. The calculations under
“Options Exercisable at Grant” allow executives to exercise options anytime during their
term. Compared to the case without early exercise, the company’s cost is lower, and the
executive’s value and incentives are higher, for grants that allow early exercise. For example,
for an executive with ρ = 2 and 67% of his wealth in company stock, allowing early exercise
increases his value from $7.41 to $9.96, while reducing the company’s cost of granting the
option from $16.55 to $13.60.

      In addition to increasing executive value while reducing company cost, Table 3 shows
that allowing early exercise also increases executive incentives. For example, for an
executive with ρ = 2 and 50% of his wealth in stock, a one dollar increase in the stock price
will increase the value of an option without an early exercise provision by only 45¢, but will
increase the value of an otherwise identical exercisable option by 61¢. Allowing early
exercise doubles the option incentives for a ρ = 3 and 50% executive (from 26¢ to 53¢), and
nearly triples the incentives for a ρ = 3 and 67% executive.

      Overall, our results help explain not only why executive options are so often exercised
early, but why it is in the interest of shareholders to allow early exercise. Early exercise
reduces the company’s cost of granting options, while increasing both the value to the
executive recipient and the grant-date incentive strength of the options. Of course, to the

34
     Formally, we compute the value of a path-dependent barrier option (Hull, 1997), where the barrier (the
     price path above which the executive exercises) varies over time as shown in Figure 7.
NOVEMBER 2000                       EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                             PAGE 26



extent that exercised options are replaced with new grants, early-exercise provisions may
increase the total number of options granted in the long run; such dynamic issues are
interesting but are beyond the scope of our current study.


4.4 Vesting Schedules

      The analysis so far in this section has assumed that options are immediately exercisable
upon grant, and can be freely exercised at anytime during the term of the option. In practice,
however, options typically become exercisable only when they “vest” (that is, when the
options are no longer subject to forfeiture if the executive leaves the firm). Although there is
a range of observed practices, the most common schedules vest options 33% annually over
three years, 25% annually over four years, or 20% annually over five years.

      Huddart and Lang (1996) have noted that executives (and employees) exercise a
disproportionate number of options immediately upon vesting, creating spikes in option-
exercise patterns. Table 4 replicates this empirical result for our hypothetical risk-averse,
undiversified executives. The table shows the likelihood of exercising on the vesting date, for
options with cliff-vesting in two, three, or four years. For example, the table shows that an
executive with ρ = 3 and 67% of his wealth in company stock has a 17% chance of
exercising his options on the vesting date if they vest in two years, and a 33% chance if they
vest in four years. The spike is naturally smaller for executives who are more risk tolerant
and more diversified: the likelihood of exercising on the vesting date for a ρ = 2, 50%
executive is only 1.4% for options vesting in two years, and 10% for options vesting in four
years.

      Table 3 showed that allowing early exercise reduced the company’s cost of granting the
option and increasing the perceived value of the option to the executive. Therefore, the ratio
of the executive’s value to the company’s cost is higher for companies with immediately
exercisable options than for companies not allowing early exercise. Figure 9 plots the
intermediate cases, showing value:cost ratios for option grants with vesting periods that
range from 0 years (complete early exercise is allowed) to 10 years (no early exercise is
allowed).

     Two primary results emerge from Figure 9. First, the value:cost ratios fall more
dramatically in the cases in which executives are more risk-averse and less diversified.
Second, the value:cost ratios are very flat at low vesting durations, especially in cases in
which risk-aversion is relatively low and diversification is relatively high. This result
NOVEMBER 2000                      EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                             PAGE 27



suggests that shortening already short vesting periods does not increase the value:cost
inefficiency of options very much. To the extent that short vesting periods create benefits to
companies—in terms of retention and ensuring that options are held and provide positive
incentives for some minimum period of time—our analysis suggests that the
counterbalancing “inefficiency” costs of short vesting may not be too large. Thus, this
analysis helps explain why short vesting periods are so common while longer vesting periods
(of more than five years) are virtually non-existent.


                                        5. Conclusion


     Risk aversion combined with non-diversification drives a wedge between the company
cost and the executive value of stock options. The result that risk affects compensation is not
new: economists have long understood that individuals demand compensating differentials
for bearing risk, and the tradeoff between risk and incentive compensation lies at the heart of
agency theory (Haubrich, 1994; Aggarwal and Samwick, 1999). However, the implications
of adjusting stock-option compensation for risk have not been explored extensively. Indeed,
although academics and practitioners sometimes note the shortcomings of Black-Scholes,
academics routinely use Black-Scholes to measure the value, cost and pay/performance
sensitivity of non-tradable executive options, and practitioners routinely use Black-Scholes
(or some non-risk adjusted modification) in order to “measure” option compensation,
conflating value and cost.

     We use a certainty-equivalent approach to derive the risk-adjusted “Executive Value”
of a non-tradable option, and compute the “value:cost” ratio by dividing this value by the
company’s cost. We show that value:cost ratios are lower for more risk-averse and less
diversified executives, and that value:cost ratios are higher for options that are in-the-money
or have provisions allowing early exercise. More broadly and most importantly, we show
that understanding this divergence between value and cost explains, or provides insight
about, virtually every major stock option practice, ranging from option design to executive
behavior.

     Our results help justify, for example, why executives often claim that Black-Scholes
values are too high and why they demand large premiums for accepting stock options in lieu
NOVEMBER 2000                        EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                            PAGE 28


of cash compensation. In addition, and largely consistent with practice, our results suggest
that granting at-the-money options maximizes incentives when grants are an add-on to
existing pay packages, while restricted stock is preferred when grants are in lieu of existing
cash compensation. We also use our framework to analyze option repricings and show that
cost-neutral repricings can benefit both shareholders and executives. Finally, our results are
consistent with a variety of stylized facts regarding early exercise policies and behavior. We
show why both executives and shareholders benefit from early-exercise provisions, why
executives routinely exercise options on their vesting dates, and why (relatively) short-
vesting periods are the norm.

         Our results have important implications for future research in executive compensation
and lead to reinterpretation of existing research. Studies of time-trends in executive
compensation have documented a rapid growth in executive pay levels over the past decade,
driven by the dramatic growth in (Black-Scholes measures of) option compensation. We
show that after adjusting for the riskiness of equity-based pay, the increase in “pay” levels
has plausibly been relatively modest (although there has been a dramatic growth in the cost
of executive compensation). In addition, we show that much of the observed difference in
pay across industries (for example, between manufacturing and utility executives) can be
explained by differences in the riskiness of pay. These findings suggest that analyses of pay
levels that fail to account for risk can produce misleading results. For the same reason, we
argue that studies of pay-performance sensitivities based on changes in Black-Scholes values
can produce misleading results, and we therefore introduce a conceptually cleaner measure
of pay-performance sensitivity: the derivative of Executive Value with respect to the stock
price.

         Although our analysis has focused on stock options, our framework is general and
applies to all risky components of pay. One of the key results of this paper is that options are
a particularly expensive way to convey compensation. But the same is true for risky bonuses
and other forms of contingent pay. There are important incentive benefits to both types of
pay (obviously, since without such benefits, our analysis suggests that companies would
never offer risky pay), but there is a strong need for a framework for researchers and
practitioners to understand, and quantify, the value:cost efficiency of all forms of risky
compensation. Moreover, this need continues to grow as companies increasingly put higher
NOVEMBER 2000                      EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                             PAGE 29


percentages of pay at risk for increasingly higher percentages of their managers and
employees, a trend that also appears to be spreading far beyond the borders of the US. We
believe that there is a high return to future research that broadens our framework in precisely
this way.
NOVEMBER 2000                     EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                            PAGE 30




                                        References



Abowd, John M. and David S. Kaplan, “Executive Compensation: Six Questions That Need
     Answering,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 13, Number 4, Fall, 1999,
     145-168.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K. and Andrew A. Samwick (1999), “The Other Side of the Tradeoff: The
      Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 65-
      105.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Do CEOs Set Their Own Pay? The Ones
       Without Principals Do,” NBER working paper 7604, March 2000.

Bettis, J. Carr, John M. Bizjak, and Michael L. Lemmon (1999) “Insider Trading in
        Derivative Securities: An Empirical Examination of the Use of Zero-Cost Collars and
        Equity Swaps by Corporate Insiders.” Arizona State University.

Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973), “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,” Journal
       of Political Economy, 81, 637-59.

Carpenter, Jennifer (1998), “The Exercise and Valuation of Executive Stock Options,”
      Journal of Financial Economics, 48(2): 127-158.

Carpenter, Jennifer (1999), “Does Option Compensation Increase Managerial Risk
      Appetite?,” forthcoming in the Journal of Finance.

Cox, John C., Steven R. Ross, and Mark Rubinstein (1979), Option Pricing: A Simplified
       Approach, Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 229-263.

DeTemple, Jerome and Suresh Sundaresan (1999), Nontraded Asset Valuation with Portfolio
     Constraints: A Binomial Approach, The Review of Financial Studies, 12 (4), 835-872.

Dial, Jay and Kevin. J. Murphy (1995), “Incentives, Downsizing, and Value Creation at
       General Dynamics,” Journal of Financial Economics, 37(3), 261-314.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, “An Analysis of the Principle-Agent Problem,”
      Econometrica, Vol. 51, No. 1, January, 1983, 7-45.

Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman (1998), “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, August, 653-691.

Hall, Brian J. and Kevin J. Murphy (2000), “Optimal Exercise Prices for Risk Averse
       Executives,” American Economic Review, May, 209-214.

Haubrich, Joseph (1994), “Risk-Aversion, Performance Pay and the Principal-Agent
       Problem,” Journal of Political Economy, 102 (2) , 258-276.
NOVEMBER 2000                     EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                           PAGE 31


Heath, Chip, Steven Huddart, and Mark Lang (1999), “Psychological Factors and Stock
       Options Exercises,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, May, 601-628.

Himmelberg, Charles P. and R. Glenn Hubbard (2000), “Incentive Pay and the Market for
     CEOs: An Analysis of Pay-for-Performance Sensitivity,” Columbia University.

Huddart, Steven (1994), “Employee Stock Options,” Journal of Accounting and Economics,
      18, 207-231.

Huddart, Steven and Mark Lang (1996), “Employee Stock Options Exercises: An Empirical
      Analysis, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 21, 5-43.

Hull, John (1997), Options, Futures, and Other Derivative Securities, 3rd Edition, Prentice
       Hall: New Jersey.

Jensen, M. and K. J. Murphy (1990), “Performance Pay and Top-Management Incentives,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 98(2), 225-64.

Joskow, Paul, Nancy Rose and Catherine Wolfram (1996), “Political Constraints on
      Executive Compensation: Evidence from the Electric Utility Industry,” RAND
      Journal of Economics, 27 (1), 165-182.

Kulatilaka, Nalin and Alan J. Marcus (1994), “Valuing Employee Stock Options,” Financial
        Analysts Journal, November- December, 46-56.

Lambert, R., W. Lanen, and D. Larcker (1989), “Executive Stock Option Plans and
      Corporate Dividend Policy,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 24(4),
      409-425.

Lambert, Richard A.; Larcker, David F. and Verrecchia, Robert E. (1991), “Portfolio
      Considerations in Valuing Executive Compensation,” Journal of Accounting
      Research, 29(1), 129-49.

Merton, Robert C. (1997), Continuous-Time Finance, Blackwell Publishers.

Merton, Robert C. (1973) “Theory of Rational Option Pricing,” Bell Journal of Economics
      and Management Science, IV, 141-183.

Meulbroek, Lisa K., “The Efficiency of Equity-Linked Compensation: Understanding the
      Full Cost of Awarding Executive Stock Options,” HBS working paper, 2000.

Murphy, Kevin J.. (1999) “Executive Compensation,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
      eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, North Holland.

Oyer, Paul (2000), “Why Do Firms Use Incentives That Have No Incentive Effects?”
      Stanford University.
NOVEMBER 2000                   EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                        PAGE 32


Rubenstein (1995), “On the Accounting Valuation of Employee Stock Options,” Journal of
      Derivatives, Fall.

Saly, J. (1994), “Repricing Executive Stock Options in a Down Market,” Journal of
       Accounting and Economics, 18(3), 325-356.
NOVEMBER 2000                      EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                             PAGE 33



                                           Appendix A

                                 Risk-Adjusted Pay Calculations

      Our risk-adjusted pay calculations for S&P 500 executives are based on the following
data available from Compustat’s ExecuComp (unless otherwise sourced):
       s         Shares of stock owned,

       n0        Number of previously granted options held at year-end,

       X0.       Average exercise price for previously granted options,

       Salary    Base salary plus all non-variable compensation,

       Bonus     Bonus plus the target award from accounting-based long-term plans,

       ni        Number of shares in the ith option, restricted stock, or target performance-
                 share grant,

       Xi        Exercise price for the ith option grant (equals 0 for restricted stock and
                 performance-share grants),

       T         Option term

       σ         Annualized standard deviation of continuous returns, measured over 48
                 months,

       β         Equity beta, calculated from monthly data over 48 months,

       rf        Average yield on U.S. government securities over the fiscal year (Source:
                 Federal Reserve System),

       (rm-rf)   Equity premium (assumed to be 6.5%).



      In calculating risk-adjusted pay we also make assumptions regarding executive relative
risk aversion, ρ, and non-firm-related wealth, w. Our calculations are based on ρ=2 or ρ=3,
assuming that w is equal to the greater of $5 million or four times cash compensation. In
addition, we (somewhat arbitrarily) discount Bonuses by 20%, to account for the risk in
bonuses. Assuming that w, Salary, and Bonus is invested at the risk-free rate, rf, and that the
realized stock price at T is PT, the executive’s wealth at time T is given by

(A1)                      WT ≡ w(1+ rf)T + sPT + n0•max(0,PT-X0) +
                       (Salary+.8*Bonus)(1+ rf)T + ∑ni•max(0,PT-Xi),
NOVEMBER 2000                             EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                      PAGE 34



where the summation in ∑ni•max(0,PT-Xi) allows for multiple option and stock grants.35 If,
instead of the option, he were awarded V in cash that he invested at the risk-free rate, his
wealth at time T would be:

(A2)                         WT ≡ (w+V)(1+ rf)T + sPT + n0•max(0,PT-X0)

     As before, we assume the executive’s utility over wealth is U(W) with constant relative
risk aversion, and define the executive’s risk-adjusted compensation as the certainty
equivalent V that equates the expected utilities of (1) and (2):
(A3)                               ∫U(W VT )f(PT)dPT ≡ ∫U(WT)f(PT)dPT
where the distribution of stock prices in T years is lognormal with volatility σ and expected
value equal to (rf + β(rm-rf) - σ2/2)T.




35
     Our methodology requires that the grant-date market price and the expiration term be the same for all
     grants made to a single executive during the year. When grants were made at different dates (and different
     prices), we “normalized” the price by adjusting the exercise price and the shares granted. When grants were
     made for various terms, we used the term for the largest grant. This restriction was seldom required: 98%
     of the sample executives had only single grants or multiple grants with a common expiration term.
NOVEMBER 2000                              EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                       PAGE 35



                                                     Appendix B

                       A Binomial Framework for Non-tradable Options

       We begin by building a traditional binomial tree (Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein, 1979),
starting with an initial stock price of P0. The stock prices in the second period are either P0 λ
(with probability π) or P0/λ probability 1-π; subsequent prices are determined similarly for h
periods per year and Y years (the total number of periods is T≡Yh). In the traditional model
with risk-neutral growth, the probabilities π are determined so that the expected return is the
risk-free rate. We depart from the traditional model by assuming an expected continuously
compounded annual return of µ ≡ ln(1+rf+β(rm-rf)) and (therefore) a per-period return of
m ≡ eµ/h. The “uptick” λ and probability π are chosen to solve:
                                                  πλ + (1-π)(1/λ) = m,

                                               πλ2 + (1-π)(1/λ)2 - m2= γ,

                        (   2
                                           )
where m and γ ≡ m 2 e σ / h − 1 are (respectively) the mean and variance of the assumed
lognormal distribution of stock prices. Applying the quadratic formula,


                        λ=
                                 1
                                2m   ((m   2                2        2    2
                                               + γ + 1) − (m + γ + 1) − 4m ,)
                                                        m− 1
                                                   π=       λ .
                                                        λ − λ1

     In order to determine executive option values and early exercise decisions, we employ
a backward induction algorithm combined with same utility function (and parameter
assumptions) used in our previous analysis. As before, we assume the executive holds non-
firm-related wealth, w, invested at the risk-free rate, rf, holds s shares of company stock, and
is given a grant of n options at exercise price X. If the executive decides to exercise his
options early, the profits from the exercise are invested in the riskless asset, which is then
held until the final period.

      The executive’s exercise decision rule is: exercise at any period t if the expected utility
from exercise is greater than the expected utility from holding the option to the next period.
Specifically, utility based on final period T wealth is calculated at each final period node.
(The final period exercise decision is trivial since, at in-the-money nodes, all options will be
exercised, and at out-of-the-money nodes, all options expire worthless.) Then, in the period
prior to the final period (T-1), the executive solves:
NOVEMBER 2000                       EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                             PAGE 36



                                        {
                                    Max π UT+ + (1 − π )UT− ),UTE−1   }
         +                                                                              −
where UT is the expected utility in T if the stock price increases by λ (an uptick), UT is the
expected utility in T if the stock price increases by 1/λ (a downtick), and UTE−1 is the
expected if utility in T-1 if the executive exercises in T-1. Evaluating utility in the event of
exercise is straightforward since no further decisions are made by the executive. Expected
utility under early exercise is based on post-exercise holdings of safe wealth and stock
evaluated at all possible (given the current node) final-period stock prices. Following
evaluation at T-1, the same process is repeated at T-2 and backward induction is then used
until the root node is reached and the tree is fully grown. At completion, each of the nY nodes
of the final tree contains a stock price Pt,i, an expected utility, and an indicator for whether
the option has been exercised.

      The expected utilities in each node of the binomial tree assume cash, stock, and options
are held until period T, and therefore denote final-period utilities. We estimate the executive
value of the option grant by finding the grant-date cash award (invested until T at the risk-
free rate) that yields the expected utility at the first node of the binomial tree.
NOVEMBER 2000                                   EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                               PAGE 37


                                                             Table 1
               Ratio of Executive Value to Black-Scholes Cost for Option with $30 Exercise Price,
                                                                    ρ) and Diversification
                       for Various Pairs of Relative Risk Aversion (ρ

   Stock               B-S                ρ=2                ρ=2                 ρ=3                 ρ=3                Payout
   Price               Cost             50% Stock          67% Stock           50% Stock           67% Stock          Probability

     $5                $0.39              24.5%               13.4%               5.8%                2.2%               13.1%

    $15                $4.95              49.7%               31.6%               22.3%              10.7%               51.5%

    $30               $16.55              63.5%               44.8%               36.7%              21.1%               77.9%

    $45               $30.11              69.1%               51.2%               44.0%              27.8%               88.4%

    $60               $44.40              71.9%               54.9%               48.0%              32.0%               93.3%

Note: B-S cost is the Black-Scholes value of one option with an exercise price of $30. Executive values are estimated
      numerically assuming that the executive has constant relative risk aversion, ρ=2 or ρ=3, and assuming (using the Capital
      Asset Pricing Model, CAPM) that the distribution of stock prices in T=10 years is lognormal with volatility σ = .30 and
      expected value (rf + β(rm-rf) - σ2/2)T, where β = 1 is the firm’s systematic risk, rf = 6% is the risk-free rate, and rm- rf =
      6.5% is the equity premium. The payout probability that the market price at expiration, PT, exceeds the exercise price, X,
      is calculated under the standard CAPM assumption that Ln(PT/P0) is normally distributed with mean µ≡Ln(rf + β(rm-rf) -
      σ2/2)T and variance σ2T.
NOVEMBER 2000                           EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                           PAGE 38


                                                     Table 2
           Explanatory Regressions for Risk-Adjusted and Unadjusted Pay for S&P 500
                                             CEOs

                                             Dependent Variables: CEO Total Compensation

                                           No Risk              Risk-Adjusted          Risk-Adjusted
        Independent Variable
                                          Adjustment              with ρ=2               with ρ=3
                                               (1)                    (2)                    (3)

                                              5.90                   4.97                   4.96
        Intercept
                                             (49.7)                 (49.4)                 (51.2)
                                             0.302                  0.332                  0.311
        Ln(Sales)
                                             (23.2)                 (30.2)                 (29.4)
                                             0.226                  0.310                  0.306
        Finance (Dummy)
                                             (5.4)                  (8.8)                  (9.0)
                                             -0.650                 -0.364                 -0.276
        Utility (Dummy)
                                             (-12.4)                 (-8.2)                 (-6.5)
                                             -0.766                 -0.327                 -0.243
        Year 1992 (Dummy)
                                             (-13.8)                 (-6.9)                 (-5.4)
                                             -0.621                 -0.238                 -0.161
        Year 1993 (Dummy)
                                             (-11.2)                 (-5.1)                 (-3.6)
                                             -0.519                 -0.139                 -0.079
        Year 1994 (Dummy)
                                              (-9.5)                 (-3.0)                 (-1.8)
                                             -0.400                 -0.046                 -0.005
        Year 1995 (Dummy)
                                              (-7.4)                 (-1.0)                 (-0.1)
                                             -0.221                 0.058                  0.055
        Year 1996 (Dummy)
                                              (-4.1)                (1.3)                  (1.3)
                                             -0.076                 0.127                  0.113
        Year 1997 (Dummy)
                                              (-1.4)                (2.8)                  (2.6)

                    R2                       0.266                  0.287                  0.263
        Note: t-statistics in parentheses. Sample size is 3,351 for all regressions. Total compensation
              defined as the sum of salaries, bonuses, benefits, share options (valued on date of grant
              using the Black-Scholes formula), LTIP-related stock grants (valued at 80% of face value
              for performance-contingent awards), and other compensation. Risk-adjusted compensation
              is computed assuming constant relative risk aversion and assuming that CEO has “safe
              wealth” equal to the greater of $5 million or four times cash compensation. All monetary
              variables in 1988-constant dollars.
NOVEMBER 2000                                 EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                              PAGE 39


                                                                 Table 3
                    Cost, Value, and Incentives from Executive Options with and without Early Exercise

                                     Options Exercisable at Expiration                           Options Exercisable at Grant
                % of
 Risk          Wealth         Company       Executive      Value      Incentives       Company       Executive      Value      Incentives
Aversion      in Stock          Cost         Value         Cost         ∂V∂/P            Cost         Value         Cost         ∂V∂/P

     2          50%             $16.55        $10.51       63.5%         $0.45           $14.76        $12.40       84.0%         $0.61

     2          67%             $16.55          $7.41      44.8%         $0.35           $13.60          $9.96      73.2%         $0.56

     3          50%             $16.55          $6.07      36.7%         $0.26           $13.06          $9.42      72.1%         $0.53

     3          67%             $16.55          $3.49      21.1%         $0.17           $11.57          $7.33      63.4%         $0.49

Note: The data depict the per-share costs, value, and incentives from a grant of 5,000 ten-year stock options with an exercise price of
      $30 (the market price on the date of grant). The cost is estimated as the binomial valuation of an American option (under risk-
      neutral pricing), where the exercise decision is determined not by the investor but rather by the threshold prices in Figure 7. The
      value is estimated as the grant-date cash award that yields the same expected utility as receiving an option, and incentives are
      measured as the derivative of this value with respect to an incremental change in the stock price. The executive is assumed to
      have initial wealth of $5 million, split between riskless cash and company stock.
NOVEMBER 2000                              EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                              PAGE 40


                                                       Table 4
                                   Likelihood of Exercising on Vesting Date

                                                          Likelihood of Exercising on Vesting Date
                         Diversification
         Risk            (% of Wealth              Vesting at              Vesting at              Vesting at
        Aversion            in stock)               2 Years                 3 Years                 4 Years

            2                 50%                     1.4%                    5.8%                   10.0%

            2                 67%                     5.9%                   12.9%                   19.8%

            3                 50%                     5.9%                   16.7%                   23.7%

            3                 67%                    17.0%                   26.3%                   33.3%

     Note: The executive, with initial wealth of $5 million, split between riskless cash and company stock, is
           assumed to receive 5,000 ten-year stock options with an exercise price of $30 (the market price on
           the date of grant). Exercise probabilities are based on a simulation with 100,000 sample price paths
           (through the tree) for each risk/diversification/vesting group. The likelihood of exercising at vesting
           date is calculated as the percentage of price paths (out of 100,000) that exceed the threshold price at
           the executive’s first opportunity to exercise.
NOVEMBER 2000                                EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                            PAGE 41


                                                        Figure 1

                      Executive Value Lines: Option Values for Undiversified Executives

    $45

                                                                                  Black-Scholes "Cost"
    $40


    $35
                                                                        "Intrinisic Value"

    $30

                          Option Values for Executive with:
    $25                     ρ=2, 50% of Wealth in Stock
                            ρ=2, 67% of Wealth in Stock

    $20
                            ρ=3, 50% of Wealth in Stock
                            ρ=3, 67% of Wealth in Stock
    $15


    $10


     $5


     $0
          $0                       $15                        $30                            $45                     $60
                          Out-of-the-Money                  At-the-Money                     In-the-Money

                                                          Stock Price
Note: Executive values for ten-year options with an exercise price of $30 are estimated using the “certainty equivalence”
      approach, and are defined as the amount of riskless cash compensation the executive would exchange for the option.
      Certainty equivalents are estimated numerically assuming that the executive has constant relative risk aversion, ρ=2
      or ρ=3, and assuming (using the Capital Asset Pricing Model, CAPM) that the distribution of stock prices in T=10
      years is lognormal with volatility σ = .30 and expected value (rf + β(rm-rf) - σ2/2)T, where β = 1 is the firm’s
      systematic risk, rf = 6% is the risk-free rate, and rm- rf = 6.5% is the equity premium.
NOVEMBER 2000                                  EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                          PAGE 42


                                                           Figure 2

                                     Executive Indifference Curves:
               Amount of Stock-Based Pay Required to Offset $300,000 in Cash Compensation

       $3.0                                        "Cost" of Stock-Based Pay for Executives with:


       $2.5
                                                                  ρ =3, 67% in Stock
                                                                  ρ =3, 50% in Stock
       $2.0


       $1.5                                                                                         ρ =2, 67% in Stock
                                                                                                    ρ =2, 50% in Stock

       $1.0


       $0.5


       $0.0
                          Res Stock                      FMV Option
                   Cash               Discount Options                           Premium Options
      $-0.5
              0%            0%              50%           100%           150%          200%         250%         300%
                          [100%]           [93%]          [78%]          [63%]         [51%]        [42%]        [35%]
                                                   Exercise Price as % of Stock Price
                                                         [Payout Probability]
Note: Executive values are estimated numerically assuming that the executive has constant relative risk aversion, ρ=2 or
      ρ=3, and assuming (using the Capital Asset Pricing Model, CAPM) that the distribution of stock prices in T=10
      years is lognormal with volatility σ = .30 and expected value (rf + β(rm-rf) - σ2/2)T, where β = 1 is the firm’s
      systematic risk, rf = 6% is the risk-free rate, and rm- rf = 6.5% is the equity premium
NOVEMBER 2000                                 EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                            PAGE 43


                                                        Figure 3

                     CEO Pay and Risk-Adjusted Pay in S&P 500 Industrials, 1992-1998

                                                                                                                $5,129
    $5,000        Unadjusted Pay in Columns
                                                                                                                  7%



                                                                                                  $4,208
                                               Risk-Adjusted Pay for Executive with:
    $4,000                                                                                          7%
                                                        Risk Aversion ρ = 2         $3,754
                                                        Risk Aversion ρ = 3            7%
                                                                      $3,221                                     53%

                                                                         8%
    $3,000
                                                         $2,714                                     48%

                                                           8%                          46%
                                           $2,375
                                             8%                         42%
                              $1,986
    $2,000                                                36%
                               7%
                                             34%
                     Other
                               30%                                                                               18%
                    Stock-                                                             21%          21%
                    Based                                 24%           23%
                                             21%
    $1,000                     22%
                    Bonus
                                                                                                                 22%
                                             36%          32%           27%            26%          23%
                     Salary    41%

        $0
                              1992          1993          1994         1995          1996          1997          1998

Note: Median pay levels (in 1998-constant dollars) based on ExecuComp data for S&P 500 CEOs (financial firms and
      utilities excluded). Total compensation (in columns) defined as the sum of salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock options
      (valued on date of grant using the Black-Scholes formula), stock grants, and other compensation. Executive values
      are estimated using the “certainty equivalence” approach, and are defined as the amount of riskless cash
      compensation the executive would exchange for his stock and option grants, conditional on his current stock and
      option holdings. The risk-adjusted value of accounting-based bonuses are assumed to be worth 80% of actual
      bonuses. The CEO's safe wealth is assumed to be the greater of $5 million or four times cash compensation.
      Certainty equivalents are estimated numerically assuming that the executive has constant relative risk aversion of 2
      or 3, and assuming (using the Capital Asset Pricing Model, CAPM) that the distribution of stock prices over the
      actual term of the options granted is lognormal with volatility σ and expected value (rf + β(rm-rf) - σ2/2)T, where σ
      and β are determined using monthly stock-return data over 48 months, rf is the average yield on US government
      securities during the year of grant, and rm- rf = 6% is the equity premium.
NOVEMBER 2000                                  EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                         PAGE 44


                                                        Figure 4

                 Incentives (per share) from 5,000 Options Granted to Undiversified Executives

    $1.00
                                               Slope of Black-Scholes Line

    $0.90

    $0.80
                                                               Slope of Executive Value Lines
    $0.70

                                                                   ρ =2, 50% of Wealth in Stock
    $0.60                                                          ρ =2, 67% of Wealth in Stock

    $0.50
                                                                         ρ=3, 50% of Wealth in Stock
    $0.40                                                                ρ=3, 67% of Wealth in Stock


    $0.30

    $0.20

    $0.10

    $0.00
            $0                      $15                        $30                        $45                       $60
                            Out-of-the-Money                 At-the-Money                 In-the-Money

                                                            Stock Price
Note: The figure shows the “slopes” of the Black-Scholes and executive valuations in Figure 1, which in turn depict the
      per-share cost and value of a grant of one ten-year option with an exercise price of $30. We define “incentives” as
      the change in the certainty-equivalent option value for each $1 change in the stock price.
NOVEMBER 2000                                   EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                        PAGE 45


                                                        Figure 5

             Incentives from $300,000 “worth” of Options Granted to Undiversified Executives

       $25


                                                                     Change in
                                                                Black-Scholes Value
       $20




       $15




       $10                                                  Change in Executive Value:
                                                                   ρ =2, 50% in Stock

                                                                   ρ =2, 67% in Stock

        $5                                                         ρ =3, 50% in Stock

                                                                   ρ =3, 67% in Stock
                         Max        Max   Max           Max
                         40%        65%   85%           130%
        $0
         Res Stock                        FMV Option
                     Discount Options                                   Premium Options

            0%               50%                100%           150%              200%            250%             300%
          [100%]            [93%]               [78%]          [63%]             [51%]           [42%]            [35%]
                                            Exercise Price as % of Stock Price
                                                  [Payout Probability]
Note: The figure assumes that executives with $5 million in initial wealth are granted stock options with a Black-Scholes
      value of $300,000; the number of options granted naturally increases as the exercise price increases. We define
      “incentives” as the change in the certainty-equivalent option value for each $1 change in the stock price.
NOVEMBER 2000                                 EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                            PAGE 46


                                                        Figure 6

        Incentives from Options with a "Net Cost" of $100,000 Granted to Undiversified Executives

       $12



       $10



         $8
                                                                   Change in Executive Value:

                                                                       ρ=2, 50% in Stock
         $6



         $4
                                                                       ρ=2, 67% in Stock


         $2                                                          ρ =3, 50% in Stock

                                                                       ρ=3, 67% in Stock


         $0
         Res Stock                         FMV Option
                     Discount Options                                    Premium Options

            0%               50%              100%             150%              200%              250%             300%
          [100%]            [93%]             [78%]            [63%]             [51%]             [42%]            [35%]
                                             Exercise Price as % of Stock Price
                                                   [Payout Probability]
Note: Net cost is defined as the Black-Scholes value less the Executive Value. The figure assumes that executives with $5
      million in initial wealth are granted stock options with a net cost of $100,000; the number of options granted
      naturally increases as the exercise price increases. We define “incentives” as the change in the certainty-equivalent
      option value for each $1 change in the stock price.
NOVEMBER 2000                                 EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                             PAGE 47


                                                         Figure 7

            “Threshold Prices” for Early Exercise Decisions on Immediately Exercisable Options

    $100


      $90


      $80                                  ρ =2, 50% in Stock
                                           ρ =2, 66% in Stock

      $70


      $60                             ρ=3, 50% in Stock
                                      ρ=3, 66% in Stock


      $50


      $40
                 Maximum price for each
                 period in Binomial Tree
      $30
                       1          2         3        4       5      6      7                       8          9         10
                                                  Years Since Option Grant
Note: The threshold price is the stock price where the executive is just indifferent between exercising early or holding the
      option for another period. The figure assumes that executives with $5 million in initial wealth are granted 5,000
      immediately exercisable stock options. At exactly T=10, the threshold price falls to the exercise price of $30.
NOVEMBER 2000                               EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                             PAGE 48


                                                      Figure 8

                   Cumulative Exercise Probabilities for Immediately Exercisable Options

    100%



     80%                                          ρ=3, 66% in Stock
                                                  ρ=3, 50% in Stock

     60%



     40%
                                                                                       ρ =2, 66% in Stock
                                                                                       ρ =2, 50% in Stock
     20%



       0%
                      1          2         3        4       5      6      7                    8            9       10
                                                 Years Since Option Grant
Note: The figure shows the cumulative probability of exercise for an executive with $5 million in initial wealth and an
      option grant of 5,000 options. All of our other assumptions are maintained from our earlier analysis.
NOVEMBER 2000                                 EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS                                            PAGE 49


                                                        Figure 9

                  The Ratio of the Executive Value to the Company’s Cost, by Vesting Date

    100%

                                                                                 ρ=2, 50% in Stock
     80%                                                                         ρ=2, 66% in Stock




     60%
                              ρ=3, 50% in Stock
                              ρ=3, 66% in Stock
     40%



     20%



       0%
            0         1         2        3       4      5       6       7       8                      9         10
       Immediately                  Number of Years Until Options are Exercisable                             No Early
        Exercisable                                                                                           Exercise

Note: The figure shows the value:cost ratios for various vesting lengths for an executive with $5 million in initial wealth
      and an option grant of 5,000 options. All of our other assumptions are maintained from our earlier analysis.
