 $! )   

  

         


 !"#
$%&'(*+,*
# (-../'.((.*+,*

         
0+1+"#2 32
4/&'5+607*
28

 
                !
        "     !
     #  $  % & 
  
'" % % () % )  ( *+ ,   , 
(    ( "-  (
  ' ( 

" &" 92:& 8 # "4& # &   
55 !"#
 $%&'(*+,*
286++0
 00
  
  %  #3&:: " # 4 (2 4 &" ; #& ((
"& #:&  &: &#(&' #(2" 4&<: &3''&
& #& #  &' #(&" &4"%"#=#:& 4:5%# #:: #
'&& # " #4: &3" (&" &' #(2" && #4:5
 &3  ':    : &3 "  (&" 92:& 8 #  & /2   2/3 '&:
(2" &3& 8&"52/3'&:" 92:& 8&"53& &&(2" &
"#:'8 " &2 & &'   4 0>?6=0>>65  @"  # # #8( #& #  ::
'&" #4: &3" (&"&3:  &3& # :  #& &" " 
(&"" '&& "& #&4&:: &3" (&"5& # &2 84&<
3&8 4 &"::8" #'2('& # & "#"3 &4#34"#2&'
&2 &

2"%"#:2&
0++2"%::
35+7?11
,+7=,A,=+7+6B(C
,+7=,A,=07+*BC
//D 42 #2

  "4&" 2&
22 #2
*>+1& &:%8
2& 6+,
((:/56+??6

 !"#
:"#:'4
<6+*6++
35+,16+=*6++

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

1.

2

Introduction

Do workers in New York and Nashville face the same benefits and costs
from increased international trade? Does a firm’s survival depend upon
where in the US it is located? If the US is a single, tightly integrated
market, then the answer to these questions should be no: with workers
and capital receiving the same returns everywhere, and with technology
and inputs free to cross state and county borders, a shock to any part of
the US aﬀects the whole country. However, if relative wages vary across
regions, then the possibility exists for diﬀerential dislocation in Nashville
and New York due to trade and globalization.
Our research challenges the view of the US as a seamless, integrated
economy. Using the implications of the Heckscher-Ohlin trade model as
a framework, we derive a general test of relative factor price equality for
US regions that is robust to unobserved regional productivity diﬀerences,
unobserved regional factor quality diﬀerences, and variations in production
technology across industries. Using regional plant level manufacturing
data from 1972-1992, we reject the hypothesis that all regions in the US
face the same relative factor prices. We also find that regional product
mix varies with relative factor rewards. In the language of trade theory,
we find that the US contains multiple cones of diversification.1
While the concept of multiple factor price cones is usually applied across
countries, it is substantially more controversial when considering regions
within a relatively flexible economy such as the US. It is easy to imagine
that the relative similarity of endowments, regulations and markets combined with the mobility of capital, technology, and even labor within the
US would make it likely that relative price diﬀerences are at best transitory.
In that scenario, the regions of the US would occupy a single factor price
cone. However, work in the convergence of regional incomes within the US
finds slow movements of relative per worker income levels, suggesting that
either factor endowments or relative factor prices are at best converging
1

The word ‘cone’ refers to the set of endowment vectors that all select the same mix
of products.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

3

slowly.2
An important question in pursuing research of this nature is why or
whether migration eﬀectively integrates the various US labor markets. Topel
(1986) provides a dynamic model and evidence for the eﬀects of local demand conditions on wage levels and the inducement to migration. He
argues that higher income workers are more mobile and move in response
to local demand shocks of sustained duration. In contrast, lower income
workers are largely constrained from moving and see substantial movements
in their wages. The existence of increasing marginal costs of out-migration
allows for persistence diﬀerences in relative wages. In Topel’s framework,
demand shocks are region-specific but of undefined origin. In this paper,
we argue that the existence of multiple relative factor price cones within
the US is at least partly responsible for the heterogeneity in industry composition. Variations in industry location due to factor price diﬀerences
provide a source of heterogenous local demand shocks.
Developing an understanding of both the current and past structure of
relative wages across US regions is important for a variety of mainstream
research questions. Most obvious is the relevance for the literature on wage
inequality itself. Much of the literature from both the labor and international trade perspectives has assumed that wage inequality varies across
and within socioeconomic groups and industries but not across regions.
Recently this assumption of regional homogeneity has been the subject of
research. Focusing on the heterogeneity of relative wage movements at
the regional level, Lee (1999) and Bernard and Jensen (2000a) both find
substantial variation in wage inequality movements and levels across US
states. We provide a direct test of the similarity of relative factor prices
across regions and over time.
The implications of multiple relative factor price regions extend into
the industrial organization and productivity literatures as well. If regions
in the US face substantially diﬀerent factor prices, then many estimates
of industry production functions that assume common factor prices are
misspecified. This is likely to feed into calculations of productivity and
markups at both the plant and industry levels.
In this paper, we add to a growing literature on factor price equality.
This research began with Samuelson (1949), who noted that two countries’
2

See, for example, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1991) and Carlino and Mills (1993).

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

4

factor rewards will be equal if their endowments vary less than industry
input intensities. This insight, derived from a model with two goods and
two factors, sparked eﬀorts by Mckenzie (1955), Dixit and Norman (1980),
Wu (1987) and Deardorﬀ (1992) to generalize the necessary conditions for
factor price equality to an arbitrary number of countries, goods and factors. Debaere and Demiroglu (1997) find a violation of these conditions in
a cross section of countries, and interpret this result as evidence that developed and developing countries inhabit distinct cones of diversification. In
compementary work, Repetto and Ventura (1998) show that international
productivity-adjusted wages vary significantly across countries in a manner
consistent with the existence of a multiple cone world.
More recent eﬀorts have investigated alternate implications of factor
price equality as well as its applicability to regions within countries. Schott
(1999, 2000), for example, finds that countries tend to enter and exit sectors
in a manner consistent with movement through multiple cones of diversification. Digging deeper into this Rybczynski adjustment mechanism, Bernard
and Jensen (2000b) find that US plant closures occur more frequently in
regions that are experiencing rapidly changing relative factor supplies and
in industries with factor requirements at odds with the new supplies. Hanson and Slaughter (1999), on the other hand, find that US state factor
supply changes are largely absorbed by changes in production technique
that are common across states, an outcome they argue is consistent with
productivity-adjusted factor price equality. In this paper we suggest that
regional variation in relative factor prices is an important, unexplored component of how the US adjusts to both changes in factor supplies and the
pressures of international trade.
Finally, our investigation of regional factor price equalization complements existing research in economic geography. That body of work, nicely
surveyed by Hanson (2000), focuses on the agglomeration of economic activity and its eﬀect on the spatial variation of wages, employment and production. Our approach is most closely related to that of Kim (1995, 1999),
who finds that long-run trends US regional industry specialization are consistent with regional comparative advantage. Our emphasis in this paper
on skilled-to-unskilled wage disparity, as well as the overlap of industries
across regions, however, is unique.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 outlines the

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

5

implications of the multiple cone Heckscher-Ohlin equilibrium and summarizes the extent of regional variation in the United States. Section
3 details the relevant theorems on factor price equality and develops the
testable implications. In Section 4, we discuss possible problems with existing techniques to test for relative factor price equality and outline our
empirical methodology. Section 5 presents the results from the empirical
tests of relative factor price equality for 1972 and 1992 and oﬀers additional
evidence on the relation between industry structure and factor prices. We
look for variation in industry mix across factor price cones in Section 6.
Section 7 concludes.
2.

Single versus Multiple Cone Heckscher-Ohlin Equilibria

The easiest way to build intuition for single versus multiple cone equilibria is to assume there are just two factors of production and that the world
is even in the sense that regions produce just two goods at every stage of
their economic development. Such a world is captured by the Lerner (1952)
diagram displayed in figure 1. This figure contains unit value isoquants
for four sectors, Apparel, Textiles, Machinery and Chemicals, in a world
with two factors, capital (K) and labor (L). Chemicals is the most capital
intensive sector while Apparel is the most labor intensive sector. To keep
things simple, all sectors are assumed to have Leontief technology.
Under standard Heckscher-Ohlin assumptions (Dixit and Norman 1980),
the four sectors delineate three cones of diversification, the word cone referring to the set of endowment vectors that all select the same mix of
products. Because production of a good outside of the cone in which a
region resides results in negative profit, GDP-maximizing regions produce
only the two goods anchoring their cones. In this respect, each of the
three cones in figure 1 represents a standard, two good - two factor single
cone equilibrium: if all US regions were located in the middle cone, for
example, only Machinery and Textiles would be produced by the United
States, with each region’s ratio of the two outputs depending upon their
relative capital abundance. As drawn, regions 1 and 4 each have a distinct
product mix, with capital abundant region 4 producing relatively capital
intensive Machinery and Chemicals and labor abundant region 1 manufacturing relatively labor intensive Apparel and Textiles. Note that regions in

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

6

neighboring cones produce one good in common.
As cones increase in capital intensity, wages rise and capital rental rates
decline. This change in relative factor rewards can be seen by connecting
isoquants with their respective isocost lines. Unit value isoquants are tangent to their respective isocost lines under perfect competition. One such
isocost line, tangent to Machinery and Textiles, is present in the diagram.
Note that the absolute value of the slope of this line indicates the ratio
of wages to capital rental rates; since the isocost lines become steeper as
countries move from the most labor abundant cone to the most capital
abundant cone, relative wages rise.
Figure 2 provides a summary of the empirical implications of single
and multiple cone equilibria under the basic assumptions outlined in this
section. These implications change if the world is uneven, if production
requires more than two factor inputs, or if production technologies are not
Leontief. We now discuss the implications of each of these complications,
in isolation.
2.1.

What if There Are More Sectors than Factors?

Specialization of output across regions may not be indicative of a multiple cone equilibrium if prices are such that the number of sectors a region
can produce profitably exceeds the number of factor inputs. This case is illustrated in figure 3, which exhibits a single cone of diversification anchored
by four rather than two sectors. Because prices render the choice of product mix arbitrary, regions 2 and 3 may not produce the same mix of sectors
even though they inhabit the same cone. Region 3, for example, might
produce Chemicals and Textiles and region 2 might produce Machinery
and Apparel. Unevenness also implies that regions in neighboring cones
may no longer produce at least one good in common. On the other hand,
there remains a link, albeit weaker, between the probability that a region
produces a sector and the similarity of the region’s factor endowments with
the industry’s input intensity.
2.2.

What if Factor Inputs are Substitutable?

If production technologies allow for the substitutability of inputs, it is
no longer true that regions from neighboring cones must produce common

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

7

goods with identical techniques. In figure 4, for example, regions 1 and 3
both produce Textiles, but region 3 produces the sector with a more capital
intensive technique. In this case, regions in the same cone use identical
techniques, while regions in disparate cones use techniques that are closer
to their endowments.
2.3.

What if There are More Than Two Factors?

The key complication of considering higher dimensional factor spaces
is that with F factors, regions can produce up to F − 1 goods in common, and therefore identifying a particular cone’s neighbors can be quite
complex. The first panel of figure 5 illustrates the mechanics of generalizing a two factor HO model to three dimensions. The trick, noted by
McKenzie (1955) and Leamer (1987) is to construct an endowment simplex
by reducing a three dimensional factor space of capital (K), labor (L) and
human capital (H) to a two dimensional simplex. This simplex is formed
by intersecting the positive orthant of the factor space with a plane so that
the coordinate axes of the factor space are represented by the corners of
the endowment simplex, while the industry-input and country-endowment
vectors are represented by points on the surface of this triangle. Thus,
cones of diversification are represented by triangles on the surface of the
simplex. In the figure, the shaded triangle represents a cone anchored by
Machinery, Textiles and Apparel. The tilt of this triangle is determined
by the three product prices and is analogous to the slope of the isocost line
in the earlier Lerner diagrams.
In the figure, the production of Apparel and Textiles requires only physical capital and labor, while the manufacture of Machinery requires capital,
labor and human capital (H). Note as well that approaching a corner of
the endowment simplex along a ray emanating from that corner represents
an increase in the use (for an industry input vector) or abundance (for an
endowment vector) of that factor, holding the concentration of other factors
constant. Thus, Textiles use more physical capital than Apparel, and both
use the same ratio of human capital to labor, which is zero. Since factors
become relatively more abundant as regions move closer to a given vertex,
the associated factor rewards decline as regions move through cones. Thus,
in the second panel, which describes a multiple cone equilibrium containing
eight cones, the return to labor declines as one moves through the cones at

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

8

the bottom of the endowment simplex from right to left.
In the two dimensional Lerner diagrams above, the existence of three
or more cones is enough to guarantee that at least two are not neighbors.
In higher dimensions, however, there is no guarantee that non-neighboring
cones exist.3 Intuition for this claim is provided by panel two of figure 5:
in that endowment simplex, six of the eight cones produce the machinery
sector.
The complex neighborliness of cones in higher dimensions means that
regions with quite disparate endowments can produce sectors in common.
In the figure, for example, regions 1, 2 and 3 all produce machinery even
region 1 has almost no human capital to labor, region 3 has extremely high
human capital to labor, and region 2 is in between. This complication
limits the use of product mix as a means of empirically discerning single
from multiple cone equilibria. For example, though all regions producing
the same mix of goods is evidence of a single cone equilibrium, specialization
does not imply a multiple cone equilibrium.
2.4.

Relaxing The Basic Assumptions

If we relax the standard assumptions of the Heckscher-Ohlin model it
becomes much more diﬃcult to distinguish empirically a multiple from a
single cone equilibrium. Indeed, as indicated in figure 6, we are left with
three types of tests:
1. PRODUCT MIX: If all regions produce the same group of sectors,
the US is characterized by a single cone equilibrium.4 This implication is easy to verify but not very satisfying because the absence of
production overlap does not imply existence of multiple cones. Figure 7, for example, reports that US regions do not in fact all produce
the same mix of goods, though the extent of overlap is increasing
with time. The first panel of the figure indicates that the median
percent of regional participation across within a four digit Standard
3

We hypothesize that non-neighboring cones will exist if there are at least F −1 sectors
that use all F factors as inputs.
4
Of course, this test must be performed at a reasonable level of sector disaggregation
to be meaningful. In the empirical test below, we focus on four digit SIC codes which
break manufacturing into approximately 480 sectors.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

9

Industrial Classification sector rose from 28% in 1972 to 37% in 1992.
Interestingly, there are some sectors that all regions produce, though
it is possible that these sectors are non-tradeables. The second panel
of the figure reports that most regions produce relatively few industries, that there are no regions that produce all industries, and that
regional coverage also is increasing with time. Finally, the third panel
reveals that the bilateral overlap of industries across region-pairs has
also edged up with time.5 Nevertheless, all we can conclude from this
evidence is that the existence of a multiple cone equilibrium cannot
be ruled out.
2. PRODUCTION TECHNIQUE: If production techniques for commonly produced goods are identical, the US is characterized by a single cone equilibrium. On the other hand, evidence that production
techniques vary with regional endowments is evidence for the multiple
cone model. For any pair of regions one can test whether industries
produced in common have techniques that vary systematically with
the diﬀerences in relative endowments.
3. RELATIVE WAGES: If relative wages vary with regional endowments in the manner suggested above, the US cannot be characterized by a single cone equilibrium. We can test this implication by
regressing log relative raw wages on log relative raw endowments, or
µ ¶
µ N¶ X
Nr
wir
=
+ ²ir ,
αi + β ln
ln
P
Pr
wir
i
where w, N, P , i and r represent wages, non-production (skilled)
workers, production (unskilled) workers, industry and region, respectively. Results of this regression are reported in figure 8. They
indicate that regions relatively abundant in skilled workers receive
relatively lower wages in both 1972 and 1992. This result is suggestive of the failure of relative factor price equality. In the next section,
we develop a stronger test that is robust to potential unobserved heterogeneity of factors across regions.
5

Percent of sectors in common is defined as the number of sectors produced in both
region r and region s divided by the maximum of the number of sectors in r and s.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

3.

10

Factor price equality across regions

We now turn to a more formal examination of factor price equality
across economic regions.6 We introduce the theorems that motivate our
empirical framework and develop the testable implications of the theory
under a relatively general set of assumptions.
We start by restating the Factor Price Equality theorem of Leamer
(1995) which provides the basis for our null and alternative hypotheses:
Proposition 1 The Factor Price Equality Theorem (FPEQ). Regions producing the same mix of products with the same technologies and
the same product prices must have the same factor prices for identical factors.
This theorem contains the essential, relevant prediction from the HeckscherOhlin trade model for our purposes. At any point in time, regions making
identical products with identical technologies should face the same factor
prices. If prices for identical factors diﬀered across the regions, then the
techniques and/or the products would vary. An important component of
the theorem is that the relevant factor prices are those for identical factors.
Diﬀerences in factor quality across the regions may induce diﬀerences in
nominal factor prices but should not be taken as evidence of the failure of
the prediction of the theorem.
We also want to consider a related prediction on relative factor prices
which allows for the possibility that there are region-specific productivity
diﬀerentials such as those discussed in Trefler (1993):
Proposition 2 Relative Factor Price Equality Theorem (RFPEQ).
Regions with diﬀerent productivity levels producing the same mix of products
with the same product prices must have the same relative factor prices for
identical factors.
This weakening of the original theorem allows for the likely possibility
that there are region-specific diﬀerences in productivity that do not vary
6

We use the term region to refer to the geographic unit of analysis, i.e. country, state,
etc. In our empirical work on the US, this corresponds to a labor market area as defined
by the Commerce Department.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

11

across factors or goods. Under this condition the price levels of the factors would diﬀer but the relative prices would be identical. As is obvious,
Proposition 2 is necessary but not suﬃcient for Proposition 1.
While we will make use of the theorems in looking for deviations from
factor price equality (FPEQ) and relative factor price equality (RFPEQ)
across regions within the US, the theory and empirical methodology can be
applied to any tests of factor price equality.
To develop our empirical framework, we impose some additional structure in the form of restrictions on the class of production functions. We
restrict our analysis to the class of CES production technologies.7 For the
purposes of exposition, we consider an economy with two regions (r and
s) and one homogenous industry with three inputs and a CES value-added
production function. We allow for the possibility that there are unobserved
productivity diﬀerences between region r and region s which aﬀect all factors equally. In addition, we allow for unobserved diﬀerences in factor
quality between the two regions. Throughout the section, subscripts refer
to regions and superscripts refer to factors. We start with a value-added
production function common to the industry in both regions,
¢
¡
K
(1)
Yi = F Ai, θPi Pi , θN
i Ni , θi Ki .

where Pi , Ni and Ki are observed production worker, non-production worker
K
and capital inputs and θPi Pi , θN
i Ni , and θi Ki are the true quality adjusted
inputs in each region. Ai is a region-specific, Hicks-neutral productivity
shifter. The actual production functions are CES in quality-adjusted inputs
h ¡
¢ρ
¡ N ¢ρ
¡ K ¢ρ i ρ1
P
(2)
Yi = Ai aP θi Pi + aN θi Ni + aK θi Ki
where 1/1 − ρ is the elasticity of substitution between factors.
Given price-taking in the factor market and common output prices, the
7

In Appendix A we discuss the implications of trans-log cost functions for our empirical
techniques.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

first order conditions for quality adjusted factors in each region are:
¡
¢ρ−1
∂F
¡ P ¢ = Yi1−ρ · aP θ Pi Pi
wiP =
∂ θr Pr
¡
¢ρ−1
∂F
¡ N ¢ = Yi1−ρ · aN θ N
wiN =
i Ni
∂ θi Ni
¡
¢ρ−1
∂F
¡ K ¢ = Yi1−ρ · aK θK
wiK =
i Ki
∂ θi Ki

12

(3)

These three conditions give the returns for quality-adjusted factors. We
maintain the assumption that factors are paid their true marginal product, i.e. they are compensated for quality. Since we are interested in the
possibility of detecting deviations from factor price equality, we must pay
particular attention to the diﬀerence between quantities (and prices) for
observed and quality-adjusted factors.
For the purpose of exposition assume there are two regions, r and s,
where region s is the reference region whose factors are taken to be the
baseline quality benchmarks without loss of generality, i.e. θfs = 1. The
two regions are in a single cone of factor price equality, FPEQ, if
wrP
wrN
wrK

= wsP
= wsN
= wsK

(4)

all hold simultaneously. In words, this means that the quality adjusted returns are identical for all factors. RFPEQ holds if any two of the following
three conditions hold:
wrN
wsN
=
=
= ω NP
(5)
ωNP
r
s
wrP
wsP
wrK
wK
ω KP
=
= sP = ω KP
r
s
P
wr
ws
wrK
wsK
ω KN
=
=
= ω KN
r
s .
wrN
wsN
Note that the conditions for both FPEQ and RFPEQ are for qualityadjusted factor prices which cannot be observed in practice. In the following sections we develop empirical implications of RFPEQ and FPEQ
for variables we can observe.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

3.1.

13

Implications of RFPEQ

We start by developing the testable implications for relative factor price
equality. Absent any ability to correctly adjust for factor quality diﬀerences, the observed relative labor wages in the two regions will be given
by
ω̃ NP
r
ω̃ NP
s

P P
wrN θN
wN θN
r Nr wr θr Pr
/
= rP rP
Nr
Pr
wr θr
N
P
N
ws Ns ws Ps
w
P
=
/
= sP 6= ω̃ NP
if θN
r
r 6= θr .
Ns
Ps
ws

=

(6)

Under RFPEQ, the observed relative wages will only equal the true relative
wages if the quality adjustments are the same for the two labor types across
regions.
For observed demands of the two labor types by the industry in the two
regions, under the maintained assumption of RFPEQ we can solve for the
relationship between the factor ratios in the two regions,
θPr Ns
Nr
= N
·
.
Pr
θr Ps

(7)

The observed, unadjusted, input ratios will diﬀer by exactly their relative
quality adjustments.
Now we consider the possibility that RFPEQ does not hold and let the
true quality adjusted relative factor returns vary across the two regions by
a multiplicative factor, γ.8 For our three factor world, we need two γ’s,
γ NP and γ KP . The third factor price adjustment is given by
γ KN = γ KP /γ NP .

(8)

When any γ 6= 1, then relative factor price equality fails to hold between
the two regions, i.e.
=
ω NP
r
8

N
wrN
NP ws
=
γ
= γ NP ω NP
s .
wrP
wsP

(9)

We implicitly set region s as the benchmark region and consider factor prices relative
to those in region s, i.e.
γ
γ= r
γs
where γ s = 1. When we consider multiple regions in our empirical work, we must choose
a base region.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

14

In terms of observed factors, we now have
Nr ¡ NP ¢1/(ρ−1) θPr Ns
= γ
Pr
θN
r Ps

(10)

with similar relationships for the other factor ratios.
This equation demonstrates the crux of the problem with using observed
factor inputs to test for RFPEQ. Unless the regional quality adjustment is
assumed to be identical for all factors, then relative input intensities cannot
reveal whether γ = 1.
In terms of observed relative wages from equation 6, we find
= γ NP ·
ω̃ NP
r

θN
r
· ω̃ NP
s .
θPr

(11)

A close examination of equations 10 and 11 is useful for building intuition. Suppose RFPEQ holds (i.e. γ = 1) and that region r non-production
P
workers are of higher relative quality (i.e. θN
r > θr ). Then equation 11
implies that the observed non-production to production wage ratio is higher
in region r than region s. Conversely, equation 10 implies that region r
uses relatively fewer non-production workers than region s. These ratios
might incorrectly lead one to assume that RFPEQ fails across these two
regions and that region r has higher true relative wages.
Without extra information on relative factor quality, neither observed
wages nor observed factor quantities can help us disentangle the problem of
RFPEQ versus diﬀering input quality. To tackle this problem, we use data
on both wages and employed factors and multiply the terms in equations
10 and 11. This gives us
¡ NP ¢ρ/(ρ−1) Ns wsN
Nr wrN θN
r
=
γ
.
Pr wrP θPr
Ps wsP

(12)

The numerator in left hand side of equation 12 represents total wages paid
to non-production workers in region r while the denominator is the wages
paid to production workers in region r. On the right, we have the product
of two terms, the non-RFPEQ adjustment factor and the ratio of the nonproduction to production worker wage bill in region s,
¡ NP ¢ρ/(ρ−1) wagebillN
wagebillN
r
s
=
γ
.
wagebillPr
wagebillPs

(13)

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

15

With this formulation, we do not have to separately identify the wage for
the quality adjusted input and the quality adjustment factor.
For intuition, consider the following. Suppose RFPEQ holds and production workers and capital are of identical quality in the two regions.
Then firms in the two regions will want to hire the same number of production workers as well as the same amount of capital per unit of output. This
can be seen in equation 3. Now the firms decide how many non-production
workers to hire. The first order conditions tell us that the firms will hire
the same amount of quality adjusted non-production labor and more importantly they will pay the same total amount to the non-production workers
for that quality adjusted input. Neither the number of non-production
workers per unit of output nor the wage per non-production workers will
be the same in the two regions unless the qualities are also identical.
Now allow RFPEQ to fail so that the relative wage of quality adjusted
non-production workers is 50% higher in region r (γ = 1.5) and to simplify
the argument let a non-production worker in region r be equal to one third
of a non-production worker in region s. From equation 11, we can see
that observed relative non-production wages will be 50% lower in region
r even though it is a region with high true relative non-production wages.
From equation 10, we can see that the relative quantity of non-production
to production workers will in fact be higher in region r than in region
s. From these two facts we would be likely to conclude mistakenly that
region r had relatively cheap non-production workers and thus employed
relatively more of them. The actual ratio of the relative wage bills depends
on whether γ ≶ 1 and whether ρ > 0, ρ < 0, or ρ = 0.
¢ρ/(ρ−1)
¡
= 1 is necessary but not suﬃcient to reject
Rejecting γ NP
relative factor price equality. To see why, note that there are two ways
¢ρ/(ρ−1)
¡
to equal unity. First, if RFPEQ holds, γ = 1, then
for γ NP
¡ NP ¢ρ/(ρ−1)
γ
= 1 no matter what value ρ takes. However, if ρ is close to
¢ρ/(ρ−1)
¡
may equal
zero (i.e. if production is close to Cobb-Douglas), γ NP
¡ NP ¢ρ/(ρ−1)
6= 1 can only be
unity even if γ does not. On the other hand, γ
due to the failure of relative factor price equality, γ 6= 1. In addition, even
¢ρ/(ρ−1)
¡
= 1, we will not be able to determine
if ρ 6= 0 and we reject γ NP
which region has the higher relative wages without making an assumption

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

16

on the elasticity of substitution, 1/ (1 − ρ).9
¡ ¢ρ/(ρ−1)
To reject RFPEQ we need only to reject γ f g
= 1 for one pair
of factors f and g because RFPEQ implies that all relative factor rewards
are equal. That is, even if the non-production to production wages are
equal in regions r and s, it still may be the case that the wage-rental ratios
are not equal. One can use either of the remaining two relationships to
examine the variation, if any, in wage-rental ratios,
capital paymentsr ¡ KP ¢ρ/(ρ−1) capital paymentss
= γ
.
wagebillPr
wagebillPs

(14)

Before developing our empirical framework, we explore the additional implications of factor price equality.
3.2.

Implications of FPEQ

The previous section has detailed testable implications of relative factor
price equality across regions. It is still possible for absolute factor price
equality to fail even if RFPEQ holds. Factor-independent productivity
shifters will leave relative factor prices unaltered but change the levels of
the factor rewards for all factors. In this section we consider the testable
implications of FPEQ.
The relationship between rewards for a given factor across regions is
given by
wrN = wsN
µ ¶ρ−1
µ N ¶ρ−1
Ns
θr Nr
=
.
Yr
Ys

(15)

Again the regional diﬀerences in factor quality, θ N
r , are unobserved so we
cannot use the unit factor inputs to test for FPEQ. We can, however,
9

For example, if
ρ

<

0,

ρ

>

0,

³

³

γ NP
γ NP

´ρ/(ρ−1)
´ρ/(ρ−1)

> 1 ⇒ γN P > 1
> 1 ⇒ γ N P < 1.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

17

employ the factor shares, under FPEQ
wrN θN
wN Ns
r Nr
= s
Yr
Ys

(16)

N
N
while the failure of FPEQ, wrN = γ N
rs · ws , when γ rs 6= 1, yields
ρ
¡ ¢ ρ−1
wsN Ns
wrN θN
r Nr
= γN
.
rs
Yr
Ys

(17)

Of course, this relationship holds for all the factors in the production func¡ ¢ρ/(ρ−1)
tion. To reject FPEQ, we need only reject γ f
= 1 for one single
factor.10 In the next section, we outline our strategy for estimation with
its advantages and disadvantages relative to existing methodologies.
4.

Econometric Methodology

In this section, we start by discussing possible problems that have arisen
in the existing empirical literature on testing FPEQ and RFPEQ. We then
outline an empirical methodology for testing the null hypothesis of one
RFPEQ cone versus the alternative of multiple RFPEQ cones. In the event
that the null of one cone is not rejected, we describe a related method for
testing for one FPEQ cone versus the alternative of multiple FPEQ cones.
In the event that the single RFPEQ cone hypothesis is rejected, we present
a technique for grouping regions into cones. Finally we conclude with an
assessment of the pros and cons of our empirical methodology.
4.1.

Unit input requirements

Observed unit factor requirements have been used in several recent papers on testing predictions of the HO model, e.g. Hanson and Slaughter
(1999) and Davis and Weinstein (1998). We argue in this section that unit
¡ ¢ρ/(ρ−1)
As before, rejecting γ f
= 1 for a single factor is suﬃcient but not necessary
¡ ¢ρ/(ρ−1)
to reject FPEQ. There are again two ways for γ f
to equal unity. Either FPEQ
holds, γ = 1, or the production function is Cobb-Douglas, i.e. ρ is close to zero. On the
¡ ¢ρ/(ρ−1)
6= 1 can only be due to the failure of factor price equality.
other hand, γ f
We can only use n − 1 of the n factor share relationships in estimation because of the
restriction that the factor shares sum to one.
10

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

18

factor requirements cannot be used to determine whether two regions have
common relative factor prices unless there are (1) no regional productivity
diﬀerences and (2) no diﬀerences in regional factor quality. We simplify
the discussion by focusing on the special case of a Cobb-Douglas production function with two (labor) inputs (N and P ), constant returns to scale,
variations in regional labor quality, and regional productivity diﬀerences.
The production functions for the industry in the two regions are given by
¡
¢α ¡ P ¢1−α
θi Pi
.
(18)
Yi = Ai θN
i Ni

Each region has a Hicks-neutral productivity shifter, Ai , and the two types
of labor in region r diﬀer in quality (productivity) from those in the benchP
mark region, s, by multiplicative factors, θN
r and θr . These productivity
shifters do not vary across industries within a region. Only industry valueadded, Yi and unadjusted labor inputs, Ni and Pi can be observed.
Solving for the input-output ratios in terms of the ratio of observed
factor inputs in the two regions, we get
µ ¶1−α
Nr
Nr
1
1
Nr
=
(19)
¡ N ¢α ¡ P ¢1−α =
¡ N ¢α ¡ P ¢1−α
Yr
Ar θ Nr
Pr
θr Pr
θr
Ar θr
r
µ ¶
Ns
Ns
1
1 Ns 1−α
=
=
.
(20)
Ys
As (Ns )α (Ps )1−α
As Ps

Rearranging terms, we can write the observed factor inputs in terms of the
observed unit factor requirements,11
¶
µ
¡ N ¢α ¡ P ¢1−α 1/1−α
Nr
Nr
θr
=
· Ar θr
(21)
Pr
Yr
µ
¶1/1−α
Ns
Ns
=
· As
(22)
Ps
Ys
Under the maintained hypothesis of RFPEQ, we can solve for the relationship between the observed factor ratios by equating the relative wages
11

As constructed, both the observed factor ratios and the observed unit factor requirements may diﬀer from the true measures in region r.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

19

paid to the true labor inputs across the regions,12 yielding
θPr Ns
Nr
= N
·
.
Pr
θr Ps
In words, the observed, unadjusted, input ratios will diﬀer by exactly their
relative quality adjustments.
Suppose RFPEQ does not hold and let the true quality adjusted relative
factor returns vary across regions by a multiplicative factor, γ r . When
γ r 6= 1, then relative factor price equality fails to hold between the two
regions, i.e.
=
ω NP
r

wsN
wrN
NP
=
γ
r P = γω s .
wrP
ws

(23)

In terms of observed factors ratios, we now have
Nr
θPr Ns
= (γ r )−1 N
Pr
θr Ps

(24)

and substituting equations 21 and 22 into equation 24, we can express the
unit factor requirement in region r in terms of the unit factor requirement
in region s,
µ
¶
As ¡ N ¢−1
Nr
α−1 Ns
θ
=
(γ r )
.
(25)
Yr
Ar r
Ys

Equation 25 reveals several problems with any empirical implementation
using unit input requirements to test for RFPEQ. Most importantly, there
is a problem with identification in that specification 25 cannot separately
identify the diﬀerences in regional Hicks-neutral productivity, Ai , diﬀerences in factor quality across regions, θN
i , and diﬀerences in factor prices
across regions, γ r , all of which only vary across regions. Furthermore,
adding additional factors to the production function does not solve the
problem but merely adds more factor-specific productivity shifters to be
estimated.
12

wN

wN

NP
S
The first order conditions and RFPEQ yield ω NP
= wR
. Observed
P = wP = ω S
R
R
S
relative factor prices need not be equal in this case. The observed relative wages will
only equal the true relative wages if the quality adjustments are the same for the two
labor types across regions.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

4.2.

20

Testing one cone versus many (RFPEQ)

We now outline our preferred techniques for testing the competing hypotheses of one versus many cones. We start by considering the predictions
from the RFPEQ theorem and then the FPEQ theorem. Finally we develop a technique for grouping regions into cones in the event that the single
cone hypothesis has been rejected.
Under the null of RFPEQ across all regions, every region should have
the same wagebill ratio within an industry and this should be equal to the
average for the US,
wagebillN
wagebillN
i,U S
ir
=
.
P
wagebillir
wagebillPi,U S
The simplest test is a regression of the form:
Ã
!
fg
X
W BRir
αfr g dr + ²firg
ln
=
fg
W BRi,U S
r

(26)

fg
is the average relative wagebill for industry i in the US
where W BRi,US

for a pair of factors f and g, and αfr g ’s are coeﬃcients on a vector of region
dummies. Under the null hypothesis of RFPEQ, αfr g = 0 for all regions
and factor pairs. Note that in order to estimate equation 26 for any factor
pair including capital, one would have to construct a measure of capital
payments as they are not usually recorded directly in the data. One possible
solution is construct capital payments as the residual of value-added after
payments to the two types of labor,
capital paymentsir = Yir − wagebilliNr − wagebilliP r .
However, this measure is particularly noisy in the plant data that we employ. We therefore focus our empirical work on relative wages.
Second, we test RFPEQ by estimating equations 13 and 14 for all industry and region-pair combinations. We start by choosing a region to be
the benchmark, i.e. γ fBg = 1. Then we run a regression of the form:
µ
¶ ³ ´
ρi
fg
g
(27)
ln γ fr g + ln W BRfiBg + ²firB
ln W BRir =
ρi − 1

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

or
ln

Ã

fg
W BRir

W BRfiBg

!

=

X

g
αfrBg dr + ²firB

21

(28)

r6=B

where the dr ’s are region dummies that equal one whenever region r is the
g
’s are jointly equal to zero
independent variable. Testing whether the αfrB
provides a test of the null hypothesis of a single cone versus the alternative
g
= 0 is suﬃcient to reject the hypothesis
of multiple cones. Rejecting αfrB
of RFPEQ between regions. Any pair of regions are in the same RFPEQ
cone if αfrBg = αfsBg .
When testing the null of one RFPEQ cone versus the alternative of multiple cones, we can reject the null if any region is significantly diﬀerent from
the benchmark region for a single factor pair. However, equation 27 cannot
be run if the benchmark region has no (or few) industries in common with
region r. As discussed above, this fact of no common industries by itself
is not suﬃcient for us to categorize the regions as being in diﬀerent cones.
To avoid this problem in practice, and as a general robustness check, we
run separate regressions allowing each region to be the benchmark region.
4.3.

Testing one cone versus many (FPEQ)

If we cannot reject the one cone hypothesis for relative factor prices,
it still may be the case that absolute factor prices diﬀer. In order to test
the single cone hypothesis for FPEQ, we make use of equation 17 and test
γ irs = 1 for each of the following two relationships
wrN θN
r Nr
Yr
wrP θPr Pr
Yr

ρ
¡ N ¢ ρ−1
wsN Ns
γ rs
Ys
P
¡ ¢ ρ w Ps
= γ Prs ρ−1 s .
Ys

=

(29)
(30)

¡ ¢ρ/(ρ−1)
To reject FPEQ, we need only reject γ f
= 1 for one single
factor.13 The general form of the tests outlined above for RFPEQ works
equally well in testing FPEQ, with the obvious substitution of the factor
share in total costs in place of the relative wagebills. As before, the caveats
about choosing benchmark regions apply.
13
We can only use n − 1 of the n factor share relationships in estimation because of
the restriction that the factor shares sum to one.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

4.4.

22

Grouping regions into cones

If we reject the hypothesis that there is a single factor price cone, we
must consider how to allocate regions to cones, i.e. which regions do face
the same relative factor prices. We start with our specification using the
entire US as the benchmark for an industry.
Our grouping procedure for a factor pair in a year is as follows:
1. Regress region-industry relative wagebills on that for the US (equation 26).
2. Any region that has a significantly higher wagebill ratio, i.e. α̂fr g >
0, is placed in a High group while regions with significantly lower
wagebill ratios, i.e. α̂fr g < 0, are placed in a Low group. All remaining
regions are placed in the Middle group. The only decision variable
is the appropriate p-value.
3. Run equation 26 separately for each group of regions using only the
regions in the cone to construct the benchmark wagebill ratio.
4. If no regions have coeﬃcients significantly diﬀerent from zero, then
stop and use the three groups as cones.
5. If a region rejects, it is moved to a higher or lower group and repeat
steps 3 and 4 until no regions switch groups.14
This method has the advantage that the number of groups is chosen
endogenously and all industries are used in allocating regions to groups.
It has the disadvantage that two regions may end up in the same group
even though their wagebill ratios are significantly diﬀerent from one another. Alternative grouping procedures could use the pairwise regression
coeﬃcients from equation 28. Using these coeﬃcients presents the problem that for 3 regions, A, B, and C, regions A and C may be significantly
diﬀerent from each other but neither may be significantly diﬀerent from
region B.
14
If, in this subsequent set of regressions, a region in the Low group has an estimated
coeﬃcient significantly less than zero, then we can create a new Lower group. Similarly
for positive rejections in the High group. If a region cycles back and forth between
groups over subsequent iterations, we can create an additional intermediate group.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

4.5.

23

Econometric Issues

In this section we consider econometric issues that may cause us to
mistakenly reject RFPEQ. Product misclassification can cause us to reject
RFPEQ spuriously. To see why, suppose that industry i comprises two
goods, j and k, and that good j is non-production worker intense relative
to good k by a factor of ηir (e.g. stylish dress shirts versus ordinary dress
shirts).15 In addition, to keep things simple, assume there are no factor
quality diﬀerences either across regions or between factors within a region,
so that all θ’s are equal to zero. If region r produces good j and region s
produces good k16 , then instead of equations 11 and 10 we have
Njr
Pjr
ω̃ NP
jr

=

¡ NP ¢1/(ρ−1)
Nks
γ
· ηir ·
Pks

= γ NP ω̃ NP
ks

In words, while relative wages must still be equal in the two regions, relative
intensities diﬀer by η ir . As a result, when we compute relative wage bills
for equation 12, we need to account for η ir
Nr wrN θN
r
Pr wrP θPr
NP
W BRir

¡
¢ρ/(ρ−1) Ns wsN
= ηir γ NP
Ps wsP
¡
¢ρ/(ρ−1)
NP
= ηir γ NP
W BRi,U
S

Clearly, η ir 6= 1 can cause us to reject RFPEQ even if γ NP = 1. Indeed,
ηir 6= 1 also can cause us to fail to reject RFPEQ even if γ NP 6= 1. To
minimize the problem of product misclassification, we use the most detailed
industry data we can assemble by region.
As always, measurement error is of concern. However, our two specifications for testing RFPEQ minimize the problems with measurement error.
With the US as the base in equation 26, under the null hypothesis measurement error in the regressor should be minimized. In equation 28 estimated
over pairs of regions, we can check for problems due to measurement error
by looking at the reverse regressions, i.e. switching base regions.
15

In our CES framework, η ir 6= 1 is a violation of the assumption that production
technologies are identical within industries across regions.
16
The two regions might produce diﬀerent goods due to the output indeterminacy
discussed in section 3.1.2.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

5.

24

Empirical Results

In this section we describe our data set and present results from the
tests of relative factor price equality.
5.1.

Data

The data cover the years 1972-1992 and come from the Longitudinal
Research Database of the Bureau of the Census. We use data only from
the Census of Manufactures which is conducted every fifth year on all manufacturing plants in the lower 48 states.17 We make use of the information
on quantities of and total payments to two types of labor. We exclude
plants that have non-positive value-added or any non-positive inputs. In
addition, we exclude all Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes that
represent miscellaneous products within an industry, i.e. SICs 39xx or xxx9,
to reduce the possibility that we are comparing diﬀerent goods within an
industry. This leaves us with 385 of the original 458 4-digit SIC industries.
As is well known, the LRD only collects wage information on two categories of workers, production and non-production. However, we avoid the
usual criticism that dividing workers into production and non-production
groups imperfectly classifies them according to skill as our methodology is
robust to unobserved diﬀerences in regional factor quality. More important
for our purposes is that any imperfections in the allocation of workers to
production and non-production categories be similar across regions within
an industry.
A separate dimension of the data that we exploit in this paper is that of
geography. Almost all previous work on trade and geographic heterogeneity
within the US has used state data. We prefer to work with groups of
counties that correspond more closely with regional labor markets. To
this end, we use the Labor Market Areas constructed by the Bureau of
Economic Analysis based on common commuting patterns. In the 48
states in our sample there are 181 LMAs. Working with the LMA as the
unit of geographic analysis has several advantages in that it allows labor
markets to cross state lines and admits the possibility of multiple labor
markets within large states.
17

We exclude so-called administrative records. Administrative records typically contain
the smallest establishments and do not have data on inputs.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

25

To run our tests for relative factor price equality, we aggregate the
variables into region-industry cells before constructing wagebill ratios.
5.2.

Testing RFPEQ

In Figure 9, we report the results from equation 26 using the US as the
base region. For both 1972 and 1992 we easily reject the null hypothesis
that all the regions have the same relative wagebills. In 1972, 47 (60)
regions have relative wagebills significantly diﬀerent from the US at the 5
(10) percent level. In 1992, 83 regions reject at the 5 percent level and 97
at the 10 percent level. This is suﬃcient to reject the single factor price
cone hypothesis across regions within the US. In fact, for both years we
see regions that reject on each side of zero, i.e. regions with significantly
higher relative wagebills and regions with significantly lower relative wagebills suggesting that there are at least three separate factor price regions in
the US.18
We can now answer the question posed at the outset. Nashville and
New York have significantly diﬀerent relative wagebills for non-production
and production workers, and thus significantly diﬀerent relative wages. In
fact, in 1972 the relative wagebill in Nashville is 11 percent below the US
average while that for New York is 15% above. To map the estimated
coeﬃcients into diﬀerences in relative factor prices, we need to make assumptions about the elasticity of substitution. Figure 10 reports relative
factor prices for the two labor markets with 1/ (1 − ρ) equal to 1/2 and 2 in
1972 and 1992. Nashville and New York do indeed have diﬀerent exposure
to external shocks as they have significantly diﬀerent relative factor prices.
With these elasticities, relative wages in New York and Nashville diﬀer by
30%-85%. Left unresolved is whether the exposure comes through diﬀerences in their product mix or through diﬀerences in the factor intensity of
production. In section 6, we examine whether variations in factor prices
correspond to variations in industries across regions.
Our other test for relative factor price equality is the set of bivariate
regressions in equation 28. However, there are far too many coeﬃcients
to report, 32580 in total for each year after allowing every region to be
18

We will restrict our analysis to 3 factor price cones although results not reported
here suggest that there may be an additional lower cone in both 1972 and 1992.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

26

the base.19 Figure 11 shows the patterns of rejections for region-pairs in
1972.20 Darker shades indicate lower p-values. From the figure, we can
see groups of regions with few rejections and groups with large numbers of
rejections. In 1972, 21.4 percent of the region-pairs reject relative factor
price equality at the 10 percent level, while 8.1 percent reject at the 5
percent level. Every region rejects with at least 8 other regions. In 1992,
30.0 percent of the region pairs reject relative factor price equality at the
10 percent level, 11.2 percent reject at the 5 percent level. Every region
rejects with at least 10 other regions.
Both sets of results provide strong evidence against the single cone
hypothesis for the US. Next we group regions into factor price cones.
5.3.

Putting regions in cones

From Figure 9, we know that the single cone hypothesis can be easily
rejected. Using those results and the methodology described above, we
can produce factor price cones within the US based on relative wages for
1972 and 1992.21 Regions with significantly higher wagebill ratios are
grouped in cone 1. For 1972, there are eight regions in this upper cone
including large, urban labor markets such as New York City, Chicago, and
Los Angeles. Regions with significantly lower wagebill ratios are placed in
cone 3 with the remaining regions in cone 2. In 1972 there are 52 regions in
cone 3. Figure 12 shows the three cones on a map of the US for 1972. Black
shading indicates that the relative wagebill for the region was significantly
higher than that for the US. Cross-hatching indicates that the relative
wagebill was significantly lower.
For 1992, there are 15 regions in the upper cone, 84 in the middle and
82 in the lowest cone. Figure 13 maps the three cones for 1992. Again
black and cross-hatching indicate significantly higher and significantly lower
relative wagebills respectively.
19
We also are prevented by the disclosure rules (Title XIII) of the Bureau of Census
from reporting the coeﬃcients.
20
The regions have been sorted by a distance measure calculated from pairwise rejections at the 10% level.
21
The initial 1972 regression in figure 1 produced a stable grouping of regions. Iterations on the 1992 initial groups produced oscillations, with regions switching back and
forth between cones. We chose groups based on the initial regression reported in figure
26.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

27

There is a large amount of movement between cones over the period
with most movers leaving the middle cone as shown in Figure 14. 19 regions
moved to a higher relative wagebill cone and 42 regions moved to a lower
relative wagebill cone. This movement over time to the extreme factor
price cones is somewhat surprising given the usual assumption that regions
in the US are becoming more integrated and thus more likely to face the
same relative factor prices. However, the distribution of regions across
cones does not tell us whether factor prices are moving farther apart. The
cones themselves could be moving closer together even as regions become
more evenly distributed across cones.
To check this, we look at the distribution of coeﬃcients from our regressions with the US as the base. Figure 15 shows the histogram of coeﬃcients
for 1972 and 1992. While regions were separating into cones, the overall
dispersion of relative wagebills did narrow slightly during the period, as we
would expect if the US were becoming more integrated. However, the reduction was not suﬃcient to suggest that relative wages were substantially
more equal across regions. To examine what was happening to the cones
themselves, we report the means and standard deviations of the estimated
coeﬃcients by cone in Figure 16. While cones were becoming more similar
in terms in relative wages, the within cone distributions were tightening.
From the coeﬃcients using the US as a base, we can ask whether the
average pair of regions has a larger or smaller diﬀerence in relative wagebills
in 1972 and 1992. The distance between regions as measured by the
significance of the wagebill rejections is increasing, however, the average
distance between regions based on the regression coeﬃcients is decreasing
from 0.121 to 0.109. Comparing the average distance between pairs of
regions in the high and low cones, we find that it decreased from 0.302 in
1972 to 0.260 in 1992.
The results in this section provide strong evidence against the hypothesis that all regions in the US face identical relative factor prices. In
addition, while a number of regions have moved across factor price cones,
there remain at least three distinct relative factor price cones even in 1992.
In the next section, we explore another dimension of the HO model and ask
whether the diﬀerences in factor prices are correlated with industry mix in
the regions.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

6.

28

RFPEQ and Product Mix

As described above, an additional implication of multiple factor price
cones is that regions in non-neighboring cones are expected to have distinct mixes of goods. By determining the relationship between product
mix overlap and cone assignments for pairs of regions, we can provide a
robustness check on our results.22 More specifically, we estimate the number of industries two regions have in common as a function of their cone
assignments
12
13
23
+ β 12 Drs
+ β 13 Drs
+ β r Ir + β s Is + ²rs
Irs = α + β 11 Drs

(31)

where Irs is the number of industries that regions r and s produce in comcd is a dummy equalling unity when regions are from diﬀerent cones
mon, Drs
and Ir and Is are the number of industries produced by region r and s,
respectively.
Results of this estimation for 1972 and 1992 are reported Figure 17
and indicate that regions have fewer industries in common when they are
members of diﬀerent cones. If one region is in Cone 1 (high) and the other
is in Cone 2 (middle), the pair have 9 fewer industries in common in 1972
and 15 fewer industries in common in 1992 than two regions residing in the
same cone. These numbers represent roughly 9% and 15% of the average
number of industries per region in the two years. More importantly, regions
with a cone between them have 17 and 19 fewer industries in common in
1972 and 1992, respectively.23
As noted above, between 1972 and 1992 one third of the 181 LMA
regions switched cones. A dynamic interpretation of HO product mix
implications suggests that regions which switch cones over time drop old
industries and add new ones. We can test this implication of the model
22

All our estimates to this point have been based on industries that exist in both
regions.
23
There are at least two reasons why the product mix of regions in the first and third
cones is not wholly distinct. First, because we focus on just two labor inputs, it is
possible, in a higher dimensional setting, that our first and third cones actually do share
a border. Second, it is possible that the four digit SIC aggregation used in our analysis
obscures product heterogeneity at lower levels of aggregation. A more complete analysis
of product mix is necessary to determine the importance of these explanations.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

29

by estimating
Ar = α + β d Jr + ²r

(32)

where Ar is the portion of industries that region r added or dropped between 1972 and 1992 relative to the number producing in 1972 and Dr is
the number of cones a region jumps between. Results of this estimation
are reported in Figure 18. They indicate that each cone a region jumps
increases the fraction of industries added or dropped by 14%.
These results provide confirming evidence that diﬀerences in relative
factor prices across regions have important implications for the responses
to apparently common global shocks.
7.

Conclusions

In this paper, we provide a general methodology to test for factor price
equality across economies. Under the usual HO assumptions of common
products, common product prices, and common technologies, we develop
testable implications of the Factor Price Equality Theorem and the Relative
Factor Price Equality Theorem for a broad class of production technologies.
Unlike previous attempts to formulate tests for FPEQ and RFPEQ, our
testing methodology is robust to sources of unobserved heterogeneity that
are likely to be present in any cross-country or cross-region data, including
diﬀerences in regional productivity, unobserved regional factor quality, and
variations in production technology. Our empirical methodology can be
applied to any cross-region data set with factor payment information and
suﬃcient industry detail.
We test for relative factor price equality across labor markets in the US
in both 1972 and 1992. In both years, we soundly reject the null hypothesis
that all regions face the same relative factor prices. In particular, we find
that relative wages vary considerably across the US. Using a methodology
to group regions into cones of factor price insensitivity, we find at least
three such cones in the US in both years. Over time, numerous regions
have switched cones with most moving to one of the extreme factor price
groups. However, on balance regions are slightly closer together in terms
of relative factor prices in 1992 than in 1972 as the cones themselves have
moved closer together.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

30

Sorting regions into cones, we look for the predicted relationship from
HO trade theory between industry mix and factor prices. While most labor
market areas have substantial numbers of industries in common, regions in
diﬀerent factor price cones have 9-19 percent fewer industries in common.
Regions that switch cones over time have greater churning of industries.
This variation in industry mix provides a direct mechanism for variation
in the transmission of external shocks. In particular, our results suggest
that we should not expect to find homogenous responses to external shocks
throughout the US.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

A

31

FPEQ and generalized cost functions

In this appendix, we consider tests of FPEQ for alternate cost functions
using the factor share methodology developed for the CES production function.
A1. The translog cost function
The translog cost function with constant returns to scale is given by
log c(w, Y ) = a0 +

k
X

ai log wi +

i=1

k X
k
X

bij log wi log wj + log Y. (33)

i=1 j=1

Subject to the usual restrictions to ensure homogeneity in prices, the factor
shares, si = wi xi /c(wi , Y ), are linear in the parameters and are given by
shi = ai +

k
X

bij log wj .

(34)

j=1

Under the null of FPEQ, factor shares will be equal in diﬀerent regions so
long as the cost functions are identical, i.e. identical technologies. However,
the failure of FPEQ will lead to variations in factor shares across regions.24
For example, if wir = γ j,rs wis across regions r and s, then the relationship
between the factor shares in the two regions are given by
X
bij log wjr
shir = ai +
j

= ai +
=

X

X

bij log γ j,rs wjs

j

bij log γ j,rs + shis .

(35)

j

Note that, as in the CES case, using factor shares to test for FPEQ avoids
any problems with unobserved diﬀerences in factor quality, the factor prices
24
It is not possible to derive a simple test for RFPEQ under the assumption of a
translog cost function using relative factor shares.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

32

are for quality adjusted factors. Unlike the CES case, the diﬀerence in
factor shares is linear in the factor price diﬀerences, not multiplicative. In
addition, there is no way to back out the relative factor prices if more than
one factor price varies across regions. However, the basic test remains the
same in that the failure of factor shares to be the same within an industry
is suﬃcient to reject FPEQ.
A2. The Diewert cost function
The Diewert cost function with constant returns to scale is given by


k X
k
X
bij (wi wj )1/2  .
c(w, Y ) = Y · 
i=1 j=1

The factor shares are given by

P
wi · kj=1 bij (wi /wj )1/2
i.
shi = hP P
k
k
1/2
b
(w
w
)
ij
i
j
i=1
j=1

Again the null of FPEQ holds when factor shares are equal across regions.
Pk

(w1s γ rs /wjs )1/2
i 6= sh1s .
Pk Pk
1/2
1/2
b
(w
γ
w
)
+
b
(w
γ
w
)
1j
1s
js
ij
is
js
rs
rs
j=1
i=2
j=1

sh1r = hP
k

w1s γ rs ·

j=1 b1j

Again, while significant diﬀerences in factor shares are suﬃcient to reject
FPEQ, obtaining estimates of the γ’s is not possible without imposing
additional structure on the cost function.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

33

References
Barro, Robert and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, (1991) “Convergence across States
and Regions” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 107-158.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, (2000a) “Understanding Increasing and Decreasing Wage Inequality” in The Impact of International Trade on Wages, Ed. R. Feenstra, University of Chicago Press.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, (2000b) “Who Dies: International Trade, Market Structure, and Plant Closures” Dartmouth mimeo.
Carlino, GM and Mills, LO (1993) “Are Regional Incomes Converging? A
Time Series Analysis” Journal of Monetary Economics, 32: 335-346.
Deardorﬀ, Alan V (1994) “The Possibility of Factor Price Equalization,
Revisited”, Journal of International Economics 36:167-175.
Debaere, Peter and Ufuk Demiroglu (1997), On the Similarity of Country Endowments and Factor Price Equalization, University of Michigan
mimeo.
Dixit, Avanash, and Victor Norman (1980) Theory of International Trade,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.
Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein, (1998) An Account of Global
Factor Trade, NBER Working Paper 6785
Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein, (1999), “Economic Geography
and Regional Production Structure: An Empirical Investigation” European Economic Review ; v43 n2 , pp. 379-407.
Hanson, Gordon (2000) “Scale Economies and the Geographic Concentration of Industry”, NBER Working Paper 8013.
Hanson, Gordon and Matthew Slaughter (1999) “Labor Market Adjustment
in Open Economies: Evidence from U.S. States, Dartmouth mimeo.
Kim, Sukkoo (1995) “Expansion of Markets and the Geographic Distribution of Economic Activities: The Trends in U.S. Regional Manufacturing Structure”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110:881-908.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

34

Kim, Sukkoo (1999) “Regions, Resources and Economic Geography:
Sources of US Regional Comparative Advantage”, Regional Science and
Urban Economics 29:1-32..
Leamer, Edward E. (1987) “Paths of Development in the Three Factor Ngood General Equilibrium Model”, Journal of Political Economy, vol
95, p. 961-999.
Leamer, Edward E. (1995) The Heckscher-Ohlin Model in Theory and Practice, Princeton Studies in International Finance No. 77, February, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Lee, David S. (1999) “Wage Inequality in the United States during the
1980s: Rising Dispersion or Falling Minimum Wage?” Quarterly Journal of Economics; v114 n3 , p. 977-1023.
Lerner, A.P. (1952) “Factor Prices and International Trade” Economica,
19(1), 1-15.
McKenzie, L.W. (1955) “Equality of Factor Prices in World Trade,” Econometrica, 23(3), 239-257.
Repetto, Andrea and Jaume Ventura (1998) “The Leontief-Trefler Hypotheses and Factor Price Insensitivity”, MIT mimeo.
Samuelson, Paul (1949), “International Factor-Price Equalisation Once
Again”, The Economic Journal 59(234):181-197.
Schott, Peter K. (2000), “Do Countries Specialize?”, Yale mimeo.
Schott, Peter K. (1999), “One Size Fits All? Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization
in Global Production”, Yale mimeo.
Topel, Robert H. (1986) “Local Labor Markets” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3) pt. 2, S111-S143.
Trefler, Dan (1993) “International Factor Price Diﬀerences: Leontief was
right!” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 101, no. 6, 961-987.
Wu, Ho-Mou (1987) “The Equalization of Factor Prices in General Equilibrium When Commodities Outnumber Factors” Journal of International
Economics 23:343-356.

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

35

Region 4

K
Chemicals

Region 3
Region 2
Machinery
Region 1
Textiles

Apparel
L

Figure 1: Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization

Standard Assumptions: Two-Factors, Evenness, Leontief Technology

Sectoral Participation
Production Overlap
Within Cone

Single Cone

Multiple Cone

Each region produces all possible sectors

No region produces all possible sectors;
Regions produce sectors whose techniques are
similar to their endowments

Total

Total

Production Overlap
Across Cones
Production Techniques
Factor Rewards

Partial for neighboring cones;
Zero for non-neighboring cones
Identical

Identical

All regions offer same rewards

Rewards vary by cone

Figure 2: Testing Factor Price Equality — Standard Assumptions

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

K

Region 3
Chemicals

Region 2

Machinery
Textiles
Apparel
L

Figure 3: Unevenness

K

Region 3

Machinery
Region 1
Textiles

Apparel
L

Figure 4: Substitutability

36

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

H

H

37

Engineering

Region 3
Financial
Services
Machinery
Chemicals
Machinery
Region 2
Region 1
Apparel

Textiles

Cigarettes
K

L

L Handicrafts

Apparel

K

Textiles

Figure 5: Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization with Many Factors and Goods
Relaxed Assumptions: Many Factors, UnevenNess, Non-Leontief Technology

Sectoral Participation

Production Overlap
Within Cone

Single Cone

Multiple Cone

Arbitrary specialization in subsets of all
possible sectors

No region produces all possible sectors; Arbitrary
specialization in subsets of all possible sectors

Arbitrary

Arbitrary

Production Overlap
Across Cones
Production Techniques

Factor Rewards

Arbitrary for neighboring cones;
Zero for non-neighboring cones
Identical

Identical within cone;
Vary with endowments across cones

All regions offer same rewards

Rewards vary by cone

Figure 6: Testing Factor Price Equality — Relaxed Assumptions

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

Min

Median

Max

Percent of Regions per
SIC4 Industry

1972

1

28

100

1992

3

37

100

Percent of Industries per
Region

1972

5

27

95

1992

8

38

94

Precent of Bilateral
Industry Overlap Across
Region-Pairs

1972

5

32

94

1992

8

37

95

38

Figure 7: Industry Overlap Across US Regions

ln(N r /P r )
StdErr
P-Value
Obs
2

R

1972
-0.05
0.01
0.00

1992
-0.01
0.01
0.13

22,217

25,134

0.15

0.13

Figure
Regional
³ ´ Relative Wages on Regional Endowments,
³ N ´8: Regressing
P
wir
r
ln wP = i αi + β ln N
Pr + ²ir
ir

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States
1972
1992
1972
LMA Region
LMA Region
1 bangor, me
-0.095
-0.08
62 parkersburg, wv
-0.06
2 portland, me
-0.037
0.021
63 wheeling, wv
-0.278*
3 burlington, vt
-0.107
-0.131*
64 youngstown, oh
-0.068
4 boston, ma
0.106*
0.138*
65 cleveland, oh
0.061
5 providence, ri
0.104***
0.084***
66 columbus, oh
-0.086**
6 hartford, ct
0.102***
0.121*
67 cincinnati, oh
0.063
7 albany, ny
0.053
0.008
68 dayton, oh
-0.014
8 syracuse, ny
-0.074
0.025
69 lima, oh
-0.156***
9 rochester, ny
0.031
0.025
70 toledo, oh
-0.024
10 buffalo, ny
-0.07
-0.013
71 detroit, mi
0.059
11 binghamton, ny
-0.164*
-0.097***
72 saginaw, mi
-0.026
12 new york, ny
0.151*
0.159*
73 grand rapids, mi
0.055
13 scranton, pa
-0.193*
-0.144*
74 lansing, mi
-0.028
14 williamsport, pa
-0.191*
-0.079**
75 south bend, in
-0.043
15 erie, pa
0.016
-0.055
76 fort wayne, in
-0.024
16 pittsburgh, pa
-0.106*** -0.085***
77 kokomo, in
-0.112
17 harrisburg, pa
-0.081**
-0.144*
78 anderson, in
-0.149***
18 philadelphia, pa
0.004
0.069***
79 indianapolis, in
-0.057
19 baltimore, md
0.043
0.058
80 evansville, in
-0.188*
20 washington, dc
0.037
-0.073**
81 terre haute, in
-0.167***
21 roanoke, va
-0.035
-0.141*
82 lafayette, in
-0.214*
22 richmond, va
-0.072
-0.117*
83 chicago, il
0.122*
23 norfolk, va
0.005
0.055
84 champaign, il
-0.075
24 rocky mount, nc
-0.146*** -0.115***
85 springfield, il
-0.044
25 wilmington, nc
0.084
-0.12***
86 quincy, il
-0.09
26 fayetteville, nc
-0.094
-0.315*
87 peoria, il
-0.083
27 raleigh, nc
0.052
0.037
88 rockford, il
0.086
28 greensboro, nc
0.041
-0.079***
89 milwaukee, wi
0.035
29 charlotte, nc
-0.006
0.013
90 madison, wi
-0.213*
30 asheville, nc
-0.135**
-0.107***
91 la crosse, wi
-0.049
31 greenville, sc
-0.004
-0.083***
92 eau claire, wi
-0.221***
32 columbia, sc
0.013
-0.123***
93 wausau, wi
-0.112
33 florence, sc
-0.137**
-0.177*
94 appleton, wi
0.018
34 charleston, sc
0.12
0.038
95 duluth, mn
-0.164***
35 augusta, ga
-0.019
-0.073
96 minneapolis, mn
0.054
36 atlanta, ga
-0.036
-0.038
97 rochester, mn
0.084
37 columbus, ga
-0.128**
-0.121***
98 dubuque, ia
-0.142**
38 macon, ga
-0.131**
-0.192*
99 davenport, ia
-0.054
39 savannah, ga
0.056
-0.15*
100 cedar rapids, ia
-0.052
40 albany, ga
-0.074
-0.098**
101 waterloo, ia
-0.113
41 jacksonville, fl
-0.165*
-0.042
102 fort dodge, ia
-0.042
42 orlando, fl
0.001
0.026
103 sioux city, ia
-0.085
43 miami, fl
0.048
0.055
104 des moines, ia
-0.01
44 tampa, fl
0.132*
0.117*
105 kansas city, mo
0.026
45 tallahassee, fl
-0.147
0.093
106 columbia, mo
-0.178***
46 pensacola, fl
-0.091
-0.13***
107 st. louis, mo
-0.004
47 mobile, al
-0.154***
-0.076
108 springfield, mo
-0.168*
48 montgomery, al
-0.053
-0.108*** 109 fayetteville, ar
-0.257*
49 birmingham, al
-0.028
-0.085*** 110 fort smith, ar
-0.15**
50 huntsville, al
-0.129**
-0.142*
111 little rock, ar
-0.191*
51 chattanooga, tn
-0.131***
-0.121*
112 jackson, ms
-0.113***
52 johnson city, tn
-0.142***
-0.19*
113 new orleans, la
0.018
53 knoxville, tn
-0.033
-0.146*
114 baton rouge, la
-0.082
54 nashville, tn
-0.108***
-0.148*
115 lafayette, la
-0.11
55 memphis, tn
-0.118*
-0.192*
116 lake charles, la
0.061
56 paducah, ky
-0.148
-0.248*
117 shreveport, la
-0.052
57 louisville, ky
-0.082
-0.094*** 118 monroe, la
-0.188***
58 lexington, ky
-0.168*** -0.104*** 119 texarkana, tx
-0.219*
59 huntington, wv
-0.102
-0.079
120 tyler, tx
-0.154***
60 charleston, wv
-0.13
-0.04
121 beaumont, tx
0.003
61 morgantown, wv
-0.242*
-0.224*
122 houston, tx
0.048
*Significant at 10% level; **Significant at 5% level; ***Significant at 1% level.

1992
-0.055
-0.204*
-0.064
0.034
-0.068**
0.124*
0.037
-0.187*
-0.074**
0.025
-0.021
0.025
-0.025
-0.056
-0.093***
-0.156*
-0.18*
-0.018
-0.132*
-0.208*
-0.235*
0.094*
-0.051
-0.097
-0.297*
-0.057
-0.036
0.088***
-0.038
0.005
-0.138***
-0.137***
-0.009
-0.193*
0.077***
-0.107
-0.283*
-0.111***
-0.021
-0.158*
-0.119**
-0.166*
-0.034
-0.002
-0.106**
-0.09***
-0.154*
-0.193*
-0.102**
-0.166*
-0.114***
0.002
-0.037
-0.228*
-0.113
-0.063
-0.127**
-0.236*
-0.127*
-0.2*
0.035

LMA
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181

Figure 9: Relative Wagebill Ratios [US=base] (OLS)

39

1972
Region
austin, tx
0.084
waco, tx
-0.015
dallas, tx
0.049
wichita falls, tx
-0.012
abilene, tx
-0.053
san angelo, tx
-0.372*
san antonio, tx
0.019
corpus christi, tx
0.051
brownsville, tx
-0.237***
odessa, tx
-0.021
el paso, tx
-0.078
lubbock, tx
0.07
amarillo, tx
-0.107
lawton, ok
-0.334*
oklahoma city, ok
-0.019
tulsa, ok
-0.036
wichita, ks
-0.022
salina, ks
-0.385*
topeka, ks
-0.216***
lincoln, ne
-0.026
omaha, ne
-0.053
grand island, ne
-0.126
scottsbluff, ne
-0.44*
rapid city, sd
0.059
sioux falls, sd
0.074
aberdeen, sd
-0.132
fargo, nd-mn
-0.172**
grand forks, nd
-0.011
bismarck, nd
-0.064
minot, nd
-0.148
great falls, mt
-0.134
missoula, mt
-0.19
billings, mt
0.129
cheyenne, wy
-0.151
denver, co
0.078**
colorado springs,
-0.093
grand junction, co -0.058
albuquerque, nm
-0.012
tucson, az
-0.117
phoenix, az
0.024
las vegas, nv
-0.235***
reno, nv
-0.231*
salt lake city, ut
-0.09**
pocatello, id
-0.136
boise city, id
-0.011
spokane, wa
-0.058
richland, wa
-0.173
yakima, wa
-0.293*
seattle, wa
-0.052
portland, or
0.005
eugene, or
-0.096
redding, ca
0.052
eureka, ca
-0.249**
san francisco, ca
-0.005
sacramento, ca
0.021
stockton, ca
-0.26*
fresno, ca
-0.006
los angeles, ca
0.103*
san diego, ca
0.008

1992
0.032
-0.135***
0.031
-0.127
-0.022
0.008
-0.035
-0.039
-0.105
0.011
-0.139*
-0.048
-0.04
-0.236***
-0.066
-0.066
-0.036
-0.276*
-0.069
-0.143***
-0.143*
-0.108
-0.112
0.12
-0.143***
-0.253*
-0.075
-0.033
0.054
0.039
-0.1
-0.151***
-0.067
-0.116
0.072**
-0.059
-0.033
-0.056
0.018
-0.07**
-0.052
0.032
-0.036
-0.118**
-0.104**
-0.085**
-0.192*
-0.214*
0.076***
0.004
-0.034
-0.165***
0.048
0.138*
-0.009
-0.118*
-0.061
0.15*
0.138*

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

year

difference in
elasticity
relative wage relative wage
relative wagebills of substition
(NYC)
(Nashville)

1972

0.259
0.259

0.5
2.0

1.68
1

1
1.30

1992

0.307
0.307

0.5
2.0

1.85
1

1
1.36

Figure 10: Diﬀerences in relative factor prices in NYC and Nashville

Figure 11: Pairwise Regional Regressions - 1972

40

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

Figure 12: Labor Market Areas and Cones - 1972

41

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

Figure 13: Labor Market Areas and Cones - 1992

42

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

43

140

120

100

80
1972
1992
60

40

20

0
High

Middle

Figure 14: Distribution of Regions across Cones

Low

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

44

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5
1992
1972
2

1.5

1

0.5

0
-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

Figure 15: Relative Wagebill Density across Regions

0.2

0.3

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

Cone
High
Middle
Low

N Mean St. Dev.
1972
8 0.112 0.022
121 -0.028 0.067
52 -0.190 0.076

High
Middle
Low

1992
15 0.110
84 -0.024
82 -0.150

0.031
0.052
0.056

Figure 16: Estimated Coeﬃcients by Cone (US=base)

45

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

Cone 1 and Cone 2
Cone 2 and Cone 3
Cone 1 and Cone 3
Industries in r
Industries in s
Constant

Observations
R-squared

1972
-9.1
1.1
-1.8
0.3
-17.5
1.5
0.4
0.004
0.3
0.003
-26.3
0.5

1992
-15.6
1.0
-3.0
0.3
-19.3
0.8
0.5
0.003
0.4
0.003
-51.1
0.6

16471
0.80

16471
0.85

Robust standard errors in italics.
Figure 17: Common Industries (OLS)

46

Factor Price Equality and the Economies of the United States

Number of Cones Jumped
Constant

Observations
R-squared

0.137
0.067
0.875
0.036
181
0.02

Robust standard errors in italics.

Figure 18: Percentage of Industries Dropped/Added (OLS)

47

