                                  " #   




                                       


                                           


                                         !$%&'
                                ((!)**+++,-, *!!.*+$%&'



                                 /
                                0%1% ..2.((.32
                                  4- 5 %'06$
                                      728




                    
!"#      $            %  
&  ' '    ()* + ,    ( -.* (
  .  '          /    0 
          /',!1   #              
        /   '(,  !

23 4!5     !            #   
( 3 6 #      (        2     
 !
.924(. (-(8
  
    ! ,$%&'
728'%%0
7  , 605 :'5 ;0


                                                     

        . !! 2. (( 4( ! .(-(8 92. ( 8 44(4( ( 
!!!( 4(8 !8 25 -2(  !!!( . !8 2 . +, <
923=.(4!8((.!8.3(5>!((.(..
!.?<=!.@,.3!4(.((4(
2A4.2.(((28..( ,,-A!.2!!(4
 ( 0B:%., 3 ( (( . ( (  !..-(8   A
4..524-.92.(+(!.(
.2!.(-(8,>4!4(8A.4+((((3!!(.+2
4-  <8 2=  4(8 !8 +( 4A( (( .  . !8
44(4(,


  
C!(4( 4.
 ( 3.(8
 (5 7%$1::
  
+D!(,2
        “Proposals for a monetary rule require a supplementary proposal of a fiscal rule.”
                                                           Karl Brunner (1986), p. 54.



1         Introduction
Recent years have seen a worldwide movement toward greater emphasis upon the achieve-
ment of inflation targets as the primary criterion for judging the success of central banks’
conduct of monetary policy. At the same time, the independence of central banks in their
choice of the means with which to pursue this goal has also increased. An implication would
seem to be that it is now widely accepted that the choice of monetary policy to achieve a
target path for inflation is a problem that can be, and indeed ought to be, separated from
other aspects of government policy, such as the choice of fiscal policy.1 But is this really
so clear? Or do the agencies responsible for inflation stabilization properly need to concern
themselves with fiscal policy choices as well, while the agencies concerned with fiscal policy
have a corresponding need to coordinate their actions with those of the monetary authority?
        The argument for separation of decision-making about these two aspects of macroeco-
nomic policy necessarily relies upon two theses: first, that fiscal policy is of little consequence
as far as inflation determination is concerned, and second, that monetary policy has little
effect upon the government budget. I shall argue here that neither proposition is true, for
reasons that are related. The fiscal effects of monetary policy are often thought to be an
insignificant consideration in the choice of monetary policy by the major industrial nations,
because seignorage revenues are such a small fraction of total government revenues in these
countries. But such a calculation neglects a more important channel for fiscal effects of
monetary policy, namely the effects of monetary policy upon the real value of outstanding
government debt, through its effects upon the price level (given that much of the public debt
is nominal) and upon bond prices, and upon the real debt service required by such debt
    1
    A particularly striking example of an attempt to separate the two types of policy decisions is the European
monetary union, in which monetary policy is the responsibility of a supra-national European Central Bank,
while fiscal policies continue to be the prerogatives of individual national governments.


                                                      1
(insofar as monetary policy can affect real as well as nominal interest rates).2
       Fiscal policy is often thought to be unimportant for inflation determination – at least
when, as in countries like the U.S. and the U.K., a desire to obtain seignorage revenues plays
no apparent role in the choice of monetary policy – on two different, though complementary,
grounds. On the one hand, it is often argued that inflation is purely a monetary phenomenon,
and hence that only the choice of monetary policy matters for what level of inflation one will
have. And on the other, the celebrated “Ricardian equivalence” proposition implies that
insofar as consumers have rational expectations, fiscal policy should have no effect upon
aggregate demand, and hence no effect upon inflation.
       I shall argue that neither proposition is of such general validity as is often supposed.
As a considerable recent literature has stressed,3 fiscal shocks affect aggregate demand, and
the specification of fiscal policy matters for the consequences of monetary policy as well,
in rational expectations equilibria associated with policy regimes of the kind that I shall
call “non-Ricardian” (Woodford, 1995, 1996), even when the monetary policy rule involves
no explicit dependence upon fiscal variables of any sort. This happens, essentially, through
the effects of fiscal disturbances upon private sector budget constraints and hence upon
aggregate demand. Such effects are neutralized by the existence of rational expectations and
frictionless financial markets only if it is understood that the government budget itself will
always be subsequently adjusted to neutralize the effects, in present value, of any current
fiscal disturbance. A “non-Ricardian” fiscal policy is one that does not have this property;
we show that non-Ricardian policies may easily be consistent with the existence of a rational
   2
    See King (1995) for discussion of this point, with some quantitative evidence.
   3
    The discussion of price-level determination under a non-Ricardian policy regime in section 2 below
recapitulates results from Woodford (1994, 1995, 1996, 1998c), drawing also upon the important contributions
of Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), and Cochrane (1999). Important precursors of this literature include Sargent
(1982), Begg and Haque (1984), Shim (1984), d’Autume and Michel (1987), and Auernheimer and Contreras
(1990, 1993). Other recent discussions and extensions of this work include Bassetto (2000), Benhabib et al.
(2000a, 2000c), Bénassy (2000), Bergin (1996), Buiter (1998, 1999), Canzoneri and Diba (1996), Canzoneri
et al. (1998, 1999), Carlstrom and Fuerst (2000), Christiano and Fitzgerald (2000), Cochrane (1998, 2000),
Cushing (1999), Daniels (1999), Dupor (2000), Gordon and Leeper (1999), Kenc et al. (1997), Kocherlakota
and Phelan (1999), Leith and Wren-Lewis (1998), Loyo (1997, 1999, 2000), McCallum (1998, 1999), Schmitt-
Grohé and Uribe (2000), and Sims (1997, 1998, 1999).




                                                     2
expectations equilibrium, which means that the expectation that the government will follow
such a rule need never be disconfirmed.
        This possibility, however, means that a central bank charged with maintaining price sta-
bility cannot be indifferent as to how fiscal policy is determined. To be concrete, I shall argue
that the mere commitment of a central bank to conduct monetary policy according to a rule
such as the “Taylor rule” (Taylor, 1993) is insufficient to ensure a stable, low equilibrium rate
of inflation. On the one hand, (non-Ricardian) fiscal expectations inconsistent with a stable
price level may frustrate this outcome, even when monetary policy is itself consistent with
price stability. Indeed, the combination of a Taylor rule with certain kinds of fiscal policy
may result in an inflationary or deflationary spiral. And on the other hand, even when fiscal
policy is consistent with stable prices, the policy regime (including the commitment to a
Taylor rule) may not preclude other equally possible rational expectations equilibria, such
as equilibria involving self-fulfilling deflationary spirals.4 Alternative fiscal policy commit-
ments may instead exclude these undesired deflationary equilibria (as discussed in Woodford,
1999a), and thus in this way help to ensure stable prices. As a practical proposal that ad-
dresses both of these issues, I shall suggest that a Taylor rule for monetary policy should be
accompanied by targets for the size of government budget deficits.


2         Price-Level Determination under a Bond Price-Support
          Regime
Before turning to a discussion of Taylor rules, it will be useful to take up the more general
question of how fiscal policy can affect the determination of the equilibrium price level. The
role of fiscal developments as a source of disturbances to the price level can be seen most
clearly in policy regimes sometimes said to involve “fiscal dominance”. These are policy
regimes, often associated with the special fiscal pressures of war finance, in which other
goals of central bank policy are subordinated to the goal of assisting in the financing of the
    4
    Benhabib et al. (2000b) criticize regimes involving a Taylor rule on this ground, though it is important
to note that the problem that they identify is in no way special to the Taylor rule.



                                                     3
government budget. However, it is important to note that this does not necessarily mean
that fiscal developments affect the price level only because the central bank adjusts monetary
policy in response to them.
   A familiar textbook account of fiscally-dominant regimes runs as follows: fiscal exigencies
determine the size of a real government budget deficit that must be financed; this budget
shortfall is then assigned to the central bank as a level of seignorage revenue that it must
generate through money creation; the monetary base is increased by whatever amount suffices
to generate the required revenues; and finally, the rate of money growth determines the
equilibrium rate of inflation, through the usual quantity-theoretic mechanism. Under this
account, fiscal developments affect the rate of inflation, but only because they affect monetary
policy, under this particular sort of monetary policy rule; inflation is still a “purely monetary”
phenomenon. Such an account is still perfectly consistent with the view that commitment
to an anti-inflationary monetary policy is sufficient to ensure price stability. Furthermore,
the model just sketched might seem to apply only to a few less-developed economies, not to
advanced economies such as the U.S. or the European Union. For it would seem not to apply
in the case of an independent central bank, that need not accept seignorage targets dictated
by the Treasury; nor would it seem likely to apply to an economy with sophisticated financial
markets, in which it is difficult for the government to raise large seignorage revenues, because
of people’s ability to substitute away from non-interest-earning assets. Thus the part of the
world in which such a regime would even be a potential outcome might seem to be rapidly
shrinking.
   Instead, I shall argue that fiscal policy can affect the price level even when the central
bank pursues an autonomous monetary policy, by which I mean a rule for setting its instru-
ment (in practice, a nominal interest rate) that is independent of fiscal variables. Thus it
will not be enough, to avoid price-level instability resulting from fiscal disturbances, to sim-
ply adopt an institutional arrangement under which the central bank receives no directives
from the Treasury dictating changes in policy; nor will it be enough that the central bank
commits itself to an interest-rate rule, like the Taylor rule, that involves no direct feedback


                                                4
from variables such as the the government budget. Furthermore, the potential effects of
fiscal disturbances described here will continue to exist even in what I shall the “cashless
limit” (Woodford, 1998a) — the hypothetical limiting case of an economy in which finan-
cial innovation has proceeded to the extent that available seignorage revenues are negligible.
This is because these effects in no way depend upon attempts to use monetary policy to
generate seignorage revenues. Thus the possibility that fiscal policy may interfere with the
achievement of price stability cannot be so easily dismissed, even for advanced economies.
      In fact, “fiscally dominant” regimes often do not involve any direct assignment of a
seignorage target to the central bank, as in the textbook analysis. Instead, “fiscal dominance”
manifests itself through pressure on the central bank to use monetary policy to maintain the
market value of government debt. A classic example is provided by U.S. monetary policy
from 1942 up until the Treasury-Fed “Accord” of March 1951.5
      Beginning in April 1942, the Fed and the Treasury agreed to an interest-rate control
program, the declared aim of which was to maintain “relatively stable prices and yields for
government securities”.6 The yield on 90-day Treasury bills was pegged at 3/8 of a percent;
this peg was maintained through June 1947, and as shown in Figure 1(a), until that point
the price of bills was completely fixed, as the Treasury offered both to buy and sell bills at
that price. An intention was also announced of supporting 1-year Treasury certificates at a
price corresponding to a 7/8 percent annual yield; this policy continued after 1947, though
at a slightly higher yield. Finally, the prices of 25-year Treasury bonds were supported at
a price corresponding to a 2 and 1/2 percent annual yield; this price floor was maintained
up until the time of the “Accord”. The commitment to supporting the price of long-term
bonds seems to have been the central element of Fed policy in the late 1940s. In particular,
when bond prices rose during the first half of 1949, the Fed sold over three billion dollars of
its bond holdings (Eichengreen and Garber, 1991, p. 184); thus the Fed acted to stabilize
bond prices (and in the face of criticism at the time, over the contractionary consequences of
  5
     See, e.g., Friedman and Schwartz (1963), chap. 10; Eichengreen and Garber (1991); and Timberlake
(1993), chap. 20; and Toma (1997), chap. 8.
   6
     Eccles (1951), p. 350; quoted by Timberlake (1993), p. 304.


                                                 5
                                             (a) Yield on Treasury Securities
                 3


                 2


                 1

                                                                                       90−day
                 0                                                                     1−year
                                                                                       long bond

               −1
                     1943     1944    1945       1946        1947       1948    1949     1950      1951


                                               (b) Consumer Price Index
               100

                90

                80

                70

                60

                50
                     1943     1944    1945       1946        1947       1948    1949     1950      1951


Figure 1: The U.S. bond-price support regime, 1942-51. (a) Yields on Treasury securities.
(b) Evolution of the consumer price index.

the policy during a recession period), rather than refusing to intervene as long as the price
remained above the floor.
       This sort of relation between a central bank and the treasury is not uncommon in wartime,
and may have characterized at least some central banks at other times as well, in cases where
the perceived constraints on fiscal policy have been similarly severe.7 The interest of the
case for our present purposes is that while the Fed during this period is typically described
as thoroughly subordinate to Treasury policy, this is actually an example of an autonomous
monetary policy, in the sense defined above. A policy of conducting open-market purchases
and sales so as to stabilize the prices of Treasury securities is one that requires no central
   7
     For example, Fratianni and Spinelli (1997) describe the Bank of Italy as operating under a regime of
“fiscal dominance” during most of its history, from its founding in the late 19th century until the so-called
“divorce” between the Bank and the Treasury in 1981. In this case as well, “fiscal dominance” seems to
have meant above all the inability to set an independent interest-rate policy; instead, interest rates had to
be kept low to allow the sale of government debt at a high price.

                                                         6
bank monitoring of fiscal developments for its implementation, nor any directives from the
Treasury about how to respond to fiscal developments. It is in fact an especially simple
example of an interest-rate rule, essentially equivalent to an interest-rate peg. Any effect of
fiscal shocks upon the growth the monetary base under this regime was purely a general-
equilibrium phenomenon, and not a consequence of any direct dependence of the Fed’s
interest-rate targets upon such shocks.
       Yet fiscal developments clearly have a major impact upon the course of inflation under
such regimes. For example, in the case of the U.S. in the 1940s, the regime was inflationary
during the war period, though wage and price controls suppressed much of this inflation
until their relaxation in several stages during 1946. (The burst of inflation in 1946-47 seen
in Figure 1(b) should not be attributed to any surge in aggregate demand at that time, but
rather to the allowance of prices to finally rise to their equilibrium level.) On the other hand,
the price-support regime resulted in deflation over the period 1948-50. This corresponds to
a period in which the large wartime deficits had ended, and the U.S. government budget was
instead chronically in surplus. With the outbreak of the Korean war in June 1950, inflation
suddenly began again. It was only at this time that the bond price-support regime came to
be denounced as “an engine of inflation”, and was for that reason suspended.8
       How is one to explain these effects upon the general level of prices of variation in the
fiscal situation? It cannot be through any direct effect of fiscal developments upon monetary
policy, understood to refer to the Fed’s rule for setting interest rates. Rather, such effects
indicate that the government budget can play a role in price-level determination in addition
to the specification of monetary policy.
       Might one still salvage a traditional quantity-theoretic view of inflation determination
by saying that in such a regime, the money supply depends upon the government budget,
as well as the interest-rate rule? In equilibrium, it is true that it does; fiscal disturbances
affect the equilibrium growth rate of the money supply. But the causality is not from the
   8
    See Brunner and Meltzer (1966) for an important discussion of this period, stressing that the inflationary
or deflationary character of the regime depended upon fiscal policy.



                                                      7
government budget to the growth of the money supply, and then only from the change in the
money supply to prices. Rather, the government budget affects the general level of prices,
and only because prices change does it also affect the money supply (as higher prices result in
higher money demand, which the Fed passively accommodates under such a regime). Thus
one cannot explain the change in the price level as being due to the increase in the money
supply.
   Upon first thought, one might suppose that under a bond price-support regime, there is
a direct connection between the government budget and growth in the monetary base. One
might reason that a commitment by the Fed to act as the residual purchaser of government
debt will require the Fed to increase the monetary base, in order to increase its holdings of
government debt, whenever the Treasury issues more debt, which is to say, whenever (and to
the extent that) the government runs a budget deficit. But this superficial analysis implicitly
assumes that the public’s demand for government bonds is fixed, so that (in the absence of
a price change) the Fed will have to acquire the additional issues, while it assumes at the
same time that there is no obstacle to increasing the public’s money holdings by an arbitrary
amount, without any change in the relative yield on money and bonds.
   Instead, economic theory implies that if anything, the opposite relations should obtain.
There are good reasons why it may not be possible for the Fed to increase the monetary base
without having to accept a change in the yields on Treasury securities. A money demand
relation of the conventional sort (e.g., equation (2.16) below) implies that the public’s desired
money balances will be a function of the price level, of the quantity of real transactions, and
of the interest differential between money and bonds, but not of fiscal variables such as the
stock of public debt. Thus it is generally supposed that the Fed cannot change the monetary
base without accepting a change in the level of interest rates, something that is precluded
under the bond price-support regime. At the same time, there are equally good reasons why
an increase in government borrowing might well increase the public’s willingness to hold
government bonds, even in the absence of any change in bond yields. Indeed, the doctrine of
Ricardian Equivalence asserts that government borrowing automatically creates an increase


                                               8
in desired private bond holdings of exactly the same size (due to an increase in expected
future tax obligations), so that bond yields need not change at all to maintain equilibrium
in the bond market.
   The analysis that I shall propose here will not imply that Ricardian Equivalence obtains
(in that case, there would be no inflationary impact of an expectation of budget deficits,
either). But it will assume a conventional money demand relation, so that the quantity
of money that must be supplied in order to maintain bond prices at their target levels is
a function solely of prices and real activity. Thus the government budget will be able to
affect the money supply only because it is able to affect equilibrium prices through another
channel; prices will not be affected only because of the change in the money supply.

2.1    A Simple Model

Let us consider price-level determination under such a regime using a simple monetary
framework, namely, a representative-household model of the kind introduced by Sidrauski
(1967) and Brock (1974, 1975). I shall suppose that the representative household seeks to
maximize a discounted sum of utilities of the form
                                     (   ∞
                                                                    )
                                         X
                                                t
                                E0             β U(ct + gt , Mt /Pt ) ,                    (2.1)
                                         t=0
where U(c, m) is an increasing, concave function of both arguments, and the discount factor
satisfies 0 < β < 1. The second argument of U indicates the liquidity services provided by
end-of-period money balances Mt ; these depend upon the real purchasing power of those
balances, so that Mt is deflated by the price level Pt . In the specification (2.1), I assume
that (real) government purchases gt are perfect substitutes for (real) private consumption
expenditure ct . This simplification allows us to focus solely upon the effects of fiscal policy
upon private budget constraints; government purchases have exactly the same effect on the
economy as transfers to households of funds sufficient to finance private consumption of
exactly the same amount. (I shall assume that taxes are lump-sum for the same reason; a
tax increase will then have the same effect as a reduction in transfers that reduces household
budgets in the same amount.)

                                                      9
       The representative household is subject each period to a flow budget constraint of the
form
                       Mt + Et [Rt,t+1 (Wt+1 − Mt )] ≤ Wt + Pt yt − Tt − Pt ct ,                         (2.2)

stating that end-of-period financial wealth (money balances Mt plus bonds) must be no
greater in value than financial wealth Wt at the beginning of the period, plus income from
the sale of period t production yt , net of tax payments and consumption expenditure. The
variable Tt represents (nominal) tax obligations net of any government transfers; the two
components need not be distinguished, as taxes are assumed to be lump-sum. The difference
Wt+1 − Mt represents the (nominal) value in period t + 1 of the household’s bond portfolio
at the end of period t; as I assume complete financial markets, this portfolio may include
state-contingent claims of many sorts. The (nominal) market value of such a bundle of state-
contingent claims in period t is given by Et [Rt,t+1 (Wt+1 − Mt )], where the random variable
Rt,t+1 is a stochastic discount factor for pricing arbitrary (non-monetary) financial claims.9
Note that the household, as a price-taker in financial markets (as well as goods markets),
takes the evolution of the stochastic discount factor as being independent of its own portfolio
decisions (indicated by the evolution of Mt and Wt ).
       The nominal interest rate it on a one-period riskless claim purchased in period t must
satisfy
                                           1 + it = Et [Rt,t+1 ]−1 .                                     (2.3)

Using this, we may rewrite (2.2) in the form

                                   it
                      P t ct +          Mt + +Et [Rt,t+1 Wt+1 ] ≤ Wt + [Pt yt − Tt ],                    (2.4)
                                 1 + it

in which it /(1 + it ) appears as the effective cost of holding wealth in monetary form. Let
us also assume a borrowing limit each period, according to which the household’s portfolio
   9
    The existence of such a pricing kernel follows from the absence of arbitrage opportunities; the pricing
relation applies, of course, only to financial assets that (unlike money) do not yield additional non-pecuniary
benefits. Under our assumption of complete markets, Rt,t+1 is uniquely defined.




                                                      10
(including any short positions) must satisfy
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                 Wt+1 ≥ −                   Et+1 [Rt+1,T (PT yT − TT )]                 (2.5)
                                                 T =t+1

in each possible state in period t + 1; this states that the household must never have debts
greater than the present value of all future after-tax income.10 The sequence of flow bud-
get constraints (2.4) combined with (2.5) is then equivalent to the intertemporal budget
constraint11
                  ∞
                  X                                            
                                                                X∞
                                                 iT
                         Et Rt,T PT cT +              MT ≤ Wt +      Et Rt,T [PT yT − TT ].             (2.6)
                  T =t                         1 + iT           T =t
We may thus state the household’s problem, looking forward from any date t, as the choice
of a consumption plan and planned money holdings to maximize (2.1) subject to (2.6), given
financial wealth Wt .
       Necessary and sufficient conditions for household optimization12 are then that the first-
order conditions13
                                   Um (ct + gt , mt )     it
                                                      =        ,                      (2.7)
                                   Uc (ct + gt , mt )   1 + it
                                 Uc (ct + gt , mt )        β     Pt
                                                      =                               (2.8)
                             Uc (ct+1 + gt+1 , mt+1 )    Rt,t+1 Pt+1
hold at all times, and that the household exhaust its intertemporal budget constraint, i.e.,
that
                ∞
                X                                          X∞
                                              iT
                      Et Rt,T PT cT +              MT = Wt +      Et Rt,T [PT yT − TT ] < ∞.            (2.9)
               T =t                         1 + iT           T =t
This last condition states both that the left and right-hand sides of (2.6) are equal, and that
both infinite sums converge.14 This condition for optimality could equivalently be replaced
by the stipulation that the household’s planned expenditure has a finite present value,
                                     ∞
                                     X                                     
                                                                     iT
                                            Et Rt,T       P T cT +        MT < ∞,                     (2.10)
                                     T =t                          1 + iT
  10
     Here the discount factor Rt+1,T for discounting income in period T back to period t + 1 is defined as the
product of factors Rs,s+1 for s running from t + 1 through T − 1; it is equal to one when T = t + 1.
  11
     See Woodford (1999a) for details.
  12
     For simplicity, we ignore the possibility of corner solutions.
  13
     In writing these, I use the notation mt ≡ Mt /Pt for real money balances.
  14
     The latter stipulation is necessary, as both left and right-hand side being infinite would not imply that
the household could not afford to consum more. Indeed, in such a case, (2.5) would impose no limit on
borrowing, and “Ponzi schemes” would be possible, allowing unbounded consumption at all dates.

                                                                11
together with a transversality condition on wealth accumulation,15

                                           lim Et [Rt,T WT ] = 0.                                     (2.11)
                                          T →∞


       A rational expectations equilibrium is then a collection of state-contingent paths for
the various endogenous variables that satisfy these conditions for household optimization,
together with the market-clearing conditions

                                                 ct + g t = y t ,                                     (2.12)

                                                  Mt = Mts ,                                          (2.13)
                                                        s
                                               Wt+1 = Wt+1                                            (2.14)

at all dates and in all possible states.16 Here the aggregate supply of goods yt is an exoge-
nously specified stochastic process, whereas the money supply Mts and the market value of
                                                   s
total beginning-of-period government liabilities Wt+1 evolve in accordance with the specifi-
cation of monetary and fiscal policy (to be clarified below).
       Substituting (2.12) – (2.13) into (2.7), we obtain the equilibrium condition

                                        Um (yt , Mts /Pt )     it
                                                  s
                                                           =        .                                 (2.15)
                                        Uc (yt , Mt /Pt )    1 + it

Under standard assumptions on preferences,17 this equation can be solved for a unique
equilibrium level of real money balances,

                                              Mts
                                                  = L(yt , it ),                                      (2.16)
                                              Pt

where the “liquidity preference function” L is increasing in its first argument and decreasing
in the second. Thus our model incorporates an equilibrium condition stating that the price
level is at all times such that the implied real value of the money supply is equal to desired
  15
     Again, see Woodford (1999a) for details.
  16
     Equilibrium from some date T onward requires that (2.12) – (2.14) be expected to hold at all dates t ≥ T.
The fact that WT = WTs would follow from the specification of the initial portfolio of the representative
household, rather than being a market-clearing condition.
  17
     In addition to those noted earlier, we assume that both consumption and liquidity services are normal
goods, and also assume boundary conditions guaranteeing an interior solution to (2.15).

                                                       12
real balances; but as we shall see, this need not mean that the evolution of the price level is
best explained by the evolution of the money supply.
   A similar substitution of (2.12) – (2.13) into (2.8) allows us to solve for the stochastic
discount factor, obtaining
                                                           s
                                             Uc (yt+1 , Mt+1   /Pt+1 ) Pt
                                Rt,t+1 = β                   s
                                                                          .                          (2.17)
                                                 Uc (yt , Mt /Pt ) Pt+1
Substitution of this into (2.3) then yields
                                       (     "                                            #)−1
                                                               s
                                                 Uc (yt+1 , Mt+1   /Pt+1 ) Pt
                      1 + it = β −1 Et                           s
                                                                                                 .   (2.18)
                                                     Uc (yt , Mt /Pt ) Pt+1
This equilibrium relation is a sort of “Fisher equation”, linking nominal interest rates to
expected inflation, but also involving the real factors that determine the equilibrium real
rate of interest. In the familiar textbook case of a utility function U that is additively
separable between consumption and liquidity services (or in the “cashless limit” discussed
below), (2.18) reduces to
                                                 (        "                    #)−1
                                            −1                u0 (yt+1 ) Pt
                               1 + it = β            Et                               ,              (2.19)
                                                               u0 (yt ) Pt+1
where u(ct + gt ) is the part of U that depends upon consumption (or the value of U in the
“cashless limit”). In this special case, the expected rate of inflation is the only endogenous
variable on the right-hand side of the equation.
   Under similar substitutions, the remaining requirements for optimality, (2.10) and (2.11),
become
                       ∞
                       X
                              β T Et [Uc (yT , mT )cT + Um (yT , mT )mT ] < ∞,                       (2.20)
                       T =t

                               lim β T Et [Uc (yT , Mts /PT )WTs /PT ] = 0.                          (2.21)
                               T →∞

Here I have substituted (2.17) to eliminate the stochastic discount factors, and in (2.20) have
also substituted (2.15) for the factor i/(1 + i). Let us suppose furthermore that the share of
government purchases in the total national product is bounded, i.e., that 0 ≤ gt ≤ γyt at all
times, for some bound 0 < γ < 1. Then we must have

                                       cT ≤ yT ≤ (1 − γ)−1 cT

                                                          13
at all times, so that (2.20) is equivalent to the condition
                                          ∞
                                          X
                                                 β T Et F (yT , MTs /PT ) < ∞,                    (2.22)
                                          T =t

where
                                      F (y, m) ≡ Uc (y, m)y + Um (y, m)m.

Thus both of the remaining equilibrium conditions, (2.21) and (2.22), place bounds upon
how far the price level can diverge asymptotically from proportionality to the nominal asset
supplies Mts and Wts .
    The transversality condition for optimal wealth accumulation can alternatively be ex-
pressed by the equality in (2.9). A similar substitution of conditions (2.12) – (2.14) and into
this equation yields
 ∞
 X                                                               ∞                                 
            T −t      Uc (yT , mT )                iT MTs    Wts X               Uc (yT , mT )      TT
        β          Et               (yT − gT ) +           =    +      β T −t Et               yT −
 T =t                 Uc (yt , mt )              1 + iT PT   Pt   T =t           Uc (yt , mt )      PT
                                                                                                   (2.23)
as a substitute for (2.21). One notes that the present value of the yT − gT terms on the
left-hand side must be finite, as a consequence of (2.22) and the assumed bound on govern-
ment purchases. Subtracting these terms from both sides and rearranging, one obtains the
equilibrium condition
                                      X∞                                        
                                Wts                  Uc (yT , mT )        iT MTs
                                    =      β T −t Et               sT +           ,               (2.24)
                                Pt    T =t           Uc (yt , mt )      1 + iT PT

where st denotes the real primary government budget surplus

                                                             Tt
                                                      st ≡      − gt .
                                                             Pt

This condition states that the real value of net government liabilities must equal the present
value of expected future primary budget surpluses, corrected to take account of the gov-
ernment’s interest saved on the part of its liabilities that the public is willing to hold in
monetary form. Note however that this relation necessarily obtains in a rational expecta-
tions equilibrium, not because we have assumed it as a constraint upon the government’s

                                                             14
fiscal policy, but rather because it follows from private sector optimization, together with
market clearing. (This point will be of considerable importance for the discussion below.)
       To sum up, a rational expectations equilibrium is a collection of stochastic processes
{Pt , it , Mts , Wts } that satisfy (2.16), (2.18), and (2.22), as well as either (2.21) or (2.24),
along with the equations specifying monetary and fiscal policy. These equations suffice to
determine equilibrium in the case that both the monetary policy rule and the law of motion
for government liabilities given the fiscal policy rule can be specified without reference to
asset prices other than it . (An example of such a case is presented in the next subsection.)
Once an equilibrium (i.e., solution to these equations) is found, the implied equilibrium
processes for all other asset prices are then given by (2.17). If instead monetary and/or
fiscal policy cannot be specified without reference to longer-term bond prices, the necessary
bond pricing equations must be adjoined to the system of equations listed above, and the
bond prices in question added to the list of endogenous variables that are jointly determined.

2.2       A Treasury-Bill Peg

Let us now consider the equilibrium price level under a bond price-support regime. As a first
simple example, suppose that monetary policy pegs the price of a one-period Treasury bill;
thus it is equivalent to specification of an exogenous process {it } for the short-term nominal
interest rate. We shall assume that it > 0 at all times.18 Let us suppose furthermore that
fiscal policy is described by an exogenous primary-surplus process {st }. Since yt is assumed
to be exogenous, such a fiscal specification might correspond to an exogenous process {gt } for
real government purchases, together with an exogenous process for a proportional tax rate
{τt }, with aggregate tax collections then evolving as Tt = τt Pt yt . Such a specification of fiscal
expectations is particularly likely to apply in wartime, when government purchases vary for
reasons largely independent of the state of the economy or the government’s budget, and
  18
    The theory extends directly to the case of a zero yield, as long as preferences involve satiation in money
balances at some finite level. In that case, the equilibrium path of the price level would still be uniquely
defined, but the equilibrium money supply would be indeterminate (it could take any value greater than or
equal to the satiation level) in all periods with it = 0.



                                                     15
when the government’s ability to further increase tax rates may also be tightly constrained.
       Suppose also, for simplicity, that the public debt consists entirely of (riskless nominal)
one-period Treasury bills. Then total government liabilities at the beginning of any period
t are equal to
                                       Wts = Mt−1
                                              s                 s
                                                  + (1 + it−1 )Bt−1 ,

where Bts denotes the supply of Treasury bills at the end of period t (measured by their market
value at the time of issuance). The flow budget constraint for the government implies that
the supply of bills must satisfy

                                           Bts = Wts − Pt st − Mts .

It follows that under this fiscal regime, total government liabilities evolve according to the
law of motion
                                                                             
                                                                        it
                                  s
                                Wt+1   = (1 + it )   Wts   − P t st −       Ms .                        (2.25)
                                                                      1 + it t
Our problem is now to solve for rational expectations equilibrium processes {Pt , Mts , Wts }
satisfying (2.16), (2.18), (2.22), (2.24), and (2.25), given exogenous processes {yt , it , st } and
an initial quantity of nominal government liabilities.
       The equilibrium conditions may be solved sequentially, as follows. We first note that
(2.16) determines the equilibrium evolution of real balances, given the exogenous processes
{yt , it }. Substituting this solution for real balances into (2.24), we obtain
                                 X∞                                                
                           Wts                  λ(yT , iT )        iT
                               =      β T −t Et             sT +        L(yT , iT ) ,                   (2.26)
                           Pt    T =t           λ(yt , it )      1 + iT

where
                                           λ(y, i) ≡ Uc (y, L(y, i)).

Note that all terms on the right-hand side are now functions of exogenous variables. Let us
suppose that the fiscal expectations represented by the process {st } are such that the right-
hand side has a finite positive value.19 We then also observe that Wts is a predetermined
  19
       If not, and if (as we assume) Wts > 0, then no equilibrium is possible. This would represent a monetary-


                                                         16
quantity in period t, under the fiscal regime specified here. Thus if Wts > 0, there is a unique
equilibrium price level Pt > 0 that satisfies (2.26).
                                                                   s
    Once we have solved for Pt , (2.25) then implies a value for Wt+1 , given by
                                                                                  
                                                                 it
                            s
                          Wt+1 = (1 + it ) Wts − Pt st −              Pt L(yt , it ) .                  (2.27)
                                                               1 + it

We may then apply the same reasoning in period t + 1, solving (2.26) for Pt+1 , and so
on iteratively. We thus solve for unique equilibrium processes {Pt , Wts }, given an initial
(positive) level of government liabilities and expectations regarding the exogenous processes.
The equilibrium process for the price level then implies an endogenous evolution for the
money supply, given by (2.16), and for any other asset prices that may be of interest, given
by (2.17).
    It might be thought problematic that the above construction of an equilibrium requires
       s
that Wt+1 turn out to be positive in all periods. But in fact it suffices that the process {st }
satisfy bounds that imply that the right-hand side of (2.26) is positive at all dates. Under
this assumption, one can show that the law of motion (2.27) always yields a positive value for
  s
Wt+1 , given a positive value for Wts . This allows continuation of the construction forever. The
constructed series must also satisfy (2.22) in order for it to represent an equilibrium. However,
this simply requires certain bounds on the exogenous processes {yt , it }; in particular, it
suffices that F (yt , L(yt , it )) be a bounded process.
    It may also be noted that no reference to equilibrium condition (2.18) has been made
in this construction. This might lead to a suspicion that equilibrium is actually “overdeter-
mined” under the kind of policy regime that has been postulated. But in fact the equilibrium
just constructed necessarily satisfies (2.18). Note that if (2.26), with all time subscripts ad-
fiscal policy mix that is inconsistent; in equilibrium, one policy or the other would have to be expected to
deviate from the proposed specification at some point. If one supposes that the the primary surplus process
is unchangeable, this would mean that people would not be able to expect maintenance of the bill-rate peg
forever. If the ’inflation tax’ proceeds iL(y, i)/(1 + i) are increasing in i, and expected primary deficits are
too large to be consistent with the contemplated sequence {it }, an increase in the bill rate at some point
might solve the problem. On the other hand, if projected primary deficits are too large, there might be no
path of bill yields consistent with the {st } process, which would then necessarily have to be adjusted. We
do not take up such cases here, but instead consider the effects of fiscal news within the class of processes
{st } that are consistent with the postulated bill-rate peg.

                                                      17
vanced by one, is expected to determine the price level in period t + 1, it follows that in
period t the conditional expectation should satisfy

                                           X∞                                                  
                             −1     1                                          iT
       βEt [λ(yt+1 , it+1 )Pt+1 ] =  s
                                                 β T −t Et λ(yT , iT ) sT +         L(yT , iT )
                                  Wt+1 T =t+1                                1 + iT
                                                                                               
                                    1                  Wts                      it
                                =    s
                                           λ(yt , it )     − λ(yt , it ) st +        L(yt , it )
                                  Wt+1                 Pt                     1 + it
                                   λ(yt , it )
                                =              ,
                                  (1 + it )Pt
                                                     s
where the final line uses (2.27) to substitute for Wt+1 . Thus (2.18) holds as well.
   Note the effects of fiscal disturbances upon the price level in this equilibrium. News that
reduces the conditional expectation at date t of current and/or future values of the primary
surplus sT , results (other things being equal) in a lower positive value for the right-hand
side of (2.26). As a result, since Wts is predetermined, the equilibrium price level Pt must
rise. Thus fiscal disturbances result in variations in the rate of inflation under such a regime.
Furthermore, the nature of the effect is consistent with the observation that the outbreak of
war in June 1950 (leading to expectations of lower government surpluses in the near future)
resulted in an increase in the U.S. price level.
   This effect of fiscal developments on inflation cannot really be explained by the fact that
the money supply expands when the government budget deteriorates (or is expected to in
the future). It is true that the quantity equation (2.16) is satisfied at all times; but the
reason for the increase in the price level is supplied by (2.26), while (2.16) simply indicates
how much the money supply must expand given that the price level rises. Furthermore, the
fact that the price level may rise (and the money supply therefore expand) even before the
reduced surpluses actually materialize, but simply because they are expected, makes it clear
that a mechanical connection between the government budget and the monetary base is not
at work.
   The principle that most directly explains inflation determination under such a regime is
instead the following: the price level adjusts as necessary to maintain intertemporal govern-
ment budget balance. Such a fiscal theory of the price level makes the connection between

                                                  18
fiscal developments and price-level instability straightforward. The basic economic mecha-
nism is the wealth effect of fiscal disturbances upon private expenditure. The anticipation of
lower primary government surpluses makes households feel wealthier (able to afford a greater
sum of private and government expenditure, given their expected after-tax income and given
expected government purchases on their behalf), and thus leads them to demand goods and
services in excess of those the economy can supply, except insofar as prices rise. A sufficient
rise in prices can restore equilibrium by reducing the real value of the nominal assets held
by households (which, in aggregate, are simply the nominal liabilities of the government).
Equilibrium is restored when prices rise to the point that the real value of those nominal
assets no longer exceeds the present value of expected future primary surpluses, since at this
point the (private plus public) expenditure that households can afford is exactly equal in
value to what the economy can produce.
      Note that in this analysis, the inflationary effects of fiscal disturbances do not relate
primarily to changes in expected seignorage revenues. The fiscal effect of the change in
the real valuation of nominal government liabilities is also an important consequence of
inflation; and this effect may well be the more important one for high-debt economies with
sophisticated financial markets.
      Indeed, the equilibrium just described remains well-defined in the limiting case of a “cash-
less” economy. By this I mean an economy in which the transactions frictions responsible
for the demand for cash balances are negligible.20 In this limiting case, seignorage becomes
negligible relative to the size of the government budget, and variations in real balances (in
percentage terms) come to have a negligible effect on the marginal utility of income. This
means that the marginal utility of income may be expressed simply as λ(ct +gt ), a decreasing
function of total (private and public) purchases; that total nominal liabilities Wt correspond
simply to the value of (interest-earning) public debt; and that the primary budget surplus
need not be corrected to include interest savings on the monetary base in the evolution
 20
      See Woodford (1998a) for a more formal analysis.




                                                    19
equation for government liabilities. Thus in this limiting case, (2.26) and (2.27) reduce to
                                             X∞
                                       Wts                  λ(yT )
                                           =      β T −t Et        sT                                (2.28)
                                       Pt    T =t           λ(yt )
and
                                        s
                                      Wt+1 = (1 + it ) [Wts − Pt st ]                                (2.29)

respectively. This pair of equations can be solved recursively to obtain unique equilibrium
sequences {Pt , Wts }, just as in the discussion above.

2.3       An Extension to Longer-Term Government Debt

A similar analysis is possible of price-support regimes with debt of longer duration, at the
price of greater algebraic complexity. Here I consider a single, relatively simple case that
illustrates the main new element introduced by longer-term debt: the fact that Wts is in
general no longer completely predetermined, as it will depend upon the market value at t
of government debt that has not yet matured. In this simple case, I shall suppose that all
government debt consists of perpetuities with coupons that decay exponentially. Specifically,
I suppose that a bond issued in period t pays ρj dollars j + 1 periods later, for each j ≥ 0
and some decay factor 0 ≤ ρ < β −1 . The classic “consol” is a security of this kind, with
ρ = 1. More generally, in an environment with stable prices, the duration of such a bond is
(1 − βρ)−1 . Thus our simple assumption allows us to analyze bonds of arbitrary duration.
At the same time, we need consider the equilibrium price at each point in time of only one
type of bond, because a bond of this type that has been issued k periods ago is equivalent
to ρk new bonds. Let Qt be the price in period t of a new bond. (Note that the bond’s
yield-to-maturity is a monotonic function of this, given by Q−1
                                                             t − (1 − ρ).)

       Now let us consider a price-support policy under which the central bank fixes the price of
this bond each period. To simplify the analysis, let us suppose that {Qt } is an exogenously
specified deterministic positive sequence.21 Then arbitrage considerations determine a unique
  21
    This assumption still allows us to consider the effects of a one-time surprise change in monetary policy,
after which households are assumed to have perfect foresight about the economy’s path. In the case of small
enough random fluctuations in the bond-price targets, the effects of random variations in bond prices are
approximately the same as in this perfect-foresight analysis, but the extension is not taken up here.

                                                     20
rational expectations equilibrium sequence for the short-term nominal interest rate it , given
by
                                              1 + ρQt+1
                                       it =             − 1.
                                                 Qt
(I assume that the bond-price targets satisfy Qt+1 > ρ−1 (Qt − 1) at all times, so that the
implied short-term interest-rate sequence satisfies it > 0.) The policy is thus equivalent to
a Treasury-bill peg corresponding to this particular sequence, and we may solve for the
equilibrium price level as above.
     If the public debt consists solely of this single type of bond, the value of total government
liabilities at the beginning of any period t is given by

                                  Wts = Mt−1
                                         s      s
                                             + Bt−1 (1 + ρQt ),

where now Bts denotes the quantity of the geometrically decaying bonds outstanding at the
end of period t. When ρ > 0, the dependence upon Qt means that Wts is no longer a
predetermined variable. Nonetheless, Wts depends only upon the predetermined variables
 s      s
Mt−1 , Bt−1 and the exogenous variable Qt . Given the specification of monetary and fiscal
                                                            s      s
policy from date t onward, and the predetermined values of Mt−1 , Bt−1 , there is a uniquely
determined value for Wts . There is also a uniquely determined value for the right-hand side
of (2.26), given the uniquely determined sequence {iT } just discussed. Thus (2.26) continues
to uniquely determine the equilibrium price level Pt .
     The money supply in period t is determined by money demand given this price level,

                                         Mts = Pt L(yt , it ),                             (2.30)

while the supply of bonds is then determined by the government’s flow budget constraint,

                     Bts = Q−1
                            t [Mt−1 + Bt−1 (1 + ρQt ) − Pt st − Pt L(yt , it )].
                                s      s
                                                                                           (2.31)

                                             s
These equations then determine a value for Wt+1 in the following period, given the exoge-
nously specified value for Qt+1 . One can then use (2.26) to solve for Pt+1 , and so on, iterating
on the system of equations comprised by (2.26), (2.30), and (2.31). Once again, we assume

                                                  21
monetary/fiscal commitments such that the right-hand side of (2.26) is positive and finite
at all times. Then if we start from initial conditions that imply a positive value for Wts at
some initial date, the implied price level and the implied value of total government liabilities
will also be positive at all later dates.
   Thus the basic logic of price-level determination remains the same in this case. The
main difference that longer-term debt makes is in the case of an unexpected change in the
sequence of bond-price targets expected to be maintained from some date t onward. In
the case that all debt is short-term, Wts is predetermined, and is thus unaffected by an
unexpected change in monetary policy (current or future interest-rate expectations) at date
t. A change in monetary policy then cannot affect the price level immediately, except insofar
as it affects the present value of future budget surpluses (including the government’s interest
savings on the monetary base). This means that in the case of a high-debt economy, in
which means for economizing on cash balances are also well-developed, the main effect of
an increase in nominal interest rates by the central bank will be a faster rate of growth of
nominal government liabilities, resulting in faster inflation. (This can be clearly seen in the
case of the “cashless limit” discussed above.) Yet such a result makes it puzzling that in
early 1951, the Fed wished to suspend its commitment to keep interest rates low, in order
to contain the increase in prices underway at that time. (It would seem instead, under the
present analysis, that an increase in nominal interest rates would only make the price level
grow even faster.)
   Allowing for longer-term government debt changes this conclusion. A decision to increase
target bond yields lowers Qt , and so lowers the value of Wts for any given predetermined values
 s      s
Mt−1 , Bt−1 > 0. In the absence of any change in the value of the right-hand side of (2.26),
the increase in bond yields would therefore require a decline in the equilibrium price level Pt .
In fact, the effects of interest-rate changes on the present value of future surpluses are likely
to be small; in the “cashless limit”, the right-hand side of (2.28) is completely independent
of monetary policy. Thus in the case of greatest interest, an increase in bond yields will be
associated with deflation, initially, though it will also lead to faster subsequent growth of


                                               22
nominal government liabilities, and consequently to a higher eventual price level. (It is this
expectation of higher goods prices in the future that justifies the immediate decline in bond
prices.)
       The theory just expounded has several appealing features as a model of the U.S. bond
price-support regime of the 1940s. First of all, it can explain why a regime that sought
to fix nominal interest rates was consistent with relatively stable prices for so many years.
Conventional theories of interest-rate pegs generally imply that such policies should lead to
severe price instability. According to the familiar (Wicksellian) view summarized by Fried-
man (1968), an attempt to peg nominal interest rates should lead to either an inflationary or
a deflationary spiral, requiring the peg to be abandoned before long. According to Sargent
and Wallace (1975), instead, it should lead to indeterminacy of the rational expectations
equilibrium price level, so that fluctuations in inflation may occur as a pure result of self-
fulfilling expectations. The relative stability of prices in the 1940s is a puzzle from either
point of view. In particular, it is striking that people continued to be willing to hold long-
term U.S. Treasury securities at low nominal yields (below 2.5 percent per year) during the
temporary high inflation (a 25 percent annual rate) of 1946-47; evidently there was little fear
that this indicated that the price-support regime would generate chronic inflation, let alone
an explosive Wicksellian “cumulative process”.
       Friedman and Schwartz (1963, pp. 583-585) hypothesize that people did not expect infla-
tion to continue because previous post-war periods (such as that following World War I) had
been associated with deflation.22 But it is unclear why post-war periods should be expected
to bring about deflation in the absence of a commitment to return to the gold standard at
a pre-war parity, which there was no reason to expect following World War II. Eichengreen
  22
     However, they also discuss a mechanism closely related to the one analyzed here, when they discuss the
role of the government’s budget surpluses. “Had the federal government not run a surplus, the public, with
its accumulated liquid assets and pent-up demand, would have tried to spend more in the post-war period
than it received,... [This] would have tended to raise prices and incomes and so would have reduced the level
of liquid assets relative to income by this inflationary route.... As it was, the federal surplus enabled some
reduction of liquid assets relative to income to be achieved without inflation” (p. 583). However, Friedman
and Schwartz expound their idea in terms of effects of the government budget on “the market for loanable
funds,” rather than a general-equilibrium analysis in terms of its effect upon private budget constraints, of
the kind presented here.


                                                     23
and Garber (1991) instead propose that the policy regime of the early post-war period was
actually an “ implicit target zone” for the price level, with the price level maintained within
the zone by an expectation of intervention should the boundaries ever be reached, even
though little intervention was observed during these years. But such a hypothesis explains
the behavior of the price level in terms of a purely hypothetical commitment to interventions
that were not actually observed; it is hard to see why the public should have had confidence
in such a presumed commitment. The explanation offered here, instead, depends only upon
credibility of the commitment to interest-rate targeting (which commitment was being con-
tinuously demonstrated by the Fed’s actions), and beliefs about the exogenous evolution of
primary budget surpluses (which again required only a simple extrapolation into the future
of the policy that could already be observed).
       The model can also explain the variations over time in the degree to which the regime
generated inflation, at least broadly speaking. During World War II, the regime was infla-
tionary, though much of the inflation was suppressed by a system of price controls, until
their removal in 1946. This corresponded to a period of time in which large government
deficits turned out to be necessary that would not initially have been expected. The tran-
sitory burst of inflation in 1946-47 represented delayed price adjustment once the wartime
controls had been removed, rather than a demand-driven inflation. Once this adjustment
had occurred, the regime was actually moderately deflationary in the early post-war period.
The model predicts that pegging nominal interest rates at a low rate, with expectations of
primary surpluses sufficient to make these interest rates consistent with equilibrium, should
lead to steady mild deflation as the nominal liabilities of the government contract over time.
Finally, inflation took off again suddenly in the second half of 1950, following the outbreak of
war in Korea. The model explains why such a sudden change in expectations regarding the
government budget should be inflationary. Furthermore, it can explain why the outbreak of
war was able to cause inflation even before any large budget deficits materialized.23 It is the
  23
    Note that the U.S. government budget continued to be in surplus during the second half of 1950 (Tim-
berlake, 1993, p. 313).



                                                  24
present value of current and expected future surpluses that matters in equation (2.26); be-
cause of the crucial role of fiscal expectations in this theory, it is completely understandable
that the outbreak of war should affect inflation before even it has significantly changed the
government budget.
       The model also offers an explanation for the abandonment of the price-support regime
after March 1951. As just explained, the model implies that such a regime should lead to
inflation when previously unexpected deficits come to be anticipated.24 The Fed’s complaint
that the regime had become an “engine of inflation” was justified, given the return to wartime
fiscal policy. Furthermore, the model (in the version with long-term bonds) implies that an
increase in bond yields should have been able to mitigate the degree to which prices needed
to rise in the short run, following the revision of fiscal expectations. Hence the Fed’s interest
in allowing bond yields to rise above the 2.5 percent ceiling, in order to contain inflation.
The model implies that, in the absence of any change in fiscal expectations, the change in
monetary policy actually implied greater eventual increases in the price level, though the
suspension of the bond price-support policy allowed them to be delayed in time. Given the
inflation that did in fact occur in the years subsequent to the “Accord”, it would be hard to
call this an inaccurate prediction.25
       Finally, the model offers insight into why a policy regime of this kind would be appealing
as an approach to war finance. First of all, the regime is one which loosens the constraint
upon fiscal policy required for consistency with stable prices. Note that equilibrium condition
(2.26) must hold in the case of any monetary and fiscal policies; the right-hand side is simply
not always a function of purely exogenous variables. This implies that only a certain specific
value for the expected present value of future primary government budget surpluses will
be consistent with maintaining a price level Pt+j = Pt−1 for all j ≥ 0. The bond price-
  24
     In the flexible-price model set out above, the price-level increase resulting from any single change in fiscal
expectations occurs immediately, as soon as information changes. However, in a more realistic sticky-price
extension of the model (expounded in Woodford, 1996), the price increase is predicted to be more gradual,
and to be associated with high output during the period of adjustment.
  25
     Toma (1997, pp. 109-110) similarly interprets the Treasury-Fed “Accord” of March 1951 as a “default”
on the government’s previous “commitment to long-run monetary constraint” under the bond price-support
regime. See also Grossman (1990).


                                                       25
support regime, as modeled here, instead allows that present value to vary arbitrarily in
response to fiscal shocks, within certain bounds. Such flexibility would obviously be quite
valuable during wartime in particular. At the same time, the regime is one under which
inflation variations are expected to be transitory; even when news of government budget
shortfalls results in inflation, people can be confident (insofar as they expect equilibrium to
be determined as described here) that inflation will quickly return to a stable (and quite
low, possibly negative) long-run level. Such stable long-run inflation expectations would be
valuable to a government needing to issue large quantities of long-term bonds exactly at a
time when (because it has just been learned that the government’s fiscal needs are more
dire than previously anticipated) prices are currently rising. From this point of view, the
Treasury’s pressure upon the Fed to cooperate with such a regime during World War II
would hardly be surprising.


3     Ricardian and Non-Ricardian Fiscal Policies
Before turning to the policy implications of this view of the effects of fiscal policy on inflation,
it is appropriate to address some questions that may arise about the logic of the analysis
just presented. One of the most obvious of these is, why should not Ricardian equivalence
imply that fiscal disturbances have no effect upon aggregate demand, and hence no effect
upon the price level?
    The answer is that the usual argument for Ricardian equivalence assumes that changes
in the government budget must involve no change in the present value of current and future
budgets. (It is asserted, for example, that a current tax cut financed by government bor-
rowing is necessarily accompanied by the expectation of tax increases at some later date or
dates, of equal present value.) If this is so, then then equation (2.26) is satisfied by the same
price level Pt as would have been the case in the absence of the fiscal disturbance. We would
then indeed find that there should be no effect upon the price level of any such event. We
have reached a different conclusion above because we have assumed that when war breaks
out unexpectedly, this news reduces the present value of expected future budget surpluses.

                                                26
We have thus considered a type of fiscal disturbance that Ricardian theory assumes cannot
occur.
       Let us call a fiscal policy commitment Ricardian if it implies that the present-value
relation (2.24), or equivalently the transversality condition (2.21), necessarily holds for all
possible goods-price and asset-price processes.26 As an example of how this could be so,
suppose that each period the primary surplus is set according to the rule
                                                              it
                                         Pt st = αWts −           M s,                                      (3.1)
                                                            1 + it t
for some coefficient 0 < α ≤ 1. This rule states that the primary budget surplus is chosen
to pay off a certain positive fraction of existing government liabilities each period, but that
the required surplus is adjusted to take account of the government’s interest savings on the
monetary base. Using the government’s flow budget constraint,

                              Mts + Et [Rt,t+1 (Wt+1
                                                  s
                                                     − Mts )] = Wts − Pt st ,                               (3.2)

we observe that (3.1) implies that

                                                    s
                                       Et [Rt,t+1 Wt+1 ] = (1 − α)Wts

each period, and hence that

                                       Et [Rt,T WTs ] = (1 − α)T −t Wts

for all T > t. But this guarantees that

                                            lim Et [Rt,T WTs ] = 0,
                                           T →∞
  26
    This differs slightly from the definition of Ricardian policy originally proposed in Woodford (1995).
There policy was defined to be Ricardian if it ensured that the value of the interest-earning public debt
(as opposed to total government liabilities) satisfied a transversality condition. My reason for the original
proposal was that I wanted to argue that the Ricardian postulate was implicit in standard quantity-theoretic
analyses of price-level determination; the definition was therefore tailored to include a policy regime with an
exogenous money supply and zero government debt at all times as an example of “Ricardian” policy. Such
a regime is not Ricardian in the sense used here, since for price-level paths involving sufficient deflation, real
balances would grow rapidly enough to violate the transversality condition (2.21); and this fact can be used
to exclude deflationary paths that would otherwise satisfy all conditions for rational expectations equilibria
(see, e.g., Woodford, 1999a, sec. 4.2). The definition of Ricardian policy used here, and in references such
as Benhabib et al. (2000a), is conceptually preferable, as it defines the case in which the transversality
condition ceases to play any role in equilibrium determination.

                                                       27
and hence that the transversality condition (2.21) holds, regardless of the paths of any of
the endogenous variables. This condition plus the fact that (3.2) holds at all times can also
be used to show that (2.24) necessarily holds.
       In such a case, neither (2.21) nor (2.24) places any additional restrictions upon possible
equilibrium paths for goods prices or asset prices. Rational expectations equilibrium is then
defined simply by satisfaction of conditions (2.16), (2.18), and (2.22), along with the equation
specifying monetary policy. None of the first three equations involves any fiscal variable (such
as the government budget or the size of the public debt). Then if the monetary policy rule is
autonomous in the sense defined above, the final equation is independent of all such variables
as well, and the complete system of equations available to determine the equilibrium path
of the price level is independent of all fiscal variables.
       We thus obtain the Ricardian Equivalence proposition: if monetary policy is autonomous,
the set of possible rational expectations equilibrium processes for goods and asset prices is
the same for all alternative fiscal policy specifications within the Ricardian class. If monetary
policy suffices to uniquely determine equilibrium in such a case, then a change in fiscal policy
does not change the equilibrium path of prices. More typically, there will be a set of possible
equilibrium price processes; but as the set is the same for each possible fiscal policy, one
might suppose that the same equilibrium should be selected regardless of fiscal policy.27
       We have obtained a different result in the previous section because we have instead as-
sumed a non-Ricardian fiscal policy specification. In the case of an exogenous real primary
surplus process {st }, most paths for the price level and the nominal interest rate — even
most of the paths that are consistent with the other requirements for rational expecta-
tions equilibrium — will not imply dynamics for total government liabilities that satisfy the
transversality condition (2.21). Unlike what is assumed in (3.1), in the previous section we
did not assume that the government budget would be automatically adjusted in response to
changes in the level of total liabilities, so as to keep the latter quantity from growing explo-
  27
    In fact, I shall argue below that there may instead be good reasons for fiscal variables to affect the
equilibrium selection in such a case. See section 3.2.



                                                   28
sively. The consequence is that only certain price-level paths will result in the transversality
condition nonetheless being satisfied; these are those that satisfy condition (2.26). Hence the
latter becomes a condition for equilibrium, making fiscal expectations relevant to price-level
determination.

3.1    Mustn’t Fiscal Policy Satisfy an Intertemporal Budget Con-
       straint?

The explanation just offered raises questions of its own. It may be doubted whether it
is in fact possible for fiscal policy to be anything other than Ricardian; if not, Ricardian
equivalence should indeed hold (and the qualification about “Ricardian” fiscal policies may
be omitted).
   A common objection to the logical possibility of a non-Ricardian fiscal policy is to assert
that condition (2.24) is nothing but the intertemporal budget constraint of the government;
it is argued that government policy must be expected to satisfy this constraint, regardless
of what prices the government faces, just as in the case of private households and firms. It
would then follow that fiscal policy must necessarily be Ricardian.
   It is true that general equilibrium models always assume that private households and
firms optimize subject to a set of budget constraints that imply an intertemporal budget
constraint, though they may be even more stringent (as it may not even be possible to
borrow against all of a household or firm’s expected future income). But it is not obvious
that government fiscal policy must be modeled as subject to a similar constraint, for the
situation of a government is different from that of a private agent in certain important
respects.
   First of all, if private agents were allowed to borrow (by issuing debt that promises to pay
a market rate of return) without any limit related to the amount that their expected future
income should make it possible for them to eventually repay, then an equilibrium would be
impossible. For no plan involving finite amounts of borrowing and consumption at each date
will be optimal for such an agent; it would always be preferred to borrow and consume even


                                              29
more, simply rolling over the additional debt forever. And if demands are unbounded at any
prices, there cannot be any market-clearing prices. But there is no similar problem with a
general equilibrium model in which government policy is assumed to be specified by a rule
that does not satisfy a corresponding intertemporal budget constraint. As the example in
the previous section shows, one may specify non-Ricardian policy rules that are nonetheless
consistent with the existence of a rational expectations equilibrium.
       Indeed, it is not even necessary, at the level of general principle, for an intertemporal
budget constraint of the form (2.24) to be satisfied in equilibrium. The famous overlapping
generations model of Diamond (1965) describes a situation in which (because the equilibrium
real rate of return does not exceed the economy’s growth rate) it is possible for a government
to finance transfers to an initial old generation by issuing debt that it then “rolls over”
forever, without ever raising taxes. Of course, in the setting assumed above, condition
(2.24) is a requirement for equilibrium, and the Diamond result that it is possible to violate
this condition in equilibrium depends upon a number of rather special assumptions (even
once one has granted that people are finite-lived), as explained in Santos and Woodford
(1997).28 But this is a consequence of optimal wealth accumulation by households, not of
any constraint upon government borrowing programs other than the requirement that in
equilibrium someone has to choose to hold the debt that the government issues.
       Even if we wish to analyze the behavior of an optimizing government, the government
should not optimize subject to given market prices and a given budget constraint, as private
agents are assumed to in the theory of competitive equilibrium. For the government is a large
agent, whose actions can certainly change equilibrium prices, and an optimizing government
surely should take account of this in choosing its actions. Such a government should also
understand the advantages of committing itself to a rule (given the way that expected future
government policy affects equilibrium), and should consider which rule is most desirable by
  28
    Note that the possibility of rolling over government debt forever implies the possibility of an equilibrium
involving an asset pricing “bubble”; the same people who hold the government debt in the debt roll-over
example can hold the ”bubble asset” instead. Thus the Santos-Woodford results on the fragility of examples
with “bubbles” also apply to the possibility of rational expectations equilibria in which (2.24) is violated.



                                                      30
computing the equilibria that should result under commitment to one sort of policy rule or
another. Advice to such a government would then involve computing such equilibria under
the assumption of one rule or another, as an input to the government’s deliberations about
optimal policy. There would be no reason to exclude non-Ricardian regimes from the rules
that are considered in such an exercise, in those cases where they are in fact consistent with
an equilibrium.29
       Thus far I have addressed only the question of whether a commitment to satisfy an
intertemporal government budget constraint is a logical necessity, as suggested by authors
such as Buiter (1998, 1999). A subtler question is whether it makes sense to suppose that
actual market institutions do not actually impose a constraint of this kind upon governments
(whether logically necessary or not), given that we believe that they impose such borrowing
limits upon households and firms. The best answer to this question, I believe, is to note that
a government that issues debt denominated in its own currency is in a different situation
than from that of private borrowers, in that its debt is a promise only to deliver more of
its own liabilities. (A Treasury bond is simply a promise to pay dollars at various future
dates, but these dollars are simply additional government liabilities, that happen to be non-
interest-earning.) There is thus no possible doubt about the government’s technical ability
to deliver what it has promised; this is not an implausible reason for financial markets to
treat government debt issues in a different way than the issuance of private debt obligations.
       Furthermore, no one would doubt the ability of a government to issue an arbitrary amount
of currency, without any commitment to retiring it from circulation (e.g., by running budget
surpluses) at some later date. Market participants do not consider whether newly issued
government liabilities of this kind exceed some bound on what it is considered prudent for
  29
      Woodford (1998c, section 5) gives an example of a case in which a non-Ricardian policy regime – one
quite similar to our description above of a bond price-support regime, in fact – provides a simple way
of implementing the Ramsey-optimal allocation of resources. (See also Sims (1999) and Christiano and
Fitzgerald, 2000.) I do not wish to dwell upon this case here, as I do not wish to suggest that such a regime
is likely to be a desirable policy commitment in general. But the example illustrates the point that the mere
wish to hypothesize that government policy is optimal, from the point of view of some coherent objective
that the government happens to pursue, is not in itself a reason to exclude the possibility of non-Ricardian
policy.



                                                     31
the government to issue before deciding whether to accept them as payment for real goods
and services; instead, each agent makes an individual decision about the terms on which
to accept such government paper, that depend upon the expected rate of return on the
asset in equilibrium. An issuance of further monetary liabilities by the government, without
any increase in the real money balances that the private sector wishes to hold, requires an
increase in the price level (reduction in the exchange value of the government paper) in order
for the market to clear; but this is a condition for market equilibrium given the government’s
policy, and not a precondition that must happen to hold for other reasons in order for the
government to be able to create additional money. All this is a familiar way of thinking
about monetary financing of the government budget. But what is fundamentally different
about the issuance of interest-earning debt, when this is simply a promise of future delivery
of money?
   A useful analogy is suggested by Cochrane (2000) and Sims (1999). Consider the equi-
librium valuation of the stock of a company that pays no dividends, and instead distributes
its earnings to its shareholders entirely through share repurchases. (The example may seem
fanciful, but in fact share repurchases have become a more important source of distributions
to shareholders in the case of some U.S. stocks, such as Microsoft, and the tax code favors
this development.) The correct (beginning-of-period) equilibrium share price qt for such a
stock would generally be agreed to be given by the present-value relation
                                           ∞
                                           X                  λ(yT )
                                 qt St =          β T −t Et          eT ,                (3.3)
                                           T =t               λ(yt )

where St is the number of shares outstanding at the beginning of period t, et is the total
earnings of the company used to finance share repurchases in period t, and λ(yt ) is again
the marginal utility of (real) income in period t. (I here assume the “cashless limit”, as is
standard in financial economics.)
   The argument for this valuation equation is simple. If the earnings stream {et } were
instead paid out in the form of dividends, the valuation formula (3.3) would follow from
standard theory. But suppose instead that each period, the stock were to “split” at a rate


                                                    32
given by
                                                    et
                                         σt =              ,                                 (3.4)
                                                qt St − et
meaning that during period t, each owner of a share of the stock receives a distribution of
σt additional units, followed by a repurchase of (1 + σt )et /qt shares of the outstanding stock.
Under this alternative policy, the total payout by the company during period t is again equal
to et (because the price per share after the split is qt /1+σt ), and the value of the distribution
per share is again et /St . The same prices and portfolio allocations then continue to describe
an equilibrium; it should not matter whether the distribution is called a distribution of stock
followed by a repurchase of exactly the number of new shares just issued, or a cash dividend.
   On the other hand, the fact that the stock splits at exactly the rate (3.4) should be
irrelevant to its valuation. Whatever the process {σT } describing the expected rate of split-
ting for dates T ≥ t, the equilibrium evolution of the total value of the company’s stock
qt St should be the same, as long as the process {eT } describing the total resources used to
finance repurchases remains the same. Thus (3.3) should continue to apply, regardless of
the splitting policy. Note that for any given process {eT } specifying the funds available for
repurchases, and any given process {σT } describing the rate of splitting, the evolution of the
number of outstanding shares {ST } is given by the accounting identity

                                   St+1 = (1 + σt )[St − et /qt ].                           (3.5)

Equations (3.3) and (3.5) then jointly describe the evolution of the endogenous variables
{qt , St } under a rational expectations equilibrium. Note that the equilibrium valuation qt
implied by (3.3) is necessarily such that (3.5) implies a positive number of outstanding shares
at the beginning of the following period, so that these two equations can be solved recursively
forever, yielding a positive equilibrium share price at all dates.
   One may now observe a formal analogy between equations (3.3) and (3.5) for the valuation
of the zero-dividend stock and equations (2.28) and (2.29) for the equilibrium valuation of
nominal government liabilities (also in the “cashless limit”). To the variable St in the stock
example there corresponds Wts (the number of dollar claims on the government outstanding

                                                 33
at the beginning of period t); to qt there corresponds 1/Pt (the exchange value of each dollar’s
worth of public debt); to et there corresponds st (the stream of “earnings” used to retire
public debt); and to σt there corresponds it (the rate at which additional dollar claims are
distributed to the holders of existing claims).
       The advantage of considering this analogy is that it is clear in the stock case that (3.3) is
an equilibrium condition that determines the share price, given earnings expectations (that
may well be causally independent of the evolution of the company’s stock value), and not a
constraint upon possible corporate policies. There is no requirement, enforced by the finan-
cial markets, that the company generate earnings that validate whatever market valuation
of its stock may happen to exist. Indeed, if the company’s earnings were to be determined
by such a requirement, its equilibrium share price would come to be indeterminate, just
as the equilibrium price level is indeterminate under a bond-price support regime, if the
government budget is determined by a Ricardian rule such as (3.1).
       The analogy is also deeper than a mere similarity of algebraic form. The economic mech-
anism that ensures that (3.3) must hold in equilibrium is in fact the requirement that house-
holds must exhaust their intertemporal budget constraints if they are behaving optimally; a
stock valuation qt St in excess of the present value of future corporate earnings would imply
that households should believe themselves wealthy enough to purchase a stream of goods
with greater value than the economy’s product (the source of corporate earnings), which (if
households exhaust their budget constraints) will be inconsistent with goods market clear-
ing.30
       Finally, the stock analogy provides an answer to a common question about the fiscal
theory of the price level: What is special about the government, that its budget should
be able to determine the equilibrium price level (under policy regimes like the bond price-
support regime analyzed above), and not that of any other person or organization? The
  30
    Above, I have instead presented a heuristic argument for (3.3), starting from the standard present-
value theory in the case that all distributions are cash dividends. But that latter theory relies upon the
requirement that households exhaust their intertemporal budget constraints in order to exclude the possibility
of an equilibrium pricing “bubble”; see, e.g., Santos and Woodford (1997).



                                                     34
answer is not simply that national governments routinely issue liabilities that entitle the
holders only to the receipt of further similar liabilities in the future; as we have seen, a
private organization such as Microsoft could do this as well, in principle. (It would call
its liabilities “stock” rather than “debt” in such a case.) The other crucial special feature
of a national government is that prices are commonly quoted in units of its liabilities, i.e.,
in terms of the national currency. If it happened that prices of goods and services were
routinely quoted in units of Microsoft stock, say, then it would indeed be Microsoft’s budget
that would determine the price level, and not that of the federal government.

3.2    Consequences of a Government Borrowing Limit

Finally, even if one supposes that markets do impose a limit on how much a government
can borrow, it is not clear that this invalidates the analysis given above of the way in which
fiscal developments determine the equilibrium price level under a bond price-support regime.
Suppose that there is a finite level of real public debt (the determination of which we shall
not model here) beyond which new debt issues will simply not be purchased. This would
mean that it is not possible for a government to refuse to adjust its budget when its debts
grow too large; thus a purely exogenous primary surplus process, as assumed in section 2,
would be precluded.
   For the sake of concreteness, suppose that there is an upper bound on the possible end-
of-period value of outstanding government liabilities, so that government borrowing must
remain within the bound
                                        Mts + Qt Bts
                                                     ≤ d¯
                                            Pt
                                              ¯ (For simplicity, I shall assume in the discus-
at all times, for some finite positive bound d.
sion to follow that government debt consists entirely of single type of bond with geometric
coupons, the price of which is Qt .) This implies a lower bound st ≥ wt − d¯ upon possible
levels of the real primary surplus, where wt ≡ Wts /Pt is the real value of beginning-of-period
government liabilities. We may similarly imagine that there should be a lower bound on
the value of end-of-period liabilities as well (not so much because the private sector will

                                              35
not allow unlimited government lending, but because we may suppose that governments will
never actually be so generous); for simplicity, let us suppose that this is zero. This would
imply an upper bound upon feasible primary surpluses as well, st ≤ wt , the value that would
leave the government with no net liabilities at the end of the period.31 Then the fact that
total government liabilities must satisfy the bounds

                                            Mts + Qt Bts
                                         0≤              ≤ d¯                                         (3.6)
                                                Pt

implies that the primary surplus process {st } would have at all times to satisfy the bounds

                                           wt − d¯ ≤ st ≤ wt .                                        (3.7)

       Condition (3.6) implies that in any equilibrium

                                                                     iT MTs
                 −Et β T Um (yT , mT )mT = −Et β T λ(yT , iT )
                                                                  1 + iT PT
                                                                                      
                                                                     1 MTs      QT BTs
                                            ≤ Et β λ(yT , iT )
                                                   T
                                                                              +
                                                                  1 + iT PT      PT
                                                                   s        s
                                                                M    + Q  B
                                                                         T T
                                            ≤ Et β T λ(yT , iT ) T
                                                                      PT
                                                                ¯
                                            ≤ betaT λ(yT , iT )d.

Furthermore, the third term in this series is equal to

                                                                 WTs +1
                                       Et β T λ(yT +1, iT +1 )          ,                             (3.8)
                                                                 PT +1

so that expression (3.8) must be bounded above and below by the initial and final terms in the
previous series. But equilibrium condition (2.22) implies that the initial term must converge
to zero as T is made unboundedly large; and for all interest-rate paths {iT } satisfying bounds
sufficient to imply that {λ(yT , iT )} is uniformly bounded,32 the final term must converge
to zero as well. Thus (3.8) must converge to zero as T becomes large as well, and the
  31
     As noted earlier, this bound would already imply some government lending, but the government would
discount private obligations only in the amount that the central bank could hold as backing for the monetary
base.
  32
     This assumption is certainly not problematic in the case of a bond price-support regime which implies
bounds on interest rates that are independent of the evolution of goods prices.

                                                     36
transversality condition (2.21) is necessarily satisfied. It follows that any fiscal policy that
satisfies the bounds (3.7) at all times is essentially Ricardian;33 and condition (2.24) places
no restrictions upon possible equilibrium paths of the price level.
       Nonetheless, fiscal disturbances might well affect the price level. To see why, let us con-
sider a modified version of our previous analysis of the bond price-support regime. Suppose
that the government’s “desired” real primary surplus evolves according to some exogenous
stochastic process {s̄t } as assumed earlier, and that the actual budget surplus equals this,
except when one of the bounds in (3.7) would be violated; in the latter case, the real primary
surplus is equal to the bound. Thus under this fiscal regime,
                                             
                                             
                                                   wt if wt < s̄t
                          st = s(wt , s̄t ) ≡      s̄t if s̄t ≤ wt ≤ s̄t + d¯
                                              
                                                wt − d¯ if wt > s̄t + d¯
Otherwise, policy is as assumed earlier: there is a single type of interest-earning government
debt (with geometric coupons), and monetary policy is specified by an exogenous bond-price
sequence {Qt }.
       Note that as long as the fluctuations in {s̄t } are small enough (or the bounds (3.7) are
loose enough), the equilibrium presented earlier is still a rational expectations equilibrium
under the modified specification of fiscal policy. This is because the equilibrium described
earlier does not involve explosive growth of the real public debt. If the bounds (3.7) would
not have been violated in equilibrium in any event, stipulating that fiscal policy must respect
those bounds does nothing to exclude an equilibrium of that kind.
       Thus one still can have an equilibrium in which fiscal disturbances affect the price level;
this is simply no longer the only equilibrium. However, it continues to be a locally unique
equilibrium, in the following sense: it is the only equilibrium in which the state variable
{(Mts + Qt Bts )/Pt } remains forever in the interior of the interval (3.6). Thus there is no
other equilibrium “near” this one in the sense of involving nearby values for all endogenous
  33
    The qualification is that the transversality condition has not been shown to hold for all possible price-
level and interest-rate paths, but only those that satisfy certain bounds on interest rates and the equilibrium
condition (2.22). But this near-Ricardian property suffices to imply that the transversality condition, or
alternatively condition (2.24), places no additional restrictions upon the possible equilibrium paths of the
price level, given a monetary policy that maintains interest rates within the assumed bounds.

                                                      37
variables (including this one) at all times. This concept of local uniqueness or determinacy
of equilibrium suffices, for example, for the usual sorts of “comparative statics” analyses of
the effects of perturbations of the model (see, e.g., Woodford, 1998a, 1999a).
       If we are simply interested in the existence of a determinate equilibrium in which fiscal
disturbances affect the price level, then the global specification of the fiscal policy rule does
not matter: all that matters is how the government’s budget would be different in the case of
price-level and asset-price paths that are close to the equilibrium paths. It thus only matters
that fiscal policy be locally non-Ricardian:34 that the dynamics of the public debt be locally
explosive, for most price-level paths near the equilibrium path. The existence of debt limits
such as (3.6), that eventually constrain the growth of the public debt in the case of paths
far from the equilibrium in question, do nothing to interfere with this.
       Despite this conclusion, under fiscal policy of the type just described, Ricardian Equiv-
alence holds, when properly understood. The set of possible state-contingent equilibrium
paths is the same regardless of the evolution of the desired primary surplus process {s̄t }.
But under this policy regime, the set of equilibrium price processes is quite large; among the
possibilities is a solution in which the price level happens to fluctuate at the same time as
unexpected changes in the desired primary surplus.
       In order to illustrate the multiplicity of possible equilibria, it is useful to further specialize
our example, and consider the case in which s̄t = s̄ > 0 forever, Qt = Q̄ < (1 − ρ)−1 forever,
and yt = ȳ > 0 forever. Let ı̄ > 0 be the constant nominal interest rate implied by the
bond-price target, and m̄ ≡ L(ȳ, ı̄) be the implied stationary equilibrium level of real money
balances. We assume that
                                                                   
                                              1          ı̄
                                      d¯ >       βs̄ +        m̄ > 0,                                        (3.9)
                                             1−β       1 + ı̄
so that an equilibrium of the kind described earlier exists, and remains forever within the
interior of the bounds (3.7). To simplify, let us consider simply the set of perfect foresight
  34
     This is what Leeper (1991) calls “active” fiscal policy; his definition is for a specific parametric family of
fiscal policy rules, but his more general intent seems to be the one identified here. Note that his analysis of
equilibrium is purely local, in that he relies upon linear approximations to the equilibrium conditions, and
considers only non-explosive solutions. See Woodford (1998a) for further discussion of “locally Ricardian”
and “locally non-Ricardian” policies.

                                                        38
(deterministic) equilibria (p.f.e.) consistent with such a regime.
   Given an initial condition W0s ≡ M−1
                                     s       s
                                        + Q̄B−1 > 0, any path for {wt } satisfying the
difference equation
                                                                           
                                      −1                              ı̄
                           wt+1 = β            wt − s(wt , s̄) − m̄                      (3.10)
                                                                    1 + ı̄
for all t ≥ 0, and the transversality condition

                                               lim β t wt = 0,                           (3.11)
                                               t→∞


represents a p.f.e. The equilibrium path of the price level corresponding to any such solution
is given by
                                                  W0s
                                      Pt =            [β(1 + ı̄)]t .
                                                  w0
   A graph of the right-hand side of (3.10) is shown in Figure 2. Under assumptions (3.9),
there are three possible steady-state solutions to (3.10), given by

                                     1 ı̄
                             w ≡ −           m̄ < 0,
                                    β 1 + ı̄
                                                         
                              ∗     1                ı̄
                            w ≡           s̄ +             m̄ > 0,
                                  1−β             1 + ı̄
                                                   
                                  1 ¯          ı̄
                             w̄ ≡     d−                m̄ > w ∗.
                                  β          1 + ı̄

In addition to these three solutions with a constant level of real government liabilities, there
exists a continuum of non-stationary solutions to the difference equation. In particular, for
any choice of w0 > 0, the sequence can be continued forever. (An example of a non-stationary
solution with w ∗ < w0 < w̄ is shown in the figure.) Because the implied sequence {wt } is
necessarily bounded, the transversality condition (3.11) is necessarily satisfied, and as long
as w0 > 0, the implied price sequence is forever positive. Thus this entire continuum of
solutions represents alternative possible p.f.e. under such a regime.
   One of these solutions, the one with wt = w ∗ forever, is the fiscalist equilibrium discussed
earlier. Previously, when we assumed that st = s̄ at all times, this was the only possible
equilibrium; in that case, the corresponding graph would continue the steep center segment
off indefinitely in both directions, and all solutions to the difference equation starting from

                                                      39
           wt+1

                                                                            45˚
               w




              w*




              w



                                                                                  wt
                                                    w0w1 w2    w3    w4

                          Figure 2: Perfect foresight debt dynamics.

w0 6= w ∗ would be explosive, and would violate (3.11). With the assumed bounds on govern-
ment liabilities, this is no longer true. For example, another equilibrium is the one shown in
the figure, in which the price level is initially (and forever after) lower than in the fiscalist
equilibrium. This lower price level is sustained as an equilibrium by people’s (correct) expec-
tations that the exploding public debt will eventually lead to a fiscal consolidation, following
which primary surpluses are increased. Anticipation of this leads to feel less wealthy, so that
lower prices are required for goods markets to clear.
   But the fiscalist equilibrium is still the only equilibrium in which neither bound in (3.6)
is ever binding; thus this equilibrium is locally isolated, as mentioned above. One may also
observe that none of the other p.f.e. are locally unique; corresponding to any equilibrium


                                               40
like the one with an exploding public debt shown in Figure 2, there exist an infinite number
of other equilibria arbitrarily close to it (in the sense that the price level and other variables
are nearly the same, but not exactly the same, at all times as in this equilibrium). Slightly
different expectations about the size and timing of the eventual fiscal consolidation are
equally consistent with equilibrium.
       Given the existence of a multiplicity of possible self-fulfilling expectations, an obvious
question is whether the fiscalist equilibrium remains a plausible equilibrium selection, under
a regime of the kind just described. This is presumably what McCallum (1998) means
to challenge, in arguing that the fiscalist equilibrium is a “bubble equilibrium”. However,
what constitutes a “bubble equilibrium” is often in the eye of the beholder; one might at
least as easily say that the equilibrium shown in Figure 2 is a “bubble equilibrium”, as the
higher value of the public debt is sustained by self-fulfilling expectations of a future fiscal
consolidation. Here I present an argument for why expectations might naturally coordinate
upon the fiscalist equilibrium.35
       Essentially, I would argue that the fiscalist equilibrium is an especially plausible focal
point for households’ expectations, because it involves simpler fiscal expectations than the
other possible equilibria. More formally, one may note that these particular expectations
are ones that households could converge upon through an Evans-Ramey (1998) process of
“expectation calculation”. Evans and Ramey define an intuitively plausible form of iterative
refinement of expectations, in which people make use of their knowledge of a true model
of the economy to decide what to expect should happen in equilibrium. The process is one
which converges — if it converges — to a rational expectations equilibrium (r.e.e.); Evans and
Ramey are instead interested in the kind of approximate r.e.e. that may result from iterating
only a finite number of times, owing to “calculation costs”. One might alternatively use the
same analysis to consider the stability of alternative r.e.e. under the calculation dynamics,
  35
    It is worth noting that in the present example, there is no “monetarist equilibrium” (the selection
principle that McCallum would instead prefer), because of the endogeneity of the money supply. Rational-
expectations monetarist analyses generally argue that the price level should be indeterminate under a mon-
etary policy of the kind considered here.



                                                   41
and use this judge whether a given equilibrium is likely to be reached in practice.
   Such an analysis begins with a mapping of expectations into equilibrium outcomes. To
simplify, I shall suppose that there is no uncertainty about the deterministic paths of real and
nominal interest rates, as these are the same in each of the continuum of perfect foresight
equilibria just described; I shall only consider the coordination of expectations upon one
expected path or another for the primary budget surplus {st }. In the model just considered,
a household’s optimal plan for the sequences {cT + gT , mT } at dates T ≥ t depends solely
upon its estimate of its “total wealth” Wt /Pt + Ht , where “human wealth” is defined as
                                             ∞
                                             X
                                      Ht ≡          β T −t [y − sT ].
                                             T =t

(Here we have included government purchases as part of the household’s “income” net of
taxes, as they substitute for private expenditures.) Specifically, in the context of a constant
real rate of return on (non-monetary) savings equal to β −1 −1, and a constant nominal interest
rate ı̄, the optimal plan involves a constant level of total (private plus public) purchases,
cT + gT = y d , and a constant level of real money balances, mT = L(y d ,ı̄), for each T ≥ t,
where y d is the highest level of total purchases consistent with the household’s intertemporal
budget constraint, i.e., the solution to
                                                            
                             1         ı̄                Wt
                                yd +        L(y d ,ı̄) =    + Ht .                        (3.12)
                            1−β      1 + ı̄              Pt

In the case of arbitrary fiscal expectations, I shall assume that the representative household
chooses consumption ct = ytd − gt and money balances Mt = Pt L(ytd ,ı̄), where the values of
gt and Pt are observed by the household at the time that it decides, and ytd is the solution
to (3.12), given the observed values of Wt and Pt , and the household’s subjective estimate
Hte of its human wealth Ht .
   If each household has a common (though not necessarily rational) expectation Hte , then
goods market clearing requires that ytd = y. This occurs if and only if the price level satisfies

                           Wts              1         ı̄
                               + Hte = x ≡     [y +        L(y,ı̄)].                      (3.13)
                           Pt              1−β      1 + ı̄

                                                    42
Corresponding to any sequence36 of expectations {Hte }, the corresponding sequence of tem-
porary competitive equilibrium (t.c.e.) paths for the price level is given by (3.13), where Wts
evolves according to
                                s
                              Wt+1 = Pt [(1 + ı̄)(x − Hte − st ) − ı̄L(y,ı̄)],                          (3.14)

and the primary budget surplus each period is given by

                                             st = s(Wts /Pt , s̄).                                      (3.15)

In this way, an arbitrary evolution over time of beliefs about future government budgets
(summarized by the evolution of {Hte }) gives rise to a sequence of actual government budgets
(the t.c.e. sequence {st } given by (3.15)).
       We now consider what expectations a household might have which understands the above
model, and hence the mapping just described. Evans and Ramey propose that a household
should begin by conjecturing a path for the economy (for example, the t.c.e. dynamics gen-
erated by some simple expectational hypothesis such as “adaptive expectations”), and then
refine this conjecture by iterating on the mapping just derived. That is, they propose that
a household should form its own forecast of the economy’s evolution by assuming that the
beliefs of others will evolve in the conjectured way, and then calculating the t.c.e. dynamics
that should actually occur given that others have beliefs of the simpler sort. (The process
might then be iterated again, if the household instead assumes that other households will
form their beliefs by iterating once, and so on.)
       Any of the sequences {st } associated with one of the continuum of p.f.e. identified earlier
is a fixed point of this mapping; thus the proposed method of mapping expectations into
t.c.e. outcomes does not exclude any of these possibilities by itself. And the beliefs obtained
(even if one imagines iteration an infinite number of times) obviously depend upon what the
initial conjecture is. But we may still regard beliefs as more likely to be converged upon
  36
     As usual (see, e.g., Grandmont, 1983), certain bounds upon expetations are required in order for a
temporary equilibrium to exist. In the present context, equations (3.14) – (3.15) below imply uniquely
                                                                 s
defined temporary equilibrium sequences with Pt > 0 and Wt+1        > 0 each period, starting from any positive
initial level of nominal government liabilities, as long as expectations satisfy the bound Hte < H̄ each period,
where H̄ is defined in (3.17) below.

                                                      43
if they have a larger “basin of attraction” under the expectation-calculation dynamics (i.e.,
iteration of the above map). It is thus noteworthy that the fiscalist equilibrium (correspond-
ing to the expectation that sT = s̄ for all T ≥ t) is the only p.f.e. with the property that
expectations converge to it under the calculation dynamics, from any near enough initial
beliefs. Specifically, suppose that one initially conjectures an evolution of fiscal beliefs such
that the sequence {HTe } is expected to satisfy the bounds

                                                H < HTe < H̄                                             (3.16)

for all T ≥ t, where

                                                    ¯
                                       H ≡ x − s̄ − d,
                                                               ı̄
                                       H̄ ≡ x − s̄ −                L(y,ı̄).                             (3.17)
                                                             1 + ı̄

Then (3.13) implies that each period, the t.c.e. price level will satisfy

                                                     WTs        ¯
                                              s̄ <       < s̄ + d,
                                                     PT

so the neither bound on government liabilities ever binds, and sT = s̄ each period. One
thus obtains convergence to the beliefs associated with the fiscalist equilibrium, after even a
single iteration of the expectation-calculation algorithm, starting from any initial conjecture
satisfying the bounds (3.16).37
       Furthermore, an initial conjecture satisfying (3.16) would not be implausible. For ex-
ample, suppose a household generates its initial conjecture by assuming that the beliefs of
others will evolve according to an “adaptive expectations” formula. Since Hte is an estimate
of (1 − β)−1 times a certain (discounted) long-run average value of y − sT , one might assume
that people will adjust their estimate in response to the discrepancy between their current
estimate and the most recently observed value of the variable in question. This would suggest
  37
    On the other hand, no other p.f.e. has the property that its basin of attraction includes any neighborhood
of the equilibrium beliefs themselves. This is because no other p.f.e. is locally isolated, and every p.f.e. is a
fixed point of the expectation-calculation mapping.



                                                        44
a rule of the form

                      HTe +1 = λHTe + (1 − λ)(1 − β)−1 (y − sT )

                              = λHTe + (1 − λ)(1 − β)−1 (y − s(x − HTe , s̄)).

Combining this law of motion for expectations with (3.13) – (3.15), one generates a t.c.e.
in which expectations satisfy the bounds (3.16) forever, as long as one conjectures that
expectations will initially start from a value of Hte satisfying the bounds. (The same would
be true for a large number of other simple adaptive schemes.)
      Thus it is easy to describe reasoning that would lead households who understand the
model to converge upon expectations that would bring about the fiscalist equilibrium, rather
than any of the others. But if one accepts that this should be equally true following a fiscal
disturbance (say, a one-time permanent change in the value of s̄, correctly understood by the
households who form their beliefs according to the above algorithm), then such a disturbance
should affect the price level in the way described by the fiscal theory, and contrary to the
doctrine of Ricardian Equivalence.

3.3       Empirical Evidence on the Character of Fiscal Policy

Thus far our primary concern has been with the logical possibility of a non-Ricardian fiscal
regime. It is worth asking as well whether actual fiscal policies seem to be of this kind.
This has been challenged in a number of studies, though on the whole there has been little
empirical analysis relative to the amount of recent theoretical interest in regimes of this
kind.38 It will take us too far afield to address the issue in any detail here; but a few
comments on the relevance of the empirical literature to our discussion may nonetheless be
appropriate.
      Several studies have sought to show that fiscal policy is Ricardian, at least in particular
places and times, such as the U.S. in the twentieth century. For example, Bohn (1998a)
regresses the primary U.S. government budget surplus (as a share of GDP) on privately held
 38
      Two noteworthy early attempts were Shim (1984) and Leeper (1989).


                                                   45
U.S. public debt (again as a share of GDP), along with other variables that are regarded as
plausible arguments of a fiscal policy rule, and finds a significantly positive coefficient (with
a point estimate on the order of three to five percent) for each of the sample periods that he
considers. Bohn interprets his results as estimates of the coefficients of a fiscal policy rule,
and in particular he interprets the regression coefficient on the debt/GDP ratio as indicating
the degree of feedback from the size of the public debt to the size of the primary surplus
— i.e., as the coefficient α in a feedback rule of the form (3.1). If this is correct, then
our reasoning above would imply that fiscal policy over this period was Ricardian, as the
transversality condition would hold for all inflation and asset-price processes.39
       However, such a regression coefficient need not have a structural interpretation of the
proposed sort. In the case of an exogenous primary surplus process — a simple example
of a non-Ricardian regime — the existence of an equilibrium present-value relation between
the value of the public debt and expected future primary surpluses would imply that vari-
ations in the value of the public debt relative to GDP would tend to forecast subsequent
variations in primary surpluses relative to GDP. The reason is the same as the reason that,
according to the present-value theory of stock prices, the price-earnings ratio of a stock
should forecast future earnings growth; yet no one would interpret econometric support for
the latter prediction as a demonstration that high p/e ratios cause companies’ earnings to
grow faster. Similar alternative interpretations are possible in the case of the more sophis-
ticated “tests” for Ricardian as opposed to non-Ricardian policy presented by Canzoneri et
al. (1999).40 Indeed, as Cochrane (1998) and Woodford (1998b) demonstrate, it is possible
to propose non-Ricardian policy regimes, under which the inflation process evolves primarily
in response to fiscal disturbances, which match quite well the joint stochastic processes of
inflation, interest rates, the public debt, and the primary budget surplus for the U.S. since
1960. Thus there are no aspects of the co-movements of those series that are incompatible
  39
     Bohn (1998b) suggests exactly this interpretation of the results reported in Bohn (1998a). Note that
the analysis above does not apply precisely to the rule estimated by Bohn, because his estimated rule does
not have a term responding to variations in the interest saved on the monetary base; but it is unlikely that
this matters much for the validity of his conclusion.
  40
     See Cochrane (1998, 1999) and Woodford (1998b) for detailed discussion.


                                                    46
with Ricardian regimes (and fiscal determination of the price level) as such.
   A general difficulty with econometric tests of whether policy is Ricardian is that in the
model expounded above, the present-value relation (2.24) must hold in equilibrium, whether
policy is Ricardian or not. Thus the empirical question is not whether or not such a relation
appears to hold in practice; it is whether the fiscal policy is such that it would also have
held in the case of other price paths that have not actually occurred, and perhaps could not
ever occur. This is inherently a difficult question to try to answer, and it plainly cannot
be answered in the absence of assumptions about the structural form of the policy rules
in place. (This does not, however, make it any less meaningful an empirical question than
the other counterfactual questions that econometricians habitually address, when estimating
elasticities of demand and the like.) Furthermore, simple structural specifications like the one
proposed by Bohn are not too persuasive in this context, owing to the fact that the process
that determines the size of government budgets clearly involves considerable lags. It is thus
quite plausible that market participants will often have additional important information
about likely future budgets, beyond that contained in a small number of variables like those
included in Bohn’s regression; but then the possibility that a regressor such as the current
debt/GDP ratio responds to such information must be taken seriously.
   Bohn (1998b) suggests that his proposed structural interpretation of his regression coeffi-
cient is more sensible than the alternative suggested by Cochrane (1998), because it is based
on “a coherent model of government behavior,” namely a model of optimal tax-smoothing.
But while the theoretical model to which Bohn refers may justify the inclusion of certain
regressors in his fiscal rule, it does not provide any theoretical justification for the assump-
tion that no other information can help to forecast future budgets, and it is this exclusion
restriction that is crucial to Bohn’s proposed identification. Nor is it really true that the
model of optimal tax smoothing provides theoretical justification for assuming a fiscal rule
of Bohn’s form (in particular, one in which the primary budget surplus is a function of the
size of the public debt). The model of optimal tax-smoothing justifies a particular pattern
of state-contingent government budgets, but there is no unique form of feedback rule for the


                                              47
government budget that implements the desired equilibrium. (Once again, different spec-
ifications of government policy out of equilibrium may be equally consistent with a given
equilibrium.) For example, Woodford (1998c) shows how an optimal tax-smoothing policy
can be implemented by a regime that combines a non-Ricardian fiscal policy (specifically,
one in which the real primary budget surplus is exogenous) with an interest-rate peg for
monetary policy — exactly the type of regime analyzed in section 1.
       An alternative possible source of information about the likely form of the fiscal policy rule
can be obtained from estimates of the monetary policy rule, combined with deductions about
the kind of equilibrium behavior that should result from alternative monetary/fiscal policy
rule combinations. For example, John Taylor (1993) argues that U.S. monetary policy since
at least the late 1980s has been characterized by an interest-rate feedback rule according to
which increases in inflation cause increases in the federal funds rate of an even larger magni-
tude, and a large subsequent empirical literature has reached similar conclusions. However,
this sort of policy rule (which Leeper, 1991, calls “active monetary policy”), would imply
explosive debt dynamics in the presence of an exogenous real primary surplus process, or
other similar locally non-Ricardian fiscal rule.41 (We discuss this further in the next section,
in connection with Loyo’s (1999) analysis of Brazil’s policy mix in the early 1980s.) The fact
that a Brazilian-style debt explosion and hyperinflation did not occur in the U.S. following
the shift to a monetary policy similar to the “Taylor rule” implies that U.S. fiscal policy
has been locally Ricardian, at least since the late 1980s.42 This also conforms with what we
know about the emphasis upon the goal of budget balance in discussions of U.S. fiscal policy
  41
     Leeper (1991) and Loyo (1999) show this in the case of flexible-price models. However, the analysis in
Woodford (1996) of determinacy of equilibrium in a model with sticky prices (Calvo-style staggered pricing)
shows that the same classification of policy regimes consistent with unique non-explosive debt dynamics
continues to apply in that context. The only difference is that the demarcation between “active” and
“passive” monetary policy rules must be modified to take account of the effects of feedback from the level
of output to the central bank’s interest-rate instrument, as in the discussion of the “Taylor principle” in
Woodford (2000).
  42
     Of course, such a judgment depends upon believing the identifying assumptions that are made in esti-
mates of Fed reaction functions; but these are arguably grounded to a greater extent in knowledge of the
factors actually considered in Fed decisionmaking than is the case with attempts to estimate a fiscal policy
rule.




                                                    48
since the late 1980s.
       On the other hand, Taylor (1999) argues that Fed policy in the 1960s and 1970s involved
an interest-rate response to inflation increases that was substantially weaker, and in par-
ticular failed to raise nominal interest rates by as much as the increase in inflation. Such
a policy (which Leeper, 1991, calls “passive monetary policy”) would not imply explosive
debt dynamics when combined with a locally Ricardian fiscal policy; indeed, it is only in
the case of such a fiscal policy that the policy regime would imply determinate equilibrium
paths for nominal variables, including the path of the public debt.43 Clarida et al. (2000)
similarly find that their estimated Fed policy rule for the period 1960-1979 would imply an
indeterminate equilibrium, under their (implicit) hypothesis of Ricardian fiscal policy; but
once again (and for similar reasons) their estimated policy would be consistent with a unique
non-explosive equilibrium under a hypothesis of locally non-Ricardian fiscal policy. The em-
pirical relevance of the hypothesis of “passive” monetary policy on the part of the Fed is even
clearer for the 1940s, as discussed above. Once again, this would at least make it possible
to reconcile an apparently stable inflation process with a hypothesis of non-Ricardian fiscal
policy; and indeed, we have argued that this hypothesis provides an appealing explanation
of several aspects of inflation variation during that period.
       It is important to recognize that the analysis presented above of equilibrium determi-
nation under the bond-price support regime is not offered as a universal theory of inflation
determination. While the equilibrium relation (2.24) should always hold, regardless of the
character of the monetary/fiscal policy regime, it may or may not be useful to view this
condition as the key to price-level determination, and fiscal disturbances may or may not
have an important effect upon inflation — these latter propositions will depend upon the
nature of the policy regime. However, the fact that non-Ricardian policy regimes are among
the possible kinds of systematic fiscal policies is important, even if one does not think that
  43
     In the case of a model with nominal rigidities, indeterminacy of the paths of nominal variabilities would
imply indeterminacy of the equilibrium paths of real variables as well. The determinacy of equilibrium
under a policy rule of the kind that Taylor estimates for the 1960s and 1970s, when combined with a locally
non-Ricardian fiscal policy, is shown by Leeper (1991) for a flexible-price model and by Woodford (1996) for
a sticky-price variant of that model.


                                                     49
U.S. fiscal policy (for example) is currently of that kind, for reasons to be taken up next.


4        Implications for Inflation Control
I now turn to the implications for the design of public policy of a recognition that non-
Ricardian fiscal regimes are possible (though not, of course, a necessity). Consideration of
this possibility has consequences of several sorts. In taking them up, I shall assume that
a key goal of policy is the maintenance of as stable a general price level as possible; the
question whether, or to what extent, this should be a goal is left for another occasion.44
       First of all, in the case that the government’s budgetary policy is expected to be non-
Ricardian — for reasons that a policymaker choosing a monetary policy rule is not in a
position to change — this fact affects which monetary policy rules should be expected to be
consistent with the greatest degree of price stability. Rules that would be quite desirable in
the context of a (locally) Ricardian fiscal policy, such as a “Taylor rule”, may instead have
disastrous consequences for price stability when combined with an alternative fiscal policy.
       But this very fact implies that the choice of fiscal policy is also relevant to an economy’s
chances of achieving price stability, and so our second category of policy implications con-
siders the choice of a fiscal policy rule that would be consistent with price stability. Here the
essential point is that fiscal policy should be locally Ricardian, so that fiscal expectations do
not frustrate the central bank’s use of a suitably “active” monetary policy to stabilize the
price level.
       Finally, the contribution that a suitable fiscal policy commitment can make to price
stability is not simply a matter of failing to interfere with a desirable equilibrium that
would otherwise be consistent with the central bank’s monetary policy rule. A globally non-
Ricardian (though locally Ricardian) fiscal commitment may be useful in order to exclude
undesirable equilibria, ones involving less stable prices, that would otherwise be consistent
  44
    One reason for doing so is that the simple theoretical framework used above is one in which there are
no frictions of the sort that imply that any economic distortions should result from unexpected variation in
the equilibrium price level; in reality, such frictions are important. See Woodford (1999b) for discussion of
the welfare consequences of inflation variability in some simple models with sticky prices.


                                                     50
with the monetary policy regime. I take up each of these categories of implications in
sequence.

4.1       Monetary Policy Choice when Fiscal Policy is Non-Ricardian

If fiscal policy is expected to be non-Ricardian, these fiscal expectations constrain the set
of possible equilibrium outcomes that monetary policy can achieve. This constraint may
futhermore have important consequences for the ranking of alternative monetary policies.
In the presence of non-Ricardian fiscal expectations, the choice of a monetary policy that
is intended to be anti-inflationary may lead (at least eventually) to even more inflation.
Indeed, it could even result in a hyperinflation, as Loyo (1999) argues occurred in Brazil in
the 1980s.
       Consider, for example, the consequences of a central bank commitment to set a short-term
nominal interest rate instrument according to a “Taylor rule”45

                                               it = φ(Πt ),                                           (4.1)

where Πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 is the gross rate of inflation, and φ(Π) is an increasing, non-negative
function, consistent with an implicit target rate of inflation Π∗ > β, i.e., such that

                                          1 + φ(Π∗ ) = β −1 Π∗ .                                      (4.2)

I shall assume that there is a unique Π∗ > β satisfying (4.2).
       Let us again consider a deterministic environment for simplicity, and suppose that output
is constant and equal to y > 0 each period. Given a commitment to the monetary policy
rule (4.1), perfect foresight equilibrium requires that the inflation sequence {Πt } satisfy the
nonlinear difference equation
                                        Πt+1         β(1 + φ(Πt ))
                                                   =               ,                                  (4.3)
                                    λ(φ(Πt+1 ), y)    λ(φ(Πt ), y)
  45
     The rule discussed in Taylor (1993) also involves feedback from deviations of real output from trend
and/or potential. But in the present flexible-price model, there are no deviations of output from potential,
and any deviations from trend are exogenous, so that such feedback would represent at most an exogenous
shift term in (4.1), with consequences identical to those of time variation in the inflation target. Such an
extension would not change our conclusions about the stability of inflation dynamics under the policy rule.

                                                    51
           P t+1                                                b(1+f(P))


                                                                            45˚




              P*




                                                                                  Pt
                                                     P0 P1 P2 P3



                     Figure 3: An inflationary spiral under a Taylor rule.

obtained by using (4.1) to substitute for it in (2.18). In the “cashless limit,” or the case of
additively separable preferences, (4.3) reduces to

                                      Πt+1 = β(1 + φ(Πt )).                                  (4.4)

Our analysis of the qualitative properties of this difference equation is simplified if (following
Loyo) we restrict attention to the latter special case.
   If, in accordance with Taylor’s (1993) characterization of U.S. policy since the late 1980s,
we assume that φ (Π∗ ) > 1, where φ (Π) is the elasticity of 1 + φ with respect to Π, then the
graph of the right-hand side of (4.4) cuts the diagonal from below, as shown in Figure 3. As
the figure shows, in this case Π∗ is an “unstable” steady state under the dynamics implied by
(4.4). (The figure illustrates a solution starting from an initial inflation rate Π0 > Π∗ : in this

                                                52
case, inflation must grow without bound over time. If instead one were to assume Π0 < Π∗ ,
inflation would have to be forever declining, eventually leading to permanent deflation.) This
means that the only solution to (4.4) in which Πt remains within a neighborhood of Π∗ forever
is the one in which Πt = Π∗ for all t. Thus the target steady state is not only consistent
with policy rule (4.1), but, if (4.4) is the only restriction upon equilibrium inflation, the rule
also makes it a determinate (locally unique) equilibrium.46 One might then be optimistic
that people would in fact succeed in coordinating their expectations upon that equilibrium,
so that the “Taylor rule” would succeed in stabilizing inflation at the desired rate.47
       But is this in fact the only requirement for a perfect foresight equilibrium? The answer
depends upon the character of fiscal policy. If fiscal policy is “locally Ricardian,” in the sense
introduced above — the fiscal rule implies that real government liabilities will necessarily
remain within a bounded interval, in the case of any path for inflation that remains forever
near enough to the target inflation rate Π∗ — then (4.4) is the only restriction upon inflation
paths that remain forever near the target inflation rate. The conclusion in that case would
be (i) that the target steady state is indeed a perfect foresight equilibrium, and (ii) that it
is indeed determinate, as there will be no other nearby solutions. Thus in such a case the
“Taylor rule” would be an appealing approach to inflation stabilization.
       But suppose instead that fiscal expectations can be described by an exogenous sequence
{st }. Then we can show, as in our analysis above of the bond price-support regime, that
there is only a single initial value for Π0 that is consistent with these fiscal expectations.
This is most easily seen in the case of short-term (one-period) nominal government debt.48
Then W0s is given as an initial condition, while the right-hand side of (2.28) depends only
upon the exogenous sequence of surplus expectations; so there is clearly a unique value of
P0 that satisfies (2.28), and correspondingly a unique possible equilibrium inflation rate Π0 ,
  46
     Here it is important to note that Πt is not a predetermined state variable, so that history provides no
initial condition for the difference equation (4.4). Instead, the variable is free to “jump” so as to be consistent
with the expected future evolution of inflation.
  47
     This is the sort of analysis of inflation determination under such a rule proposed, for example, in
Woodford (1999a). See section 4 of that manuscript for discussion of other possible equilibria.
  48
     See Woodford (1998c) for an extension of the analysis to the case of longer-term government debt.



                                                        53
given an initial condition for P−1 . This initial condition then picks out a unique solution from
among the continuum of solutions to the difference equation (4.4), and this will be the unique
p.f.e. inflation sequence consistent with the fiscal expectations in question. Alternatively,
the evolution of inflation is determined by recursive solution of the pair of equations (2.28)
and (2.29), with it in the latter equation being substituted out using (4.1); as shown earlier,
this generates an inflation sequence that also satisfies (2.18) and hence (4.4). The latter
calculation better represents the causal logic by which a particular sequence of inflation
rates is generated in equilibrium; but simple reference to (4.4) is an easier way to quickly
determine what the equilibrium inflation dynamics are like.
   The unique value of Π0 that solves (2.28) will, in general, not happen to equal Π∗ . If,
for example, the expected future budget surpluses are too small, so that Π0 > Π∗ , then
the only possible p.f.e. is one in which the inflation rate grows without bound over time,
as shown in Figure 3. This equilibrium is characterized by an inflationary spiral, in which
progressively higher rates of inflation lead to higher nominal interest rates, hence higher
rates of growth of nominal government liabilities, which in turn lead to still higher rates of
inflation. Alternatively, if the expected future budget surpluses are too large, this sort of
policy regime will instead lead to a deflationary spiral, in which the logic is the same but
in the opposite direction. Thus this particular type of policy combination almost inevitably
leads to equilibrium inflation far from the target rate.
   Our analyze of this problem has assumed a globally non-Ricardian policy; but even if
we instead were to assume that the primary surplus is equal to the exogenously evolving
“desired” surplus only when it does not violate the bounds (3.7), much the same problem
arises. Just as before, the imposition of these bounds does nothing to change the character of
the fiscalist equilibrium (which here involves an inflationary or deflationary spiral); as long as
the fluctuations in {s̄t } are small enough, wt never violates the bounds in this equilibrium,
and so the same equilibrium continues to be possible. It is true that the bounds on the
evolution of real government liabilities make possible other equilibria as well; in particular,
in the present case there will now be a possible equilibrium in which Πt = Π∗ forever. (In the


                                               54
case where the expected sequence of “desired” primary surpluses is too small, this equilibrium
is associated with explosive growth in real government liabilities, as shown in Figure 2, and
the expectation that at a certain future date a fiscal retrenchment will bring about actual
surpluses higher than the “desired” surpluses.) But the arguments given in section 2.2 above
for selection of the fiscalist equilibrium would continue to apply in this case. In particular, it
is still true that for any conjectured fiscal expectations close enough to those consistent with
the fiscalist equilibrium, a single iteration of the expectation-calculation mapping defined
above would lead to the expectations that bring about the fiscalist equilibrium. It thus
remains plausible that people could coordinate upon an equilibrium with unstable inflation
under such a policy configuration.
       On the other hand, if the central bank were to commit itself to a policy rule like (4.1),
but with φ (Π∗ ) < 1,49 then the graph of the right-hand side of (4.4) cuts the diagonal from
above, so that the dynamics converge to Π∗ regardless of the initial condition Π0 . In this
case, in the presence of an exogenous primary surplus process, one has a uniquely determined
p.f.e., in which Π0 will in general not exactly equal Π∗ , but the sequence {Πt } will converge
asymptotically to π ∗ in any event. Thus there will be a substantial range of fiscal expectations
that are all consistent with an equilibrium inflation rate that remains forever near the target
rate. (In the case of a stochastic version of this model, the equilibrium inflation rate will
vary in response to random shocks, but with bounded shocks it will fluctuate forever within
an interval around the target inflation rate.) This alternative type of monetary policy rule
would accordingly be more conducive to price stability, in the context of a non-Ricardian
fiscal policy of the kind assumed.50
       We thus observe that a monetary policy rule that would conventionally be thought to be
  49
      This is what Leeper (1991) calls “passive” monetary policy, by contrast with the “active” case when the
inequality is reversed.
   50
      Leeper (1991) obtains a similar conclusion in the context of a purely local analysis. He finds that there is a
determinate r.e.e., involving stationary fluctuations in the inflation rate, when an “active” monetary policy is
combined with a “passive” (locally Ricardian) fiscal policy, or alternatively when a “passive” monetary policy
is combined with an “active” (locally non-Ricardian) fiscal policy. He regards the combination of an “active”
monetary policy and an “active” fiscal policy as mutually incompatible, as in this case there will generally
be no non-explosive equilibrium at all. But as we have seen, this need not mean that there is actually no
equilibrium possible; instead, the equilibrium may necessarily involve an inflationary or deflationary spiral.


                                                        55
anti-inflationary, such as a Taylor rule with an aggressive response to deviations of inflation
from the target rate, may instead lead to an inflationary spiral when combined with an
unsuitable fiscal policy. This is exactly what Loyo (1999) argues occurred in Brazil in the
early 1980s. As shown in Figure 4(a), the Brazilian inflation rate remained quite stable
(though non-trivial, two to three percent per month) throughout the late 1970s, but grew
to progressively higher levels in the early 1980s, degenerating into hyperinflation by 1985.51
Loyo attributes this to a shift toward a more anti-inflationary interest-rate policy beginning
in 1980. He shows that nominal interest rates on Treasury obligations were quite steady
in the 1970s, despite fluctuations in inflation, while they rose more than one-for-one with
increases in inflation in the early 1980s, and thus proposes that the shift was from a policy
rule with φ < 1 to one with φ > 1. If we suppose that fiscal expectations remained non-
Ricardian both before and after the monetary policy change, then the above model implies
that equilibrium inflation could well have been stable before 1980 (as it was), while the
change in the monetary policy could result in an inflationary spiral of the kind shown in
Figure 3.
       Loyo also notes that real seignorage revenues (shown in Figure 4b) did not increase
notably during the inflationary spiral, so that the increased inflation cannot plausibly be
attributed to increased revenue needs that resulted in an increase in the central bank’s
seignorage target. The inflationary spiral was associated with explosive growth of nominal
government liabilities, resulting from increased conventional deficits (plotted in real terms
in Figure 4b). As the figure shows, the increased deficits were largely due to rapid growth in
the interest payments required on the public debt, which exploded as a result of the change
in interest-rate policy.
       Why, then, did the shift in the U.S. to a policy similar to the “Taylor rule” in the 1980s
not lead to a similar inflationary spiral?52 A possible answer is that in the U.S. this kind
  51
    The data plotted in Figure 4 are kindly supplied by Eduardo Loyo.
  52
    As noted earlier, Taylor (1999) argues that U.S. policy in the 1960s and 1970s could be described a
similar interest-rate feedback, but with an inflation elasticity φ < 1, whereas policy since the late 1980s at
least can be described by a rule with φ > 1.



                                                      56
                                                           (a)
            14

            12        inflation
                      interest rate
            10

             8

             6

             4

             2

             0
             1975   1976    1977      1978   1979   1980         1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986


                                                           (b)
            50

            40         seignorage
                       interest on debt
            30         total deficit

            20

            10

             0

           −10
             1975   1976    1977      1978   1979   1980         1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986


Figure 4: Onset of hyperinflation in Brazil. (a) Inflation rate and short-term nominal interest
rate, in percent per month. (b) Real value of seignorage revenues, interest payments on public
debt, and deficit inclusive of interest payments. Source: Loyo (1999).

of monetary policy was accompanied by a different type of fiscal expectations. From the
mid-1980s onward, concern with the size of the public debt led to calls for constraints upon
the government budget, such as those incorporated in the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act of
1985, which would automatically adjust annual budgets so as to prevent further growth in
the debt. And at least since the 1990 budget, this concern (implying feedback from the
size of the public debt to the size of the primary surplus) has been a major determinant of
the evolution of the U.S. federal budget. If these developments were correctly anticipated,
then people would indeed have expected fiscal policy to be Ricardian, allowing expectations
to coordinate upon the desirable equilibrium in which inflation fluctuates around its target
level.
    Note that the success of the American experiment need not imply that people under-


                                                       57
stood that fiscal policy would be Ricardian from the beginning of vigorously anti-inflationary
interest-rate policy under Paul Volcker.53 Even in the context of unchanged expectations
regarding the future path of real primary budget surpluses, a shift toward a lower target
inflation rate and a value of φ > 1 need not result in an immediate increase in inflation.
Instead, in an economy with long-term, non-indexed government debt, nominal interest rate
increases can lower the (nominal) market value of existing government bonds, and thus lead
initially to a lower path for Wts than would otherwise have been followed, and correspond-
ingly a lower path for the price level. The inflationary spiral thus would not have had to
manifest itself immediately in the American context (though it would have been expected
to in Brazil, owing to the much shorter maturity of the Brazilian public debt). It is thus
possible that the expectation of a Ricardian fiscal policy developed only later, but still in
time to head off inflationary debt dynamics in the U.S.
       The successful disinflation in the U.S. during the 1980s, and the successful maintenance
of low inflation since, indicates that commitment to an interest-rate policy similar to the
“Taylor rule” can indeed be an appropriate way of stabilizing inflation around a low level.
But the contrary example of Brazil suggests that countries plagued by high inflation and
seeking to emulate the U.S. recipe should not assume that mere adoption of a Taylor rule
will be sufficient; instead, it is important also to emulate the constraints upon fiscal policy
characteristic of the U.S. during this period.

4.2       Constraining Fiscal Expectations

Above we have commented upon the choice of a monetary policy rule so as to minimize the
undesirable instability of the price level, in the presence of a non-Ricardian fiscal policy that
is taken as given. But it is clear that such an adaptation to the inevitability of exogenous
fluctuations in primary budget surpluses is hardly the optimal arrangement, at least from
the point of view of price stability.54 For example, in general, a given exogenous process
  53
    Articles such as Sargent and Wallace (1981) indicate that the existence of a fiscal commitment of this
kind was not clear during the early Volcker years.




                                                   58
for the primary budget surplus will be inconsistent with complete stabilization of the price
level, regardless of the monetary policy that is chosen (Woodford, 1996, 1998c). On the
other hand, complete stabilization of the price level, even in the face of real disturbances,
may well be possible in principle — say, using a Taylor rule with a time-varying intercept
that shifts appropriately in response to the real disturbances (Woodford, 1999a) — as long
as fiscal expectations are consistent with that equilibrium. Thus the best approach to the
achievement of price stability will involve the choice of an appropriate rule for fiscal policy,
in addition to the choice of a desirable monetary policy rule.
       What kind of fiscal policy would best serve this end? The simplest answer would be, any
policy that is consistent with stable prices. But this does not go far enough. An exogenous
process for the primary budget surplus, for example, could happen to be consistent with a
target path for the price level . Thus one might suggest that the inflationary spiral shown in
Figure 3 will not occur, and instead one will have inflation equal to the target rate forever,
as long as the expected sequence of primary surpluses makes Π0 = Π∗ the solution to (2.28).
But this would depend upon getting the size of the expected surpluses exactly right, which is
simply incredible (in the case that the surpluses are set simply as a function of the estimated
exogenous state of the world, and not with feedback from endogenous developments, such
as the actual evolution of prices).
       A more plausible proposal might seem to be a regime like the bond price-support regime
described in section 2, in which however the exogenous surplus process is chosen to be
one that is calculated to be consistent with stable prices. (One would be committed, for
example, not to reduce primary surpluses in response to an event such as the outbreak of
war in Korea.) This is a more practical proposal, in that control errors in the government’s
attempts to target the primary surplus would not lead to any explosive deviation from the
desired equilibrium. Still, this type of regime is not one in which inflation is likely to be
too stable in practice. It makes the equilibrium price level a function not merely of fiscal
  54
    Whether it is possible or desirable for primary surpluses to follow an alternative path depends, of course,
upon what sources of revenue are available and how pressing the government’s need for funds may be. These
issues are beyond the scope of the analysis here.


                                                      59
expectations in the near term, but of expectations about government budgets far in the future
(since it is the present value of all future surpluses that enters (2.24)). Expectations about
the distant future may be especially difficult for the government to “manage” through policy
announcements. Furthermore, the nature of the legislative process in a democracy makes it
unlikely that government budgets can subjected to the same degree of discipline as monetary
policy actions. A nontrivial degree of random variation in the equilibrium price level would
be inevitable under the price-support regime, both as a result of random disturbances to fiscal
policy that could not be prevented, and as a result of inability to adjust fiscal policy with
sufficient precision to offset the consequences of other real disturbances (such as fluctuations
in the equilibrium real rate of interest).
   Controlling inflation through an interest-rate rule such as the Taylor rule represents a
more practical alternative, both because it is more politically realistic to imagine monetary
policy being subordinated wholly to this task, and because it is technically more feasible to
“fine-tune” monetary policy actions as necessary to maintain consistency with stable prices.
Finally, under a Taylor rule (together with a locally Ricardian fiscal policy), expectations
regarding future monetary policy do affect equilibrium inflation, but these expectations are
discounted more rapidly (as one considers dates farther in the future) in this case than under
the bond price-support regime — much more rapidly, in the case of sufficiently aggressive
response to current inflation (Woodford, 1999a). It would make sense, then, to choose a
fiscal rule that is compatible with this kind of approach to control of inflation. What this
requires is choosing a fiscal rule that is consistent not simply with one particular target path
for inflation, but with all paths involving sufficiently moderate deviations of the inflation rate
from its desired path; one would then rely upon an “active” monetary policy to determine
which of these paths would actually be the equilibrium path. This means choosing a locally
Ricardian fiscal policy. (Whether it should also be globally Ricardian is another matter; in
the next section, I shall argue that it is better that it not be.) Because the property of being
locally Ricardian requires only that the path of the public debt satisfy certain bounds, this
is a goal that remains practical even in a world where the government budget will inevitably


                                               60
be subject to only imperfect control.
       What kind of constraint upon fiscal policy does this mean? A mere commitment to
“satisfy the transversality condition” is plainly unsuitable; this would place no constraints
upon observable behavior over any finite time period, so that it is hard to see how the public
should be convinced of the truth of such a commitment, in the absence of a commitment
to some more specific constraint that happens to imply satisfaction of the transversality
condition. One such possibility, discussed above, is a commitment to keep real government
liabilities within bounds such as (3.6). This is exactly the spirit of the requirement of
the Maastricht treaty (and of the subsequent “Stability Pact” binding the members of the
European Monetary Union) constraining each nation’s public debt to (eventually) remain
no greater than 60 percent of a year’s GDP.55
       However, while a commitment to such a constraint would suffice to ensure satisfaction of
the transversality condition (under mild conditions, as discussed above), and so render policy
Ricardian, it may not suffice to eliminate the problem illustrated by the Brazilian case.56
For as we have shown in section 2.3 above, fiscal policy might remain locally non-Ricardian
even while respecting the bounds (3.6). In such a case, there would remain a determinate
(locally isolated) equilibrium in which fiscal expectations would determine the price level,
and people might well coordinate their expectations upon this particular equilibrium. In the
case that monetary policy is described by a Taylor rule with φ > 1, this fiscalist equilibrium
almost inevitably involves an inflationary or deflationary spiral. Of course, the commitment
to the bounds would also make possible other equilibria (just as in our previous discussion,
when it was hypothesized that such bounds would be inevitably satisfied); these equilibria
would include one in which inflation is always equal to the target rate. But because of the
complicated nature of the fiscal expectations required to support that “good” equilibrium,
one may not wish to rely upon people to coordinate upon it rather than one of the others.
  55
     Above we have considered a ceiling on the real value of government liabilities, but in a model in which
output does not grow over time. Similar conclusions can easily be obtained in a model with growth in the
case of debt limit that grows in proportion to real GDP.
  56
     Here I take a different view of the consequences of such a constraint than that presented in Woodford
(1996).


                                                    61
       In the case of a locally Ricardian fiscal policy, instead, there will be no unique inflation
path with the property that the real value of government liabilities remains within narrow
bounds, to provide a natural focal point for expectations. (This will instead be equally true
of all of the solutions to (4.4).) It then may be plausible for expectations to coordinate upon
the locally unique equilibrium in which inflation and interest rates never deviate too far from
the values Π∗ and φ(Π∗ ) respectively, which is the one in which the Taylor rule successfully
stabilizes inflation.57
       One simple example of a locally Ricardian regime would be to make the primary budget
surplus a linear function of accumulated real government liabilities,

                                          st = s̄ + α(wt − w̄)                                        (4.5)

where 1 − β < α ≤ 1, and w̄ > 0 is some “target” level for real government liabilities. (This
is closely related to Leeper’s (1991) definition of “passive fiscal policy”.) Substituting (4.5)
into (2.31) yields a law of motion for real public debt of the form

                                 bt = B(bt−1 , Πt , Qt−1 , Qt , mt−1 , mt ),                          (4.6)

where bt ≡ Qt Bts /Pt . Evaluated near a stationary equilibrium with constant values of Πt ,
Qt , and it , the derivative of this function with respect to its first argument is

                                           ∂B
                                              = β −1 (1 − α),
                                           ∂b

which is non-negative and strictly less than one. Thus the dynamics of the real public debt
are stable (in the absence of perturbations to the other arguments of B). It follows that for
any small enough fluctuations in {Πt , Qt , it } around the constant values just assumed (which
in turn imply small fluctuations in {mt } around a constant value, given small enough fluc-
tuations in {yt }), the path of {bt } will be restricted to a bounded interval as long as it starts
from an initial condition within that interval. This in turn implies bounded fluctuations in
wt as well; thus such a policy is locally Ricardian.
  57
    Whether there continue to actually be other equilibria depends the specification of policy far away from
the target inflation rate; see the next section.

                                                     62
       An alternative possibility would be real conventional deficit targeting. Under such a rule,
the conventional (i.e., inclusive of interest on the public debt) budget deficit,58

                              ∆t ≡ (1 + ρQt − Qt−1 )Bt−1
                                                     s
                                                         + Pt gt − Tt ,

is set each period according to a rule of the form

                                                ∆t /Pt = δ̄,                                           (4.7)

where δ̄ is a constant target level. Equivalently, we may assume a constant target value for
the deficit as a share of GDP; such a rule is in the spirit of the limits on government budgets
imposed by the Maastricht treaty and the “Stability Pact”. Note that in the special case
that δ̄ = 0, this reduces to a balanced-budget rule.59
       In a steady state with a constant rate of inflation Π∗ , and under the assumption that
the official interest rate is chosen to equal the steady-state interest rate associated with the
inflation target, ı̄ = β −1 Π∗ − 1, deficit target (4.7) is associated with a steady-state level of
(end-of-period) real government liabilities equal to

                                                        Π∗
                                           m̄ + b̄ =          δ̄.
                                                       Π∗ − 1

Let us assume that Π∗ > 0, and that δ̄ ≥ 0, so that end-of-period government liabilities are
non-negative in the steady state. (In practice, the value of δ̄ would need to be set at a level
that is high enough to be consistent with a steady state in which the government is not a
net creditor, but low enough to be consistent with a steady state in which the tax collections
required by the rule are not too burdensome. The exact level of δ̄ does not matter, however,
  58
     Here we measure “interest” on the public debt by the realized nominal one-period holding return, rather
than by the part of payouts to bondholders that is officially designated “interest” as opposed to repayment
of principal; the latter quantity has no economic significance. However, our conclusion as to the locally
Ricardian character of such a policy does not depend upon this particular definition of the deficit. The
main convenience of this definition is that it establishes a simple equivalence between deficit targeting and
targeting the path of nominal government liabilities; these would otherwise be closely related, but slightly
distinct types of fiscal commitment.
  59
     Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2000) analyze the consequences of a fiscal rule of this kind in a slightly
different model, and under the assumption that ρ = 0.



                                                     63
for our argument here.) Fiscal rule (4.7) again implies public debt dynamics of the form
(4.6), but now the derivative is
                                        ∂B
                                           = Π∗ −1 < 1.
                                        ∂b
Hence (as long as the target inflation rate is positive) the debt dynamics are again stable,
and policy is locally Ricardian. Thus adoption of deficit targets of this kind in conjunction
with a Taylor rule for monetary policy would create a regime consistent with stable, low
inflation, and in which there would be no reason to expectations to coordinate upon an
equilibrium other than the one in which this outcome is achieved.

4.3    Fiscal Commitments to Exclude a Deflationary Trap

Thus far we have considered only the problem of choosing a fiscal commitment that will not
interfere with the central bank’s efforts to stabilize inflation through interest-rate policy. We
have argued that this can best be achieved through a fiscal commitment that ensures that
the dynamics of the public debt will be stable, in the case of any moderate fluctuations in
inflation, interest rates, and bond prices, so that fiscal policy will be equally consistent with
any of these paths. But a fiscal rule can also serve the goal of price stability by excluding
unwanted equilibria that would otherwise be consistent with the monetary policy rule. Thus
there may be advantages to commitment to a rule that is not globally Ricardian: fiscal
expectations of that kind may prevent unwanted price-level instability due to self-fulfilling
expectations.
   We have pointed out above that commitment to the Taylor rule in itself does not exclude
any of the possible solutions to the difference equation (4.4) from being possible perfect
foresight equilibria. (And the complete set of rational expectations equilibria would include
a large set of stochastic equilibria as well.) We have suggested that the locally unique
equilibrium with inflation forever near the target rate might be a logical one for people to
coordinate upon; but a policy regime that could actually exclude the other paths as genuine
equilibria (i.e., as outcomes that could be expected by people with a correct understanding
of the policy rule and of the principles of price-level determination) would allow greater

                                               64
           Pt+1                                               b(1+f(P))


                                                                          45˚




              b




                                                                                Pt
              0            P**= b     P2      P1      P0        P*




                   Figure 5: A self-fulfilling deflation under a Taylor rule.

confidence that the desired equilibrium should actually be reached. It is particularly difficult
for the central bank to achieve this by itself in the case of the possibility of a deflationary
spiral of the kind shown in Figure 5. (This is another solution to the same difference equation
as in Figure 3, but now assuming an initial inflation rate Π0 < Π∗ .)
   Inflationary spirals of the kind shown in Figure 3 might be excluded, or at least rendered
less likely for people to coordinate upon, through a commitment to raise interest rates sharply
in the case of high rates of inflation; this would mean that any inflation rate higher than
the target rate could be sustained only by expectations of future inflation that are quite


                                              65
extreme, if not impossible.60 But similarly aggressive responses to deflation are not possible,
insofar as the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates limits the extent to which interest
rates can be reduced. As Benhabib et al. (2000b) point out, this implies that there must
exist a second, lower steady-state equilibrium inflation rate in the case of a Taylor rule with
φ (Π∗ ) > 1, at or above the gross inflation rate of β, which corresponds to deflation at
the rate of time preference. (Under our assumptions, this second steady state Π∗∗ involves
deflation at exactly that rate, and a nominal interest rate of zero.) There necessarily exists a
continuum of solutions to (4.3) converging to Π∗∗ , and the deflationary expectations required
to support these solutions are not too extreme, either. Benhabib et al. suggest that the
possibility of such self-fulfilling deflationary traps is an important weakness of the Taylor
rule as a prescription for monetary policy.
      However, whether these solutions represent genuine perfect foresight equilibria or not
depends upon the nature of fiscal policy. Benhabib et al. assume a (globally) Ricardian
fiscal policy, so that all solutions to (4.3) represent perfect foresight equilibria. But as
Woodford (1999a, sec. 4.2) points out, under alternative fiscal policy commitments, this
is no longer true.61 In particular, it is possible for fiscal policy to be locally Ricardian (so
that the transversality condition is satisfied in the case of all inflation paths that remain
forever within an interval of inflation rates around the target rate), and still imply that the
transversality condition is violated in the case of any deflationary path of the kind shown
in Figure 5. To achieve the latter end, it suffices that fiscal policy place a floor on the
asymptotic growth of nominal government liabilities, which implies that their real value
will grow too rapidly for consistency with the transversality condition if the price contracts
asymptotically at the rate of time preference. Such a growth rate of nominal government
liabilities may instead be consistent with the transversality condition as long as the rate of
inflation never falls too far below the target rate.
      One way of guaranteeing such a floor on the growth rate of nominal government liabilities
 60
      See Woodford (1999a, sec. 4.3) for further discussion.
 61
      The idea is further developed in Benhabib et al. (2000c).



                                                      66
is to directly target this variable. A policy of this type that has often been assumed in the
theoretical literature is a money growth target,

                                         Mts /Mt−1
                                               s
                                                   = µ,                                    (4.8)

for some µ ≥ 1, together with an implicit commitment to maintain Bts ≥ 0 as well. For
example, a policy of this kind is shown to exclude deflationary equilibria in Brock (1975)
and in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983), where it is assumed that there is zero government debt
at all times. In these papers, of course, the monetary policy rule is specified by (4.8), rather
than by a Taylor rule. But the elimination of the possibility of self-fulfilling deflations is no
special property of monetary targeting as opposed to commitment to an interest-rate rule;
rather, the result follows from the assumption of a fiscal rule that puts a floor on the path
of nominal government liabilities. Indeed, the money-growth target alone would not avoid
this problem, in the absence of a stipulation that the government budget will ensure that
Bts ≥ 0 forever.
    A deficit target of the form (4.7) also puts a floor on the path of total nominal liabilities
of the government. Note that under our above definition of the deficit, end-of-period total
liabilities Dt ≡ Mts + Qt Bts evolve according to

                                        Dt = Dt−1 + ∆t .

Any non-negative value for the deficit target δ̄ therefore implies that {Dt } will be a non-
decreasing sequence. Hence if prices fall at the rate of time preference, as they do asymp-
totically in the case of the deflationary path shown in Figure 5, the real value Dt /Pt grows
as β −t , and the transversality condition will be violated. In the case of a path in which the
deflation is only asymptotically this great, the condition may or may not be violated; but
one can ensure that it is, in the case of any solution to (4.4), through an appropriate choice
of the function φ(Π). (Interest rates must fall to zero quickly enough as the inflation rate
falls.)
    Alternatively, one can ensure a positive floor on the growth rate of nominal liabilities,
so that the transversality condition is violated in the case of any sustained rate of deflation

                                               67
that even approaches the rate of time preference. If one adopts a deficit target of the form

                                    ∆t = max(δ̄Pt , γDt−1 ),                               (4.9)

where 0 < γ < Π∗ − 1, δ̄ > 0, then in the steady state with inflation at the target rate, the
binding constraint is the one defined by δ̄, rather than the one defined by γ. Hence the debt
dynamics near the steady state are as defined above, and such a policy is once again locally
Ricardian. At the same, such a commitment establishes a floor for the growth rate of total
nominal liabilities, as it ensures that

                                      Dt /Dt−1 ≥ (1 + γ).

It follows that any path of prices along which the gross inflation rate eventually satisfies
Πt < β(1 + γ) forever will imply that β t Dt /Pt will be bounded away from zero, and so
cannot constitute an equilibrium.
   The crucial aspect of such policies, in order to exclude the possibility of a self-fulfilling
deflation, is that the government be committed to continued growth of its nominal liabilities
(or at the very least, to preventing them from contracting), even if the price level, and hence
nominal GDP, does steadily decline. This would mean allowing the ratio of government
liabilities to GDP to rise, in principle without bound, along such a deflationary path —
though if the private sector believes in the government’s commitment, the deflationary path
(and hence the explosion of the debt/GDP ratio) should never occur in equilibrium.
   Admittedly, this requires a different way of thinking about the “soundness” of fiscal
policy than is yet common. An example is provided by recent discussion of Japanese fiscal
policy. As shown in Figure 6, the ratio of the public debt to GDP has grown sharply in the
1990s, rising from only 49 percent at the end of 1991 to more than 96 percent by the end of
1999. This is widely deplored as an indication of reckless fiscal policy during the 1990s, and
has been accompanied by assurances from the government that a future fiscal retrenchment
would prevent further growth of the debt ratio. However, a commitment to maintain a
ceiling on the ratio of government liabilities to GDP is exactly the sort of fiscal commitment

                                              68
                             800


                                     GDP
                             700     Exponential Trend
                                     Public Debt + MB
                                     Public Debt
                             600



                             500
              yen trillion




                             400



                             300



                             200



                             100



                              0
                              1975     1980              1985        1990      1995


             Figure 6: Public debt, the monetary base and nominal GDP for Japan.

that makes self-fulfilling deflations possible, under an interest-rate rule or a money-growth
rule alike.62 For such a commitment implies that in the event of a self-fulfilling deflation,
the government will run surpluses of the size necessary to contract nominal liabilities as fast
as prices fall. But then there is no violation of the transversality condition, or alternatively,
no accumulation of wealth by households that makes them feel in a position to spend more
than the shrinking level of nominal GDP, so that the ever-smaller level of nominal GDP is
indeed an equilibrium.
       Instead, the exclusion of such equilibria requires a commitment to a target path for
nominal government liabilities that will not decline over time even if nominal GDP does;
  62
    They will not be possible in the case of a money-growth rule with µ ≥ 1, if there is also a commitment
to maintain a non-negative debt in the hands of the public. But in this case, there is no commitment to
a bound on the ratio of government liabilities to GDP. The ratio of the monetary base to GDP will grow
at the rate of time preference along a deflationary path, and so will the ratio of total liabilities to GDP.
Furthermore, insofar as the monetary base is backed by holdings of government debt, the ratio of the public
debt to GDP (counting the debt held by the central bank) will also grow at the rate of time preference under
such a policy.


                                                                69
this should be explained to the public by reference to a target path for nominal GDP, to
which the government is committed to return (through reflation of the economy) even if
actual nominal GDP drops below the target path for a time. Interestingly, from this point
of view the growth of the Japanese public debt during the 1990s does not seem so alarming.
Figure 6 also plots an exponential trend fitted to nominal GDP for the period through 1991;
relative to this trend (which might have been a plausible target path for nominal GDP
after 1991 as well),63 neither debt nor the sum of the public debt and the monetary base
have grown to historically extreme levels. While both have increased some since 1991, each
is still well below its typical level, relative to the nominal GDP trend, in the 1970s and
1980s. (Public debt relative to trend GDP had risen to 59 percent by the end of 1999,
while it was above 80 percent in the 1970s.) Nonetheless, given the Japanese government’s
statements, the Japanese public may reasonably have been expecting that the government
is not committed to continued growth of nominal liabilities at such a rate, and that the
growth of the debt now forecasts tight budgets later. These are exactly the sort of Ricardian
fiscal expectations that should undercut any stimulus to aggregate demand from the current
deficits, as households judge that they must increase private saving to prepare for the future
government budget cuts. They may also have allowed the Japanese economy to fall into a
deflationary trap of the kind depicted in Figure 5.


5      Conclusion
Our results imply that a central bank charged with maintaining price stability cannot be in-
different as to how fiscal policy is determined. Commitment to an anti-inflationary monetary
policy rule, such as a Taylor rule with a low implicit inflation target, cannot by itself ensure
price stability. First of all, fiscal expectations inconsistent with a stable price level may pre-
vent that outcome from occurring. This possibility is often discussed (e.g., in Sargent and
Wallace, 1981) as resulting from an inconsistency between the policies of the central bank
  63
    This trend grows at approximately 7 percent per year; in the period 1975-91, this consisted of 4 percent
average real growth and 3 percent average inflation.



                                                    70
and of the fiscal authority, so that the outcome depends upon which must accommodate the
other’s policy commitment in practice; this sometimes leads to the argument that a suffi-
ciently independent or sufficiently credible central bank can eliminate the problem, simply
by insisting upon its commitment to its own rule. We have seen however, that the problem
is more subtle; it is possible that the policies are not actually inconsistent (in the sense
that an equilibrium exists in which both commitments are maintained forever), but that the
only possible equilibrium will involve an inflationary or deflationary spiral. Policymakers
concerned with price stability will not wish to allow expectations of this kind to develop.
In the case that the non-Ricardian fiscal expectations assumed in the Loyo (1999) model
are unavoidable, the choice of a different type of monetary policy would be prudent; but
in general, a more desirable solution will be to constrain fiscal expectations so that stable
prices will not require explosive debt dynamics.
   We have also seen that, even when both fiscal and monetary policy are consistent with an
equilibrium with stable prices (as one among many possible outcomes), there may be good
reason for people’s expectations to coordinate upon an equilibrium other than this one — one
in which the price level is determined by expectations regarding the government budget. In
such a case, commitment by the central bank to a Taylor rule would again result in inflation
far from the target level. To exclude this possibility, one would need a commitment to a
fiscal policy that is locally Ricardian, and not merely globally Ricardian (as in the case of a
primary budget that evolves exogenously until certain debt limits are reached).
   An example of a suitable fiscal commitment for this purpose would be a target for the
real value of the conventional budget deficit (inclusive of interest on the public debt). For-
tunately, commitments to budget balance or to deficit limits have achieved new prominence
in macroeconomic policy in the same period that has seen increased emphasis upon central
bank independence and actively anti-inflationary monetary policy, both in the U.S. and in
the European Union. We have seen that this type of fiscal commitment also has the ad-
vantage of placing a floor on the path of the nominal value of total government liabilities,
which can be useful as a means of excluding self-fulfilling deflations that would otherwise be


                                              71
possible equilibria under a Taylor rule. Thus a fiscal commitment of this kind, in conjunction
with a monetary policy commitment such as a Taylor rule, represents a sound approach to
the achievement of long-run price stability.




                                               72
                                REFERENCES



Auernheimer, Leonardo, and Benjamin Contreras, “Control of the Interest Rate with
     a Government Budget Constraint: Determinacy of the Price Level, and Other
     Results,” unpublished, Texas A&M University, February 1990.

— — and — —, “A Nominal Interest Rate Rule in the Open Economy,” unpublished,
    Texas A&M University, August 1993.

Bassetto, Marco, “A Game-Theoretic View of the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,”
     unpublished, Northwestern University, March 2000.

Begg, David K.H., and Badrul Haque, “A Nominal Interest Rate Rule and Price Level
     Indeterminacy Reconsidered,” Greek Economic Review 6:31-46 (1984).

Bénassy, Jean-Pascal, “Price-Level Determinacy under a Pure Interest-Rate Peg,” Review
      of Economic Dynamics 3: 194-211 (2000).

Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe, “Monetary Policy and
     Multiple Equilibria,” American Economic Review, forthcoming 2000a.

— —, — —, and — —, “The Perils of Taylor Rules,” Journal of Economic Theory,
   forthcoming 2000b.

— —, — —, and — —, “Avoiding Liquidity Traps,” unpublished, New York University,
    April 2000c.

Bergin, Paul R., “Price Level Determination in a Heterogeneous Monetary Union,” un-
      published, University of California, Davis, December 1996.

Bohn, Henning, “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 113: 949-964 (1998a).

—- —-, “Comment on John Cochrane, ‘A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation’,” NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual 13: 384-389 (1998b).

Brock, William A., “Money and Growth: The Case of Long-Run Perfect Foresight,”
     International Economic Review 15: 750-777 (1974).

— —, “A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics 1:
    133-150 (1975).



                                        73
Brunner, Karl, “Fiscal Policy in Macro Theory: A Survey and Evaluation,” in R.W.
     Hafer, ed., The Monetary versus Fiscal Policy Debate, Totowa, NJ: Rowman and
     Allanheld, 1986.

— —, and Allan H. Meltzer, “A Credit Market Theory of the Money Supply and an
    Explanation of Two Puzzles in U.S. Monetary Policy,” in T. Bagiotti, ed., Investi-
    gations in Economic Theory and Methodology, Padova, Italy: CEDAM, 1966.

Buiter, Willem H., “The Young Person’s Guide to Neutrality, Price Level Indeterminacy,
      Interest Rate Pegs, and Fiscal Theories of the Price Level,” NBER working paper
      no. 6396, February 1998.

— —, “The Fallacy of the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” NBER working paper no.
    7302, August 1999.

Canzoneri, Matthew B., Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad T. Diba, “Fiscal Discipline and
     Exchange Rate Regimes,” CEPR discussion paper no. 1899, May 1998.

— —, — —, and — —, “Is the Price Level Determined by the Needs of Fiscal Solvency?”
    unpublished, Georgetown University, June 1999.

Canzoneri, Matthew B., and Behzad Diba, “Fiscal Constraints on Central Bank Inde-
     pendence and Price Stability,” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 1463, September 1996.

Carlstrom, Charles T., and Timothy Fuerst, “The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,”
      Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, forthcoming 2000.

Christiano, Lawrence J., and Terry J. Fitzgerald, “Understanding the Fiscal Theory of
      the Price Level,” NBER working paper no. 7668, April 2000.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeco-
      nomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115:
      147-180 (2000).

Cochrane, John H., “A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation,” NBER Macroeconomics
     Annual 13: 323-384 (1998).

— —, “Long-Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” un-
    published, University of Chicago, June 1999. [Available at http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/
    fac/john.cochrane/research/Papers.]

— —, “Money as Stock: Price Level Determination with No Money Demand,” NBER
    working paper no. 7498, January 2000.



                                        74
Cushing, Matthew J., “The Indeterminacy of Prices under Interest Rate Pegging: The
     Non-Ricardian Case”, Journal of Monetary Economics 44: 131-148 (1999).

Daniel, Betty C., “A Fiscal Theory of Currency Crises,” unpublished, SUNY Albany,
     April 1999.

d’Autume, Antoine, and Philippe Michel, “ ‘Transversality Conditions’, Budget Con-
     straints and the Determinacy of a Perfect Foresight Equilibrium in a Monetary
     Growth Model,” European Economic Review 31: 1343-1367 (1987).

Diamond, Peter A., “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Eco-
    nomic Review 55: 1126-1150 (1965).

Dupor, Bill, “Exchange Rates and the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics 45: 613-630 (2000).

Eccles, Marriner, Beckoning Frontiers, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1951.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Peter Garber, “Before the Accord: U.S. Monetary-Financial Pol-
     icy, 1945-51,” in G. Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises, Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Evans, George W., and Garey Ramey, “Calculation, Adaptation and Rational Expecta-
     tions,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 2: 156-182 (1998).

Fratianni, Michele, and Franco Spinelli, A Monetary History of Italy, Cambridge: Cam-
      bridge University Press, 1997.

Friedman, Milton, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review 58: 1-17
     (1968).

— —, and Anna J. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960,
   Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.

Gordon, David B., and Eric M. Leeper, “Money, Debt and Price Determination: The
     Quantity and Fiscal Theories,” unpublished, Indiana University, July 1999.

Grandmont, Jean-Michel, Money and Value, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     1983.

Grossman, Herschel I., “The Political Economy of War Debt and Inflation,” in W. Haraf
     and P. Cagan, eds., Monetary Policy for a Changing Financial Environment, Wash-
     ington, 1990.



                                         75
Kenc, Turalay, William Perraudin, and Paolo Vitale, “A Fiscal Theory of Inflation with
     Sovereign Default,” unpublished, Birkbeck College, July 1997.

King, Mervyn, “Commentary: Monetary Policy Implications of Greater Fiscal Disci-
     pline,” in Budget Deficits and Debt: Issues and Options, Federal Reserve Bank of
     Kansas City, 1995.

Kocherlakota, Narayana, and Christopher Phelan, “Explaining the Fiscal Theory of the
     Price Level,” Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 23(4): 14-23
     (2000).

Leeper, Eric, “Policy Rules, Information and Fiscal Effects in a ‘Ricardian’ Model,”
     International Finance Discussion Paper no. 360, Federal Reserve Board, August
     1989.

—- —-, “Equilibria under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Policies,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics 27: 129-147 (1991).

Leith, Campbell, and Simon Wren-Lewis, “Interactions between Monetary and Fiscal
      Policy Rules,” unpublished, University of Exeter, October 1998.

Loyo, Eduardo H.M., “Going International with the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,”
      unpublished, Princeton University, November 1997.

— —, “Tight Money Paradox on the Loose: A Fiscalist Hyperinflation,” unpublished,
    Kennedy School of Government, June 1999.

— —, “Demand-Pull Stagflation,” unpublished, Kennedy School of Government, April
    2000.

McCallum, Bennett T., “Indeterminacy, Bubbles, and the Fiscal Theory of Price Level
    Determination,” NBER Working Paper no. 6456, March 1998.

— —, “Theoretical Issues Pertaining to Monetary Unions,” NBER working paper no.
    7393, October 1999.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, “Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing
     Models: Can We Rule Them Out?” Journal of Political Economy 91: 675-687
     (1983).

Santos, Manuel S., and Michael Woodford, “Rational Asset Pricing Bubbles,” Economet-
     rica 65: 19-58 (1997).

Sargent, Thomas J., “The Ends of Four Big Inflations,” in R.E. Hall, ed., Inflation,


                                        76
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.

— — and Neil Wallace, “ ‘Rational’ Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument,
    and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy 83: 241-254
    (1975).

— — and — —, “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,” Quarterly Review, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Fall 1981.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe, “Price Level Determinacy and Monetary
     Policy under a Balanced-Budget Requirement,” Journal of Monetary Economics
     45: 211-246 (2000).

Shim, Sang Dal, “Inflation and the Government Budget Constraint: International Evi-
     dence,” unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Economics, University of
     Minnesota, August 1984.

Sidrauski, Miguel, “Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy,”
      American Economic Review 57(2): 534-544 (1967).

Sims, Christopher A., “A Simple Model for the Study of the Determination of the Price
      Level and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theory 4:
      381-399 (1994).

— —, “Fiscal Foundations of Price Stability in Open Economies,” unpublished, Yale
    University, September 1997. [Available at http://www.princeton.edu/∼ woodford.]

— —, “Econometric Implications of the Government Budget Constraint,” Journal of
   Econometrics 83: 9-19 (1998).

— —, “Fiat Debt as Equity: Domestic Currency Denominated Debt as Equity in the
    Primary Surplus,” unpublished, Princeton University, August 1999. [Available at
    http://www.princeton.edu/ sims.]

Taylor, John B., “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Con-
     ference Series on Public Policy 39: 195-214 (1993).

— —, “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in J.B. Taylor, ed., Monetary
    Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.

Timberlake, Richard H., Monetary Policy in the United States: An Intellectual and
    Institutional History, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993.

Toma, Mark, Competition and Monopoly in the Federal Reserve System, 1914-1951,

                                        77
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Woodford, Michael, “Monetary Policy and Price-Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-Advance
    Economy,” Economic Theory 4: 345-380 (1994).

— —, “Price-level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggregate,” Carnegie-
    Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43: 1-46 (1995).

— —, “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price Stability?” NBER working
    paper no. 5684, July 1996. [Shorter version published in G.A. Calvo and M.
    King, eds., The Debt Burden and its Consequences for Monetary Policy, London:
    Macmillan, 1997.]

— —, “Doing Without Money: Controlling Inflation in a Post-Monetary World,” Review
    of Economic Dynamics 1:173-219 (1998a).

— —, “Comment on John Cochrane, ‘A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation’,” NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual 13: 390-418 (1998b).

— —, “Public Debt and the Price Level,” unpublished, Princeton University, June 1998c.
    [Available at http://www.princeton.edu/∼ woodford.]

— —, “Price-Level Determination under Interest-Rate Rules,” unpublished, Princeton
    University, April 1999a. [Available at http://www.princeton.edu/∼ woodford.]

— —, “Inflation Stabilization and Welfare,” unpublished, Princeton University, August
    1999b. [Available at http://www.princeton.edu/∼ woodford.]

— —, “A Neo-Wicksellian Framework for the Analysis of Monetary Policy,” unpublished,
    Princeton University, September 2000. [Available at http://www.princeton.edu/
    ∼
      woodford.]




                                        78
