                                 %&           %   




                                                     


                                            
                                          


                                           !"#$'())
                                  *$+,,-#,$$,'())



                       % % &  .%                          
                                /(0( *1 21
                                  3-"#4    (5/6'
                                      718




           
      ! "  #$%&
' !()  &    #*  ! 
      #

+&"#," -#* #) .  #    
   .   &/                  .+
  .  #
*! !221
  
%&  !"#$%'())
7185((/
7%/54/6455


                                               

        *219$:1"""*9"*995(((/'"3#
""33!3!8*2#1**3!"221*"2
  13"*89"**3!"821*84*3!
219:1"8$1-"-"""*1:1*219$1"2$1-"
*219-"184*3!219:1"8*1-$$;"38:1
*3!219$1"2 9"**3!219$1"2"1#*8
/'%"*9"""**3!219:1"8




                                        
  *$3                                    $393"
. 2&!9 "$"                     "2"89 "
<($" 21                                      5)//<* 211*
   "$"4 %00='(                                   "$"4 %00=00
>?/5@5(=A0056                                          >?/5@5(=A005(
%&                                                 %&
3B3$9-91                               $B131
1. Introduction
       In the United States, the value of corporate equities relative to income has nearly

doubled since 1994. In the first half of 2000, the value of corporate equities was close to 1.8

times the U.S. gross national income, or equivalently gross national product (GNP).1 This

ratio is high by historical standards. Its previous post-World War II peak was 1.0, which

occurred in 1968. Over the 1946-1999 period, the value of all U.S. corporate equity averaged

only 0.67 GNPs. [See Figure 1.] Thus, at 1.8 times GNP, the ratio is two and a half times

the ratio’s average in the postwar period.

       Is the stock market value too high? Glassman and Hassett (1999) have argued that

it is not. In fact, they say that it is undervalued by a factor of three. But others are

concerned that, at 1.8 times GNP, the market is overvalued. In Congressional testimony,

Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan has suggested that the high value of the market

may reflect “irrational exuberance” among investors. Shiller (2000) has reiterated this concern

and views a 50 percent drop in the value as plausible. General concern about an overvalued

market is fueled by the experience of Japan in the 1990s. The value of corporate equity fell

in 1990 by 60 percent, and subsequently the economy stagnated.

       We use standard economic theory to value U.S. corporate equities and find that a value

of 1.8 times GNP is justified. An implication of the theory is that the value of corporate

equity should be equal to the value of productive assets in the corporate sector.2 Our basic

method, then, is to estimate the value of corporations’ productive assets and compare that

value to the value of corporate equities. This is not as easy as it may seem.

       Productive assets include tangible assets—like factories, oﬃce buildings, and machines—

and intangible assets—like patents, brand names, and firm-specific human capital. And a good

measure of the value of these assets must include not only those used by U.S. corporations

                                              1
in the United States itself, but also those used outside the United States, by their foreign

subsidiaries.

       Estimates of the value of some of these assets are reported by the U.S. government. The

Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) provides estimates of the value

of tangible corporate assets located in the United States. In the 1990s, the estimate is slightly

above 1.0 GNP. However the BEA does not estimate the value of assets of U.S. corporate

foreign subsidiaries or the value of intangible assets in the corporate sector.

       To estimate the value of assets of U.S. corporate foreign subsidiaries, we use profits

of these subsidiaries divided by an estimate of the return on tangible capital in the United

States. Our estimate is close to 0.4 GNPs. To estimate the value of corporate intangible

assets, we use data on corporate profits and tangible assets, and an estimate of the return on

capital used in the corporate sector. We find that corporate profits are larger than can be

justified with tangible assets alone. If we redo the national accounts with intangible assets

included, we can derive formulas that allow us to residually determine the value of these

assets. The key assumption is that the after-tax returns on tangible and intangible capital

are equal. We find that the value of intangible capital is roughly 0.4 GNPs.

       A value of corporate intangible assets of 0.4 GNP is large, being nearly one-quarter of

corporate equity. We think this estimate is reasonable in light of direct evidence. The value

of high-technology companies can only be justified by their intangible capital, particularly

human capital.3 A significant fraction of the value of drug companies must be assigned to

the value of patents that they own. And, as Bond and Cummins (2000), point out, brand

names such as Coca-Cola account for much of the value of many companies.

       Adding together the values of corporate tangible assets located in the United States,

assets of foreign subsidiaries, and intangible capital gives us 1.8 GNPs as the value of produc-

                                               2
tive assets in the corporate sector. As theory predicts, both the value of corporate equities

and the value of productive assets were 1.8 GNPs in the first half of 2000.

       Although our focus is the value of corporate equities, our theory has predictions for

average real returns on debt and equity. Theory predicts that average returns on both debt

and equity will be near 4 percent in the future. This assumes that there will be no impor-

tant policy changes that significantly aﬀect the pricing of financial assets. We see already

that interest rates on U.S. Treasury inflation-protected securities with various maturities are

consistent with this 4-percent prediction.


2. Theory
       Our method of estimating the value of corporate assets involves constructing a stan-

dard growth model and quantifying it.4 The growth model we use is established aggregate

economic theory and is fast becoming the textbook model in intermediate and advanced

undergraduate macroeconomic courses. In this section, we derive formulas for the value of

corporate equity and asset returns. In the next, we use national income and product data to

derive estimates for the United States.5

       Our model economy includes two sectors, a corporate sector and a noncorporate sector.

Since our focus is on the value of domestic corporations, output from the corporate sector

is the gross domestic product of corporations located in the United States. Output of the

noncorporate sector of our model is the remaining product of U.S. GNP. Our noncorporate

sector thus includes the household business sector, the government sector, the noncorporate

business sector, and the rest-of-world sector.




                                                 3
A. Willingness to Substitute

       Our model economy is inhabited by infinitely lived households with preferences ordered

by the expected value of
       ∞
       X        h                        i
             β t (ct `ψt )1−σ /(1 − σ) Nt                                                       (1)
       t=0

where t indexes time, ct is per-capita consumption, `t is the fraction of productive time

allocated to nonmarket activities such as leisure, and Nt is the number of household members.

The fraction of time allocated by households to market activities is denoted by n = 1−`. The

size of a household is assumed to grow at the rate of population growth, η. The curvature

parameter on consumption, σ ≥ 0, measures how risk averse a household is. The larger this

parameter’s value, the more risk averse is the household. The parameter 0 < β < 1 measures

impatience to consume, with a smaller value implying more impatience. The parameter ψ

measures the relative importance of leisure and consumption to the household. The larger ψ

is, the more important is leisure.


B. Ability to Transform

       The model economy has two intermediate good sectors — a corporate sector, denoted

by 1, and a noncorporate sector, denoted by 2. These provide the inputs to produce the

economy’s final good.

       The noncorporate production technology is simple:

       y2,t ≤ (k2,t )θ (zt n2,t )1−θ .                                                          (2)

Here y2 is sector output, k2 is capital services, n2 is labor services, z is a stochastic technology

parameter, and θ is the capital share parameter, 0 < θ < 1.

       For our purposes, the corporate sector is the important sector and is more compli-

cated. It has both tangible and intangible assets. U.S. corporations make large investments

                                                 4
in such things as on-the-job training, R&D, organization building, advertising, and firm-

specific learning by doing. These investments are large, and the stock of intangible assets has

important consequences for the pricing of corporate assets. So we assume that production in

the corporate sector requires both tangible assets, which are measured, k1m , and intangible

assets which are unmeasured, k1u . In addition to capital, labor services n1 are required. The

aggregate production function for the corporate sector is


       y1,t ≤ (k1m,t )φmt (k1u,t )φut (zt n1,t )1−φmt −φut                                  (3)


where φmt and φut are the random capital shares for measured and unmeasured capital,

respectively. In order to capture variations in profit shares over the business cycle, we make

the nonstandard assumption that capital shares vary. Variations in profit shares aﬀect the

equity risk premium, which we want to estimate.

       The three per capita capital stocks in this economy depreciate geometrically and evolve

according to


       ki,t+1 = [(1 − δ i )ki,t + xi,t ]/(1 + η)                                            (4)


where i = 1m, 1u, or 2; δ i is the rate of depreciation for capital of type i; and xi,t is gross

investment of type i in period t. The right side of the capital accumulation equation (4) is

divided by the growth in population (1 + η) because ki and xi are in per capita units.

       The model also has a final good sector, which combines the intermediate inputs from

the corporate and noncorporate sectors to produce a composite output good that can be used

for consumption and investment. This production function is

                                                      ³              ´1/ρ
                                                 ρ             ρ
       ct + gt + x1m,t + x1u,t + x2,t ≤ yt ≡ A µy1,t + (1 − µ)y2,t                          (5)


where g is government consumption, 0 < µ < 1 is a parameter that determines the relative

                                                          5
sizes of the corporate and noncorporate sectors, ρ ≤ 1 is a parameter that governs the

substitutability of corporate and noncorporate goods, and A > 0 is a scale parameter.

       Government production is assumed to be included in noncorporate production. How-

ever, the government plays a special role in the economy: it taxes various activities to finance

government purchases and transfers. In particular, the government taxes consumption, labor

income, property, and profits. Taxes are proportional in our model economy.


C. Equilibrium

       There are two ways to decentralize our model economy and they lead to the same equi-

librium outcome. One way is to assume that firms hire workers, make investment decisions,

pay taxes directly to the government, and pay dividends to the households. Because of the

investment decision, the firms’ problem, in this decentralization, is dynamic. The other way

to decentralize is to assume that firms rent capital and labor from households. Households

make the investment decisions and pay taxes to the government. In this decentralization,

the firms’ problem is simple and static. The relevant equilibrium outcomes are the same in

the two decentralizations because the households eﬀectively own the capital in both cases.

Here, we describe an equilibrium for the second type of economy. We find this economy easier

to work with because we can consolidate all of the interesting transactions for a particular

period into the household’s budget constraint.

       The household budget constraint in period t is


           (1 + τ c,t )ct + x1m,t + x1u,t + x2,t

                = r1m,t k1m,t + r1u,t k1u,t + r2,t k2,t + wt nt

                     −τ 1k,t k1m,t − τ 2k,t k2,t − τ n,t wt nt



                                                      6
                    −τ 1,t [(r1m,t − δ 1m,t )k1m,t + r1u,t k1u,t − x1u,t − τ 1k,t k1m,t ]

                    −τ 2,t [(r2,t − δ 2 )k2,t − τ 2k,t k2,t ] + π t .                       (6)


Households rent tangible and intangible capital to corporations at rental rates r1m and r1u ,

respectively. Households also rent capital to noncorporate firms at a rental rate of r2 . Wage

income is wn, where n = n1 + n2 is total labor services. Taxes are paid on consumption

expenditures, wage income, property, and profits. The tax rate on consumption is τ c ; that

on wage income is τ n ; tax rates on property in the corporate and noncorporate sectors are

τ 1k and τ 2k ; and the rate on corporate profits is τ 1 . Note that corporations can subtract

depreciation and property taxes when they compute their corporate profits tax. Note also

that unmeasured investment, for things like R&D, is untaxed. It, too, is subtracted from

income when taxable income is computed. Noncorporate profits are taxed at a rate τ 2 .

Again, depreciation and property taxes are subtracted when taxable income is computed.

Finally, transfers from the government to households are denoted by π.

       Now consider equilibrium in this economy. Households maximize their expected utility

(1) subject to the sequence of budget constraints (6) and the capital accumulation equations

(4). Households take as given initial capital stocks as well as current and future prices and

tax rates. Firms in all sectors behave competitively and solve simple, static optimization

problems. The intermediate good firms choose capital and labor to maximize profits subject

to the constraint on their production, namely, functions (3) or (2). Thus, wages and rental

rates in the corporate and noncorporate sectors are equal to their marginal value products.

The final good firms choose the intermediate inputs to maximize y − p1 y1 − p2 y2 , where pi

is the price of the intermediate goods of sector i. Maximization is done subject to (5). If

households and firms choose allocations optimally, then equilibrium prices are set so that


                                                       7
markets for goods, labor, and capital services all clear.

       In this economy, the value of corporate equities is equal to the value of the end-of-

period stock of capital used in the corporate sector. If we use the price of output as the unit

of account, then the value is given by

       Vt = [k1m,t+1 + (1 − τ 1,t )k1u,t+1 ] Nt+1 .                                                     (7)

This follows from the facts that the cost, on margin, of a unit of measured capital is 1 and

the cost, on margin, of a unit of unmeasured capital is 1 minus the corporate income tax rate.

Expenditures on unmeasured investment are expensed and reduce taxable corporate income.

[See the budget constraint (6).]

       The return on corporate equities is given by

        e
       rt,t+1 = [Vt+1 + dt+1 Nt+1 /Vt ] − 1                                                             (8)

where {dt } is the stream of payments to the shareholders of the corporation (that is, the

households). Payments to shareholders are given by


       dt = p1,t y1,t − wt n1,t − τ 1k,t k1m,t

                     −τ 1,t [(r1m,t − δ 1m − τ 1k,t )k1m,t + r1u,t k1u,t − x1u,t ] − x1m,t − x1u,t .    (9)


This represents what the corporation has left over after workers have been paid, taxes on

property and profits have been paid, and new investments have been made.

       The return on a one-period bond, which we refer to as the risk-free rate, is given by
              n     h                                            io−1
       rf,t = βEt (ct+1 )−σ (`t+1 )ψ(1−σ) /(ct )−σ (`t )ψ(1−σ)          − 1,                           (10)

where c−σ `ψ(1−σ) is the marginal utility of consumption. The value, or price, of the bond is

simply the inverse of 1 + rf,t .

                                                      8
3. Findings
       We can use the formulas for the asset values and returns just described to assess

whether our model is consistent with U.S. observations. It is. To demonstrate that, we first

abstract from uncertainty and price corporate equity and risk-free debt using a deterministic

version of the model. Without uncertainty, calculations of the relevant quantities are trivial.

We then establish that, for all practical purposes, the results are the same in the deterministic

and stochastic versions of the model when we introduce uncertainty consistent with the

behavior of the U.S. economy.6


A. Deterministic version

       Again, we work first with the steady state of a deterministic version of the model. We

derive an estimate for the return to capital using data from the U.S. noncorporate sector.

We then derive an estimate for the size of the intangible capital stock. We choose the level of

intangible capital so that the returns to capital in the corporate and noncorporate sectors are

equated. With the estimate for intangible capital and data on measured corporate capital

and taxes paid in the corporate sector, we can estimate the value of the stock market.

       With no uncertainty, the after-tax return to corporate equities and the after-tax return

to a bond that pays 1 for sure in the following period are both equal to the after-tax interest

rate, which we denote by i and define to be

       i = [(1 + γ)σ /β] − 1                                                                (11)

where γ is the growth of the technology parameter zt . This follows directly from the first-

order conditions of the household. In fact, if there is no uncertainty, then the after-tax return

to each type of capital is also given by i, and the following is true:

       i = (1 − τ 1 )(r1m − δ 1m − τ 1k ) = r1u − δ 1u = (1 − τ 2 )(r2 − δ 2 − τ 2k ).      (12)

                                                    9
       Assuming that the U.S. economy is roughly in a steady state, we can estimate i using

data from the BEA’s national income and product accounts (NIPA). In Table 1, we report

average values for income, product, and capital stocks of the United States during 1990-99.

The first column of the table lists the accounting concepts used for NIPA data. The second

column lists the average values over the period 1990-99 relative to GNP. We make adjustments

to these values as theory requires, in order that the accounts are consistent with our model.

The third column describes and quantifies the adjustments, and the fourth column lists the

final, adjusted averages. (In Appendix B, we provide details about the calculations made for

Table 1.) In Table 2, the adjusted averages are matched up with model counterparts.

       Our estimate of the return to capital comes from noncorporate data because we observe

the relevant quantities needed to infer (1−τ 2 )(r2 −δ 2 −τ 2k ). However, before we can construct

an estimate of the return to capital in the noncorporate sector, we need to consider several

of the adjustments made to the NIPA data. Two sets of adjustments are relevant: those to

noncorporate profits and those to capital.

       Consider first noncorporate profits. We make two adjustments to this item. One is

to reduce the net interest payments of the sector by an estimate of the sector’s purchases

of intermediate financial services. We estimate that of the 0.042 GNPs of this sector’s net

interest payments, 0.022 should be treated as intermediate service purchases. So we reduce

GNP 2.2 percent, with the reduction on the product side being in consumption of financial

services and that on the income side, in imputed net interest income of households. Most

of this adjustment is simply the diﬀerence in interest paid by people with home mortgages

and the interest received by households who lend to the financial institutions that issue the

mortgages.

       The imputed net interest income that remains is 0.02 of GNP, which we see as a rea-

                                               10
sonable number. Some of this is forgone interest of people who hold currency and checking

accounts that pay less than the short-term interest rate. Some of it is the reduction in insur-

ance premiums that is possible because the insurance company earns interest on premiums

for a period prior to making claims. In these cases, the household is receiving services for

forgone interest, and there should be an imputation to income and product.

       The other adjustment that we make to noncorporate profits is the addition of imputed

capital services to government capital and to consumer durables. The U.S. system of accounts

uses a 0 percent interest rate when imputing services to government capital. We instead use

the average return on capital in the noncorporate sector. So that income equals product, we

add imputed services both to profits in the noncorporate sector and to government consump-

tion. In the U.S. system, consumer durables are treated as consumption. We treat them

instead as investment and impute services to these durables. These imputed capital services

are added to profits in the noncorporate sector and to private consumption.

       We must make one addition to the capital stock of the noncorporate sector. Capital

stocks reported by the BEA include only capital located in the United States. But our

measure of noncorporate profits includes profits of U.S. foreign subsidiaries equal to 0.012 of

GNP. To estimate the capital stock used to generate these profits, we divide 0.012 by our

estimate of the return on capital i.

       We are now ready to compute the after-tax return on capital in the noncorporate

sector (which is equal to (1 − τ 2 )(r2 − δ 2 − τ 2,k ) and to i):


                      accounting returns + imputed returns
       i =                                                                                (13)
               noncorporate capital + capital of foreign subsidiaries
               .064 + (.592 + .287)i
          =                                                                               (14)
                  2.153 + .012/i



                                                  11
where 0.064 GNPs is noncorporate profits plus net interest less intermediate financial services,

0.592 GNPs is the net stock of government capital, 0.287 GNPs is the net stock of consumer

durables, 2.153 GNPs is the sum of stocks of government capital, consumer durables, and

noncorporate business, and 0.012 GNPs is net profits from foreign subsidiaries. We have

assumed that τ 2 is 0 because the main categories of noncorporate income — namely services

of owner-occupied housing, government capital, and consumer durables — are untaxed. The

value of i that satisfies (14) is 4.08%. Therefore, our estimate of the imputed services to

capital is 0.036, and our estimate of the capital associated with the net profits of 1.2 percent

is 0.294.

       So, theory predicts that, on average, the return to capital in the noncorporate sector

should be 4.08 percent. This is close to the average values of the risk-free rate on inflation-

protected bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury. In the first quarter of 2000, the average return

on 5-year inflation-protected bonds was 3.99 percent, and the average return on 30-year

inflation-protected bonds was 4.19%.

       We turn next to the value of domestic corporations. To compute our estimate, we

need the value of measured tangible capital, the corporate income tax rate, and an estimate

of the value of unmeasured intangible capital. [See equation (7).]

       In Table 1, measured tangible capital as reported in the BEA’s Fixed Reproducible

Tangible Wealth is 0.821 GNPs. However, this measure does not include inventories or land.

Inventories are however available in NIPA so we add them. Land is not included in NIPA

estimates but it is in the Flow of Funds Accounts for nonfinancial corporate business. The

diﬀerence between real estate values reported by the Fed and nonresidential structures re-

ported by the BEA is 0.06 GNPs. Thus, our estimate of measured capital, with land and

inventories included, is 1.042 times GNP.

                                              12
       In Table 1, the corporate profits tax liability is 0.026 GNPs, and corporate profits are

0.073 GNPs. The tax rate is taken to be the average tax and is, therefore, equal to 0.356.

       The next step is obtaining an estimate for unmeasured capital in the corporate sector.

In the deterministic version of our model, the after-tax returns for the three types of capital

must be equal, and this requirement ties down the size of unmeasured corporate capital.

Above we computed one of these after-tax returns, namely the return on noncorporate capital.

We can use this as our estimate of r1u − δ 1u and our estimate of (1 − τ 1 )(r1m − δ 1 − τ 1k ). We

can also use the fact that profits in the model economy’s corporate sector are equal to NIPA

corporate profits plus unmeasured investment, so


       (r1m − δ 1 − τ 1k )k1m + r1u k1u = NIPA profits + x1u                                  (15)


Replacing r1m − δ 1 − τ 1k by i/(1 − τ 1 ) in (15) and rearranging we have


       i = (1 − τ 1 ) [NIPA profits + x1u − r1u k1u ] /k1m

          = (1 − τ 1 ) [NIPA profits + ((1 + η)(1 + γ) − i)k1u ] /k1m                         (16)


where we have used the fact that x1u is proportional to k1u on the steady state growth path.

The only unknown in equation (16) is intangible capital. Using U.S. averages from Tables 1

and 2, we have


       0.0408 = (1 − 0.026/0.073)(0.073 + 0.03k1u − 0.0408k1u )/1.042                         (17)


where 0.026 GNPs is the tax paid on domestic corporate profits, 0.073 is NIPA profits, 0.03

is the growth rate of GNP, and 0.03 k1u is the value of unmeasured net intangible investment

in the steady state. The solution to this equation is k1u = 0.645. Therefore, unmeasured

intangible investment is equal to 0.019 GNPs.


                                                13
       With our estimate for unmeasured capital, we can now compute the model’s market

value of domestic corporations using the formula (7). Assuming that the time period is not

too long, the total value, that is, N times the per capita value, is


       V = [k1m + (1 − τ 1 )k1u ] N = 1.457N                                              (18)


where τ 1 = 0.356 (which is value of corporate income taxes divided by the value of taxable

corporate income).

       To compare this estimate to the data’s market value of U.S. corporations, we need to

add in the value of U.S. foreign subsidiaries. Profits from U.S. foreign subsidiaries averaged

1.56 percent of GNP over the period 1990-99.7 Using an interest rate of 4.08 percent, we

estimate that capital of U.S. foreign subsidiaries has a value of 0.382 GNPs. Let VU S be the

market value of U.S. corporations. Then,


       VUS = V + .382N = 1.84 N = 1.84 GNPs.                                              (19)


We write this in terms of GNPs because per capita GNP is normalized to 1, and total GNP

is, therefore, N .

       According to the Fed’s Flow of Funds data, the market value of domestic corporations

at the end of the first quarter of 2000 was 1.83 times GNP of that quarter. In the second

quarter of 2000, the market value was 1.71 times GNP. The average thus far in 2000 is 1.77.

       This number is equal to our estimate of the value of corporate capital if corporate debt

is taken into account. In 2000, corporate debt was roughly 7 percent of GNP, which implies

that the total value of US corporations — debt plus equity — is 1.84 times GNP. Our total

value is 1.84 as well.

       Thus far, we have assumed that the premium for nondiversifiable risk is small.



                                               14
B. Stochastic version

       Now we work out the implications of a stochastic version of the model. With uncer-

tainty, we expect that risky assets, like corporate equities, would be paid a risk premium.

So here, we quantify this premium. We find that, in fact, the premium is very small. Thus,

the results of the stochastic version of the model are essentially those of the deterministic

version.


Calibration

       To determine the implications of the stochastic version of the model, we must first

calibrate the model. We do this in three steps. First, we compute a steady state for the

model that is consistent with the adjusted accounting measures in Table 1. Second, we choose

parameters for the model — including means of stochastic parameters — that are consistent

with these steady state values. Third, we choose stochastic processes for shocks that lead

to fluctuations in the key variables that are comparable to their U.S. counterparts. The key

variables for asset pricing are output, consumption, labor, and after-tax corporate earnings.


Steady State

       To compute a steady state for the model we need to make some further adjustments

to the NIPA data so that they are consistent with the model concepts. The adjustments

that we have discussed so far are the addition of unmeasured investment; the subtraction of

intermediate financial services; the imputation of consumer durable and government capital

services; and adjustments to the capital stocks. The final adjustments needed are adjustments

for sales and excise taxes, for depreciation of consumer durables, and adjustments for foreign

subsidiary capital.

       NIPA includes sales taxes in the measure of private consumption. In our model, we


                                             15
treat consumption as pretax. Therefore, we must subtract sales taxes from NIPA private

consumption. Consumer durables are treated as private consumption by NIPA and as invest-

ment in our model. Therefore, we add the depreciation of consumer durables to noncorporate

depreciation and to consumption. Finally, because profits of foreign subsidiaries are included

in national income (and therefore in noncorporate profits), we add an estimate of investment

and depreciation for foreign subsidiaries. To do this, we use the same rate of depreciation as

other noncorporate capital in the United States.

       The adjusted values for income, product, and capital stocks are treated as a steady

state for the model. These values are reported in Table 2 along with the relevant expressions

for the model.

       Also in this table are values and expressions for hours worked, growth rates, and tax

rates. In the United States, hours worked per person are roughly one-quarter of discretionary

time. The growth rates are averages over 1990-99 of total factor productivity and population.

With the exception of the labor tax rate, we use NIPA values reported in Table 1 to calculate

tax rates. The corporate and noncorporate income tax rates — which we used in earlier

calculations — are set equal to 0.356 and 0, respectively. Property taxes and consumption

taxes are the two parts of indirect business taxes. Consumption taxes are 0.047 GNPs, and

property taxes are 0.032 GNPs. Our tax rate of 0.086 for consumption is found by dividing

the total tax of 0.047 by private consumption, which is equal to 0.544. (See Table 2.) Our

tax rates on property are found by dividing total property taxes by the capital stocks in the

respective sectors. For corporate property, the rate is 0.02/1.042 or 0.019. For noncorporate

property the rate is 0.012/2.447 or 0.005.

       The labor tax rate is more diﬃcult to estimate since the U.S. income tax is progressive,

while taxes in our model economy are proportional. Households in the federal tax bracket of

                                              16
28 percent or higher pay nearly all of the income tax. However, because of fringe benefits and

before-tax contributions to retirement plans, the marginal tax rates of these households are

eﬀectively lower than 28 percent. Therefore, we choose the tax rate on labor income to be

25 percent. But our analysis is not sensitive to the exact rate used. The diﬀerence between

tax revenues and government expenditures is a lump-sum transfer.


Parameters

       In Table 3, we derive depreciation rates, capital shares, and parameters for the final

good technology and the utility function. Most of these parameters can be pinned down by

steady-state values.

       There are two exceptions: the elasticity of substitution of corporate and noncorporate

goods 1/(1 − ρ) and the curvature parameter on consumption σ, which measures the degree

of risk aversion. For these parameters, we experiment with diﬀerent values — in such a way

as to get reasonable predictions for the variability of consumption relative to GNP and the

variability of corporate share to product. Our baseline values are σ = 1.5 and ρ = −2.


Stochastic Shock Processes

       The final choices necessary for the stochastic version of the model are the stochastic

processes. We assume that the technology parameter zt is stochastic, with the process given

by


       log zt+1 = log zt + log(1 + γ) + εzt+1                                            (20)


where εzt is an independent and identically distributed normal random variable with a mean

of zero. Notice that zt grows at rate γ, as do other nonstationary variables in this economy.

We choose the variance of εz so that the standard deviation of U.S. GNP and our model’s


                                                17
output are roughly the same once we log the series and run them through the Hodrick-Prescott

filter. The standard deviation of U.S. GNP is 1.74 percent for the postwar period.

       In our baseline economy, we assume that the only shocks hitting the economy are tech-

nology shocks for two reasons. First, technology shocks in the postwar period are important

sources of aggregate fluctuations. Second, correctly identifying the shocks matters little for

the size of the equity premium provided the model has been calibrated to the steady-state ob-

servations and provided the model’s variances and covariances of consumption and corporate

profits match their empirical counterparts.

       Table 4 summarizes the parameters for the baseline economy. One parameter included

in this table that has not yet been discussed is that for the adjustment cost b. Because the

cyclical variation of consumption is crucial for asset pricing, we include adjustment costs on

all types of capital of the form ϕ(x/k) = b/2(x/k − δ̂)2 k, where δ̂ = δ + γ + η.8 We do this to

ensure that the relative volatility of consumption and output in the model is approximately

equal to the observed relative volatility.


Simulation Results

       Given parameter values, we compute an equilibrium for the economy, simulate time

series, and compute asset values and returns. Following Jermann (1998), we compute a linear

approximation to the decision rules for capital. All other variables, including equity returns,

can be determined in a nonlinear way once we have values for the capital stocks and the

stochastic shocks.

Shocks Only to Technology

       With no other shocks, we find that the ratio of the value of corporate equities to GNP

is 1.85, about what we found in the determinstic version of our model; the return on equity



                                              18
is 4.1; and the return on debt is 4.07. (See Table 4.) The equity risk premium in this case

is small, being only 0.03 percent, which is close to the deterministic case with no equity

premium.

       In this economy with only technology shocks, hours of work are too smooth relative

to U.S. data, and corporate earnings are too volatile. We need to get the right variations

in hours as well as consumption since both are arguments of marginal utility; movements in

marginal utility are what is relevant for asset pricing. We also need to get the right variation

and co-variation in corporate earnings since this is relevant for stock returns and the equity

premium paid to stocks. Thus, we consider several variations on our baseline economy that

should move the model toward greater volatility in hours and less volatility in corporate

earnings. The parameters used in these variations are summarized in Table 4.

Shocks Also to Labor Taxes

       To get more volatility in hours and leisure, we assume that labor tax rates are stochas-

tic. Assume, for example, that τ nt is an autoregressive process with


       τ nt+1 = (1 − ρn )τ̄ n + ρn τ nt + εnt+1                                              (21)


where τ̄ n is the mean of the process and εnt is a i.i.d. normal shock with a mean of zero. We set

τ̄ n equal to 0.25. In order to get a high value for the autocorrelation of hours, as is observed

in U.S. data, we set ρn equal to 0.95 to The variances of εzt and εnt are chosen to make the

standard deviations of GNP and hours in the model match those in the U.S. data (which are

1.74 percent and 1.52 percent, respectively, for the postwar period). The adjustment cost

parameter is set so that the relative volatility of consumption and output is roughly 0.5, as

in the data.

       In Table 4, we report the results of this experiment. Notice that little has changed from


                                                  19
the economy with only technology shocks. The average ratio of the stock value to GNP is the

same, and the equity and debt returns are not much diﬀerent from the baseline economy’s.

Note also that the variation in tax rates actually leads to a fall in the premium from 0.03 to

0.01. This happens because the greater variation in hours reduces the correlation between

consumption and earnings. But with shocks to technology and labor tax rates, the variation

in corporate earnings and the correlation between earnings and consumption are still high

relative to that for the U.S. data.

Shocks Also to Corporate Capital Share

       So now we try a shock to a variable that has a significant eﬀect on corporate earnings

and consumption: the share of corporate profits in income. We assume here, as with the

labor tax rate, that this variable follows an autoregressive process, with


       φmt+1 = (1 − ρφ )φ̄m + ρφ φmt + εφt+1                                             (22)


where φ̄m is the mean of the process and εφt is i.i.d. normal with a mean of zero. If we

choose ρφ and the variance of εφt to replicate the variability in U.S. corporate shares, then

the results show little diﬀerence from the benchmark economy. In fact, with shocks to both

the labor tax rate and the corporate profits share, we find that we are eﬀectively back to the

deterministic version of the model with the equity premium equal to zero.

       We tried some other experiments to see if we could generate a large risk premium.

Introducing random corporate profit tax rates led to counterfactually high variation in cor-

porate earnings. With larger values of σ, we found the volatility of consumption too high

and the volatility of hours too low. Diﬀerent values of ρ, the parameter which aﬀects the

substitutability of corporate and noncorporate goods, changed the results little.

Eﬀects of More Rapid Growth


                                               20
       If we increased the growth rate in technology, we got a higher risk-free rate but a

similar risk premium. The media have suggested that higher future growth justifies higher

equity values. We found that this is not so. There are two consequences of higher growth

for the value of the stock market. One is that with more rapid growth, future corporate

payouts are larger. If market discount factors remained fixed, then these higher payouts

imply higher stock market values. But higher growth also leads to greater discounting of

future payouts, which reduces the current value of these future payouts. We find that these

two consequences of more rapid growth for the value of corporate equities roughly oﬀset each

other. The expectation of more rapid economic growth does not justify higher equity values

relative to GNP.

       A change that would justify higher corporate value relative to income is an increase

in the corporate after-tax earnings share of income. This we see as very unlikely because of

the historic stability of this variable, once it is corrected for business cycle variation.

       From the exercises of this section, we can summarize our principle findings. First, the

equity premium is small. The equity premium is less than 0.1 percent and our best estimate is

that it is close to 0. Second, the value of the stock market relative to GNP should be near 1.8

GNPs and risk-free real return should be near 4 percent. These conclusions depend crucially

on our assumption that there is unmeasured intangible capital in the corporate sector. But

they are robust to our choices of key parameters and shocks.


4. Conclusions
       Some stock market analysts have argued that corporate equities are currently overval-

ued. But such an argument requires a point of reference: overvalued relative to what? In this

paper, we use the basic growth model that is standard for macroeconomists as our reference



                                                21
point. We make full use of the U.S. national income and product accounts in matching up

all variables in the model with NIPA data. We show that theory has a clear prediction for

the value of corporate equities. It should be equal to the value of productive assets less net

debt. We find that it is. We also find that the risk-free return should be near 4 percent, as

it currently is. Barring any institutional changes, we predict a small equity premium in the

future.




                                             22
Appendix A. Some Financial Facts

       In this appendix, we report some facts about U.S. household asset holdings that guided

the selection of the model that we use to determine whether the U.S. stock market is currently

overvalued.

       We assumed that individuals in our model are not on corners with respect to their

asset choices. There is some evidence that most are not. Households hold a lot of both debt

and equity. Table A1 reports the balance sheet of U.S. households in 1999 and on average for

the 1946-99 period, all relative to gross national product. Their holding of debt is 1.46 GNP.

Some of this debt is held for liquidity purposes, but the total holding is significantly above

what financial planners typically recommend for emergencies and unforeseen contingencies.

       Of the non-liquid assets, approximately 50 percent are currently in retirement ac-

counts. In Table A2, we report holdings in retirements accounts in 1999 — by type of account

and by type of asset.9 These pension fund assets are roughly split between debt and equity.

The holdings can cheaply be shifted by pension managers or, in many cases, by individuals

themselves.

       Survey data find that many people do in fact shift between debt and equity. [See

Vissing-Jorgenson 2000.] Figure 2 captures this switching in a graphic manner. The figure is

a scatter plot of the fraction of financial assets in equity in two diﬀerent years for a sample

of people. A circle depicts the positions of a person in the sample in 1984 and 1994. The

circle for a person with the same equity share in the two years falls on the 45-degree line.

The large number of circles that are far from the 45-degree line establishes that many people

made large changes in the share of their portfolio in equity.

       We assumed that tax rates on dividends and interest were eﬀectively zero. Corpora-

tions do pay taxes on capital income. But taxes on dividends and realized capital gains from

                                              23
the sale of corporate equity are not taxes on corporate capital income. Someone can avoid

taxes on dividends and capital gains by managing his portfolio is such a way that gains are

unrealized capital gains. Dividends paid to pension funds, which now own half of corporate

equity, are not subject to the personal income tax. Similarly pension funds’ realized capital

gains from the sale of corporate equity are not taxed. There are also tax-managed mututal

funds, introduced in the mid-1999s, which are used to minimize taxes and financial fees while

allowing people to hold well-diversified portfolios.10




                                               24
Appendix B. NIPA Data and the Model

       In this appendix, we describe in detail the adjustments that we made to the U.S. BEA’s

NIPA data (as reported in the Survey of Current Business (SCB) ) before we compared these

data to our model’s estimates.

The Data

       On the left side of Table 1, we report average values for income, product, and capital of

the United States during 1990-99. The first column of the table lists the accounting concepts

of the NIPA. In the second column, we report average values relative to GNP. Thus, GNP is

normalized to 1. Notice also that the sum of value added for the corporate and noncorporate

sectors is equal to GNP.

       Corporate income is domestic income of corporations with operations in the United

States (see Table 1.15, SCB). Noncorporate income is the diﬀerence between gross national

income (Table 1.14, SCB) and corporate income. Thus, noncorporate income includes income

of households, the government, noncorporate business, and foreign subsidiaries. For compen-

sation in the noncorporate sector, we include total employee compensation and 80 percent of

proprietors’ income. Profits of the noncorporate sector include profits of foreign subsidiaries,

rental income, and 20 percent of proprietors’ income.

       Total product is the sum of private consumption, public consumption, and investment

in the three types of capital, namely measured corporate, unmeasured corporate, and noncor-

porate (Table 1.1, SCB). We include net exports in noncorporate investment since production

in the rest of the world is included in our model’s notion of noncorporate production.

Adjustments

       On the right side of Table 1, we provide descriptions and values of the adjustments

that we made to NIPA data in order to make them consistent with the theory. We now

                                              25
describe each adjustment in detail.

       NIPA includes sales taxes in its measure of private consumption. On the income side,

these taxes are included in indirect business taxes. In our model, we treat consumption as

pre-tax, and therefore, subtract sales taxes from both sides of the accounts. We estimate

that of the 0.079 GNPs of total indirect business taxes, 0.047 GNPs is sales or excise taxes,

which we model as taxes on private consumption. The remainder is attributed to property

taxes in the corporate and noncorporate sectors.

       NIPA does not include a measure of intangible investment because this type of invest-

ment is expensed. We estimate it to be 0.019 GNPs. We include an estimate of intangible

investment in our notion of GNP because it raises both after-tax corporate profits and in-

vestment.

       We make an adjustment to net interest — in both the corporate and noncorporate

sectors. We subtract the part of financial services purchased by businesses that we estimate

consists of intermediate financial goods. NIPA treats net interest of financial intermediaries

as purchases of services by the lender, typically, the household. The United Nations system of

accounts treats it, instead, as purchases of services by the borrower. Thus, in the U.N. system,

no entry for imputed interest is made, so imputed interest and consumption services are lower.

Here, we compute lenders’ (borrowers’) purchases of financial services as the product of the

short-term interest rate less interest received and the amount loaned (borrowed).

       We assume that all of the NIPA net interest in the corporate sector, totaling 0.015

GNPs, is intermediate services and we subtract it. We assume that only part of the net

interest in the noncorporate sector, equal to 0.022 GNPs, is intermediate. The remainder of

noncorporate net interest is included in profits. Most of the 0.022 GNPs adjustment is for

services implicitly purchased by homeowners with mortgages. On the product side, we lower

                                              26
consumption services by 0.037 GNPs.

       Consumer durables are treated as private consumption in NIPA and as investment in

our model. Therefore, we include depreciation of consumer durables. On the income side,

this depreciation appears in noncorporate capital consumption. On the product side, it is

added to consumption services. This is the procedure used for housing services which are

included in NIPA.

       Because profits of foreign subsidiaries are included in NIPA (and therefore in non-

corporate profits), we add an estimate of the capital of these subsidiaries to noncorporate

capital. To make the depreciation and investment of the noncorporate sector comparable to

the capital stock, we include depreciation and net investment for the foreign subsidiaries. In

making these estimates, we are assuming that depreciation rates and growth rates are the

same at home and abroad.

       To noncorporate profits, we add imputed capital services to government capital and

to consumer durables. NIPA uses a zero percent interest rate when imputing services to

government capital. We instead use the average return on capital in the noncorporate sector.

So that income equals product, we add imputed services to profits in the noncorporate sector

and to government consumption. In NIPA, consumer durables are treated as consumption.

We instead treat them as investment and impute services to these durables. These imputed

capital services are added to profits in the noncorporate sector and to private consumption.

       We make several adjustments to the capital stocks reported in the SCB Fixed Repro-

ducible Tangible Wealth. Measured capital is 0.821 GNPs. This measure does not include the

value of inventories or land. A measure of inventories is, however, available in NIPA so we

add them. A measure of land is not included in NIPA but it is in the Federal Reserve’s Flow

of Funds Accounts for nonfinancial corporate business. The diﬀerence between real estate

                                             27
values reported by the Fed and nonresidential structures reported in NIPA is 0.06 GNPs.

Thus, our estimate of measured capital, with land and inventories included, is 1.043 GNPs.

       We make one adjustment to the capital stock of the noncorporate sector. Capital

stocks reported by the BEA include only capital located in the United States. However,

some national income is produced by capital abroad, namely corporate profits of foreign

subsidiaries. We estimate that the capital used abroad is equal to the profits divided by the

return on capital.

The Steady State of the Model

       We treat the adjusted values for income, product, and capital as steady-state values

for the model. In Table 2, notice that the values for income, product, and capital stocks are

the adjusted values of Table 1. In the last column of Table 2, we show the relevant expression

for the model.

       We also include in Table 2 values for hours worked, growth rates, and tax rates. In

the United States, hours per person are roughly one-quarter of discretionary time. The

growth rates are averages for 1990-99 for total factor productivity and population. With the

exception of the labor tax rate, we use NIPA values reported in Table 1 to calculate tax rates.

We have data for corporate profits before- and after-tax. We assume that the noncorporate

tax rate is zero because the main categories of noncorporate income are untaxed. Property

taxes and consumption taxes are indirect business taxes. Consumption taxes are 0.047 GNPs,

and property taxes are the remaining 0.032 GNPs.

       The labor tax rate is more diﬃcult to estimate since the U.S. income tax is progressive,

while taxes in our model economy are proportional. Households in the federal tax bracket

of 28 percent or higher pay nearly all of the income tax. However, because of fringe benefits

and before-tax contributions to retirement plans, these households’ marginal tax rates are

                                              28
eﬀectively lower than 28 percent. Therefore, we choose the tax rate on labor income to be

25 percent. But our analysis is not sensitive to the exact rate used.

       In Table 3, we back out depreciation rates, capital shares, and parameters for the

model’s final good technology and the utility function. Most of these parameters can be

tied down by steady state values. There are two exceptions: the elasticity of substitution of

corporate and noncorporate goods 1/(1 − ρ) and the curvature parameter on consumption

σ, which measures the degree of risk aversion. For these we experiment with diﬀerent values

and compare second moments of the model and data.




                                             29
                                               Notes

      1
          The two main data sources used in this article are the U.S. Department of Commerce’s
National Income and Product Accounts and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States.
      2
          Actually, the market value of equity plus the market value of debt liabilities should
equal the market value of debt assets plus the value of productive assets. Since net indebted-
ness of corporations is currently small, we simplify the discussion and ignore corporate debt
holdings and liabilities when modeling the U.S. economy.
      3
          In fact, Hall (2000) argues that ‘e-capital,’ which is human capital created by combin-
ing skilled labor and computers, is an important factor for the recent rise in equity prices.
      4
          In Appendix A, we provide evidence on U.S. household asset holdings to justify some
of the assumptions of our model.
      5
          Much work in the asset pricing literature abstracts from production and stops short of
matching variables in th theory with national income and product data. Notable exceptions
include Cochrane (1991) and Mehra (1998).
      6
          Readers familiar with the literature on the equity premium puzzle launched by Mehra
and Prescott (1985) should not be surprised by this finding. See Kocherlakota (1996) for a
nice survey on the literature. See also Jagannathan, McGrattan, and Scherbina (2000) for
estimates of the current equity premium.
      7
          Above, we used net profits, which subtracts factor payments sent abroad. This is the
relevant figure for computing GNP. To calculate the value of U.S. domestic corporations, we
want to use gross profits from U.S. foreign subsidiaries.
      8
          With adjustment costs, we need to modify our formula for the equity value as follows:
V = [k1m /(1 − ϕ0 (x1m /k1m )) +(1 − τ 1 )k1u /(1 − ϕ0 (x1u /k1u ))]N .
      9
          We consolidate pension fund reserves and life insurance reserves.
     10
          See Miller (1977) for an insightful discussion of taxes, and how they can be avoided.




                                                  30
References


Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, (1946-2000), Flow of Funds Accounts of

      the United States.

Bond, S. R. and J. G. Cummins (2000), “The Stock Market and Investment in the New Econ-

      omy: Some Tangible Facts and Intangible Fictions,” Brookings Papers on Economic

      Activity, 1 : 61-124.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991), “Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link between Stock Returns

      and Economic Fluctuations,” Journal of Finance 46: 209-237.

Constantinides, G. M., J. B. Donaldson, and R. Mehra, “Junior Can’t Borrow: A new Per-

      spective on the Equity Premium Puzzle,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcom-

      ing.

Glassman, J. K. and K. A. Hassett (1999), Dow 36,000, (New York: Times Business).

Hall, R. E., (2000), “e-Capital,” Hoover Institution working paper.

Jagannathan, R., E. R. McGrattan, and A. Scherbina, (2000), “The Equity Premium: A

      Vanishing Puzzle,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, forthcom-

      ing.

Jermann, U., (1998), “Asset Pricing in Production Economies,” Journal of Monetary Eco-

      nomics, 41: 257-276.

Kocherlakota, N. R., (1996), “The Equity Premium is still a Puzzle,” Journal of Economic

      Literature, 34: 42-71.

Mehra, R., (1998), “On the Volatility of Stock Prices: An Exercise in Quantitative Theory,”

      International Journal of Systems Science, 29: 1203-1211.

Mehra, R. and E. C. Prescott, (1985), “The Equity Premium: A puzzle,” Journal of Monetary



                                            31
       Economics, 15: 145-161.

Miller, M. H., (1977), “Debt and Taxes,” Journal of Finance, 32: 261-275.

Shiller, R. J. (2000), Irrational Exuberance, (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).

U.S. Department of Commerce, (1946-99), National Income and Product Accounts, (Wash-

       ington DC: U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce).

U.S. Department of Commerce, (1946-99), Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth, (Washington

       DC: U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce).

Vissing-Jorgenson, A. (2000), “Towards an explanation of household portfolio choice hetero-

       geneity: Nonfinancial income and participation cost structures,”




                                             32
 2




1.5




 1




0.5




 0
 1950   1960       1970         1980       1990    2000


        Figure 1. Value of U.S. Corporate Equity




                           33
        1




   0.75
1994




       0.5




   0.25




        0
             0         0.25           0.5            0.75            1
                                     1989
         Figure 2. Portion of Financial Wealth in Stocks, 1989 and 1994




                                       34
                               Table 1. Adjustments to NIPA Accounts

                               Average,   Adjustments to the                                       Adjusted
NIPA Concept                  1990-1999   NIPA Concept                                              Value
Income
  Corporate Sector
    Compensation                 .378                                                                .378
    Indirect Business Tax        .057     Subtract sales & excise taxes (.037)                       .020
    Capital Consumption          .069                                                                .069
    Profits
      After-tax profits          .047     Add unmeasured investment (.019)                           .066
      Profits tax                .026                                                                .026
    Net Interest                 .015     Subtract intermediate financial services (.015)            .000
    Value Added                  .592                                                                .559
    Noncorporate Sector
     Compensation                .246                                                                .246
     Indirect Business Tax       .022     Subtract sales & excise taxes (.01)                        .012
     Capital Consumption         .054     Add depreciation of consumer durables (.063)
                                          Add depreciation of foreign subsidiary capital (.016)      .133
      Profits                    .044     Add net interest (.042)
                                          Subtract intermediate financial services (.022)
                                          Add imputed capital services (.036)                        .100
      Net Interest               .042     Subtract net interest (.042)                               .000
      Value Added                .408                                                                .491
Product
 Private consumption             .588     Subtract sales & excise taxes (.047)
                                          Add depreciation of consumer durables (.063)
                                          Add imputed capital services (.012)
                                          Subtract intermediate financial services (.037)
                                          Subtract net investment of foreign subsidiaries (.009)     .570
    Government consumption       .156     Add imputed capital services (.024)                        .180
    Corporate investment         .100                                                                .100
    Noncorporate investment      .156     Add depreciation of foreign subsidiaries (.016)
                                          Add net investment of foreign subsidiaries (.009)          .181
    Unmeasured investment        .000     Add unmeasured investment (.019)                           .019
    GNP                            1                                                                1.050
                     †
Capital Stocks
 Corporate
   Measured                      .821     Add   inventories (.161)
                                          Add   land (.060)                                         1.042
     Unmeasured                  .000     Add   unmeasured capital (.645)                            .645
    Noncorporate                2.153     Add   net capital of foreign subsidiaries (.294)          2.447
†   Stocks are mid-year.




                                                   35
                              Table 2. Steady State for the Model

    Category                                 Data          Formula for the Model
    Income
      Corporate Income
        Compensation                           .378        wn1
        Indirect Business Tax                  .020        τ1k k1m
        Capital Consumption                    .069        δ1m k1m
        Profits                                .092        (r1m −δ1m −τ1k )k1m + r1u k1u
        Value Added                            .559        p1 y1
      Noncorporate Income
        Compensation                           .246        wn2
        Indirect Business Tax                  .012        τ2k k2
        Capital Consumption                    .133        δ2 k2
        Profits                                .100        (r2 −δ2 −τ2k )k2
        Value Added                            .491        p2 y2
    Product
     Private consumption†                      .544        c
     Government consumption                    .180        g
     Corporate investment                      .100        x1m
     Noncorporate investment†                  .207        x2
     Unmeasured investment                     .019        x1u
     GNP                                      1.050        c+x1m +x2 +x1u +g
    Capital Stocks
     Corporate
       Measured                               1.042        k1m
       Unmeasured                              .645        k1u
     Noncorporate                             2.447        k2
    Total Hours                                .250        n1 + n2
    Growth Rates
     Technology                                .020        γ
     Population                                .010        η
    Tax Rates
      Corporate profits                        .356        τ1
      Noncorporate profits                     .000        τ2
      Corporate property                       .019        τ1k
      Noncorporate property                    .005        τ2k
      Consumption                              .086        τc
      Labor                                    .250        τn
† In a steady state of the model, gross investment is equal to depreciation plus the change in capital. To
make noncorporate investment consistent with the observed stock and depreciation of the noncorporate
sector, we increased it slightly. Private consumption was lowered by an equal amount to leave GNP
unchanged.




                                                   36
                  Table 3. Derivation of Parameters from the Steady State

 Parameters                            Derivation from Steady State                      Value
 Depreciation rates
   Corporate, measured                 δ1m = x1m /k1m − [(1 + γ)(1 + η) − 1]                .066
   Corporate, unmeasured               δ1u = x1u /k1u − [(1 + γ)(1 + η) − 1]                .000
   Noncorporate                        δ2 = x2 /k2 − [(1 + γ)(1 + η) − 1]                   .055
 Capital shares
   Corporate, measured                 φm = r1m k1m /(p1 y1 )                               .277
   Corporate, unmeasured               φu = r1u k1u /(p1 y1 )                               .047
   Noncorporate                        θ = r2 k2 /(p2 y2 )                                  .499
 Final goods technology
   Elasticity of substitution†         1/(1 − ρ)                                            .333
   Relative weights                    µ/(1 − µ) = p1 y11−ρ /[p2 y21−ρ ]                    .223
   Scale factor                        A=    y/[µy1ρ   + (1   − µ)y2ρ ]1/ρ                 1.418
 Utility parameters
   Risk aversion†                      σ                                                   1.500
                                                       σ
   Discount factor                     β = (1 + γ) /(1 + i)                                 .990
   Weight on leisure                   ψ = (1 − τn )w(1 − n1 − n2 )/[(1 + τc )c]           2.377
† These parameters are not pinned down by steady state values. However, none of our results change
when we experiment with their values.




                                               37
                                         Table 4a. Baseline Parameters

    Description                                                         Values
    Preference parameters                    σ = 1.5, β = .99, ψ = 2.377
    Technology parameters                    ρ = −2, µ = .182
    Depreciation rates                       δ1m = .066, δ1u = .0, δ2 = .055
    Capital shares                           φm = .277, φu = .047, θ = .499
    Growth rates                             γ = .03, η = .01
    Average tax rates                        τ1 = .356, τ2 = 0, τ1k = .019, τ2k = .005, τc = .086, τn = .25
    Technology shock                         Eεz = 0, Eε2z = .0132
    Adjustment cost parameter                b = .12




              Table 4b. Parameters of the Stochastic Processes and the Adjustment Cost
                                 for Alternative Stochastic Versions

Examples                                                                           Values†
Technology only                                                  Eε2z = .0132, b = .12
Technology and Labor tax                                         Eε2z = .012, ρn = .95, Eε2n = .012, b = .15
Technology and Corporate capital share                           Eε2z = .0112, ρφ = .95, Eε2φ = .0062, b = 3.1
Technology, Labor tax, and Corporate capital share               Eε2z = .0072, ρn = .95, Eε2n = .012,
                                                                               ρφ = .95, Eε2φ = .0062, b = 3.1
†   All innovations have a zero mean.




                                        Table 4c. Predictions of the Model

                                                                                     Average Returns
                                                                     Average
                                                                      Value      Equity      Debt   Premium
                                                                     to GNP       (1)         (2)   (1) − (2)
Deterministic Version                                                  1.84       4.08       4.08      0.00
Stochastic Versions, Shocks to:
  Technology only                                                      1.85       4.10       4.07      0.03
  Technology and Labor tax                                             1.85       4.09       4.08      0.01
  Technology and Corporate capital share                               1.85       4.08       4.07      0.01
  Technology, Labor tax, and Corporate capital share                   1.85       4.07       4.07      0.00




                                                        38
            Table A1. Balance Sheet of U.S. Households Relative to GNP

                                               Average 1946-99           1999

        Assets                                           3.96            5.29
          Tangible assets                                2.10            1.99
          Corporate equity                               0.69            1.84
          Debt assets                                    1.17            1.46
        Liabilities                                      0.46            0.74
        Net Worth                                        3.50            4.55




            Table A2. Financial Assets of Pension Funds Relative to GNP

                                                                 1999

              Total                                               1.47

              By type of plan
                Defined Contribution†                              .54
                Defined Benefit                                    .52
                Public Defined Benefit                             .41

              By type of asset‡
                Equity                                             .63
                Debt                                               .57

†   This figure includes IRA and Keogh assets.
‡   These figures do not include IRA and Keogh assets.




                                              39
