                                   #&   




                           
                                       


                                            
                                              !"
                                            #$%


                                         &"'% ()*+,
                                 -(.//000121%/((3/0)*+,



                          #     4
                                 5*6* 33!-33
                                    2'%7 *85,)
                                       9




         !"#" $%
  & # ' (     ) *&+ ,
  -+.)+   /.  .  0 0/1
  )2.  .  ) +  .  + 31
24         )     *
&3

5  & 0   3   3    4 
  4 2 6  2  4       
5     3
3' 3(!':'!:''!" '!3' ('  !'
7  !"7#$%
  #&"'% ( 1)*+,
98**5
9 1,

                                                 

       &3-0-:'3''3'3'0-'!-:' 3(!':'!3!"('!'''3 %3
; :'!'% !!(' 0'-%(!'3''-33--'%'
<'3! 31!!'%-::'!' "34(-3'37%:' 3(!':'!3!"
('!'': !3-'%-'3':' 3(!':'!':'!(' '=''3!"('!31&
((3--'%-:' 3(!':'!('!''2''!:%:!' :
"::'!'!'-33:2'>5+)8?1



                                             !"
                                        (-19'3 03" :33:'!
'3': '!-'%#3'33!-                   ! :#3'33
27 @)5*+                                     '3': 2
 .>A,@?AB, B58B                                      7 2
' .C'!-1                                 B8B
                                                         #
                                                         .>A)*?@+8 6B),
                                                        ' . 1!"C 21!

#$%
2-3:: :33:' #3'33
 :33:!'!3
!- :#3'33
  0$"'3'
  0$"7 $5**58
 .>858?++) *@86
;.>858?++6 @885
' .2%C311
Does Firm-specific Information in Stock Prices Guide

                                 Capital Allocation?
                         Artyom Durnev, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung




1.      Introduction
        The widespread success of the event study methodology in empirical corporate finance is

consistent with firm-specific stock price movements reflecting the capitalization of new firm-

specific information into share prices. The Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH) proposes that

this capitalization occurs sufficiently quickly that stock prices track their fundamental (full

information) values closely enough to prevent profitable arbitrage opportunities.

        In this study, we explicitly choose the term ‘information capitalization intensity’, rather

than stock returns variation, to emphasize the event study, or corporate finance, interpretation of

stock returns variation as reflecting changes in the fundamental values of net corporate assets.

The equivalence of these concepts is a fundamental axiom to financial economics. However, as

Roll (1988) and French and Roll (1986) emphasize, the full implications of this equivalence,

though economically important, are incompletely understood.

        French and Roll (1986) and Roll (1988) find that most stock price variation in the U.S. is

firm-specific, and reflects the capitalization of traders’ private information.     Black (1986) points


                                                    1
out that information is not free and that more informed traders must therefore earn consistent

positive returns in trading against the less informed to cover their information gathering and

processing costs.      In periods of high firm-specific price movements, both informed and

uninformed traders may be active.           It is unclear whether larger firm-specific price variation

should be associated with stock prices closer to fundamental or further from them. Morck et al.

(2000) propose that more intense capitalization of firm-specific information is associated with

stock prices tracking fundamentals more closely.          However, the alternative hypothesis, that a

stock’s price tracks its fundamental value more loosely during periods when substantial new

information about that stock is being incorporated into its price, is perhaps more intuitively

appealing – and so is our starting point.

        The ability of stock prices to track firms’ fundamental value is critical for resource

allocations.   Myers and Majluf (1984) show that when investors have less information than

managers about fundamental values, they bid down the share prices of firms that undertake

secondary securities issues.     This is because investors know securities prices are not precisely

equal to fundamental values, and presume that managers tend to issue new securities when the

market price is too high. Thus, public investors react to announcements of secondary securities

issues by revising downward their estimates of the values of those securities.             This discount

raises the cost of external financing to the firm’s existing shareholders, and does so to a greater

extent for securities whose prices track fundamentals more loosely. It follows that greater

investor uncertainty about the accuracy of securities prices increases the likelihood of

underinvestment because managers are unable to finance genuine value-enhancing projects.

The overall inference is that firms whose shares track fundamentals more precisely can obtain

external financing more cheaply and are less likely to exhibit signs of underinvestment.




                                                    2
        Myers and Majluf (1984) propose that firms should retain sufficient ‘financial slack’ to

fund positive NPV projects internally; however, Jensen (1986) argues that the cure may often be

worse than the disease.        Excessive financial slack increases the likelihood of overinvestment

because it frees managers from capital market oversight, creating agency problems such as

‘empire building’ negative NPV investment by hubristic CEOs.             The overall inference is that

firms whose shares track fundamentals less precisely might be as likely to exhibit

overinvestment as underinvestment.

        Thus, investor uncertainty about asset prices leads ultimately to underinvestment,

overinvestment, or both in various firms throughout the economy.             Hayek (1941) argues that

such microeconomic misallocation of capital is pervasive, and a serious economic problem even

in the absence of aggregate overinvestment or underinvestment.           We follow Hayek (1941) in

using the term ‘malinvestment’ to describe either undertaking value-destroying projects or

declining to undertake value-enhancing projects, or both. Tobin (1982) argues that the EMH is

important primarily because more meaningful stock prices plausibly allow for improved

microeconomic capital allocation, and refers to this linkage as the ‘functional’ form of the EMH.

        The above considerations lead us to explore the empirical relationship between the

intensity of capitalization of firm-specific information, measured by firm-specific stock price

variability, and both the use of external funds and measures of malinvestment. These types of

corporate finance behavior clearly depend on macroeconomic conditions as well as the

institutional and legal environment.       Using cross-sectional data from one country, US, we hold

constant the influence of these factors.

        Our data generate the overriding result that industries in which stock returns exhibit

greater firm-specific variation use more external financing and show less evidence of

malinvestment, in that their marginal q ratios are closer to one, and their average q ratios are


                                                     3
higher.     These results survive controlling for firm-specific fundamentals variation directly, and

for industry characteristics plausibly associate with fundamentals volatility.

          We therefore cautiously endorse the suggestion of Morck et al. (2000) that more intense

capitalization of firm-specific information is associated with stock prices tracking fundamentals

more closely.

          The rest of this paper is organized as follows.             Section 2 describes our empirical

methodology and data.        Section 3 describes the construction of the stock variation measures.

Section 4 and 5 present our findings of statistically meaningful relationships between the

intensity of firm-specific variation and both external financing and the quality of capital

budgeting. Section 6 considers a possible interpretation of our findings. Section 7 concludes.



2.        Empirical Framework and Data

Empirical Framework

          Our basic empirical procedure is to run regressions explaining corporate financial

decision-making on measures of information capitalization intensity and control variables.           We

aggregate firm-level data on publicly traded US corporations to construct the industry-level

variables used in the regressions. The first set of corporate finance variables we consider gauges

the proportion of capital expenditures supported by external financing. The second set measures

the quality of capital budgeting decisions.

          We use industry aggregates for three reasons.           First, capital budgeting and access to

outside financing may affect firm entry and exit.            By aggregating to industry-level data, we

automatically capture the gross result of such evolution.         Dealing with firm entry and exit is a

challenging problem, which we relegate to future research.             Second, industry aggregates let us

pool cross-section and time-series data to construct more reliable estimates for our dependent

                                                      4
variables, particularly our proxies for the quality of capital budgeting decisions.   Third, industry

aggregates are less affected by error in variables problems due to reporting errors and the like. It

turns out that results based on firm-level regressions are very similar to the industry-level

regressions we report below. We shall also describe them wherever appropriate.

        Our empirical framework is also designed to minimize other possible sources of bias.

First, scaling the use of external financing by capital expenditure mitigates the influence of the

availability of exogenous investment opportunities.       Second, to mitigate endogeneity problems,

we use the lagged value (predetermined and historical) of the measures of information

capitalization intensity.   It turns out that using contemporaneous data does not materially affect

our results. We describe such results in our robustness discussions.



Data

        Our sample begins with all companies listed in CRSP from 1990 to 1992. We discard

duplicate entries for preferred stock, class B stock, and the like by deleting entries whose CUSIP

identifiers CRSP appends a number other than 10. We match these companies with those listed

in Standard and Poor’s annual COMPUSTAT tapes, and delete four firms that report negative

sales. Because CRSP and COMPUSTAT occasionally assign the same firm different CUSIP

identifiers, we visually inspected the lists of unmatched firms in both.     Where company name

matches (or near matches) are evident, we check the CRSP permanent identification number,

ticker symbols and stock prices to reject false matches. This matching procedure adds 165 firms

to our firm-level full sample, leaving 6 firms listed in COMPUSTAT but not CRSP and 14 firms

in CRSP but not COMPUSTAT. We discard these.

        Since the analysis below requires more than one firm in each industry, we drop seven

industries that contain three or fewer firms. Since accounting variables for financial and banking


                                                   5
industries (SIC codes from 6000 through 6999) are not comparable to those of non-financial

industries we exclude the former.         Regulated utilities (SIC 4900 through 4999) are arguably

subject to different investment constraints than unregulated firms, though liberalization in the

1980s may have mitigated this difference to some extend.             Although we leave utilities in our

sample of industries, dropping them does not qualitatively change our results.

        Finally, we drop firm-year observations with fewer than thirty days of daily stock returns

data.   When firms are delisted and COMPUSTAT indicates that a bankruptcy occurred, we

assume a final daily return of minus 100%.               When firms are delisted and COMPUSTAT

indicates that a corporate control event occurred the final return is taken as given.

        After these procedures, our final ‘1990 to 1992 sample’ contains 6,021 firms spanning

214 three-digit SIC industries.      We use this sample to construct our information capitalization

intensity variables and most of our control variables.

        Constructing some control variables requires a longer panel prior to 1993. For these, we

expand the 1990 to 1992 sample backward to 1983 by keeping sample firms that remain listed in

listed in COMPUSTAT in the period demarcated by those years. This ‘1983 to 1992 sample’

contains 5,680 firms spanning 214 industries.

        We use data from a ‘1993 to 1997 sample’ to construct our corporate finance decision

variables.   This sample consists of all firms listed in COMPUSTAT during those years in the

industries spanned by our 1990 to 1992 sample. Our final 1993 to 1997 sample contains 6,375

firms spanning 214 three-digit industries.

        When COMPUSTAT reports a value as ‘insignificant’ we set it to zero.                     When

companies change their fiscal years, COMPUSTAT records one fiscal year with fewer than

twelve months and another with more than twelve months.                 Under some circumstances, this

causes COMPUSTAT to report a missing year observation. If a firm’s fiscal year ends before


                                                     6
June 15th, COMPUSTAT reports it as data for the previous year on the grounds that more than

half of the fiscal year occurred in the previous calendar year.           This convention causes missing

values if no fiscal year has the majority of its months in the calendar year of the change. We

drop those firms.

        In all samples, we define industries as sets of firms that share the same primary three-

digit SIC code in the COMPUSTAT Business Segment database. Firms need not have data for

all time periods to be included in any of the samples; so all are unbalanced panels.



3.      Firm-specific Information Capitalization Intensity Measures

        We assume firm-specific stock returns to be driven by the capitalization of firm-specific

information, which French and Roll (1986) and Roll (1988) show to be mainly private

information.    Our measures of the intensity with which firm-specific information is capitalized

into stock returns are fashioned after those of Morck, Yeung and Yu (2000), and are described in

this section. We follow French and Roll (1986) and Roll (1988) in interpreting firm-specific

stock return as the capitalization of private firm-specific information.               These variables are

constructed from daily stock returns data in the 1990 to 1992 sample described above. This

choice of years gives us a large enough panel of annual data to construct the control variables

described below, yet also lets us to relate our information capitalization intensity variables to

subsequent corporate finance decisions.           Because we are interested in average information

capitalization intensity, we use firm-level data to estimate these variables for each industry.




                                                      7
3.1        Absolute Firm-specific Information Capitalization Intensity

           To measure the absolute magnitude of firm-specific variation in the stock prices of firms

in an industry, we isolate firm-specific return variation from industry-related or market-related

variation. We thus run the regression

            r j, t = β j, 0 + β j ,m rm, t + β j ,iri, t + ε j ,t                                         [1]

for each firm j, where t is a daily time index over the period from 1990 through 1992, r j,t is firm

j’s stock return, rm, t is a market return, and ri, t an industry return for industry i (which contains

firm j).

           Although regression [1] resembles standard asset pricing equations, we do not emphasize

this.      Our purpose is not to explain a relationship between returns and systematic risk, but to

understand the economic importance of firm-specific stock price variation. Stock price variation

associated with macroeconomic or industry information is of interest to us primarily as a control

variable.

           The market index and industry indexes in [1] are value-weighted averages excluding the

firm in question.                           This exclusion prevents spurious correlations between firm returns and

industry returns in industries that contain few firms. Thus,

            ri,t =      1
                       Ji−1   (∑     k ∈i
                                            wk ,t rk ,t − w j ,t rj, t   )                                [2]


with wk,t the value-weighting of firm k in the index and Ji the number of firms in industry i.

           Denote the unexplained variation of regression [1] for firm j as SSRj. An average of the

unexplained variation across all firms j in industry i, weighted by the number of daily return

observations for each firm, Tj, is

                        ∑     j ∈i
                                     SSR j
            σ ε2,i =                                                                                      [3]
                         ∑           T
                                 j ∈i j



                                                                             8
Since σ ε2,i is highly skewed (skewedness = 5.31) and leptokurtic (kurtosis = 40.7), we apply a

logarithmic transformation.                We use the Greek letter omicron to denote our estimate of the

absolute firm-specific information capitalization intensity of industry i,

                    ( )
         Θi = ln σε2,i                                                                           [4]

The distribution of Θi is more symmetric (skewedness = 0.163) and less leptokurtic (kurtosis =

4.11).



3.2      Relative Firm-specific Information Capitalization Intensity

         An alternative way to measure the intensity of firm-specific information capitalization is

relative to the sum of the intensities of industry- and market-related information capitalization.

Our measure of the this sum is based on the explained variation from regression [1]. Define

                    ∑ SSM
                     j ∈i              j
         σ m2,i =                                                                                [5]
                     ∑ T    j ∈i   j



where SSMj is the sum of squared variation in rj explained by the model in regression [1] for firm

j in industry i.            This variable is again asymmetrically distributed (skewedness = 5.30) and

leptokurtic (kurtosis = 36.7).                We again employ a logarithmic transformation and denote the

absolute intensity of industry- and market related information capitalization in industry i by the

Scandinavian letter oe,

                    ( )
         ∅ i = ln σ m2,i                                                                         [6]

Again, the resulting distribution is more symmetric (skewedness = 0.515) and less leptokurtic

(kurtosis = 4.59).

         A higher ∅ i indicates an industry in which stock prices fluctuate because of the

capitalization of a higher intensity stream of information related to market and industry events.

                                                           9
If investors' information flows about some industries are more intense than about other

industries, this may be reflected in generally higher returns variation.   Our focus is firm-specific

information capitalization, so ∅ i is a useful benchmark for gauging the relative magnitude of Θi.

Including ∅ i as a control variable in regressions explaining Θi lets us ask whether greater firm-

specific variation Θi is associated with more outside financing and better capital budgeting after

controlling for the intensity of the information flow regarding that industry and the economy as a

whole.

         Our relative firm-specific information capitalization intensity measure incorporates this

benchmarking explicitly. Define

                 σ m2, i
         R = 2
           2
                                                                                             [7]
          i
            σ ε ,i + σ m2, i

This measure can be interpreted as if it were the R2 of a regression, in that it measures returns

variation explained by market and industry returns relative to total variation. We interpret Ri2 as

measuring the importance of systematic industry- and market-wide information in total stock

return variation.       It follows that one minus Ri2 is an analogous measure of the relative

importance of firm-specific information capitalization.

         The distribution of 1-R2 is negatively skewed (skewedness = -0.911) and mildly

leptokurtic (kurtosis = 4.64). It also has the econometrically undesirable characteristic of being

bounded within the unit interval. As recommended by Theil (1971, chapter 12), we circumvent

the bounded nature of R2 by applying a logistic transformation

                 1 − Ri2 
         Ψi = ln 2                                                                         [8]
                 Ri 




                                                    10
taking 1- Ri2 ∈ [0,1] to Ψi ∈R.              We thus use the Greek letter psi to denote firm-specific

information     capitalization   intensity     measured      relative   to     industry-   and   market-related

information capitalization intensity. The transformed variable is again less skewed (skewedness =

0.239) and less leptokurtic (kurtosis = 3.869).              The hypothesis that Ψi is normally distributed

cannot be rejected in a standard W-test (p-val = 0.14).

         The Ψi also possess the useful trait that they are simple differences between Θi and ∅ i

since

                  1 − Ri2        σ ε2,i 
         Ψi = ln      2 
                             = ln  2  = ln(σε ,i ) − ln(σ m,i ) = Θi − ∅ i
                                               2            2
                                                                                                       [9]
                  Ri             σ m,i 

         Intuitively, the higher the value of Ψi, the more important is firm-specific variation, σ ε2,i ,

relative to market and industry-wide variation, σ m2,i , in explaining the stock price movements of

firms in industry i.

         For simplicity of exposition, we follow the finance literature in referring to σ ε2,i as ‘firm-

specific returns variation,’ and σ m2, i as ‘systematic returns variation’.            We refer to Θi as the

‘intensity of firm-specific information capitalization’ and ∅ i as the ‘intensity of systematic

information capitalization’ to emphasize the event study, or corporate finance, interpretation of

stock returns variation as reflecting the capitalization of information about ‘events’ that affect

firms.    This terminology is consistent with finance theory, in that under the Efficient Markets

Hypothesis, ‘returns variation’ and the ‘intensity of information capitalization’ are close to

synonymous.       Finally, we refer to Ψi as the ‘intensity of firm-specific information capitalization




                                                        11
relative to systematic information capitalization,’ or simply as the ‘relative intensity of firm-

specific information capitalization.’1

         Table 1 contains brief descriptions of these variables, and of all other variables used in

this study.     Panel A of Table 2 shows the mean, median, standard deviation, minimum and

maximum of each measure of information capitalization intensity (Θi, ∅ i, and Ψi). The

substantial standard deviations of all three measures and the substantial difference between their

minimum and maximum values attest to the variation of these measures across industries.

Higher intensity firm-specific and systematic information capitalization tend to occur together

(ρΘ∅ = 0.782, p-val = 0.00).2

         Our basic econometric procedure is to run regressions explaining variables Ω i , which

reflect corporate financial decisions taken by firms in industry i, on our information

capitalization intensity measures and control variables.                 The first set of corporate finance

variables we consider reflects the use of external financing as a fraction of capital expenditure.

The second set measures the quality of capital budgeting decisions.

         These regressions are either of the form

         Ω i = bΘ Θi + b∅ ∅ i + c ⋅ Z i + ui                                                                [10]

where absolute firm-specific information capitalization intensity in industry i is measured by Θi ,

with ∅i as an additional control, or of the form

         Ω i = bΨ Ψi + c ⋅ Z i + ui                                                                         [11]


1
  We depart from the standard terminology of asset pricing in that we follow Roll (1988) in distinguishing ‘firm-
specific’ variation from the sum of market-related and industry-related variation. For simplicity, we refer to the
latter sum as ‘systematic’ variation, though this is not strictly correct.
2
  In our sample, examples of high firm-specific information capitalization intensity industries include: commercial
sports, knitting mills, crude petroleum & natural gas, periodical publications, and tobacco. Examples of low firm-
specific information capitalization intensity industries include engines and turbines, general building constructors,
department stores, drug and proprietary stores, electric, gas and other services (regulated industries), and operative
builders.

                                                         12
with relative firm-specific information capitalization intensity measured by Ψi .         The vector Zi

contains control variables.



4. Firm-specific Information Capitalization and External Financing

        The first corporate finance variables we consider measure the proportion of capital

expenditure financed with external funds.        We use these variables to test for a relationship

between the intensity of firm-specific information capitalization in stock prices and the extent to

which firms use external capital.


4.1     External Financing Measures

        We consider several measures of an industry’s use of and need for external financing.

These are the values of: net long-term debt issued, denoted ∆ldi; net equity issued, ∆ei; net short-

term debt issued, ∆sdi; net long-term debt and equity issued, ∆ld&ei; and net debt and equity

issues, ∆d&ei. All of these measures are normalized by dividing by capital spending, and so are

best interpreted as measuring the extent to which external financing of various types covers

firms’ capital budgets.

        It may be inappropriate to include short-term debt because companies run lines of credit

or accounts payable up and down substantially in the course of normal business operations.

However, trade credit and bank loans are clearly important sources of external financing in some

industries. We therefore include short-term debt in some, but not all, of the analysis below.

        We truncate these variables at zero and one so that they measure the fractional coverage

of capital expenditure by external financing. This truncation means we consider net repurchases

as equivalent to no coverage of the capital budget by that type of security, and net issues

exceeding the capital budget as equivalent to full coverage of the capital budget by issues of that


                                                   13
type of security. We follow this procedure in order to limit the statistical influence of industries

with very small capital budgets and industries undergoing major capital structure adjustments.

We recognize that this truncation itself causes some econometric difficulties.                  We discuss these

issues, and rerun the regressions on untruncated data as a robustness check.

            The following paragraphs provide details on the construction of our external financing

measures, and can be skipped without loss of continuity.



Construction of the External Financing Measures

            Let LDj,t be the book value of long-term debt issued by firm j in industry i during year t ∈

[1993,1997], as reported in COMPUSTSAT. Our primary measure of the extent to which new

debt covers industry i’s capital spending costs is

                              ∑ j∈ i,t∈[1993,1997] ∆LD j,t 
                      
            ∆ldi = max 0, min                              , 1                                         [12]
                               ∑ j∈i, t∈[1993 ,1997] j, t 
                                                    ∆X        
                      

where ∆LDj,t = ∆LDj,t - ∆LDj,t-1 is the net new issue of long-term debt and ∆Xj,t is the total value

of capital spending of firm j (in industry i) in year t.                  This variable is bounded within the unit

interval.

            Let ∆Ej,t be net new equity issues by firm j (in industry i), again from 1993 to 1997. The

fractional coverage of industry i capital expenditure by new equity issues is defined analogously

as

                              ∑                    ∆E j ,t  
            ∆ei = max  0, min  j∈i, t∈[1993 ,1997]           , 1                                      [13]
                      
                               ∑
                                j∈ i,t∈[1993,1997 ]
                                                     ∆ X j , t     

This variable is similarly bounded within the unit interval.




                                                                   14
        One more form of outside capital is short-term debts, which often takes the form of bank

loans and trade credit. We capture these by summing short-term debts and account payable from

the balance sheets of all firms j in industry i. Let ∆SD j, t be the change in this sum. The extent to

which new short-term debt covers industry i’s capital spending costs is:

                             ∑                       ∆ SD j, t  
         ∆ sdi = max  0, min                                   , 1 
                                  j ∈i ,t ∈[1993,1997]
                                                                                                  [14]
                              ∑ j∈i ,t ∈[ 1993, 1997] ∆ X j, t  
                                                                     

        We examine also the fractional coverage of capital investment by new long-term debt and

new equity combined. Since some firms may issue debt to repurchase equity or vice versa, the

simple sum of ∆ldi and ∆ei may overstate an industry’s actual need for external funds to cover

capital spending. We therefore construct a combined measure of the extent to which both long-

term debt and equity are issued to pay for new capital spending as

                               ∑                          ( ∆ LDj ,t + ∆ E j, t )  
                        
         ∆ ld & ei = max 0, min   j ∈i ,t ∈[1993,1997]
                                                                                   , 1          [15]
                        
                        
                                       ∑     j ∈i ,t ∈[ 1993, 1997]
                                                                      ∆ X j, t         
                                                                                         

and again truncate it to lie within the unit interval.

        Analogously, we construct a combined measure of the extent to which total (long and

short-term) debt and equity cover an industry’s cost of new capital spending as:

                             ∑                      ( ∆ LDj ,t + ∆ SDj ,t + ∆ E j, t )  
                       
         ∆ d & ei = max 0, min  j ∈i ,t ∈[1993,1997]
                                                                                        , 1     [16]
                       
                       
                                             ∑ j∈i ,t ∈[ 1993,1997] j,t
                                                                     ∆ X                    
                                                                                              

        In constructing these variables, we assume debt or equity issues to be nil if these

variables are not reported in COMPUSTAT but all major financial variables are reported.




                                                                15
4.2     Simple Correlations

        Univariate statistics are presented in Panel B of Table 2. Table 3a shows all five external

financing measures to be significantly positively associated with the absolute magnitude of firm-

specific information capitalization intensity, Θ.       Four of them (∆ld, ∆e, and ∆ld&e, ∆d&e),

which all involve long-term market-based financing (long-term debt and equity), are also

positively significantly related to firm-specific relative to systematic information capitalization

intensity, Ψi.     Positive correlations with systematic information capitalization intensity, ∅ i, are

also evident, but with smaller coefficients, so the correlations with Ψi are also positive and

significant. In contrast, ∆sd is positively correlated with industry and market related information

capitalization intensity, rendering it uncorrelated with Ψ.

        In summary, a higher intensity of firm-specific information capitalization is associated

with more use of external funds, not less, as we initially hypothesized.



4.3     Control Variables

        Before we can infer an economically meaningful positive relationship between the use of

external financing and the intensity of firm-specific information capitalization, we must control

for other industry characteristics that might be correlated with information capitalization

intensity and that might influence the use of external financing. This is important because firm-

level economic fundamentals might naturally move more in synch with market or industry

conditions in some industries than in others for reasons that might also affect the use of external

financing.    For example, mature industries may generate more internal cash flow than young

industries.      Since mature industries often produce standardized commodities, they may be

composed of relatively homogenous firms, whose share prices and fundamentals may exhibit



                                                     16
relatively little firm-specific variation. Indeed, any factor that might affect both the homogeneity

of firms within an industry and that industry’s use of external financing could generate a

spurious correlation.

          We therefore include as specialized control variables proxies for several such factors.

However, the list of possible factors that might affect both information capitalization and the use

of external funds is long, and our proxies may be imperfect. We therefore also measure the firm-

specific volatility of fundamentals directly, and include measures of this as ‘catch all’ general

control variables.         In addition, we check the robustness of our results by substituting different

versions of these controls.


Specialized Control Variables

          First, we ought to control for industry size.                  Firms in large, established industries and

small, new industries might have different access to, and need for, external funds. Since large

firms disproportionately affect industry and market indexes, a spurious correlation is possible.

Our primary measure of industry size is the logarithm of the estimated real replacement cost of

fixed capital (property, plant and equipment), averaged across 1990, 1991 and 1992, denoted

ln(Ki). Because historical cost accounting makes simple deflators questionable in adjusting for

inflation, we use a recursive inflation adjustment formula to convert reported figures to 1983

dollars. We assume that physical assets depreciate by ten percent a year. Let Kj,t-10 be the book

value of net PP&E (in 1983 dollars) for firm j in year t. (If a company’s history is shorter than

ten years, we start the rolling equation with the first year available.) PP&E in year t-9 is then

                                    ∆X j, t −9
K j ,t −9 = (1 − δ ) K j ,t −10 +                . More generally, we apply the recursive equation
                                    1 + π t −9

                                                 ∆X     j , t +1
          K j ,t +1 = (1 − δ ) K j, t +                                                                    [17]
                                          ∏
                                                 t +1
                                                 τ =0
                                                      (1 + π τ )

                                                                   17
Thus, PP&E in year t + 1 is PP&E from year t minus 10% depreciation plus current capital

spending, denoted ∆Xj,t+1 , deflated to 1983 dollars using π t, the fractional change in the

seasonally adjusted producer price index for finished goods published by the U.S. Department of

Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.3

         Second, market structure might matter. Monopoly rents elevate internal cash flows and,

all else equal, decrease the need for funds from outside.                   Since firms in more monopolistic

industries might also be less transparent to investors, a spurious correlation is possible. At the

same time, surviving firms in industries dominated by a few firms may be seen to have more

stable and secured cash flows and thus be more able to obtain outside debt. To control for market

structure, we use standard industry Herfindahl indices, denoted Hi, based on real sales averaged

over 1990 to 1992.

         Third, firms in industries where intangible assets are important, all else equal, have fewer

assets that can serve as collateral for loans and bond issues. Since the values of intangible assets

may also be affected differentially by industry or macroeconomic events, a spurious correlation

is again possible.      To control for the importance of intangibles in an industry, we include two

control variables: industry research and development (R&D) spending and industry advertising

spending, denoted r&d and adv respectively. Both are measured per dollar of tangible assets in

each industry measured across our 1990 to 1992 sample. Tangible assets are real property, plant

and equipment, as estimated recursively in [17], plus real inventories.4                       A firm’s R&D or

advertising is considered to be negligible if not reported and all other financial data are reported.


3
  This index is available at http://www.stls.frb.org/fred/data/ppi/ppifgs.
4
  Historical cost accounting makes the use of simple deflators problematic in estimating real inventories. Standard
inventory accounting methods also complicate inflation adjustments. We convert the last-in-first-out (LIFO)
component of inventories to market value by using past inventory changes to estimate the age profile of each firm’s
inventories. Inventories are assumed to reflect market value in the firm’s first year of COMPUSTAT data. Then, a
recursive process, similar to that in [17], is used to estimate the age structure of LIFO inventories. LIFO inventories
of each age are then individually adjusted for inflation using the GDP deflator.

                                                         18
        Fourth, corporate diversification might matter because it affects both stock return

variation and the need for external financing.5 To construct a proxy for firm diversification, we

count the number of different 3-digit industry segments in which a firm operates in 1990-1992

according to the Compustat Industry Segment Data Tape. The diversification index for industry

i, which we denote dsi, is the 1990-1992 average of asset-weighted averages of firm level

diversification across that industry.

        Fifth, general levels of liquidity might matter.                             Different industries require different

degrees of liquidity in the course of normal business activity. For example, industries subject to

more fundamentals shocks might, ceteris paribus, hold larger cash cushions. Normal holdings of

liquid assets could affect both firms’ need for external funds and their ability to raise then.

        To control for industry liquidity norms, we therefore use net current assets as a fraction of

total assets


         Di =
                ∑   j ∈i , t ∈[1990,1992 ]
                                             current assetsj ,t − current liabilities j, t
                                                                                                                   [18]
                                   ∑     j ∈i ,t ∈[1990,1992]
                                                              tangible assets j, t

for each industry i for the years from 1990 through 1992, where firm j is in industry i. The

denominator is real property, plant and equipment, estimated using the recursive procedure in

[17], plus real inventories.

        Sixth, firms’ new financing decisions could depend on their existing capital structures.

Firms that already have highly leveraged capital structures might be less likely to use new debt


5
  Lewellan (1971) proposes that diversification stabilizes earnings, and helps firms access debt financing on better
terms, all else equal. Matsusaka and Nanda (1994) and Stein (1997) argue that the head office of a diversified firm
can act like financial intermediary, investing surplus funds from one division in positive NPV projects in another,
reducing the need for external funds. Amihud and Lev (1981), Morck et al. (1990), May (1995), and Khorana and
Zenner (1998) all propose that managerial utility maximization might explain value-destroying diversification, so
more diversified firms might be firms with larger agency problems. Scharfstein and Stein (1997) argue that
diversified firms shift income from cash rich divisions to cash poor ones out of a sense of “fairness”. Rajan et al.
(1998) propose that such transfers are due to self-interested divisional managers and weak head offices. Thus,
different levels of corporate diversification could conceivably generate a spurious correlation between financing
decisions and information capitalization intensity in several ways.

                                                                        19
and more likely to use additional equity financing.           Also, high existing debt level might reflect

recent extensive new debt financing, and so might presage a period of relatively scant additional

debt issuance.       In addition, Jensen (1986) argues that high leverage improves corporate

governance. Since high leverage increases the variation in stock return, and thus Θ i , and ∅ i ,

any such effects might create a bias in our simple correlations. We therefore include as an

additional control variable each industry’s asset-weighted average leverage, denoted lev i, and

defined as the market value of total long-term debt, estimated recursively from historical changes

in book values assuming 15 year bonds issued at par, scaled by tangible assets, estimated using

[17], for 1992.6

         Seventh, some industries may be more suitable as issuers of some kinds of securities. For

example, natural resources firms can readily issue secured debt using their proven reserves as

collateral.   Software firms, in contrast, have few collateralizable assets.             To control for such

industry characteristics, we include one-digit industry fixed effects.                     We discuss other

approaches to controlling for industry effects when we discuss the robustness of our results.

         Several other specific control variables are also considered in the robustness section

below.


General Control Variables

         Each of the above control variables captures a plausible relationship between firm-

specific fundamentals variation and the use of external funds. Unfortunately, the number of such

plausible relationships is large, and many are not amenable to capture by control variables. We




6
  We construct a fifteen-year age profile of each firm’s debt each year based on changes in book values. We then
estimate the market value of each vintage of each firm’s debt in each year assuming all bonds to be 15 year coupon
bonds issued at par. We use Moody’s baa bond rates to proxy for all bond yields.

                                                       20
therefore also include a general control variable that directly gauges the correlation of firm-level

fundamentals with industry and market fundamentals.

        To measure fundamentals correlation, we follow Morck, Yeung and Yu (2000) and

construct variables analogous to our stock return variation measures ψ, Θ, and ∅, but using

annual returns on assets (ROA) estimates,

                   income j + depreciation j + interest j
        ROAj =                                                                               [19]
                             tangible assetsj

The numerator of [19] is inflation adjusted using the GDP deflator.           The denominator is real

property, plant and equipment, estimated using the recursive procedure in [17], plus real

inventories.


Construction of Fundamentals Co-movement Variables

        We require estimates of the firm-specific and systematic (market- and industry-related)

components of the firm-level variation in return on assets within each industry. To obtain these,

we run firm-level regressions of the form of [1] using ROA rather than stock returns. That is, we

run

        ROAj, t = β j, 0 + β j ,m ROAm, t + β j, i ROAi,t + ε i,t                            [20]

for each firm j in each industry i represented in our 1983 to 1992 sample with t an annual time

index, ROA j ,t firm j’s ROA, ROAm,t a value weighted ROA index for the market, and ROAi, t a

value weighted industry ROA index. Again, we calculate ROAi, t as the average return across all

other firms in the industry (or the market) except the firm in question. For each firm we require

at least six years of data during 1983 through 1992 to run regression [20].

        We follow the same step-by-step procedure outlined above with regards to [1] through

[8].   We take an average of the unexplained variation in [20] calculated across all firms j in


                                                             21
industry i and weighted by, Tj, the number of annual return observations for each firm to obtain


              ∑  j ∈i ROA
                            SSR j
ROA σ ε,i =
      2
                                           (where the ROA prescript distinguishes fundamentals variation variables
               ∑           T
                   j ∈i ROA j



from their stock returns variation counterparts).

         As before, we take a logarithm of this to obtain

         ROA   Θi = ln      (   ROA   σ ε2,i   )                                                                           [21]

A similar procedure yields an estimate of the variation in firm j’s ROA that is associated with

market and industry factors,                       ROA   σ m2 ,i . Again, a logarithmic transformation gives


         ROA   ∅i = ln      (   ROA   σ m2,i   )                                                                           [22]

Finally, we construct a measure of the relative levels of systematic versus firm-specific ROA

variation, denoted

                             σ          2

         ROA Ri =
               2                 ROA m,i
                                                                                                                           [23]
                       ROA σ +                      σ m2 ,i
                                   2
                                  ε ,i ROA


Like [7], [23] can be interpreted as if it were the R2 of a regression, in that it measures explained

variation relative to total variation. A logistic transformation of [23] gives

         ROA   Ψi = ln  (   ROA            )
                                  σ ε2,i − ln            (   ROA         )
                                                                   σ m2 ,i ,                                               [24]

analogous to ψ in [8].

         Panel C of Table 2 contains univariate statistics for all of these control variables, and

Table 3b presents their simple correlation coefficients with each other.                                       Table 3c shows that

long-term debt, equity financing, and short-term debt are all negatively correlated with size (the

logarithm of real property plant and equipment). Long-term debt financing and equity financing

are also both positively correlated with net current assets, D i



                                                                               22
4.4       Regressions

          Table 4 shows our regression results. Because we truncate our dependent variables to lie

within the unit interval, we employ two-boundary Tobit regressions.                       All regressions include 1-

digit industry dummies to control for industry fixed effects.                     We find that external financing

remains      positively    correlated     with     firm-specific     information      capitalization     intensity    after

controlling for size, market concentration, diversification, spending on intangibles, net current

assets, past new long term debt, one-digit industry fixed effects, and fundamentals co-

movement.7

          These findings are clearly at odds with the hypothesis that firm-specific stock pricing

might be less efficient during times of high intensity firm-specific information capitalization.

Indeed, the opposite relationship would appear to hold: stock prices in industries with high

intensity firm-specific information capitalization may track firm’s fundamentals better, leading

to better access to outside financing.



4.5       Robustness

          In this section, which can be skipped without loss of continuity, we consider variants of

the regressions in Table 4 that construct key variables in slightly different ways from those

described above, that substitute other plausible control variables for those described above, or

that include additional control variables.            None of these changes alter our findings qualitatively.

By this we mean that, although the magnitudes of some coefficients and standard errors may


7
    We also find that industry with higher firm-specific stock price variation tend to use more equity and long-term
financing than short-term financing. The correlation of (∑j,t ∆LDj,t +∆Ej,t ) /(∑j,t ∆LDj,t +∆Ej,t +∆SDj,t ) with Θ is 0.111
(p-val = 0.10), and its correlation with Ψ is 0.03 (p-val = 0.24). These findings are consistent with more intense
firm-specific information capitalization being associated with greater use of equity and bond financing and less use
of bank financing.

                                                            23
change, and some control variables may gain or lose statistical significance, the signs and

significance patterns of our information capitalization intensity variables, Θi and ∅i or Ψi , do

not change. That is, the relationships between information capitalization intensity and the use of

external funds are stable across these specification changes.


The Measurement of External Financing

        Although we believe the dependent variables in Table 4 to be the best approach to

gauging use of external funds, we recognize that other approaches are also sensible.         In this

section, we consider such alternative approaches.

        First, by construction, the dependent variables in Table 4 are truncated at zero and one.

This is because we are concerned that values outside this range might signify large-scale one-

time recapitalizations.   We exclude such events because we are interested in typical practice in

tapping capital markets.     Using broader aggregated external financing measures, like debt plus

equity, mitigates this problem to some extent, but does not eliminate it. Truncating at zero and

100% of capital spending also allows us to interpret our external financing variables as fractions

of capital spending, which is a meaningful metric in addressing the questions at hand.

        It might be argued that this truncation is nonetheless arbitrary. Clearly, 1993 to 1997 debt

issues of forty times capital spending over the same period probably indicate a one-time event, as

does a net repurchase of a similar magnitude. However, debt issues of 150% of capital spending

might indicate better access to debt markets than debt issues of 125% of capital spending.

Nonetheless, we are confident that our results are not an artifact of our truncation procedure

because Tobit regressions of dependent variables constructed using other cut-offs and OLS

regressions on nontruncated dependent variables generate qualitatively identical results.




                                                    24
        Second, in the construction of ∆sd, we also considered "total current liabilities” as a

substitute for the sum of current debt and accounts payable.             This generates less significant

results, presumably because the more inclusive variable contains more noise.

        Third, we consider alternative definitions of capital spending, the denominator in our

various measures of sources of funds to cover capital spending. One variant is to include merger

and acquisition costs in capital spending.         This does not change our basic results.       Another

variant is to augment investment in physical capital by investment in research and development

(R&D) and advertising.       When we scale the external financing measures by the sum of capital

expenditure, R&D spending and advertising spending, our results are qualitatively unaffected.


Control Variables

        In this subsection, we return to our list of control variables, and consider reasonable

alternatives to those described above.         We also consider alternative methods of constructing

control variables, and additional control variables that might have been included in Table 4. We

find that these changes do not qualitatively alter our basic findings.

        First, the regressions in Table 4 include one-digit industry fixed effects. Using two-digit

fixed effects instead generates qualitatively similar results, and the 59 two-digit dummies are

mostly insignificant.

        Second, movement toward free trade due to NAFTA and the WTO may enhance the

ability of industries with a strong comparative advantage to raise outside financing.           However,

this is probably not a critical omission because adding direct measures of the comparative

advantages of US industries preserves our basic results. For example, including industry exports

minus imports over industry sales also does not change our findings. Including industry capital




                                                     25
labor ratios, indirect measures of comparative advantage, also fails to qualitatively alter our

results.8

            Third, we control for industry competitive structure with a sales-based Herfindahl index.

Substituting a Herfindahl indexes based on firm assets or employees again leads to qualitatively

similar results.

            Fourth, we use the natural logarithm of fixed capital to proxy for industry size. We re-

estimated the value of fixed assets using reported accounting depreciation each year, Dj,t, rather

than assuming a 10% economic depreciation rate. The resulting recursive formula,

                                                 ∆X j, t+1
            K j, t+1 = K j, t − D j ,t +1 +                                                          [25]
                                              ∏τ =0 (1 + π τ )
                                                 t +1




generates an alternative panel of firm-level fixed assets. Using this measure throughout, rather

than that from [17] does not qualitatively change our findings. Using the logarithms of 1990 to

1992 average “total book assets” or “number of employees” as alternative size measures also

does not qualitatively change our result.

            It might be argued that industry size is less important in accessing external funds than is

firm size. We therefore consider as additional independent variables several measures of average

firm size in each industry.                   These measures are the logarithms of 1990 to 1992 average real

assets estimated using [17], average real assets estimated using [25], book assets, real sales, or

employees. Adding these variables does not qualitatively change our results.

            Fifth, we control for internal liquidity using net current assets as a fraction of total assets.

As an alternative liquidity control variable, we use internal cash flow available to finance capital

spending in industry i,


8
  Industry imports and exports are from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. These data are available
only for manufacturing (SIC codes from 2000 to 3999) industries. Capital-labor ratios are deviations from the
economy -wide weighted average.

                                                                 26
                 ci =
                        ∑   j ∈ i ,t ∈[1990,1992]
                                                    incomej, t + depreciation j, t
                                                                                                                  [26]
                               ∑     j ∈ i ,t ∈[1990,1992]
                                                             tangible assets j, t

where j is an index over firms that are members of industry i. The numerator is constructed by

summing inflation-adjusted 1990, 1991, and 1992 data for all firms in each industry.                                  The

denominator is industry real property, plant and equipment, estimated using the recursive

procedure in [17], plus real inventory.                               Substituting this for the internal liquidity control

described in [18] does not qualitatively change our basic results, nor does adding [26] as an

additional control.     Another version of liquidity measure, past new long-term debt, the 1990-

1992 version of ∆ld, does not change our results either.

        Sixth, substituting variants of our basic fundamentals co-movement variables also yields

qualitatively similar results.             We use [17] to adjust the denominator of ROA for inflation.

Constructing ROA entirely from book values generates the same pattern of signs and

significance, as does adjusting PP&E with reported depreciation, as in [25] rather than the

depreciation values assumed in [17]. We drop observations where R
                                                                | OAjt – ROAj,t-1 | > 25% to

avoid spurs in accounting ROA caused not by changes in real fundamentals, but by transitory

extraordinary events and tax saving practices.                               This eliminates 17 firms from our sample.

Leaving these observations in does not qualitatively affect our results.

        Another straightforward variant is to substitute co-movement in return on equity

                  income j + depreciation j
        ROE j =                                                                                                   [27]
                            net worth j

for co-movement in return on assets in estimating [20].                                     Constructing this alternative

fundamentals co-movement control variable necessitates dropping 4 observations where net

worth is negative. Using co-movement in ROE to control for fundamentals co-movement yields

results similar to those shown in the tables.                            Also, both ROA and ROE co-movement can be


                                                                        27
estimated relative to an equal, rather than market value, weighting of the indexes.             Weightings

based on sales, book assets, or book equity also yield qualitatively similar results to those shown

in the tables.

           An issue with all the above direct measures of fundamental variation is that while they

are based on a long window they are unreliable estimates because changes in firm conditions and

the like.     Since our purpose is to estimate how similar are firms’ fundamentals, we can use a

panel variance of ROAj using all firms j in each industry i in 1990 to 1992 as an alternative

control variable. This also produces qualitatively similar results. Using a time-series average of

cross-sectional variances also yields qualitatively similar results.

           Seventh, more rapidly growing industries, such as high-technology sectors, may attract

more attention, and hence stocks in those industries may capitalize more information.                These

industries may also access external capital more often, creating a spurious correlation between

information capitalization intensity and external financing.           This argument does not appear to

generate our results because when we repeat our Table 4 regressions using only the industries

with report zero R&D spending, we obtain results qualitatively similar to those shown in Table

4. It appears that, even in low-tech industries, which presumably have few profitable growth

options,     greater   use   of   outside   financing    accompanies     higher   firm-specific information

capitalization intensity.9

           Eighth, although our focus is on the corporate finance interpretation of stock price

variation as more rapidly growing industries, research in asset pricing has clearly demonstrated a

linkage between asset returns and systematic risk.           Although such effects should be controlled

for by including systematic risk, measured by ∅, and scaling firm-specific risk by systematic




                                                        28
risk, as in Ψ, risk-return effect perhaps deserve more consideration. We need to be fairly certain

that our results are not a disguised artifact of a relationship between costs of capital and

systematic risk. This does not appear to be so because when, we divide industries into above- and

below-median Ψ (firm-specific relative to systematic information capitalization intensity), the

two resulting returns distributions are statistically identical, indicating similar ‘cost of equity’

distributions.     For the 1990-1992 data, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov D-statistic for rejecting

identical distributions is 0.1064 (p-value = 0.7446). For the 1993-97 data, D-statistic is 0.2408

(p-value = 0.6242).       Furthermore, explicitly including 1990 to 1992 industry-average weighted

average costs of capital or 1990 to 1992 unlevered betas as additional controls generates

qualitatively similar findings to those shown in Table 4. Adding past equity costs or equity betas

as additional control variables also yields qualitatively similar results.

        Ninth, Table 4 regresses 1993 to 1997 external financing on 1990 to 1992 information

capitalization intensity variables Θ, ∅, and Ψ. This is done to mitigate endogeneity problems.

However, it might be argued that current share price uncertainty should affect current access to

external funds. We therefore repeat our regressions using contemporaneous values of the outside

financing variables and Θ i , ∅ i , and Ψ i . We first measure both sets of variables across 1990 to

1992, and then measure both across 1993 to 1997. We find qualitatively similar results to those

shown, but with reduced significance for the information capitalization variables in the

regressions involving new equity financing.

        Tenth, recall that Table 4 uses a cross-section of industry observations. Aggregating to

industry-level data avoids estimation problems associated with firm exit and entry lets us pool

cross-section and time-series data to construct more reliable estimates for our dependent

9
  We can also explore this possibility using marginal and average Tobin’s q ratios, variables we develop in section
six below. Including either marginal or average 1992 q ratios 1992, as an additional control variable leaves our


                                                        29
variables, and reduces error in variables problems due to reporting errors and the like. However,

we can run firm-level regressions analogous to the industry-level regressions we report. These

regressions include the firm- level version of Θ, ∅, Ψ,           ROAΘ, ROA∅, ROAΨ,        diversification, size,

spending on intangibles, net current assets, past new long term debt, and three-digit SIC industry

dummies.10 The results are qualitatively similar to those reported in Table 4.

        In summary, our results survive a battery of robustness checks. Although no hypothesis

can be proven definitively by such checks, we believe they justify the tentative conclusion that

external financing is used more in industries where stocks capitalize firm-specific information

more intensively.



4.6     Discussion

        The focal result in Table 4 is a positive relationship between firm-specific information

capitalization intensity and the use of external financing.           This relationship is highly statistically

significant and highly robust.

        The positive relationship between firm-specific information capitalization and external

financing is also economically significant.        A one standard deviation increase in absolute firm-

                                                            ( )
specific information capitalization intensity, Θ = ln σ ε2 , raises new debt over capital spending

by 0.105 × 0.859 or 0.090, roughly 22.3% of 0.405, the average of that ratio.                        Analogous

calculations show that a one standard deviation increase in Θ raises the use of external equity by

8.9%, and short-term external funds by 14.1%, and total external funds by 4.8%. A one standard

deviation increase in relative firm-specific information capitalization intensity, Ψ, raises the use



results qualitatively unchanged.
10
   The inclusion of 3-digit SIC industry dummies makes it unnecessary to control for industry market structure as
captured by the Herfindahl index.

                                                       30
of external debt by 14.6%, external equity by 6.6%, short-term external funds by 17.9%, and

total external financing by 4.0%.

        Although other explanations may be possible, these findings are consistent with higher

firm-specific information capitalization intensity indicating stock prices that track fundamentals

more closely, rather than more loosely, and so with reduced costs of external funds of the sort

described by Myers and Majluf (1984).




5.      Firm-specific Information Capitalization and the Marginal Value of

        Capital

        If higher firm-specific information capitalization intensity is indeed associated with stock

prices tracking fundamental values more closely, this should affect corporate decision-making.

In particular, a more efficient stock market should cause a more efficient allocation of capital

across and within firms.      More meaningful stock prices should render managerial incompetence

and diversions of funds more obvious to shareholders and to the board, and therefore presumably

easier to correct.   Moreover, more meaningful stock prices should help competent and honest

managers understand their firms’ economic environments better, and thereby make better capital

spending decisions. The result should be a condition closer to the textbook idea that all positive

NPV projects be undertaken and all negative NPV projects be avoided.

        In this section, we relate ex-post NPVs of capital investment to intensity in firm-specific

information capitalization.    To measure the ex-post marginal value of investment, we estimate

marginal Tobin’s q ratios for each industry using our 1993 to 1997 sample.                   We find that

industries   characterized    by    higher   firm-specific   information   capitalization   intensity   have

marginal q ratios closer to one.


                                                    31
5.1     The Quality of Capital Budgeting Decisions

        Capital budgeting is the process by which firms purchase various combinations of capital

goods to generate future cash flows for shareholders.                Hayek (1941, 1945) argues that this

process is driven by the gathering and processing of information about shifting prices and

technological constraints, and points out that successful capital budgeting policies capture such

fleeting economic profits (quasirents) as these shifts create. The present value of the quasirents

captured by a capital investment project is referred to as the project’s net present value (NPV),

and this is the amount by which the project increases the firm’s value in an efficient stock

market. Value-maximizing firms therefore should fund all value-increasing (positive NPV)

projects, but no value-decreasing (negative NPV) projects.                 Hayek postulates that successful

capital budgeting is harder under some circumstances than others, and this postulate is the

subject of this section.

        To gauge the success of capital budgeting policies, we estimate firm’s marginal q ratios.

Firm j’s period t marginal q ratio, which we denote q& j ,t , is the amount by which the firm’s value,

Vj,t, rises per unit increase in its stock of capital goods, Aj,t. Thus,

                     dV j, t
         q& j, t ≡                                                                                 [28]
                     dAj ,t

        In a perfectly efficient market, a firm’s marginal q is the present value of the future cash

flows its marginal capital investment would generate divided by the marginal cost of that

investment. In the terminology of standard capital budgeting problems, a firm’s marginal q ratio

is one plus the expected profitability index of its marginal investment project.              That is, in a

perfectly efficient stock market, a firm's marginal q is one plus the net present value (NPV) of its

marginal capital budgeting project divided by the setup cost of that project. Thus,

                                                       32
                                                        
                      1  ∞               cf j, s               NPV j ,t
         q& j ,t   ≅        E ∑                           =   +
                                     (         )
                                                  s−t +1    1                                                     [29]
                     C j, t                                       C j ,t
                              s=t +1 1 + rj ,t          

where Cj,t is the set up cost of firm j’s marginal unexpected capital project in period t, cf j,s is the

cash flow shareholders generated by that project in period s > t, and rj,t is firm j’s discount rate

as of period t.

        Non-value-maximizing                   capital      budgeting       can   lead   to   either   over-investment    or

underinvestment (or both).                 Over-investment occurs when a firm undertakes a value-destroying

(negative NPV) project. Undertaking such a project leaves the firm with a marginal q below one.

Under-investment occurs if a firm passes up value creating (positive NPV) projects.                                Halting

capital expenditures when positive NPV projects remain unexploited leaves the firm with a

marginal q above one.11

        The purpose of this section is to test for a relationship between firm-specific information

capitalization and the deviation of marginal q from its optimal value, which we presume for the

time being to be one.



5.2     Marginal q Estimation Procedure

        To construct marginal q estimates, we regress changes in a firm’s market value on

changes in the value of its capital assets from 1993 to 1997 for firms in each of our 3-digit

industries using a random firm and time effects model, controlling for dividend policy,

depreciation, and expected capital gains. The resulting regression coefficient on the change in

capital asset value is an estimate of the average firm-level marginal q in that 3-digit industry.




11
   If pretax returns are used, taxes cause the threshold level of marginal q separating under-investment from over-
investment to differ from one. We deal with this explicitly issue below..

                                                                     33
        The remainder of this section provides a detailed description of our procedure for

estimating marginal q ratios. A first-pass approach to estimating marginal q ratios is to run the

regression

        V jt − V j ,t −1 = b j ( Ajt − Aj, t− 1 ) + c j ⋅ z j, t + u j ,t                                                     [30]

where Vj,t is the value of firm j at time t, Aj,t its stock of capital goods, zj,t a vector of control

variables (that may include a constant), and uj,t an estimation error. The coefficient bj is then an

estimate of q& , as defined in [28].

        This procedure is not satisfactory because some future capital spending is already

expected by investors, and is therefore already capitalized into today’s share price. However, a

regression of the form of [30] can still be used to estimate marginal q. To see this, consider

marginal q as the unexpected change in firm value during period t divided by the unexpected

increase in capital goods during that period.

                    V j, t − Et −1V j ,t          V j, t − V j, t −1(1 + r j, t − d j ,t )
         q& j =                              =                                                                                [31]
                  ( A j, t − Et −1 Aj ,t )       A j, t − Aj ,t −1 (1 + g j, t − δ j, t )

where rj,t is the expected return from owning the firm, dj,t its expected tax-adjusted dividend rate

(including share repurchases and implicit takeover premiums), gj,t the expected rate of spending

on capital goods, and δ j,t the expected depreciation rate on those capital goods.

        Rewrite this, normalizing by Aj,t-1 , to obtain

        V j, t − V j ,t −1 = q& j [ Aj ,t − Aj ,t −1 (1 + g j ,t − δ j ,t )] + V j ,t −1 ( rj ,t − d j, t )

or

         V j ,t − V j, t −1                                   A j , t − A j , t −1          div j, t −1          V j ,t −1
                              = − q& j ( g j − δ j ) + q& j                          − ξj                 + rj                [32]
              A j , t −1                                           A j , t −1                Aj ,t −1            A j , t −1




                                                                                34
where div j,t is dollar dividend payment.12

        Note that [32] is precisely the regression described by [30] – but with a constant and with

lagged dividend yield and lagged average q, or Vt-1 /At-1 , included as control variables.              The

constant can be cautiously interpreted as an estimate of - q& j (gj - δ j), where the j subscript

indicates a time series average. The coefficients of the lagged dividend yield and lagged average

q can be loosely interpreted as a dividend tax correction factor and an estimate of the firm's

discount rate.

        We estimate Vj,t and Aj,t as

        V j, t = Pt (CS j, t + PS j, t + LTD j, t + SD j ,t − STA j ,t )                            [33]

        Aj,t ≡ K j ,t + INV j, t

where

        CSj,t = the year t calendar year-end market value of the outstanding common shares of
                firm j.

        PSj,t = the estimated market value of preferred shares (the preferred dividends paid over
                the Moody’s baa preferred dividend yield).

        LTDj,t = estimated market value of long-term debt, calculated recursively from historical
                changes in book values and assuming all debt to be 15 year bonds issued at par.

        SDj,t = book value of short-term debt.

        STAj,t = book value of short-term assets.

        Pt     = inflation adjustment using the GDP deflator.

        K j ,t = estimated market value of firm j's property, plant and equipment, as defined in
                equation [17].

        INV = estimated market value of inventories. This is taken as equal to the book value for
              firms using FIFO accounting. For firms using LIFO accounting, a recursive


12
    This relationship can also be derived as an Euler equation resulting from the firm’s intertemporal value
maximization problem.

                                                             35
                         process is used to estimate the age structure of inventories and inventories of
                         each age are adjusted for inflation using the GDP deflator.

         We partition the 1993 to 1997 sample into three-digit industry subsamples of firms. For

each subsample, we regress

         ∆ V ji,t                          ∆ Aij ,t                V ji,t −1              divij, t −1
              i         =α   i
                                 +β   0
                                       i
                                               i         +β   1
                                                               i
                                                                       i         +β   i
                                                                                      2        i         + uij ,t                                 [38]
          A   j ,t −1                      A   j ,t −1             A   j, t− 1             A   j ,t −1



to obtain a marginal q estimate, q&i ≅ β 0i , for that industry ( divij ,t −1 is defined as dividends for

common shares plus repurchases of common shares).                                                                   Error terms are assumed to satisfy the

following conditions: u ij, t has zero mean, cov( u ij, t , u ij, s ) ≠ 0∀ t and s; and cov( u ij, t , uki ,t ) ≠ 0∀ j

and k. Equation [38] is estimated in a firm-time random effects model. All variables are scaled

by Aij, t −1 to mitigate heteroskedasticity problems.

         The average estimated values of the coefficients β1i and β2i are broadly consistent with

their interpretations in [32]. The average estimated coefficient on lagged average q (i.e., β1i ) is

0.093, implying an average discount rate of 9.32%. The average estimated coefficient β2i on the

pretax dividend rate is -0.869, and is insignificantly different from negative one in 56 out of 214

industries.             The average intercept, α i = − q& j ( g j ,t − δ j ,t ) , is -0.051, and is not significantly

different from zero in 98 of 214 industries.

         Additional collaborative evidence adds credence to our marginal q estimates.                                                                 The

regression coefficient α i = − q& j ( g j ,t − δ j ,t ) is indeed negative and significantly correlated with

growth in physical capital.                              Also, β1i is indeed highly significantly positively correlated with

estimated weighted average costs of capital.




                                                                                             36
5.3     Marginal q as the Basis for Measures of Capital Budgeting Decision Quality

        We are interested in whether the intensity of firm-specific information capitalization is

associated with the distance of marginal q’s from its optimal value, which we assume to be one

for now.     If more firm-specific information capitalization is associated with stock prices being

farther from fundamentals, marginal q should be further to one in industries where firm-specific

information capitalization intensity is larger.

        We measure the distance between q& and one as either ( q& -1)2 , the square of marginal q

minus one, or as |q& -1|, the absolute value of marginal q minus one. The former metric places a

heavier weighting of extreme values of marginal q. Summary statistics of q& , (q& -1)2 and | q& -1|

are presented in panel D of Table 2.



5.4     Simple Correlations

        Table 5 presents simple correlation coefficients between the marginal q based investment

allocation measures ( q& -1)2 and |q& -1| and our other variables. Marginal q tends to be closer to

one in industries where stock returns exhibit greater firm-specific variation, Θi.   Marginal q is

also   closer    to   one    in   industries that display higher relative firm-specific information

capitalization Ψi.    Marginal q is not, however, closer to one as systematic variation, ∅ i rises.

However, q& per se is uncorrelated with all three information capitalization intensity measures -

Θi, ∅ i, and Ψi.

        Marginal q is closer to one in industries that make more extensive use of external

financing.      This is consistent with the positive relationship, proposed by Myers and Majluf

(1984) between the use of external funds and the prevalence of efficient capital spending, and so




                                                   37
lends further credibility to our marginal q estimates. Marginal q is also related to industry size

and liquidity, but these correlations are not robust to the distance metric used.

        Moreover, partitioning the sample into industries with marginal q above and below one

also strengthens the credibility of our marginal q estimates. In the q& < 1 subsample, marginal q

rises as more outside financing is used to finance capital expenditure, consistent with value

destroying investments being funded from excess internal free cash flow, as proposed by Jensen

(1986). In contrast, in the q& > 1 subsample, net current assets over total asset is negatively and

significantly correlated with marginal q, consistent with liquidity constraints causing capital

rationing.


5.5     Regressions

        Table 6 present regressions of the distance of marginal q from one on our stock price

variation variables and the control variables discussed above. In the regression, we include all

the control variables in Table 4. In particular, we control for one-digit SIC code industry, firm

diversification, market structure, industry size, liquidity, leverage, and spending on intangibles.

The justifications for these control variables parallel those in the external financing regression.

More diversification, less leverage and more market concentration may mean less sharp

monitoring and thus more room for managerial agency behavior.                 It turns out that the only

statistically significant control variable is the Herfindahl index which attracts a positive

coefficient, indicating that industries dominated by a few firms tend to have less optimal

investment decisions.

        The central result in table 6 is that higher firm-specific information capitalization

intensity Θi is statistically significantly associated with marginal q being closer to one, as is

relative firm-specific information capitalization, Ψi.           This finding is consistent with our


                                                     38
conjecture that more intense capitalization of greater firm-specific information capitalization

intensity is associated with more efficient capital spending decisions.




5.6     Robustness

        In this section, which can be skipped without loss of continuity, we show that the central

results in Table 6 are highly robust to reasonable specification changes and over various

subsamples.

        The results in this section survive the robustness tests described in connection with the

external financing regressions of Table 4 that are relevant to the marginal q regressions.

Qualitatively similar results ensue using two-digit industry fixed effects. The same is true when

we add industry export minus imports over industry sales, capital labor ratios, average firm size,

past stock return, or past equity beta as additional controls. Using alternative measures of market

structure, industry size, liquidity, and fundamentals co-movement also generates qualitatively

similar results.   Qualitatively similar results also ensue if we restrict the analysis to industries

reporting no R&D, if we separate above and below median Ψ industries, and if we divide our

sample into positive and negative industry returns in 1990-1992.                   Using contemporaneous

marginal q and information capitalization variables also generates qualitatively similar results,

though the justification for using contemporaneous variables is weaker here, as the consequences

of capital budgeting decisions plausibly last longer than the ability to access external funds.

        Note however, that using firm-level data rather than industry-level data is not an option in

this section of the paper. Using firm level data provides us with only a handful of observations

for each estimation of regression [38]. Aggregating to industry-level data is critical here because

it allows us to use panel data to estimate [38], and hence marginal q, reliably.



                                                     39
        Our marginal q results also survive an additional set of robustness checks, which we now

describe.

        First, it is not clear that the threshold value of marginal q should be one. Tax and other

effects can lead to a threshold value of marginal q lower than one.            Investors' return from

plowing back a dollar of after-tax income into capital investment is q&(1 + D)(1 − TCG ) where D is

the value of the depreciation tax shield generated and TCG is the capital gains tax the investors

pay upon selling the stock. For capital investment to make sense, this must be larger than the

value to the investor of paying a dollar dividend or buying back a dollar’s worth of outstanding

stock. The value of the former is (1− TDIV ) where TDIV is the personal tax on dividends. The

value of the latter is (1− TCG ) . This comparison is complicated by issues such as the timing of

capital gains realization, depreciation tax rules, and the fact that some investors are tax free while

other face a variety of marginal rates. Reasonable figures for the 1990s are TDIV in the 33% to

39.6% range, TCG equal to 28%, the present value of the depreciation tax shield equal to 23% of

the value of capital invested, and repurchases equal to 20% of disbursement (Fama and French,

2000). These imply a threshold marginal q in the general neighborhood of 0.8. We therefore re-

estimate Table 6 using threshold values ranging from 0.75 to 1.00. A threshold of 0.86 generates

the highest significance level; however, all these threshold values generate qualitatively similar

results to those shown.

        Moreover, since tax effects differ across industries, the tax-adjusted threshold marginal q

might be industry specific.   However, the inclusion of one-digit industry dummies may capture

such effects to some extent, and our results are qualitatively similar if we include two-digit

industry dummies, and if we exclude the industry dummies altogether.

        Second, we can check on robustness of Table 6 by partitioning the sample into high and

low marginal q subsamples. We begin by using one as the division point between these. For the

                                                 40
marginal q < 1 sample (162 observations), we find strong results in both regression and simple

correlation analyses: higher Θ and Ψ are significantly linked to higher marginal q.                  For the

marginal q > 1 sample (52 observations), our focal variables (Θ and Ψ ) are insignificant but

with the correct sign: higher Θ and Ψ are linked with lower marginal q. We suspect that the

insignificance may be due to the smaller sample size.                When we repeat the analyses using

marginal q = 0.8 as the dividing line between the high and low marginal q subsamples, we find

significant relationships in both subsamples consistent with those shown in the tables.            Higher Θ

and Ψ are linked with lower marginal q in the marginal q > 0.8 subsample (98 observations),

and with higher marginal q in the marginal q < 0.8 subsample (116 observations).

        Third, optimal investment policies imply that marginal q should be close to one, or to a

tax-adjusted threshold value, which we estimate to be slightly below one.                  The regressions in

Table 6 should not work if we use marginal q itself as the dependent variable. When we run q&

itself on the independent variables in Table 6 across the full sample of industries, we obtain

insignificant coefficients on the firm-specific information capitalization intensity variables.

        Fourth, investment should perhaps include more than just spending on property, plant and

equipment. Spending on intangible assets, such R&D and advertising, is also arguably a form of

investment despite the fact that generally accepted accounting principles do not recognize it as

such. We can modify [38] to incorporate spending on intangibles in the estimation of q& . Doing

so does not change our results qualitatively.

        Fifth, dividend payments (including stock repurchases) are used in estimating [38].                In

some industries, only a few firms pay dividends or repurchase stock consistently. We therefore

constrain β2i to be zero in industries with less than 10% of firms paying dividends or




                                                       41
repurchasing stock and re-estimate our marginal qs. These alternate marginal qs generate results

qualitatively similar to those shown in Table 6.

        Sixth, studies of corporate investment often consider average Tobin’s q, rather than

marginal q, since average q measures total, rather than marginal, value added. Average q is the

total market value of the firm, Vj,t, over the total replacement cost of all the firm’s assets, Aj,t.

Thus,

                   V j ,t
        q j, t ≡            ,                                                                    [39]
                   Aj ,t

where Vj,t and Aj,t are as explained in [33].

        As a firm invests in ever more marginally value-increasing projects, its marginal q falls to

one. Its average q, however, need not fall to one, for the firm’s average q is investors’ expected

present value of cash flows from its marginal and inframarginal capital investments; all scaled

by the sum of the replacement costs of the assets associated with those investments. Thus, all

else equal and in the absence of liquidity constraints, a high average q ratio signifies a history of

ex post value-creating investments.          If higher intensity firm-specific information capitalization

leads to better investment decisions, a positive relationship between average q and firm-specific

information capitalization intensity should be evident.

        To estimate an industry’s average q, we sum the market values of all firms in that

industry, and divide this by the sum of all their replacement costs.         The market value and the

replacement costs of tangible assets are as described in [33]. We then take an average for each

industry from 1993 through 1997.                Average q is negatively correlated with marginal q’s

deviation from 1, and uncorrelated with marginal q itself, and positively significantly related to

all five measures of the use of external financing.




                                                      42
        Both simple correlation coefficients and regressions of average q on the independent

variables in Table 6 confirm that higher average q is statistically significantly associated with

higher absolute and relative firm-specific information capitalization intensities, Θ i and Ψ i , but

uncorrelated with systematic information capitalization intensity, Øi.

        These results survive the above mentioned robustness checks for Table 6. Similar results

follow from both industry- and firm-level regressions.           Using value to sales ratios instead of

average q also generates similar results, as does using contemporaneous dependent and

independent variables rather than lagging the latter. Also, separate regressions on high and low

average q industries generate positive coefficients on firm-specific information capitalization

intensity in both subsamples.

        Finally, liquidity constraints can affect q ratio results when a firm’s cost of capital is

discontinuous.     This occurs, for example, when a firm’s last inframarginal capital spending

project exhausts its internal capital budget and its marginal project therefore requires switching

to higher cost external funds. This allows the marginal project to have a negative NPV even

though the last (observed) inframarginal project had a positive NPV.            Thus, a low marginal q

indicates overinvestment and suggests problems in capital budgeting, but a high marginal q can

indicate either underinvestment due to poor capital budgeting or a binding liquidity constraint.

        Because Table 4 shows industries characterized by high intensity firm-specific

information capitalization to access external funds more, we believe liquidity constraints unlikely

to underlie the negative relationship we observe between marginal q and firm-specific

information capitalization. To further investigate this issue, we re-estimate Table 6 for the q& >

0.8 subsample of industries, but including as controls all three of our liquidity measures:         net

current assets over total assets, cash flow over total assets, and past external financing activity.



                                                     43
The negative relationship between marginal q and firm-specific information capitalization

intensity remains significant.

        In conclusion, our results survive numerous robustness checks.           While we acknowledge

that further analysis may overturn our results, we regard them as persuasive evidence that more

intensive firm-specific information capitalization into stock prices is associated with capital

budgeting policies more consistent with more value maximization.



5.7     Discussion

        The results in this section indicate that higher firm-specific information capitalization

intensity is associated with marginal q ratios closer to what we believe to be optimal values.

This can be interpreted as indicating a positive relationship between the intensity of firm-specific

information capitalization and the economic efficiency of capital spending decisions.                This

relationship is highly statistically significant and highly robust.

        The positive relationship between firm-specific information capitalization and the

proximity to one of the marginal value of a unit of capital spending is also economically

significant.    In regression 6.2, a one standard deviation increase in absolute firm-specific

information capitalization intensity, Θ, reduces ( q& -1)2 by 0.450 × 0.859 or 0.387, roughly 66%

of the mean squared distance of marginal q from one across industries. Analogous calculations

show that a one standard deviation increase in Θ lowers the absolute distance of marginal q from

one by 17% of its cross-industry mean.                A one standard deviation increase in relative firm-

specific information capitalization intensity, Ψ, reduces the mean squared and absolute distances

of marginal q from one by 40% and 9% respectively.




                                                        44
        These    findings   are   once    again   consistent   with   higher   firm-specific   information

capitalization intensity indicating that stock prices that track fundamentals more closely, rather

than more loosely, and so with reduced malinvestment of the sort described by Hayek (1941).




6.      Interpreting Differences in Firm-specific Information Capitalization

        Intensity


        We have shown that, after controlling for both firm-specific and systematic fundamentals

variation and other factors, higher firm-specific stock return variation is associated with greater

use of external financing and reduced malinvestment. We propose that greater firm-specific

stock returns variation indicates that stock prices track firm fundamentals more closely.            This

closer proximity of stock prices to fundamental values then explains the observed increased use

of external funds and higher quality capital budgeting decisions.

        This interpretation of our results begs the question of why stock prices should track

fundamentals more closely in some industries than others, even though all stocks in the US

market are traded in essentially the same legal, regulatory and institutional environment.             To

propose an answer to this question, we must examine the process by which new information

enters share prices.



Limits to Risk Arbitrage

        Black (1986), Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and others stress the importance of risk

arbitrageurs in keeping stock prices close to their fundamental values.         Risk arbitrageurs gather

information about firms, industries, and the economy and process this information to ascertain



                                                    45
profitable trading strategies. Roll (1988) and French and Roll (1986) conclude that firm-specific

variation is mostly due to risk arbitrage by investors with private information.

        Shleifer and Vishny (1997) show that risk-averse risk arbitrageurs limit their trading on

private information under plausible assumptions.            Shleifer (2000, chapter 4) argues that this is

important in actual markets because arbitrageurs’ past performance affects their access to capital,

and describes how Long Term Capital Management, a hedge fund, failed when its backers grew

impatient   with     continuing     losses   on   an   economically     sensible   arbitrage   position    that

unexpectedly widened, rather than closed, over time. For these and other reasons, Shleifer and

Vishny (1997) and Shleifer (2000) argue that share prices can diverge from fundamentals for

prolonged periods.

        This suggests that differences in the intensity of firm-specific information capitalization

may reflect, at least in part, differences in the limits to risk arbitrage across industries.             Firm-

specific information may be costlier to gather and process or less profitable to trade on in some

industries than in others.         If so, firm-specific risk arbitrageurs might be less active in some

industries than others.



Possible Implications of Limited Arbitrage

        Whether or not limited risk arbitrage could generate the results we find depends on

details about the information flow into stock prices that are, at present, unknown. We advance

three incomplete descriptions of how the process of information capitalization might occur under

severely limited risk arbitrage.

        One possibility is that less active informed trading might cause a steadily increasing

uncapitalized “build up” of information about changing firm-specific fundamentals.               Presumably,

large discrete jumps in the share price would occur when the discrepancy between the market


                                                       46
price and arbitrageurs’ estimate of the fundamental value diverged sufficiently to justify

arbitrage. Observing low firm-specific returns variation over a fixed short window, we might see

few discrete jumps.        Low firm-specific returns variation might thus indicate susceptibility to this

information ‘build up and discharge’ pattern.              Such a pattern clearly makes share prices less

informative, and so might raise the costs of external funds and allow more malinvestment.               A

positive relationship between our firm-specific information capitalization intensity measures and

both the use of external funds and the quality, evaluated ex-post, of corporate investment

decisions would thus follow.

          An alternative possibility is that old information may grow stale, and that an absence of

informed trading might not cause an uncapitalized information build-up.             Such ‘depreciation’ in

the value of private information would mean that the gap between true value and market value

does not grow to a very large gap to eventually attract arbitrage and thus convergence of the two

values.     This would mean that some firm-specific events would pass without ever being

capitalized into share prices.

          In a large enough sample, or over a long enough window, cross-industry differences in

our firm-specific information capitalization intensity measures should disappear if they are due

to ‘information build up and discharge’ patterns in some industries. We therefore increased the

length of the time period over which we estimate our firm-specific information capitalization

intensity variables.     We find that differences across industries in the magnitude of firm-specific

returns variation are lower when we use a longer estimation period.              Also, as we expand the

window size, the statistical significance of the firm-specific information capitalization variables

in the regressions of Tables 4 and 6 fall, though their signs do not change. A ten-year window is

sufficient to render all their coefficients statistically insignificant.




                                                          47
        A third possibility arises from theories of noise trader risk. De Long et al. (1986) stress

that increased systematic noise trading may reduce the profitability of informed all risk arbitrage,

and thereby impede the capitalization of information into stock prices.         This is because such

noise trading adds market-wide variation to stock returns, and this increases risk-averse informed

traders’ costs of capital and causes them to take smaller positions. This reduction in informed

risk arbitrage, in turn, allows noise trading to cause an even larger increase in market-wide

variation, ad infinitum.         Thus, in industries where informed arbitrage is more limited, market

wide returns variation should be elevated relative to market wide fundamentals variation.       This

would reduce the magnitude of firm-specific returns variation measured relative to systematic

returns variation, and might also reduce firm-specific returns variation per se.       However, this

interpretation would seem inconsistent with the usual insignificance of systematic variation ∅ i;

and with firm-specific relative to systematic variation, Ψi, not working as well as pure firm-

specific variation,    Θ i , in many of the above regressions. Nonetheless, our incomplete

understanding of the real importance and nature of noise trading prevents a categorical rejection

of this hypothesis at present.

        Any or all three of these hypotheses might underlie our findings that increased firm-

specific information capitalization intensity is associated with greater use of external funds and

with reduced malinvestment problems.               We recognize that extensive further empirical

investigation is needed to fully investigate these alternative hypotheses. Moreover, we recognize

that the above list of hypotheses may well be incomplete, and invite other explanations of our

empirical findings.




                                                    48
7.      Conclusions

        We speculate that greater firm-specific stock returns variation reflects the capitalization

of firm-specific information into stock prices, and thus indicates more active risk arbitrage

trading and hence more efficiently set share prices.         We find that such increased firm-specific

information capitalization intensity is linked to real investment decisions through at least two

general channels.

        First, more firm-specific information in stock prices can alleviate the Myers and Majluf

(1984) lemons problems associated with accessing external funds, and thereby lower the cost of

external capital.    Consistent with this, we find that industries exhibiting higher firm-specific

stock returns variation to be significantly make greater use of external financing.

      Second, finer firm-specific information in stock prices might mitigate malinvestment

problems by mitigating these same lemons problems, by increasing corporate transparency, and

by providing boards and managers more meaningful feedback. Such feedback plausibly reduces

malinvestment problems, or (if ignored) invites the market for corporate control to reduce them.

Consistent with these explanations, we find marginal q ratios closer to one in industries with

greater firm-specific stock returns variation.

        Tobin (1982) argues that the most important consequence of stock market efficiency is its

implication of economically efficient firm-level capital allocation, which he dubs the “functional

form of the efficient markets hypothesis”. We propose that firm-specific stock returns variation,

after controlling for firm-specific fundamentals variation and other factors, is positively

correlated with firm-specific functional-form efficiency.       We suggest that U.S. stock prices are

more functionally efficient for some industries than for others, and that this has real economic

effects. Although we believe this interpretation of our findings to be sound, we recognize that

this work is preliminary and welcome other explanations.

                                                     49
Refere nces

Amihud, Yakov and Baruch Lev, 1981, “Risk Reductions as a Managerial Motive for

       Conglomerate Mergers”, Bell Journal of Economics, 12, 605-617.

Black, Fisher, 1986, “Noise”, Journal of Finance, 41:3, 529-543.

Diamond, Douglas, 1993, “Seniority and Maturity of Debt Contracts”, Journal of Financial

       Economics 33, 341-368.

De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers and Robert J. H. Waldmann, 1990,

       “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets”, Journal of Political Economy 98:4, 703-738.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth French, 2000, “Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm

       Characteristics or Lower Propensity to Pay?”, Journal of Financial Economics,

       forthcoming.

French, Kenneth R. and Richard Roll, 1986, “Stock Return Variances: the Arrival of Information

       and the Reaction of Traders”, Journal of Financial Economics 17:1, 5-26.

Grossman, Sanford, 1976, “On the Efficiency of Competitive Stock Markets Where Traders

       Have Diverse Information”, Journal of Finance 31:2, 573-585.

Hayek, Friedrich A., 1941, The Pure Theory of Capital. Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.

Hayek, Friedrich A., 1945, “The Use of Knowledge in Society”, American Economic Review

       35:4, 519-30.

Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1993, “Market Liquidity and Performance Monitoring”,

       Journal of Political Economy 101:4, 678-709.

Jensen, M., 1986, “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flows, Corporate Finance and Takeovers”,

       American Economic Review 76, 323-329.




                                               50
King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, 1993, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right”,

      Quarterly Journal of Economics 108:3, 717–737.

Khorana, Ajay and March Zenner, 1998, “Executive Compensation of Large Acquirers in the

      1980s", Journal of Corporate Finance, 4:3, 209-240.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, 1997,

      “Legal Determinants of External Finance”, Journal of Finance 52:3, 1131-1146.

Levine, Ross, 1997, “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda”,

      Journal of Economic Literature, 35, 688-726.

Lewellan, William G. 1971, “A Pure Financial Rationale for the Conglomerate Merger” Journal

      of Finance, 26:2 521-545.

MacKinley, Craig A, 1997, “Event Studies in Economic and Finance”, Journal of Economic

      Literature, 35:1, 13-39.

Mason, Scott P. and Robert C. Merton, 1985, “The Role of Contingent Claims Analysis in

      Corporate Finance”, E. I. Altman and M. G. Subramanyan, eds. Recent Advances in

      Corporate Finance. Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Homewood, IL.

Matsusaka, John G. and Vikram Nanda, 1994, “Internal Capital Markets and Corporate

      Refocusing”, working paper.

May, Don O., 1995, “Do Managerial Motives Influence Firm Risk Reduction Strategies?”,

      Journal of Finance 50:4, 1291-1308.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny 1990, “Do Managerial Objectives Drive

      Bad Acquisitions?”, Journal of Finance 45:1, 31-48.

Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung and Wayne Yu, 2000, “The Information Content of Stock

      Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements?”,

      Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.


                                              51
Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, “Corporate Financing and Investment

       Decisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have”, Journal of

       Financial Economics 13:2, 187-222.

Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1994, “The Benefits of Lending Relationships:

       Evidence from Small Business Data”, Journal of Finance 49:1, 3-38.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, “Costly Arbitrage: Evidence from Closed-End Funds”, Quarterly Journal

       of Economics 111:4, 1135-51.

Rajan, Raghuram, Henri Servaes and Luigi Zingales. 1998. The Cost of Diversity: The

       Diversification Discount and Inefficient Investment.        National Bureau of economic

       Research working paper 6368. Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Roll, Richard, 1988, R2 , Journal of Finance 43:2, 541-566.

Ross, Stephen, A., R. W. Westerfield, and B. D. Jordan, 1993, Fundamentals of Corporate

       Finance, Irwin Press, 2nd edition.

Schumpeter, Joseph A., 1950, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, 3rd ed. New York: Harper.

Scharfstein, David S. and Jeremy C. Stein, 1997, “The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets:

       Divisional Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment”, NBER Working Paper No. W5969.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, “The Limits of Arbitrage”, Journal of Finance

       52:1, 35-55.

Stein, Jeremy C., 1997, “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources”,

       Journal of Finance 52:1, 111-33.

Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar and Sherifan Titman. 1999, “The Going Public Decision and the

       Development of Financial Markets”, Journal of Finance 54:3, 1043-1082.

Theil, Henri, 1971, Principles of Econometrics, Wiley.

Tobin, James, 1982, “On the Efficiency of the Financial System”, Lloyd’s Banking Review, July.


                                                 52
Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2000, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital”, Journal of Financial
       Economics, 58:1 pp 187-214.




                                                 53
                                                                                               Table 1
                                                                         Definitions of Main Variables
Variable                                                                                                                          Definition
Panel A. Stock return variation and information capitalization intensity variables
firm-specific information capitalization intensity         Θ   Logarithm of residual sum of squares (scaled by number of firm-year observations) from regressions of firm total return on market
                                                               and 3-digit industry value-weighted indexes (constructed excluding own return) run on daily data by 3-digit industry from 1990
                                                               through 1992.
market- and industry-related information capitalization   ∅    Logarithm of explained sum of squares (scaled by number of firm-year observations) from the regressions described above.
intensity
firm-specific relative to systematic information          Ψ    Logarithm of residual sum of squares minus logarithm of explained sum of squares (both scaled by number of firm-year observations)
capitalization intensity                                       from the regressions described above.
Panel B. Financing source variables
new long-term debt over investment                       ∆ld   Book value of net new long-term debt and common equity issued (1993-97) over capital expenditures; truncated below 0 and above 1.
new equity over investment                               ∆e    Book value of net new common equity issued (1993-97) over capital expenditures, truncated below 0 and above 1.
change in current debt & accounts payable over           ∆sd   Change in book value of current debt and accounts payable (1993-97) over capital expenditures; truncated below 0 and above 1.
investment
new long-term debt & equity over investment             ∆ld&e Book value of net new long-term debt and common equity issued (1993-97) over capital expenditures, truncated below 0 and above 1.
new long-term debt & equity plus change in current      ∆d&e Book value of net new long-term debt and common equity issued plus change in book value of current debt and accounts payable
debt & accounts payable over investment                        (1993-97) over capital expenditures, truncated below 0 and above 1.
Panel C. Control variables
log of firm-specific ROA variation                      ROAΘ   Logarithm of residual sum of squares (scaled by number of firm-year observations) from regressions of firm ROA on market and 3-digit
                                                               industry value-weighted ROA indexes (constructed excluding own return) run on annual data by 3-digit industry from 1983 through
                                                               1992. ROA is the sum of income, interest expenses, and depreciation over tangible assets. Tangible assets are defined as the sum of
                                                               real property, plant, estimated using recursive formula in [17], and real inventory.
log of systematic ROA variation                         ROA∅   Logarithm of explained sum of squares (scaled by number of firm-year observations) from the regressions described above.
log of firm-specific rel. to systematic ROA variation   ROA  Ψ Logarithm of residual sum of squares minus logarithm of explained sum of squares (both scaled by number of firm-year observations)
                                                               from the regressions described above
diversification                                           ds   Diversification measured as 1990 through 1992 average of total assets weighted industry average of the number of primary 3-digit SIC
                                                               industries a firm operates in.
sales-based Herfindahl index                              Hs   Three-digit industry sales Herfindahl index, an average of indexes from 1990 through 1992.
log of industry size                                    ln(K)  Log of average from 1990 through 1992 of real property, plant, and equipment, estimated using recursive formula in [17].
net current assets over tangible assets                    D   The ratio of the difference between book values of current assets and current liabilities to tangible assets from 1990 through 1992.
                                                               Tangible assets is defined as above.
leverage                                                  lev  Market value of long-term debt, estimated recursively from historical changes in book values assuming all debt to be 15 year bonds
                                                               issued at par, scaled by tangible assets. Tangible assets are estimated using recursive formula in [17].
advertising expenditures                                 adv   Total from 1990 through 1992 of inflation adjusted advertising expenditures over tangible assets. Tangible assets is defined as above.
R&D expenditures                                         r&d   Total from 1990 through 1992 of inflation adjusted R&D expenditures over tangible assets. Tangible assets are defined as above.
Panel D. Quality of capital allocation and valuation variables
marginal q                                                 q&  The coefficient in regression of unexpected change in firm value on unexpected change in real total assets and controls by 3-digit
                                                               industry using annual data from 1993 through 1997. Real total assets is defined as above.
                                            Table 2
                            Univariate Statistics of Main Variables
variable                                                             mean     deviation minimum maximum

Panel A. Returns variation and information capitalization intensity variables
                                                             2
firm-specific stock return variation                        σε        0.032     0.043        0.013         0.418
                                                             2
systematic return variation                                 σm        0.008     0.107        0.001         0.094
                                                             2
systematic rel. to firm-specific return variation           R         0.211     0.087        0.040         0.566
firm-specific information capitalization intensity          Θ        -3.854     0.859       -6.635        -0.871
market- and industry-related information                    ∅        -5.255     0.794       -7.418        -2.364
capitalization intensity
firm-specific relative to systematic information            Ψ        1.401      0.549       -0.265        3.184
capitalization intensity

Panel B. Financing source variables

new long-term debt over investment                          ∆ld      0.405      0.364        0.000        1.000
new equity over investment                                  ∆e       0.388      0.309        0.000        1.000
change in current debt & accounts payable over inv.         ∆sd      0.116      0.378        0.000        1.000
new long-term debt & equity over investment                 ∆ld&e    0.572      0.379        0.000        1.000
new long-term debt & equity plus change in current          ∆d&e     0.714      0.218        0.000        1.000
debt & accounts payable over investment

Panel C. Control variables

log of firm-specific ROA variation                          ROA∅     -0.172     1.036       -5.470        1.918
log of systematic ROA variation                             ROAΘ     -0.411     1.076       -3.371        2.029
log of firm-specific rel. to systematic ROA variation       ROAΨ      0.239     0.722       -2.651        2.419
diversification                                                ds    1.262      0.021       1.143         1.297
sales-based Herfindahl index                                   Hs     0.121     0.128        0.004        0.925
log of fixed capital                                        ln(K)     8.357     1.907        3.701        13.87
net current assets over tangible assets                          D    0.320     0.474       -2.701        2.309
leverage                                                      lev     0.697     0.313        0.000        1.230
advertising expenditures                                     adv      0.026     0.446        0.000        0.295
R&D expenditures                                             r&d      0.036     0.092        0.000        0.641
Panel D. Quality of capital allocation and valuation variables

marginal q                                                     q&     0.580     0.628       -1.890        2.221
                                                                    2
squared deviation of marginal q from one                   ( q& -1)   0.568     1.284        0.000        8.352
absolute deviation of marginal q from one                  | q& -1|   0.517     0.549        0.004        3.221

Note: this table reports means, standard deviations, min, and max of main variables. Refer to Table 1 for variable
definitions. Sample is 214 three-digit industries for all variables. Panel B and Panel D samples are constructed
using 1993-1997 data and consist of 214 three-digit industries based on 6,375 firms. Panel A and Panel C (ds, Hs ,
ln(K), D i , adv, r&d) sample is constructed using 1990-1992 data and consists of 214 three-digit industries based
on 6,021 firms. lev is based on 1992 data. ROA∅ , ROAΘ, and ROAΨ sample is constructed using 1983-1992 data and
consists of 214 three-digit industries based on 5,680 firms. Finance industries (SIC code 6000 - 6999) are omitted.
                                  Table 3a
  Simple Correlation Coefficients of External Financing Variables with
   Each Other and with Information Capitalization Intensity Variables

Panel A. Correlation Matrix of Financing Source Variables
  ∆ld       ∆e       ∆sd      ∆ld&e    ∆d&e
           0.467    0.350     0.867    0.516
                                                  ∆ld    new long-term debt issued over investment
           (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.00)
              )
                    0.345     0.600    0.433
                                                  ∆e     new equity issued over investment
                    (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.00)
                              0.427    0.647             change in current debt and accounts payable over
                                                  ∆sd
                              (0.00)   (0.00)            investment
                                       0.433
                                                 ∆ld&e new long-term debt & equity issued over investment
                                       (0.00)
                                                      new long-term debt & equity issued plus change in
                                                 ∆d&e current debt and accounts payable over investment


Panel B. Correlation of Financing Source with Information Capitalization Intensity Variables
  ∆ld       ∆e      ∆ld&e      ∆sd     ∆d&e
 0.183     0.413    0.254     0.184    0.149
                                                   Θ     firm-specific information capitalization intensity
 (0.01)    (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.01)   (0.03)
 0.087     0.342    0.183     0.217    0.135             market- and industry-related information capitalization
                                                   ∅
 (0.20)    (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.05)            intensity
 0.160     0.151    0.133    -0.027    0.137             firm-specific relative to systematic information
                                                   Ψ     capitalization intensity
 (0.02)    (0.03)   (0.05)   (0.68)    (0.05)

Note: financing source variables (∆ld, ∆e, ∆ld&e, ∆sd, ∆d&e) are constructed using 1993-1997 data and based on a
sample consisting of 214 three-digit industries (6,375 firms). Information capitalization intensity measures (Θ, ∅ ,
Ψ ) are constructed using 1990-1992 data and based on a sample consisting of 214 three-digit industries (6,021
firms). Finance industries (SIC code 6000 - 6999) are omitted. Refer to Table 1 for variable definitions.

Correlation coefficients are based on 214 three-digit industries sample. Numbers in parentheses are probability
levels at which the null hypothesis of zero correlation is rejected. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in
boldface.
                                  Table 3b
     Simple Correlation Coefficients of Main Control Variables with Information
              Capitalization Intensity Variables and with Each Other

  ROAΘ      ROA∅    ROAΨ      ds      Hs      ln(K)     D
                                                       lev              adv     r&d
  0.363    0.230    0.182 -0.101 -0.219 -0.243 0.090 0.080             0.148   0.058     Θ     firm-specific information
  (0.00)   (0.00) (0.03) (0.10) (0.00) (0.00) (0.18) (0.27) (0.03) (0.40)                      capitalization intensity

  0.204    0.116 0.121 -0.093 -0.173 -0.219 0.070 0.104 0.089 0.020                      ∅     systematic information
  (0.00)   (0.08) (0.07) (0.17) (0.01) (0.00) (0.30) (0.12) (0.20) (0.77)                      capitalization intensity

  0.276    0.194 0.110 -0.120 -0.093 -0.063 0.031 0.020 0.104 0.062                      Ψ     firm-specific rel. to systematic
  (0.00)   (0.01) (0.10) (0.09) (0.16) (0.35) (0.60) (0.74) (0.13) (0.37)                      info. capitalization intensity

           0.771 0.296 -0.182 -0.348 0.018 -0.117 0.053 0.059 -0.029                           log of firm-specific ROA
                                                                                        ROAΘ   variation
           (0.00) (0.00) (0.01) (0.00) (0.79) (0.08) (0.40) (0.39) (0.68)

                    -0.378 -0.291 -0.21 0.061 -0.094 0.155 -0.060 -0.059                       log of systematic ROA
                                                                                        ROA∅
                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.36) (0.17) (0.00) (0.38) (0.39)                   variation
                            -0.172 -0.191 -0.066 0.022 -0.121 0.174 0.048                      log of firm-specific rel. to
                                                                                        ROAΨ   systematic ROA variation
                             (0.00) (0.00) (0.33) (0.74) (0.07) (0.01) (0.50)
                                    -0.080 0.257 0.081 -0.111 0.095 0.023
                                                                                         ds    Diversification
                                     (0.25) (0.00) (0.24) (0.10) (0.16) (0.73)

                                             0.112 0.044 0.076 -0.138 -0.045
                                                                                         Hs    sales-based Herfindahl index
                                             (0.10) (0.00) (0.25) (0.05) (0.51)

                                                      -0.359 0.066 0.045 -0.081
                                                                                   ln(K) log of fixed capital
                                                       (0.00) (0.32) (0.51) (0.24)
                                                              -0.207 0.141 0.345               net current assets over
                                                               (0.00) (0.00) (0.00)
                                                                                         D     tangible assets
                                                                      -0.361 -0.132
                                                                                         lev leverage
                                                                       (0.00) (0.04)
                                                                               0.111
                                                                                        adv advertising expenditures
                                                                               (0.10)

                                                                                        r&d R&D expenditures


Note: (ds, Hs , ln(K), D i , adv, r&d) sample is constructed using 1990-1992 data and consists of 214 three-digit industries
based on 6,021 firms. lev is based on 1992 data. ROA∅ , ROAΘ, and ROAΨ sample is constructed using 1983-1992 data and
consists of 214 three-digit industries based on 5,680 firms. Information capitalization intensity measures (Θ, ∅ , Ψ ) are
constructed using 1990-1992 data and based on a sample consisting of 214 three-digit industries (6,021 firms). Finance
industries (SIC code 6000 - 6999) are omitted. Refer to Table 1 for variable definitions.

Correlation coefficients are based on 214 three-digit industries sample. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which
the null hypothesis of zero correlation is rejected. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.
                                       Table 3c
            Simple Correlation Coefficients of External Financing Variables
                                with Control Variables

    ∆ld          ∆e          ∆sd        ∆ld&e         ∆d&e
  -0.075       -0.117       0.039       -0.083       -0.053
                                                                   Ds      Diversification
   (0.28)       (0.09)      (0.57)       (0.23)      (0.44)
   0.097       -0.031       -0.002      -0.012       -0.116
                                                                   Hs      sales-based Herfindahl index
   (0.12)       (0.64)       (0.97)      (0.86)      (0.08)
  -0.323       -0.542       -0.250      -0.369       -0.115
                                                                  ln(K)    log of fixed capital
   (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.08)
   0.201        0.272       0.173        0.185       0.280
                                                                    D      net current assets over tangible assets
   (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)
  -0.176        0.081       -0.112      -0.042       0.028
                                                                   Lev     leverage
   (0.00)       (0.24)       (0.11)      (0.53)      (0.69)
  -0.053        0.113       0.014        0.068       -0.028
                                                                   Adv     advertising expenditures
   (0.44)       (0.10)      (0.84)       (0.32)      (0.69)
  -0.048        0.062       0.111        0.023       0.037
                                                                   r&d     research and development expenditures
   (0.48)       (0.37)      (0.10)       (0.74)      (0.60)
   0.135        0.298       -0.015       0.211       0.149
                                                                  ROAΘ     log of firm-specific ROA variation
   (0.05)       (0.00)       (0.87)      (0.00)      (0.03)
   0.034        0.179       -0.034       0.085       0.113
                                                                  ROA∅     log of systematic ROA variation
   (0.62)       (0.01)       (0.62)      (0.22)      (0.10)
   0.144        0.161       0.034        0.177       0.048                 log of firm-specific relative to systematic
                                                                  ROAΨ     ROA variation
   (0.04)       (0.02)      (0.61)       (0.01)      (0.48)

Note: financing source variables are: new long-term debt over investment, ∆ld; new equity over investment, ∆e; new
long-term debt & equity over investment, ∆ld&e; change in current debt & accounts payable over investment, ∆sd; and
new long term debt & equity plus change in current debt & accounts payable over investment, ∆d&e. Financing source
variables (∆ld, ∆e, ∆ld&e, ∆sd, ∆d&e) are constructed using 1993-1997 data and based on a sample consisting of 214
three-digit industries (6,375 firms). (ds, Hs , ln(K), D i , adv, r&d) sample is constructed using 1990-1992 data and
consists of 214 three-digit industries based on 6,021 firms. lev is based on 1992 data. ROA∅ , ROAΘ, and ROAΨ are
constructed using 1983-1992 data and consists of 214 three-digit industries based on 5,680 firms. Finance industries
(SIC code 6000 - 6999) are omitted. Refer to Table 1 for variable definitions.

Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the null hypothesis of zero correlation is rejected. Coefficients
significant at 10% or better are in boldface.
                                                        Table 4
         Tobit Regressions of Financing Source on Information Capitalization Intensity and Control Variables
                                              4.1      4.2     4.3      4.4       4.5    4.6         4.7     4.8     4.9    4.10     4.11      4.12      4.13     4.14     4.15
                                               new long-term debt             new equity          change in current debt &   new long-term debt           new long-term debt,
                                                over investment,           over investment,        accounts payable over         & equity over          equity, cur. debt & acc.
       dependent variable                              ∆ld                        ∆e                   investment, ∆sd        investment, ∆ld&e         payable / invest, ∆d&e
       firm-specific information            0.179 0.105          -     0.159 0.040          -      0.020 0.019         -   0.217 0.053           -      0.244 0.040          -
          capitalization intensity    Θ     (0.01) (0.09)              (0.04) (0.10)               (0.05) (0.08)           (0.01) (0.10)                (0.00) (0.05)
market- & industry information              -0.088   -0.082     -      0.015    0.015      -      0.057    0.053      -      0.032    0.029      -      0.052    0.076      -
        capitalization intensity      ∅     (0.25)   (0.22)            (0.74)   (0.69)            (0.21)   (0.22)            (0.72)   (0.71)            (0.85)   (0.73)
 firm-specific rel. to systematic             -        -      0.108      -        -      0.046       -        -     0.038      -        -      0.071      -        -      0.052
                                      Ψ
             info. cap. intensity                             (0.03)                     (0.10)                     (0.20)                     (0.05)                     (0.10)
       log of firm-specific ROA               -      0.141       -       -      0.078       -        -     -0.010      -       -      0.190               -      0.315       -
                       variation     ROAΘ            (0.01)                     (0.00)                     (0.70)                     (0.00)                     (0.10)
        log of systematic ROA                 -      -0.123     -        -      -0.010     -         -     0.013      -        -      0.116               -      0.015      -
                                     ROA∅
                     variation                       (0.05)                     (0.94)                     (0.72)                     (0.05)                     (0.92)
log of firm-specific rel. to syst.   ROAΨ
                                              -         -      0.133     -         -      0.034      -        -     0.018      -         -      0.140     -         -     0.126
                ROA variation                                 (0.00)                     (0.22)                     (0.75)                     (0.01)                     (0.45)
                                              -      -1.511   -1.843     -      -0.626   -1.610      -      0.640   0.426      -       1.193    2.060     -      2.470    5.913
                  diversification ds
                                                     (0.42)   (0.30)            (0.46)   (0.10)            (0.54)   (0.72)            (0.54)   (0.30)            (0.71)   (0.33)
                                      Hs      -       0.048   -0.071     -      -0.473   -0.788      -      0.262   0.388      -      -0.702   -0.970     -      0.512    0.922
               Herfindahl index
                                                     (0.91)   (0.80)            (0.01)   (0.01)            (0.20)   (0.05)            (0.10)   (0.00)            (0.66)   (0.22)
                                              -      -0.060   -0.072     -      -0.106   -0.116      -     -0.028   0.030      -       0.121    0.131     -      0.146    0.175
             log of fixed capital ln(K)              (0.00)   (0.00)            (0.01)   (0.01)            (0.16)   (0.05)            (0.03)   (0.03)            (0.09)   (0.00)
       net current assets over       Di       -      0.120    0.115      -      0.050    0.034       -     0.202    0.201      -      0.153    0.138      -      1.270    1.199
               tangible assets                       (0.15)   (0.20)            (0.18)   (0.47)            (0.03)   (0.01)            (0.18)   (0.22)            (0.01)   (0.00)
                                              -      -0.866   -0.876     -      0.060    0.100       -      0.012   0.019      -      0.599    0.640      -      0.148    0.330
                        leverage lev
                                                     (0.01)   (0.00)            (0.68)   (0.60)            (0.99)   (0.90)            (0.10)   (0.10)            (0.90)   (0.78)
                                              -      -0.099   -0.032     -      0.729    0.882       -     -0.299   0.223      -      1.152    1.280      -      2.934    2.752
      advertising expenditures adv                   (0.91)   (0.96)            (0.10)   (0.10)            (0.55)   (0.68)            (0.23)   (0.22)            (0.30)   (0.32)
                                              -      -0.563   -0.563     -      -0.194   -0.156      -     0.139    0.142      -      0.602    0.640      -      1.494    1.587
             R&D expenditures r&d
                                                     (0.17)   (0.19)            (0.53)   (0.45)            (0.55)   (0.54)            (0.20)   (0.19)            (0.30)   (0.26)
                                            8.270    40.613 39.042 39.480 129.41 110.89           6.920    32.111 28.783 13.230 54.890 52.903 33.370 107.90 103.22
         chi-squared -statistics
                                            (0.01)   (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00)           (0.03)   (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.18) (0.00) (0.00)
                     pseudo R2              0.022    0.108    0.112    0.187    0.614    0.523     0.035   0.152    0.145    0.032    0.138    0.121    0.004    0.542    0.440
Note for Table 4: this table reports the Maximum Likelihood Estimation results of Tobit regressions. Lower limit is equal to 0; upper limit is equal to 1.

Financing source variables (∆ld, ∆e, ∆ld&e, ∆sd, ∆d&e) are constructed using 1993-1997 data and based on a sample consisting of 214 three-digit industries (6,375 firms).
Information capitalization intensity measures (Θ, ∅ , Ψ ) are constructed using 1990-1992 data and based on a sample consisting of 214 three-digit industries (6,021 firms).
(ds, Hs , ln(K), D i , adv, r&d) sample is constructed using 1990-1992 data and consists of 214 three-digit industries based on 6,021 firms. lev is based on 1992 data. ROA∅ ,
ROAΘ, and ROAΨ are constructed using 1983-1992 data and consists of 214 three-digit industries based on 5,680 firms. Finance industries (SIC code 6000 - 6999) are omitted.
Refer to Table 1 for variable definitions.

Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the null hypothesis of zero coefficient can be rejected. Coefficients significant at 10% level are in boldface.

Regressions 4.1, 4.4, 4.7, 4.10, and 4.13 include one-digit industry fixed effects, firm-specific information capitalization intensity and market- and industry-related information
capitalization intensity as independent variables. Regressions 4.2, 4.5, 4.8, 4.11, and 4.14 also include log of firm-specific ROA variation, log of systematic ROA variation,
diversification, Herfindahl index, log of fixed capital, net current assets over tangible assets, leverage over total assets, advertising expenditures, and R&D expenditures as
control variables. Regressions 4.3, 4.6, 4.9, 4.12, and 4.15 include one-digit industry fixed effects, firm-specific rel. to systematic info. cap. intensity, log of firm-specific rel. to
syst. ROA variation, diversification, Herfindahl index, log of fixed capital, net current assets over tangible assets, leverage, advertising expenditures, and R&D expenditures
as independent variables.
                                           Table 5
    Simple Correlation Coefficients of Quality of Capital Allocation and Valuation Measures with
Information Capitalization Intensity, Financing Source, Main Control Variables, and with Each Other
         2                                                                 2
  ( q& -1)   | q& -1|                                               ( q& -1)   | q& -1|
  -0.148     -0.139            log of firm-specific stock return    -0.139     -0.161                new long-term debt issued over
                         Θ                                                                 ∆ld
   (0.03)     (0.04)           variation                            (0.04)     (0.02)                investment
  -0.070     -0.091                                                 -0.134     -0.172                new equity issued over
                         ∅     log of systematic return variation                           ∆e       investment
   (0.30)     (0.18)                                                (0.05)     (0.01)
  -0.130     -0.087            log of firm-specific rel. to         -0.179     -0.198                new long-term debt & equity
                         Ψ                                                                ∆ld&e
   (0.06)     (0.20)           systematic return variation          (0.01)     (0.00)                issued over investment
  0.046      0.041                                                  -0.098     -0.157                change in current debt and
                        ROAΘ   log of firm-specific ROA variation                          ∆sd       accounts payable over inv.
  (0.50)     (0.55)                                                 (0.15)     (0.02)
  -0.012     0.016                                                                             new long term debt and equity
                        ROA∅   log of systematic ROA variation
   (0.86)    (0.81)                                                 -0.12      -0.176          issued plus change in current
                                                                                          ∆d&e
  0.084      0.034             log of firm-specific rel. to         (0.08)     (0.01)          debt and accounts payable over
                        ROAΨ                                                                   investment
  (0.22)     (0.61)            systematic ROA variation
  -0.014     -0.064                                                            0.884
                                                                                          ( q& -1) squared deviation of marginal q
                                                                                                  2
   (0.84)     (0.25)     ds    diversification                                 (0.00)               from 1

  0.023      0.015       Hs    sales-based Herfindahl index                                          absolute deviation of marginal q
                                                                                          | q& -1|
  (0.73)     (0.86)                                                                                  from 1
  0.069      0.892      ln(K) log of fixed capital
  (0.31)     (0.00)
  -0.060     -0.126            net current assets over tangible
   (0.64)     (0.05)
                         D     assets
  -0.058     0.026
                         lev   leverage
   (0.30)    (0.70)
  0.044      -0.017
                        adv advertising expenditures
  (0.53)      (0.82)
  0.085      -0.01      r&d    R&D expenditures
  (0.22)     (0.89)
Note for Table 5: quality of capital allocation and valuation variables (( q& -1) 2 , | q& -1|) are constructed using 1993-1997 data and based on a sample consisting of 214
three-digit industries (6,375 firms). Financing source variables (∆ld, ∆e, ∆ld&e, ∆sd, ∆d&e) are constructed using 1993-1997 data and based on a sample consisting of
214 three-digit industries (6,375 firms). Information capitalization intensity measures (Θ, ∅ , Ψ ) are constructed using 1990-1992 data and based on a sample
consisting of 214 three-digit industries (6,021 firms). (ds, Hs , ln(K), D i , adv, r&d) sample is constructed using 1990-1992 data and consists of 214 three-digit
industries based on 6,021 firms. lev is based on 1992 data. ROA∅ , ROAΘ, and ROAΨ are constructed using 1983-1992 data and consists of 2 14 three-digit industries
based on 5,680 firms. Finance industries (SIC code 6000 - 6999) are omitted. Refer to Table 1 for variable definitions.

Correlation coefficients are based on 214 three-digit industries sample. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the null hypothesis of zero correlation is
rejected. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.
                                   Table 6
       OLS Regressions of Quality of Capital Allocation and Valuation on
          Information Capitalization Intensity and Control Variables
                                          6.1             6.2             6.3    6.4          6.5            6.6
                                                 squared deviation of            absolute value of deviation of
                                                                          2
         dependent variable                    marginal q from 1, ( q& -1)         marginal q from 1, | q& -1|
    firm-specific information            -0.349          -0.450           -     -0.117       -0.116          -
       capitalization intensity    Θ     (0.05)          (0.10)                 (0.05)       (0.05)
market- and industry-related             0.104           0.163            -     0.008        0.020           -
  information capitalization             (0.45)          (0.30)                 (0.91)       (0.80)
                                   ∅
                    intensity
         firm-specific rel. to             -                -          -0.242     -             -         -0.055
                 systematic                                            (0.05)                             (0.06)
                                   Ψ
  information capitalization
                    intensity
   log of firm-specific ROA                -             0.262            -       -          0.063           -
                                  ROAΘ                   (0.24)                              (0.40)
                    variation
     log of systematic ROA                 -             -0.081           -       -          -0.020          -
                                  ROA∅                   (0.45)                              (0.75)
                   variation
  log of firm-specific rel. to             -                           0.115      -             -          0.026
                                  ROAΨ                      -          (0.25)                              (0.60)
  systematic ROA variation
                                           -             -6.150        -4.630     -          -2.166       -1.688
               diversification     ds                    (0.18)        (0.20)                (0.30)       (0.42)
                                           -             0.714         0.969      -          0.567         0.674
             Herfindahl index Hs                         (0.23)        (0.00)                (0.05)        (0.00)
                                           -             0.070         0.140      -          0.077         0.088
          log of fixed capital ln(K)                     (0.62)        (0.25)                (0.05)        (0.00)

     net current assets over               -             0.017         0.053      -          -0.044       -0.032
                                  Di                     (0.88)        (0.77)                (0.60)       (0.66)
             tangible assets
                                           -             -1.342        -1.333     -          -0.420       -0.406
                     leverage lev                        (0.10)        (0.10)                (0.19)       (0.19)

                                           -             0.308         0.223      -          -0.475       -0.510
    advertising expenditures adv                         (0.90)        (0.89)                (0.59)       (0.58)
                                           -             1.490         1.543      -          0.195         0.196
          R&D expenditures r&d                           (0.46)        (0.44)                (0.71)        (0.71)

                                         38.750          21.024        14.320   48.150      34.320        24.872
                  F-statistics           (0.00)          (0.00)        (0.00)   (0.00)      (0.00)        (0.00)
                             2
              Regression R               0.094           0.178          0.142   0.156        0.229         0.208
Note for Table 6: this table reports OLS regression estimation results.

Quality of capital allocation and valuation variables (( q& -1) 2 , | q& -1|) are constructed using 1993-1997 data and based
on a sample consisting of 214 three-digit industries (6,375 firms). Information capitalization intensity measures (Θ, ∅, Ψ)
are constructed using 1990-1992 data and based on a sample consisting of 214 three-digit industries (6,021 firms). (ds,
Hs , ln(K), D i , adv, r&d) sample is constructed using 1990-1992 data and consists of 214 three-digit industries based on
6,021 firms. lev is based on 1992 data. ROA∅ , ROAΘ, and ROAΨ are constructed using 1983-1992 data and consists of 214
three-digit industries based on 5,680 firms. Finance industries (SIC code 6000 - 6999) are omitted. Refer to Table 1 for
variable definitions.

Numbers in parentheses are probability levels based on Newey-West standard errors at which the null hypothesis of zero
coefficient can be rejected. Coefficients significant at 10% level are in boldface. All regressions include one-digit SIC
industry fixed effects.

Regressions 6.1 and 6.4 include one-digit industry fixed effects, firm-specific information capitalization intensity and
market- and industry-related information capitalization intensity as independent variables. Regressions 6.2 and 6.5 also
include log of firm-specific ROA variation, log of systematic ROA variation, diversification, Herfindahl index, log of fixed
capital, net current assets over tangible assets, leverage, advertising expenditures, and R&D expenditures as control
variables. Regressions 6.3 and 6.6 include one-digit industry fixed effects, firm-specific rel. to systematic info. cap.
intensity, log of firm-specific relative to systematic. ROA variation, diversification, Herfindahl index, log of fixed capital,
net current assets over tangible assets, leverage, advertising expenditures, and R&D expenditures as independent
variables.
