                                & +   




                                      


                                        !
                                          "# !!$%


                                        &'(!) *,-./
                                00*122333!4)2* *23,-./



                                                   
                              -.5.  #006!#
                                   4($)7.8-9,
                                    4# :




           
  

 ! "# $%&' (  )    *
   (  * +         *  (
 * (  
!!; 0(! !<#0!(=*(#($(!)
 ! !$"# !!$%
 &'(!) *,-./
4# :8..-
">?7.87?.

                                                  

       (* *$6* !!(0:=*(4#($(!)(0: $$0(
 !) 0 0 0)( 0 0 *( 4#($ (0( :  6 #$ &   0 0 0)(
 !$!!; 0(!7 $!!; 0(!7 !$00*0$ !<#00:330
( !) 0 0 0)( $*!$ ! # = 0  0 !( ) (! = (*( 
;* !(!70 0(6==0(6!=(*(  (700=*@0(!)(*( ((0 :
*37 !$(<#($(0:!0 (!0!=(! !(!)(*(  ((0:  $$0*
=(*(  4(0(!* *#; *=0(0:=0  !7!)700 !7
 !$ %( !*(0(#0 00 **( 4((0:=00:




        !                              "# !!$%
       3! !(6(0:                                   0 0 !(6(0:=3A' 0#== 
        # )#!$ 0(!
        !$
   This paper develops an economic theory of empire building. This theory addresses both
the choice among strategies that can be used to expand an empire as well as the scope
of imperial ambitions. The paper uses examples from the history of the Roman, Mongol,
Ottoman, and Nazi German empires to illustrate the applicability of the theory.
   To focus the analysis, we consider the following story: The Romans are thinking about
expanding their empire by incorporating a country now ruled by Barbarians. Historical ac-
counts suggest that the Romans, like other empire builders, can choose among three diﬀerent
strategies.
   In an Uncoerced Annexation the Romans compensate the Barbarians suﬃciently to
induce the Barbarians to agree to the annexation of their country by Rome. This strategy
requires that incorporating the country into the Roman empire would yield either economic
or military advantages and that the Romans share these gains with the Barbarians. The
attraction of this strategy to the Romans is that it avoids the expense of sending Legions
either to threaten or to attempt to conquer the Barbarians. (Although Uncoerced Annex-
ation implies subjugation, the formal arrangements of an Uncoerced Annexation can range
from direct Roman rule to an alliance with Rome under Roman leadership.)
   In a Coerced Annexation the Romans induce the Barbarians to agree to the annexation
of their country under the threat that the Romans will attack and try to conquer the country.
This strategy requires the Romans to send Legions of suﬃcient strength to the borders of the
Barbarian country that the Barbarians decide to capitulate rather than to defy the Romans.
The attraction of this strategy to the Romans is that it avoids having to share the gains
from annexation with the Barbarians.
   In an Attempted Conquest the Romans attack the Barbarian country. This strategy
is cheaper than the strategy of Coerced Annexation. It requires sending Legions to the
Barbarian country, but fewer Legions that would be necessary to induce the Barbarians to
capitulate. But, this strategy is risky in that an Attempted Conquest can fail.



                                             1
       Our theory assumes that the Romans will employ one of these strategies only if its
expected value to the Romans is positive and is at least as large as the expected value to
the Romans of any other strategy. If none of these strategies have a positive expected value,
then the Romans will not attempt to incorporate the Barbarian country into their empire.1

1. Uncoerced Annexation
       Let ω denote the present value of the expected stream of rents that the Barbarians
receive as rulers of the country, and let Ω denote the expected gross present value to the
Romans of annexing the country, where Ω = k ω, k ≥ 0. A value of k larger than one
implies that annexing the country would yield expected beneÞts to the Romans that are
larger than the expected losses to the Barbarians. Thus, if k is larger than one, then the
Romans can proÞtably compensate the Barbarians for agreeing to annexation by paying the
Barbarians an amount whose present value is not smaller than ω.2
       The factor k could be larger than one for a variety of reasons. One set of possibilities is
directly economic. For example, Roman rule could bring more eﬃcient public administration.
It is also possible that as a part of the Roman empire or as an ally of Rome the country
would have expanded trading opportunities.
       Another set of possibilities is military and, hence, indirectly economic. For example, by
annexing the Barbarian country the Romans could gain either geopolitical advantages or
access to resources that would make it easier to incorporate other desirable countries into
their empire.
   1
       A related paper by Ronald Findlay (1996) develops an economic analysis of the size of empires. Findlay’s
model abstracts from the distinction between annexation and conquest, which is the main concern of the
present paper. Also, Findlay treats territorial expansion as a continuous choice variable, rather than modeling
the incorporation of discrete countries together with their populations into an empire, as in the present paper.
   2
       This compensation can take the form of a lump sum paid at the time of annexation or a promise of future
payments. This timing is likely to depend in part of the credibility of Roman and Barbarian commitments.
The present theory abstracts from the issue of credibility.



                                                        2
       Let RA denote the expected value to the Romans of a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation.
Allowing for the possibility that k is larger than one, we have

(1)                            RA = max{Ra , 0},         where Ra ≤ (k − 1)ω.

In equation (1), Ra equals the diﬀerence between the expected gross present value to the
Romans of annexing the country and the present value of the compensation that the Romans
pay to the former Barbarian rulers.

2. Coerced Annexation or Attempted Conquest
       Let Q denote the probability that, if the Romans send Legions to the Barbarian country,
then they will successfully incorporate the Barbarian country into the Roman empire. Let
g denote the Þghting strength of the Legions that the Romans send to the country, and let
h denote the amount of resources that the Barbarians allocate to defending their country
from a Roman threat. Assume that
                                    
                                           1
                                    
                                                for g > 0, where θ > 0,
                                    
                                       1 + h/θg
                                    
(2)                           Q=
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                          0        for g = 0.

       Equation (2) says that Q is positive if and only if g is positive. Also, if g is positive,
then Q is an increasing function of g and a decreasing function of h. If g is positive
and if h equals zero, then Q equals one. The parameter θ quantiÞes the eﬀectiveness of
the Roman Legions against the Barbarian defenses.3
       To analyze Roman strategy, we must analyze Þrst how the Barbarians respond to a
Roman threat. Let BC denote the expected value to the Barbarians of resisting a Roman
attempt to conquer their country. If the Romans send Legions to their country, then the
   3
       Equation (2) abstracts from the choice of military tactics, such frontal assault or siege warfare. In this
respect equation (2) is a generic black box, like a standard black-box production function.



                                                         3
Barbarians choose h to maximize BC , where

(3)                                  BC = (1 − Q) ω − h.

      Assume that in choosing h the Barbarians take g as given. This assumption implies
that a Roman decision to allocate resources to sending Legions to the country is irreversible.
In eﬀect, this model assumes that the Romans are a Stackelberg leader.
      From equations (2) and (3) the solution to the Barbarians’ choice problem is
                                            q
(4)                               h = max{ θgω − θg, 0}.

Equation (4) implies that the Barbarians choose a positive value of h if and only if g is
positive but smaller than ω/θ. Thus, a strategy of Coerced Annexation requires the Romans
to allocate suﬃcient resources to sending Legions to the Barbarian country such that g is
at least as large as ω/θ, which is the minimum positive value of g that would induce the
Barbarians to capitulate by choosing h equal to zero. Alternatively, if the Romans use a
strategy of Attempted Conquest, then they choose a positive, but smaller, value of g, and
the Barbarians resist the Romans by choosing a positive value of h.
      Let RC denote the expected value to the Romans of sending Legions to the Barbarian
country. Assume for now that the cost of sending Legions of Þghting strength g is g. Thus,
if the Romans send Legions to the country, then they choose g to maximize RC , where

(5)                                     RC = Q Ω − g.

In choosing g the Romans take into account both the direct eﬀect of g on Q, as given
by equation (2), as well as the indirect eﬀect on g on Q through the eﬀect of g on h,
as given by equation (4).
      From equations (2), (4), and (5), the solution to the Romans’ choice problem is

(6)                                g = min{k 2 θω/4, ω/θ}.

                                                4
Because k 2 θω/4 is smaller than ω/θ only if the product of θ and k is smaller than
two, equation (6) implies that, if the Romans send Legions to the country, then they choose
g large enough to induce the Barbarians to capitulate if and only if the product of θ and
k is at least as large as two. If θk is smaller than two, then the Romans choose a smaller
value of g the smaller is k, θ, or ω.
      Substituting equations (4) and (6) into equation (2), we Þnd that, if the Romans send
Legions to the country, then in equilibrium the probability that they will successfully incor-
porate the country into the Roman empire is

(7)                                     Q = min{θk/2, 1}.

Equation (7) implies that, if and only if the product of θ and k is as large as two, in which
case the Barbarians capitulate, then Q equals one. But, if θk is smaller than two, in which
case the Barbarians resist, then Q is smaller the smaller is θk. Equation (7) also implies
that, although Q depends on k, which is the ratio of Ω to ω, Q does not depend on
the absolute value of ω, because in equilibrium both g and h are proportionate to ω.
      Substituting equations (6) and (7) into equation (5), the expected value to the Romans
of sending Legions to the country is
                                    
                                    
                                       θk 2 ω/4       for θk < 2
(8)                          RC =
                                    
                                       (θk − 1)ω/θ for θk ≥ 2.

Equation (8) says that RC is larger the larger are θ, k and ω.

3. Roman Strategy
      From equations (1) and (8) we can infer the conditions under which the Romans will use
each of the three possible strategies. Figure 1 illustrates these results.

      • Uncoerced Annexation: The Romans compensate the Barbarians suﬃciently to
        induce the Barbarians to agree to the annexation of their country by the Roman empire


                                                   5
 θ
  6




        ¾
            θk = 2



                    Coerced Annexation




1 • Attempted
    Conquest
                      Uncoerced Annexation
                ¾
                    θ = 4(k − 1)/k2
            •          •                      -
                                                  k
            1          2

      Figure 1: Annexation or Conquest?

k: gain from imperial expansion
θ: relative eﬀectiveness of imperial armies
         only if 0 < RA ≥ RC . Assuming, for simplicity, that Ra equals (k − 1)ω, equations
         (1) and (8) imply that these conditions are satisÞed if and only if

                                either 1 < k < 2 and θ ≤ 4(k − 1)/k 2
         (9)                                                                    .
                                or         k≥2         and θ ≤ 1.

         [See Appendix A for the derivation of condition (9).] As we see in Figure 1, condition
         (9) obtains only if k is larger than one and θ is smaller than one. Thus, the Romans
         use a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation only if annexing the country would yield large
         economic or military beneÞts to the Romans and only if the Barbarian defenses are
         more eﬀective, sestertium for sestertium, than the Roman Legions.4

   • Coerced Annexation: The Romans send Legions of suﬃcient Þghting strength to
         induce the Barbarians to capitulate only if θk ≥ 2 and 0 < RC ≥ RA . Assuming
         again that Ra equals (k − 1)ω, equations (1) and (8) imply that these conditions
         are satisÞed if and only if

         (10)                                θ ≥ max{1, 2/k}

         As we see in Figure 1, condition (10) obtains if k is larger than two and θ is larger
         than one. If k is not larger than two , θ must be larger the smaller is k. Thus, if
         their Legions are more eﬀective, sestertium for sestertium, than the Barbarian defenses
         and annexing the country would not be seriously disadvantageous, either economically
         or militarily, then the Romans use a strategy of Coerced Annexation.
   4
       The assumption that Ra equals (k − 1)ω implies that the former Barbarian rulers of the country
receive an amount whose present value is ω and that the Romans get all of the net gain from incorporating
the country into the Roman Empire. If the Romans do not get all of the net gain, then, to satisfy the
condition 0 < RA ≥ RC , either k must be larger or θ must be smaller. An interesting extension would
be to model the bargaining game between the Romans and the Barbarians.




                                                   6
   • Attempted Conquest: The Romans attack and try to conquer the country only if
       θk ≤ 2 and 0 < RC ≥ RA . Assuming again that Ra equals (k − 1)ω, equations
       (1) and (8) imply that these conditions are satisÞed if and only if

       (11)                     max{4(k − 1)/k 2 , 0} < θ ≤ 2/k.

       As we see in Figure 1, condition (11) obtains only if neither θ nor k are too large.
       Thus, the Romans attack and try to conquer a country only if their Legions are not
       too eﬀective, sestertium for sestertium, than the Barbarian defenses and annexing the
       country would not yield large economic or military advantages. To understand this
       result, observe that equation (6) implies that, with a small values of θ and k, although
       the Romans attack and try to conquer the country, they do not allocate as large an
       amount of resources to this eﬀort as an alternative strategy of Coerced Annexation
       would require.

Conditions (9), (10), and (11) show how the Romans’ choice of strategy depends on the
parameters, θ and k. These conditions also reveal that the Romans’ choice of strategy
does not depend on the absolute value of ω, again because in equilibrium both g and h
are proportionate to ω.

4. The Scope of Imperial Ambitions
   In the preceding section, either condition (9), or condition (10), or condition (11) was
satisÞed. Thus, this analysis implies that the Romans want to incorporate every Barbarian
country into the Roman empire. This implication is counter factual.
   In order to bound the scope of imperial ambitions, assume that the cost to the Romans
of sending Legions of Þghting strength g to the Barbarian country is not g, but c, where
                                      
                                      
                                         0        for g = 0
(12)                              c=
                                         g + f for g > 0.


                                               7
The parameter f in equation (12) represents a Þxed cost of sending Legions. Equation (12)
says that, if g is positive, then c equals the sum of g and f.
   The preceding analysis implicitly assumed that f equals zero. Because the value of
f does not aﬀect the marginal cost of sending Legions to the Barbarian country, equations
(6) and (7) obtain whether or not f is positive. But, if f is positive, then equation (8)
generalizes to

(13)                                 RC = max{Rf , 0},
                                     
                                     
                                        θk 2 ω/4 − f      for θk < 2
                      where Rf =
                                     
                                        (θk − 1)ω/θ − f   for θk ≥ 2.
Equation (13) implies that RC is not positive if and only if

                          either θk < 2 and f /ω ≥ θk 2 /4
(14)                                                                 .
                          or      θk ≥ 2 and f /ω ≥ (θk − 1)/θ.

   Condition (14) is satisÞed for a combination of a suﬃciently large value of the ratio, f/ω,
and suﬃciently small values of the parameters, k and θ. Thus, condition (14) implies that,
if the Þxed cost of sending Legions is large relative to the wealth of the Barbarian country and
the Barbarian defenses are suﬃciently eﬀective against Roman Legions, then the Romans
will expect neither Coerced Annexation nor Attempted Conquest to be proÞtable.
   Recall that equation (1) implies that RA is not positive if k is not larger than one.
Thus, if both k is not larger than one and condition (14) obtains, then neither RA nor RC
is positive. Countries for which both k is not larger than one and condition (14) obtains
are beyond the scope of Roman imperial ambitions. The theory implies that the Romans
are not interested in incorporating such countries into the Roman empire either through
Uncoerced Annexation, Coerced Annexation, or Attempted Conquest.
   Even if RA and RC are positive, a positive value of f makes RC smaller and, hence,
would imply that RA is larger than RC for a larger range of values of k and θ. In other

                                                8
words, a Þxed cost of sending Legions makes Coerced Annexation and Attempted Conquest
less proÞtable and makes Uncoerced Annexation relatively more attractive. [See Appendix
B for a derivation of the conditions for 0 < RA ≥ RC with f > 0.]

5. Liquidity Constraints
      The preceding discussion has assumed implicitly that the Romans can mobilize suﬃcient
resources to send to the Barbarian country Legions with a Þghting strength that equals the
value of g given by equation (6). This assumption abstracts from the possibility that the
Romans face a binding liquidity constraint on their ability to mobilize resources.
      To relax this abstraction, let g denote the maximum amount of resources that the
Romans can mobilize to send Legions to the Barbarian country. If condition (10) obtains,
but g is smaller than ω/θ, which is the value of g that a strategy of Coerced Annexation
requires, then g is a binding liquidity constraint. This constraint would prevent the Romans
from using a strategy of Coerced Annexation that they otherwise would prefer.5
      If a binding liquidity constraint precludes a strategy of Coerced Annexation, then the
Romans instead would use either a strategy of Attempted Conquest or a strategy of Unco-
erced Annexation. The Romans would use a strategy of Attempted Conquest, instead of a
strategy of Coerced Annexation, only if g is large enough, and k is small enough, that the
value of RC associated with g equal to g is equal to or larger than RA . Alternatively,
the Romans would use a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation, instead of a strategy of Coerced
Annexation, only if g is small enough, and k is large enough, that the value of RC
associated with g equal to g is equal to or smaller than RA .6
  5
      A binding liquidity constraint also could cause the Romans to use a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation
instead of a strategy of Attempted Conquest that they otherwise would prefer. This situation could occur
only if condition (11) obtains, with k larger than one, but g is much smaller than k2 ωθ/4, which is the
value of g that maximizes the expected value of a strategy of Attempted Conquest.
  6
   Substituting equations (2) and (4) into equation (5), and replacing g with g, we Þnd that the value
                                          √
of RC associated with g equal to g is k θgω − g. From equation (1), RA equals max{Ra , 0}, where



                                                     9
6. The Theory Applied to Roman History
       From the Þfth century BCE until the early part of the third century BCE, the incipient
Roman empire was often engaged in bloody conßicts with its neighbors, both Latin and
Etruscan. The fact that the Romans won most of these wars suggests that in confronting
the armies of the Latin League and Etruria the Roman Legions enjoyed a large value of
θ. Also, it seems likely that the value of k associated with incorporating the Latin and
Etruscan states into the Roman empire was at least equal to one. Given that θ was large
and that k was not too small, the fact that early on the Romans did not use a strategy
of Coerced Annexation suggests that the incipient Roman empire faced binding liquidity
constraints on its ability to Þnance its Legions. This implication is also consistent with the
fact that in those days the Legions were composed mainly of conscripts and other part-time
soldiers, whose mobilization was ad hoc.
       During the third century BCE the Romans Þnally incorporated most of the states in the
Latin League and Etruria into the Roman empire, and during the second century BCE the
Romans added most of the Greek states to their empire. The strength of the Roman Legions
was critical for imperial expansion. But, as many of the previously independent states of
Italy and Greece capitulated without the Roman Legions attacking, it appears that in the
third and second centuries BCE, in contrast to earlier times, the Romans used mainly the
strategy of Coerced Annexation.7 As Edward Luttwak (1976, page 2) tells us,

         Forces visibly ready to Þght but held back from battle could serve...to control
         lands and peoples by intimidation –ideally to the point where... eﬀective domi-
         nation could be achieved without any use of force at all... indeed [the Romans]
Ra is equal to or smaller than (k − 1)ω.
   7
       The Epirians, whom Pyrrhus led to Pyrrhic victory, and the Macedonians were exceptions. The Romans
eventually conquered both of these states, but it seems that in confronting the Epirians and the Macedonians
the Romans did not have a large enough value of θ to use the strategy of Coerced Annexation.




                                                    10
         conquered the entire Hellenistic world with few battles and much coercive diplo-
         macy.

This change in the Romans’ predominant strategy suggests that by the third century BCE
the Romans no longer faced binding liquidity constraints. This implication is also consistent
with the fact that by the third century BCE the Legions comprised a standing army of
professional soldiers, whom the Roman state fed, clothed, and equipped.8
       It is noteworthy that at about the same time that the Roman empire was consolidating
its control of Italy and expanding into Greece the Romans and the Carthaginians were
alternately attempting to conquer parts of each other’s empires. Historical accounts of the
Punic Wars suggest that neither Rome nor Carthage enjoyed a large enough value of θ to
warrant a strategy of Coerced Annexation with respect to the other. Also, it seems unlikely
that incorporation of any part of either one of the empires into the other one would have
involved a large enough value of k to warrant a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation. Hence,
as the theory implies, both Rome and Carthage chose the strategy of Attempted Conquest.
       In later years, as the Roman empire expanded into central and northern Europe, Asia
Minor, and the Middle East, the Romans’ predominant strategy changed again. Now they
used mainly the strategy of Uncoerced Annexation. Historians refer to the small countries
that the Romans peacefully incorporated into their empire as “client states”. Examples
include Judea, the countries of Germanic peoples like the Chauci, Cherusi, Quadi, and
Marcomanni, and various countries in Asia Minor. Our theory also suggests an explanation
for this change in strategy.
   8
       Luttwak proposes the alternative hypothesis that the increased use of the strategy of Coerced Annexation
resulted from a learning process. He writes (page 2),

         Having learned in the earlier republican period how to defeat neighbors in battle by sheer
         tactical strength, having later mastered the strategic complexities of large-scale warfare in
         Þghting the Carthaginians, the Romans Þnally learned that the most desirable use of military
         power was not military at all, but political...


                                                           11
   In attempting to push out the northern and eastern frontiers of the empire the Romans
encountered both relatively small values of θ and relatively large values of k. On these fron-
tiers the Roman Legions were not highly eﬀective against Barbarian defenses, as evidenced
by the mixed success of the Legions in their campaigns against the Germanic tribes, the
Dacians, and Parthians. But, annexing the client states yielded large military advantages to
the Romans. Luttwak (pages 19-20, 26, 27) describes these advantages,

     Since clients would take care to prevent attacks against provincial territory, their
     obedience lessened the need to provide local security at the periphery of the em-
     pire against low-intensity threats...Against high-intensity threats, such as inva-
     sions on a provincial or even a regional scale, client states and client tribes could
     contribute both their own interposed forces and their capacity to absorb the
     threat – in other words, they could provide geographic depth...Another obvious
     contribution of client states and client tribes to Roman security was the supply
     of local forces to augment Roman armies on campaign. Naturally, these troops
     would fall into the Roman category of auxilia, i.e., cavalry and light infantry,
     rather than legionary forces of heavy infantry...Auxiliary troops contributed by
     clients had played an important role in the campaigns of the republic, not least
     because they could provide military specialties missing from the regular Roman
     arsenal, such as archers, and especially mounted archers...The complementarity
     between auxilia and legionary forces was an important feature of the Roman
     military establishment; moreover, the forces maintained by the client states were
     substantial.

Also, many of these client states had relatively primitive economies, and incorporating these
countries into the Roman empire resulted in large economic gains. With a small value of
θ and a large value of k, our theory implies that the Romans would chose a strategy of
Uncoerced Annexation.

                                              12
   How did the Romans compensate the rulers of their client states to induce them to agree
to being annexed into the Roman empire? Luttwak (pages 32, 37) tells us,

     Loyal and eﬃcient client rulers were rewarded by personal honors, ordinarily re-
     ceiving Roman citizenship (which Augustus’s highly restrictive citizenship policy
     made an important privilege)...More tangible rewards were also given, primarily
     territorial. That model client, Polemo I, king of Pontus, received Lesser Armenia
     from Anthony, and when Augustus detached that territory from Pontus, Polemo
     received instead the important (but, as it turned out, ungovernable) Bosporan
     state. Similarly, when Herod - a very eﬃcient client ruler indeed - was still
     in Augustus’s good graces, he was granted in 24-23 B.C. part of the plateau
     country of Ituraea (Golan-Hauran), at the expense of another client, Zenodorus,
     who had failed to control the nomadic raiding of his subjects...The major active
     instrument of client management among the primitive peoples of continental Eu-
     rope was a systematic policy of subsidization...By channeling money and favors
     through chosen client chiefs, the Romans helped the latter gain power over their
     subjects, while the Romans gained power over them...Speaking of the once formi-
     dable Marcomanni and Quadi, Tacitus describes both as ruled by client rulers
     maintained in power – and controlled – by a combination of occasional armed
     assistance and Þnancial support.

   Luttwak (page 37) also suggests that to enforce deals with client states after they were
annexed the Romans supplemented Uncoerced Annexation with elements of Coerced An-
nexation.

     The control mechanism was complex. It was necessary to manipulate the tribes
     through their chiefs, while controlling the chiefs by means of personal threats
     and personal inducements; always there was the latent threat of force against
     the tribe as a whole.

                                            13
       Dacia, a relatively rich country, was an exception to the use of a strategy of Uncoerced
Annexation. But, the case of Dacia also accords with our theory. According to Peter Wilcox
and G. A. Embleton (1987, page 25),

         Dacian culture at this time was far in advance of that of their fellow European
         barbarians. It was, in all recognizable aspects, an embryo civilization...Trade was
         well organized and encouraged; silver and gold work, pottery, iron implements
         and weapons, of extremely high quality, were produced for home consumption
         and export to the sophisticated Roman world in the south.

Because Dacia already was economically advanced, the economic gains associated with
adding Dacia to the Roman empire apparently were not large enough to allow the Ro-
mans proÞtably to compensate the Dacians for agreeing to annexation. Instead, just as our
theory implies, with neither θ nor k being large the Romans attempted to conquer Dacia,
and eventually were successful. Note that in the case of Dacia k was not large because
Dacia was already a rich country.9
       Our analysis of the scope of imperial ambitions also seems to be consistent with Roman
history. Luttwak (page 96) attributes the Roman decision not to incorporate Scotland into
the Roman empire to the Scotland’s being “inherently diﬃcult to settle, urbanize, and
Romanize”. In addition, because of its location, annexation of Scotland was not attractive
for geopolitical reasons. In the terms of our theory, Scotland apparently diﬀered from the
client states of central and northern Europe, Asia Minor, and the Middle East in that, in
addition to θ being too small to make a strategy of either Coerced Annexation or Attempted
Conquest attractive, k was too small to warrant a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation. Note
that in the case of Scotland k was small because Scotland was hopelessly poor.
   9
       Another exception was Judea, where a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation, supplemented by elements of
Coerced Annexation, worked well until the Jewish revolt (66-70CE) forced the Romans to shift to a strategy
of Attempted Conquest, which, as in Dacia, was eventually successful.


                                                    14
7. The Theory Applied to the History of The Mongol and Ottoman Empires
   This analysis does not only oﬀer insights into the building of the Roman empire. In
his discussion of the expansion of the Mongol empire, E.L. Jones (1998, pages 108-115)
suggests that the Mongols used mainly a strategy of Attempted Conquest, which was usually
successful. The account provided by Jones also suggests that for the Mongols, with their
superior technology of warfare and their eﬀective terror tactics, θ was much larger than
one. For example, according to Desmond Martin (1971) and Michel Hoang (1990), between
1211 and 1215 an army of little more than 110,000 Mongols defeated an army of 500,000
Chinese and conquered the Chin Empire of Northern China. According to Martin and Leo
de Hartog (1989) in 1223 a Mongol army of 20,000 decisively defeated a Russian army of
80,000 in the Battle of the River Khalka. As Martin writes (pages 11-12),

     Whenever it is possible to obtain reliable information on the strength of Mongol
     forces, one Þnds that often they were heavily outnumbered by their enemies. We
     shall see that in 1211 Chingis Khan marched against the Chin with little more
     than 110,000 men – decidedly less than a quarter of the forces of his opponent.
     During 1219 he mobilized perhaps 150,000 eﬀectives for the war against the
     Khwarazm Shah. On that occasion, while the army opposed to him was neither
     quite so large – approximately 400,000 – or as well organized as that of the
     Chin, he had to march west nearly one thousand miles from his last home base
     before reaching the enemy’s border. . . In the troops of Chingis Khan numerical
     inferiority, both on the battleÞeld and on campaign, was common.

   Also, there seems to be no reason to presume that, even if it was not larger than one, the
value of k associated with expansion of the Mongol empire typically was much smaller than
one. Thus, abstracting from liquidity constraints, it would seem puzzling that the Mongols
did not mainly use a strategy of Coerced Annexation. But, if for the Mongols g was a
binding constraint, then this puzzle is solved.

                                              15
   Indeed there are other good reasons to think that the Mongols were subject to liquidity
constraints. Most importantly, the Mongols started with a small population relative to
their imperial ambitions. According to Martin and Hoang, the Mongol population at the
beginning of the 13th century was about one million people, whereas by 1260 the Mongol
empire had a population of about 100 million people. In addition, because the Mongols were
originally nomads, they probably did not begin their imperial expansion with large amounts
of accumulated capital or other resources. Also, at the beginning their empire building it
is likely that the diﬃculty of collecting taxes from a nomadic population constrained their
ability to mobilize resources.
   Turning to the Ottoman empire, our theory suggests an explanation for the clear diﬀer-
ence in the strategies that the Ottomans used in Anatolia and in the Balkans. The Ottomans
seemed to have used a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation to incorporate Anatolia into their
empire. Metin Kunt (1995, page 10) writes, “Ottoman historical tradition describes the in-
corporation of Muslim lands as a peaceful process, in some cases as voluntary submission.”
In contrast, to incorporate the Balkans into their empire the Ottomans used a combination
of Coerced Annexation, especially in annexing Bosnia in 1453 and Herzegovina in 1454, and
Attempted Conquest in other countries, notably Serbia.
   Kunt suggests that the Ottoman armies were more eﬀective in the Balkans than in
Anatolia because the Black Death aﬀected the Balkans much more than Anatolia. Kunt
writes (page 11),

     Consideration should also be given to the eﬀects of the mid-fourteenth century
     Black Death on the demography of Anatolia and the Balkan peninsula. In later
     Ottoman sources we Þnd no mention of the plague which devastated so much
     of the Mediterranean and Europe, though event-book ‘calendars’ have scattered
     references for various years. Constantinople and other Byzantine territories suf-
     fered, as did part of Islamic West Asia such as Syria and Egypt, but not, it seems,


                                             16
         the gazi Türkmen emirates. It may be that the Turkic and Mongolian population
         of Anatolia and parts of Iran were relatively immune to the plague strain, which
         seems to have had its origin in the great Eurasian steppe, carried by Genoese
         ships from Crimea through Constantinople to the Mediterranean and beyond to
         northern Europe. If it is true the plague had less of an impact on the Oÿguz of
         Anatolia than on the Greeks and other peoples of the Balkans, this would have
         been another factor in the swift success of Murad Bey’s troops in the Balkans.

As our theory suggests, enjoying a larger θ in the Balkans, the Ottomans put aside the
strategy of Uncoerced Annexation that they used in Anatolia.

8. The Theory Applied to Nazi Germany
       Turning to modern times, our theory also can help us to understand the strategies that
Nazi Germany used to build its empire. We focus on German territorial ambitions in central
and eastern Europe.10 On our reading of history, the Germans used a strategy of Coerced
Annexation in taking over Austria and then the Sudetenland and the rest of Czechoslovakia, a
successful strategy of Attempted Conquest of Poland, a strategy of Uncoerced Annexation in
inducing Hungary and Romania to join the Axis alliance, and Þnally an unsuccessful strategy
of Attempted Conquest of the Soviet Union. Our analysis implies that these diﬀerences in
Nazi strategy resulted either from diﬀerences in θ or in k or from liquidity constraints.
       Prior to the German annexation of Austria in March 1938, the existence of a substantial
pro-Nazi faction within Austria undermined the ability of the Austrian leaders to resist
German aggression without the support of Austria’s ostensible foreign friends. As William
  10
       Whether the Nazis had ultimate territorial ambitions elsewhere is not clear. In September 1939 Great
Britain and France, being unwilling to acquiesce in further German aggression in the East, declared war on
Germany. A.J.P. Taylor (1961, page 70) tells us, “Against all expectations, Hitler found himself at war with
the Western Powers before he had conquered the East. Nevertheless, Eastern expansion was the primary
purpose of his policy, if not the only one.” But, other historians suggest that the Nazis intended all along
to incorporate western Europe into their empire. See, for example, Gerhard Weinberg (1994, page 107).


                                                     17
Shirer (1960, page 323) reminds us,

     Throughout 1937, the Austrian Nazis, Þnanced and egged on by Berlin, had
     stepped up their campaign of terror. Bombings took place nearly every day in
     some part of the country, and in the mountain provinces massive and often violent
     Nazi demonstrations weakened the governments position.

But, Great Britain, France, and Italy failed to support Austrian independence and to oppose
the Anschluss. Shirer (1960, page 327), drawing on Schuschnigg’s book, Austrian Requiem,
and on Schuschnigg’s Nuremberg aﬃdavit provides the following paraphrasing of Hitler’s
boasting to then Austrian chancellor Kurt von Schuschnigg when they met at Berchtesgaden,
Hitler’s mountain retreat, in February 1938.

     Don’t think for one moment that anybody on earth is going to thwart my deci-
     sions. Italy? I see eye to eye with Mussolini. . . England? England will not move
     one Þnger for Austria. . . And France? France could have stopped Germany in
     the Rhineland and then we would have had to retreat. But now it is too late for
     France.

Shirer (page 330) also tells us vividly how Schuschnigg was then forced into signing an
agreement that eﬀectively ended Austria’s independence “under the terrible threat of armed
attack”. British and French timidity, together with the existence of a substantial pro-Nazi
faction within Austria, meant that in confronting Austria the Germans enjoyed a large value
of θ. Hence, as our theory implies, the Germans used a strategy of Coerced Annexation.
   At Munich in September 1938 Great Britain and France, in their eﬀorts to appease Hitler
and avoid war, eﬀectively handed the Sudetenland to Germany. Manfred Messerschmidt
(1990, page 657) summarizes the British and French reluctance to support the Czechs in the
months leading to the Munich pact.

     As the British saw, Hitler was in a position to create faits accomplis that could
     only be reversed by a long war. At the beginning of such a war, British aid must

                                               18
     be basically conÞned to economic pressure. Hence, the British government placed
     more hopes in an Anglo-French policy of urging Prague to be more conciliatory
     to its German minority. In other words, London basically thought that an initial
     German success could not be avoided. At the beginning of May [of 1938] Daladier
     indicated to Bullit, the American ambassador, what conclusion the French drew
     from this: they would not be able to Þght a war in defence of Czechoslovakia.
     Their attitude was also aﬀected by fear of German air superiority.

According to Shirer (page 417), reporting what a British oﬃcial told two Czech representa-
tives at Munich,

     If you do not accept, he admonished them, as he prepared to go, you will have to
     settle your aﬀairs with the Germans absolutely alone. Perhaps the French may
     tell you this more gently, but you can believe me that they share our views. They
     are disinterested.

Again, because of British and French timidity, the Germans enjoyed a high value of θ, and
again, as our analysis implies, the Germans used a strategy of Coerced Annexation.
   Following the annexation of the Sudetenland, and after again threatening the Czechs with
military action, the Germans occupied the rest of Czechoslovakia in March 1939. Once again,
it was clear that Great Britain and France would not intervene in defense of Czechoslovakia.
Shirer (page 450) writes, “Neither Great Britain nor France made the slightest move to save
it, though at Munich they had solemnly guaranteed Czechoslovakia against aggression.” In
his discussion of the British and French “guarantee” of Czech independence, Messerschmidt
(page 674) writes,

     Chamberlain felt committed to it on moral grounds, but he did not envisage
     the commitment leading to a confrontation with Germany. The French view was
     much the same. Bonnet and his political friends wanted an accord with Germany.

                                            19
     Halifax considered that they must avoid getting into a position in which Great
     Britain and France might be called on to act against Germany and Italy.

   Furthermore, after the Munich pact, the rest of Czechoslovakia laid almost defenseless
to the German army. Shirer (pages 421-422) writes

     The Þnal settlement of November 20, 1938, forced Czechoslovakia to cede to
     Germany 11,000 square miles of territory in which dwelt 2,800,000 Sudeten Ger-
     mans and 800,000 Czechs. Within this area lay all the vast Czech fortiÞcations
     which hitherto had formed the most formidable defense line in Europe, with the
     possible exception of the Maginot Line in France.

When the Germans confronted Czechoslovakia in March 1939, again they had a large value
of θ, and again they used a strategy of Coerced Annexation.
   Now we come to Poland. Several factors suggest that, in confronting Poland, the Germans
did not have a value of θ as large as they enjoyed in confronting Austria or Czechoslovakia.
First, the probability of an Allied intervention was higher than in the case of Austria or
Czechoslovakia. After the Anschluss and the annexation of Czechoslovakia, public opinion
in Great Britain and France was opposed to any further concessions to Germany. The British
and French governments acted accordingly. Shirer (page 454) reports that on March 31st,
1939 Chamberlain said before the Commons:

     In the event of any action which clearly threatened Polish independence and
     which the Polish Government accordingly considered it vital to resist with their
     national forces, His Majesty’s Government would feel themselves bound at once
     to lend the Polish Government all support in their power. They have given
     the Polish Government an assurance to this eﬀect. I may add that the French
     Government have authorized me to make it plain that they stand in the same
     position in this matter.

                                            20
       Second, the Poles were Þrmer than the Austrians or the Czechs in resisting German
threats. As the Germans pressed claims on the port of Danzig and the Polish corridor,
Shirer (page 464) writes,

         Warsaw was not so easily intimidated as Vienna or Prague. The next day, March
         28, Beck sent for the German ambassador and told him, in answer to Ribbentrop’s
         declaration that a Polish coup against Danzig would signify a casus belli, that
         he in turn was forced to state that any attempt by Germany or the Nazi Danzig
         Senate to alter the status of the Free City would be regarded by Poland as a
         casus belli.

With θ in the case of Poland not being large enough to warrant a strategy of Coerced An-
nexation, and with k apparently not being large enough to warrant a strategy of Uncoerced
Annexation, the Germans, as our theory predicts, used a strategy of Attempted Conquest.
       In contrast to Poland, both Hungary and Romania provide examples of Uncoerced An-
nexation. The distinguishing feature of Hungary and Romania seems to be that k was
large because annexation, which took the form of Hungary and Romania joining the Axis
alliance under German leadership, oﬀered large military advantages to the Germans. These
advantages were both geopolitical and material. The Germans needed manpower in order
to confront the Soviet Union, and the military forces of both Hungary and Romania would
Þght, more or less eﬀectively, along side of the Wehrmacht. In addition, the Germans coveted
the Romanian oil Þelds.11
       To induce the Hungarians and Romanians to join the Axis alliance, the Germans used
policies similar to those that the Romans had used in annexing their client states. As a
result of the First World War Hungary had lost territory and population, whereas Romania
  11
       From a military standpoint there was little diﬀerence between direct German rule, as in the case of
Austria, and joining the Axis alliance under German leadership. Also, when it suited other Nazi objectives,
especially pursuit of their genocidal policies, the Germans imposed direct rule on Hungary and Romania.


                                                     21
had gained territory and population. In the interwar period Hungarian policy focused on
recovering its lost territory and population, whereas Romania was concerned with maintain-
ing its gains. The Germans oﬀered the Hungarians, as well as the Romanians, a share of the
spoils of war. Jürgen Förster (1998, pages 412, 416, and 417) tells us,

     After the outbreak of the European war Hungarian policy, while maintaining
     its independence and avoiding an open rupture with the Western powers, was
     aimed at achieving its revisionist objectives through close alignment with the
     Axis...[Later] with her Third Army (approximately 146,000 men) Hungary partic-
     ipated in the military and political smashing of Yugoslavia...Hungary reacquired
     Bácska, the Mur territory, and the Baranya triangle...In consequence, Hungary
     had nearly doubled her territory, compared with her 1920 frontiers, both in area
     and in population...

   The Germans also oﬀered the Romanians security against the territorial claims of the
Soviet Union, Hungary, and Bulgaria. In describing Romanian policy after the Soviet an-
nexation of Bessarabia, Herta, and northern Bukowina in 1940, Förster writes (page 393)

     As no help was to be expected from Great Britain, [King] Carol was feverishly
     trying to gain German support against the Hungarian and Bulgarian revision-
     ist claims...He saw his country’s only salvation in a very close alignment with
     Germany, with which he was willing to co-operate in all Þelds...On 1 July 1940
     Romania renounced the now worthless Anglo-French guarantee of her frontiers
     and on 11 July left the League of Nations. Carol, moreover, formed a government
     of respected pro-German ministers...

   Then, on June 22nd, 1941, Germany attacked the Soviet Union, launching, with the
active support of their Hungarian and Romanian allies, “Operation Barbarossa”. In con-
fronting the Soviet Union the Germans surely enjoyed a high value of θ. They had amply

                                              22
demonstrated their military might in easily conquering Poland, France, and the Low Coun-
tries. Undoubtedly, the Wehrmacht was qualitatively superior to the Soviet army in terms
of both weapons and leadership.
   But, the Soviet Union had the ability to mobilize massive armed forces. Moreover, the
Nazis were not yet in a position to demand large sacriÞces for the war eﬀort. Rolf-Dieter
Müller (1998, p. 187-188) writes

        Once the euphoria of the early summer of 1940 had evaporated, it became obvious
        that Germany, while dominating large parts of the European continent, had not
        in fact achieved any abundance of material assets as a result. The performance
        of the German war economy was still considerably below the pre-war level...
        Germany was unable to draw on any additional manpower reserves. Repeated
        demands from military quarters that greater use should be made of female labour
        were rejected by the political leadership. Any more intensive exploitation of the
        manpower potential was prevented not only by ideological and administrative
        obstacles, but also by a lack of enthusiasm for the war among broad circles of
        the population.

The high command of the German army calculated that “while the enemy would have
approximately 155 divisions, German strength would be about the same”. (Shirer, page
822).
   Thus, even if θ was large enough to warrant a strategy of Coerced Annexation, liq-
uidity constraints apparently prevented the Germans from using this strategy. Accordingly,
as our theory suggests, the Nazi Empire chose a strategy of Attempted Conquest of the
Soviet Union. From an ex-ante perspective this choice presumably was sound, albeit risky.
Unfortunately for the Germans, a combination of bad luck and unexpected Russian heroism
caused Operation Barbarosa to fail.



                                               23
9. Summary
   This paper has developed an economic theory of empire building. This theory addresses
the choice among three strategies that empire builders historically have used: Uncoerced
Annexation, Coerced Annexation, and Attempted Conquest. Annexation, whether unco-
erced or coerced, is peaceful, whereas Attempted Conquest involves the application of force.
Our theory views these strategies as merely diﬀerent ways to achieve the goal of building
a proÞtable empire in the most proÞtable way. In the famous words of the 19th century
military strategist Carl von Clausewitz (1976, page 87), “War is merely the continuation of
policy by other means.”
   Our theory implies that the key factors in choosing among these strategies are the eco-
nomic gains from imperial expansion, the relative eﬀectiveness of imperial armies, the costs
of projecting imperial military power, and liquidity constraints on Þnancing imperial armies.
The theory also addressed the scope of imperial ambitions. The paper used historical ex-
amples from the Roman, Mongol, Ottoman, and Nazi German empires to illustrate the
applicability of the theory.
   We conjecture that the theory also would help us to understand the strategies used by
other empire builders as well as the scope of their imperial ambitions. Applying the theory
to the building of overseas empires by European powers from the 16th through the 19th
centuries would seem to be an especially interesting extension, but we leave this exercise for
another paper.




                                             24
                                       References

Clausewitz, Carl von (1976) On War. Edited and translated by Michael Howard and Peter
   Paret. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Deist, Wilhelm (1990) “The Rearmament of The Individual Services, 1933-1939” in Deist,
   Wilhelm, Messerschmidt, Manfred, Volkmann, Hans-Erich, and Wette, Wolfram Ger-
   many and the Second World War. Volume I. The Build-up of German Aggression, pages
   405-504. Translated by P.S. Falla, Dean S. McMurry, and Ewald Osers. Clarendon Press,
   Oxford.
Findlay, Ronald (1996) “Towards a Model of Territorial Expansion and the Limits of Empire”
   in GarÞnkel, Michelle and Skaperdas, Stergios, (eds.) The Political Economy of Conßict
   and Appropriation, pages 41-56, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Förster, Jürgen (1998) “Germany’s Acquisition of Allies in South-East Europe” in Boog,
   Horst, Förster, Jürgen, Hoﬀmann, Joachim, Klink, Ernst, Müller, Rolf-Dieter, and Ue-
   berschär, Gerd R. Germany and the Second World War. Volume IV. The Attack on the
   Soviet Union, pages 386-428. Translated by Dean S. McMurry, Ewald Osers, and Louise
   Willmot. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Hartog, Leo de (1989) Genghis Khan. Conqueror of the World. I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd,
   London.
Hoang, Michel (1990) Genghis Khan. Translated by Ingrid CranÞeld. Saqi Books, London.
Jones, E. L. (1988) Growth Recurring. Economic Change in World History, Clarendon Press,
   Oxford.
Kunt, Metin (1995) “State and Sultan up to the Age of Suleyman: Frontier Principality
   to World Empire” in Kunt, Metin and Woodhead, Christine (eds.) Suleymen the Mag-
   niÞcient and His Age. The Ottoman Empire in the Early Modern World, pages 3-29.
   Longman, London.
Luttwak, Edward (1976) The Grand Strategy of the Roman Empire from the First Century


                                           25
   A.D. to the Third, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Martin, H. Desmond (1971) The Rise of Chingis Khan and His Conquest of North China.
   Octagon Books, New York.
Messerschmidt, Manfred (1990) “The Road to War, 1936-1938” in Deist, Wilhelm, Messer-
   schmidt, Manfred, Volkmann, Hans-Erich and Wette, Wolfram Germany and the Second
   World War. Volume I. The Build-up of German Aggression, pages 615-679. Translated
   by P.S. Falla, Dean S. McMurry, and Ewald Osers. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Müller, Rolf-Dieter (1998) “From Economic Alliance to a War of Colonial Exploitation” in
   Boog, Horst, Förster, Jürgen, Hoﬀmann, Joachim, Klink, Ernst, Müller, Rolf-Dieter and
   Ueberschär, Gerd R. Germany and the Second World War. Volume IV. The Attack on
   the Soviet Union, pages 118-224. Translated by Dean S. McMurry, Ewald Osers, and
   Louise Willmot. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Shirer, William L (1960) The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich. A History of Nazi Germany.
   Simon and Schuster, New York.
Taylor, A. J. P. (1961) The Origins of the Second World War. Atheneum, New York.
Weinberg, Gerhard L. (1994) A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II. Cam-
   bridge University Press, Cambridge.
Wilcox, Peter and Embleton, G. A. (1987) Rome’s Enemies: Germans and Dacians, Osprey
   Men-at-Arms Series 129, London.




                                            26
                        Appendix A: Derivation of Condition (9)

RA > 0 obtains only if k > 1.
Assuming that Ra equals (k − 1)ω, RA ≥ RC obtains if and only if

                   either (A) θk < 2 and (k − 1)ω ≥ θk 2 ω/4
                   or         (B) θk ≥ 2 and (k − 1)ω ≥ (θk − 1)ω/θ.

Observe that (k − 1)ω ≥ θk 2 ω/4 is equivalent to θk ≤ 4(k − 1)/k.
                                        ≥            ≥
Also observe that we have 4(k − 1)/k    <   2 as k   <   2.
Thus, condition (A) obtains if and only if

                         either (A.1) k < 2 and θ ≤ 4(k − 1)/k 2
                         or      (A.2) 2 ≤ k < 2/θ.

Next, observe that (k − 1)ω ≥ (θk − 1)ω/θ is equivalent to θ ≤ 1.
Thus, condition (B) obtains if and only if

                                  (B.1) 1 ≥ θ ≥ 2/k.

Furthermore, either condition (A.2) or condition (B.1) obtains if and only if

                                  (C) k ≥ 2 and θ ≤ 1.

Thus, RA ≥ RC obtains if and only if either condition (A.1) or condition (C) obtains.




                                              27
       Appendix B: Derivation of Conditions for 0 < RA ≥ RC with f > 0

RA > 0 obtains only if k > 1.
Recall that RC ≤ 0 obtains if condition (14) is satisÞed.
Thus, assuming that condition (14) is satisÞed, 0 < RA ≥ RC obtains if and only if k > 1.
Assuming that condition (14) is not satisÞed and that Ra equals (k − 1)ω, RA ≥ RC
obtains if and only if

                    either (A) θk < 2 and (k − 1)ω ≥ θk 2 ω/4 − f
                    or     (B) θk ≥ 2 and (k − 1)ω ≥ (θk − 1)ω/θ − f.

Observe that (k − 1)ω ≥ θk 2 ω/4 − f is equivalent to θk ≤ 4(k − 1 + f /ω)/k.
                                              ≥            ≥
Also observe that we have 4(k − 1 + f /ω)/k   <   2 as k   <   2(1 − f /ω).
Thus, condition (A) obtains if and only if

               either (A.1) k < 2(1 − f /ω) and θ ≤ 4(k − 1 + f/ω)/k 2
               or        (A.2) 2(1 − f /ω) ≤ k < 2/θ.

Next, observe that (k − 1)ω ≥ (θk − 1)ω/θ − f is equivalent to θ ≤ 1/(1 − f /ω).
Thus, condition (B) obtains if and only if

                              (B.1) 1/(1 − f /ω) ≥ θ ≥ 2/k.

Furthermore, either condition (A.2) or condition (B.1) obtains if and only if

                         (C) k ≥ 2(1 − f /ω) and θ ≤ 1/(1 − f /ω).

Thus, assuming that condition (14) is not satisÞed, RA ≥ RC              obtains if and only if
k > 1 and either condition (A.1) or condition (C) obtains. Consequently, assuming that
condition (14) is not satisÞed, the conditions for 0 < RA ≥ RC are satisÞed if and only if
k > 1 and either condition (A.1) or condition (C) obtains.



                                             28
