

 



 ## 

         
  
 
 

!" #$%&'(
))$*++,,,-.-"+$$+,%&'(

      /
&(0( 1)) 1
2."3  ('&4%
.15

 
             
 !"# $ !  %    & '' (
% !)       *+   
, ' +      (
-*.     / 00("# ( ) 
)!  # ' *1!)'     ##  (

2 66) 6 "1)  "1)    . !)
    
 !" #$ - %&'(
.15 '((&
7 - '83 &93 70(




#1)  . 2!) "1)  612)5 .1) 1"  ).1)"
)3 " 2 $5 ) :1)  )1 ) ) , ).1)- 13  6 "1)
)15 $ .63 ) 2 ,) )" ).1)  52 66)-  ))
25 2$5 )  6 12.) 62- 2$52) 25  6  ,-  ," 25
 .6 "3   -  )15 ) 13 , .1  2 .  ), )
12$)* $) 2$))  ) " 2!)3 , )2 )  6 ); 
.""  ) . 2!)3 , )2 ) ).1) 6 ) .), ,! 
62-

 ) )! 6 $1) 2!) "1)  )2" .) ) )5 ) 6 .5 623

 ) " 6 2$)) .), 62-

 )! 6 . 2!) "1)  )2"

) ."" $, 6 ,!- /" ) ) 66) 6 .  $1) 2!)
"1)3 , ) 1 1 1) ) )15 ), $6 1-

)3 )  ") 

22 1)  1$  ) ) ),)5 53  $)1  ) . 6 )
. - 3 ) ! ) $) 25 )) .), $1)  . 2!)
"1)-

 
 $)2) 6 2
"- 0'=4>4
2."  ('&4?
 
 

 
)< 
 
@ 3 4+0
'(&49 3 )5
 

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

3

Product and labor market regulations are often blamed for the poor
European performance of the last 30 years. Remove (many of) these regulations, the argument goes, and Europe will soar. Unemployment will
decrease, output will increase.1
Deregulation however is fundamentally about reducing and redistributing rents, leading economic players to adjust in turn to this new distribution.
Thus, even if deregulation eventually proves bene¯cial, it is likely to come
with both strong distribution and dynamic e®ects. The transition may imply the disappearance or the decline of incumbent ¯rms. Unemployment
may increase for a while. Real wages may decrease before recovering, and
so on.
Understanding these dynamic and distribution e®ects is important, for
at least two reasons. As many countries are embarking on a path of deregulation, it may help interpret their macroeconomic evolutions. And it may
also help clarify the political economy constraints on deregulation, and thus
improve its design. These are the issues we examine in this paper.
We start by developing, in Section 1, a simple general equilibrium model
of an economy with both product and labor market regulation. The model
is built on two basic assumptions: Monopolistic competition in the goods
market, which determines the size of rents; and bargaining in the labor
market, which determines the distribution of rents between workers and
¯rms. We think of product market regulation as determining both the entry
costs faced by ¯rms, and the degree of competition between ¯rms. We think
of labor market regulation as determining the bargaining power of workers.
We then characterize the macroeconomic equilibrium in Section 2. We
divide time in two periods, a short run, where the number of ¯rms is given,
and a long run, where the number of ¯rms is endogenous, determined by
1

This is for example the theme of a number of studies by the McKinsey Global Institute.

See for example McKinsey Global Institute [1997].

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

4

an entry condition. For each period, we show how the main macroeconomic
variables, in particular the real wage and unemployment, depend on the
various dimensions of regulation.
We then turn in Section 3 to the economics of deregulation. (The model
is symmetric so the economics of less regulation are the same, with sign
reversed, as those of more regulation. Focusing on deregulation is more
natural in the current context). This section o®ers in e®ect a reinterpretation
of the results of Section 2, but with a focus on distribution and dynamic
e®ects of each type of deregulation.
Section 4 discusses two extensions. In our benchmark model, which assumes privately e±cient bargaining, the wage is not allocative in the short
run. In other words, the wage is typically not equal to the marginal revenue product of labor. Our ¯rst extension considers a standard alternative
model, known as the right to manage model, in which the wage is equal to
the marginal revenue product of labor. The purpose is to show, a contrario,
the implications of the e±cient bargaining assumption, in particular for the
dynamic e®ects of labor market deregulation. Our benchmark model also
assumes linear utility. Our second extension relaxes this assumption and assumes concave utility instead. The reason is that, in that case, the intertemporal trade-o®s implied by labor market deregulation are even sharper than
in our benchmark model, higher unemployment and lower real wages in the
short run, in exchange for lower unemployment and unchanged real wages
in the long run.
Having developed the theory, we then turn, in Section 5, to the macroeconomic evidence. We show the light our approach sheds on movements in
the labor share and in the \markup", two variables at the center of much recent macroeconomic research (for example Rotemberg and Woodford [1999],
Gali and Gertler [1999]). We then focus on the dramatic decline in the labor share in continental Europe since the mid-1980s, in some countries by
more than 10% of GDP. Standard neoclassical mechanisms seem unable to

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

5

account for this evolution, and it was our guess that an explanation might
be found in deregulation and the implied changes in the distribution of rents
in the economy. Our model indeed o®ers a tentative interpretation, based
on deregulation in the labor market and the implied transfer of rents from
workers to ¯rms. If our interpretation is correct, this evolution is good news:
The long run e®ects should be a recovery of the labor share, and a decrease
in equilibrium unemployment.
Finally, Section 6 turns to the political economy of deregulation. Based
on our analysis, we look at how product market and labor market deregulation a®ect the welfare of employed and unemployed workers. We look at
how governments may combine the two so as to reduce workers' opposition
to deregulation. Based on a simple political economy model, we endogenize
the various dimensions of regulation, and, within this context, look at the
the interactions between product and labor market deregulation. We show
how product market deregulation may trigger labor market deregulation.
Intuitively, reducing rents in the goods markets reduces the incentives of
workers to ¯ght for a share of these rents: The bene¯ts may no longer be
worth the costs.

1

Monopolistic competition, bargaining, and regulation

We think of an economy in which a number of ¯rms produce di®erentiated
products, using labor. We make two main assumptions. The ¯rst is that of
monopolistic competition in the goods market, which determines the size of
the rents going to ¯rms and their workers. The second is the presence of
bargaining in the labor market, which determines how much of the rents go
to ¯rms, and how much to their workers.
We divide time in two periods: The \short run", de¯ned as the time over
which we can take the number of ¯rms as given. The \long run", de¯ned as
the time over which the number of ¯rms is endogenous, determined by an

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

6

entry condition.
We take product market regulation as determining the degree of competition among ¯rms, and the entry cost for ¯rms. We take labor market
regulation as determining the degree of bargaining power of workers.
The speci¯c assumptions are as follows:
Workers
There are L workers/consumers, indexed by j. In each period, worker j
has a utility function given by:
Vj = [m¡1=¾

m
X

¾=(¾¡1)

Cij (¾¡1)=¾) ]

(1:1)

i=1

where ¾ = ¾
¹ g(m); g 0 (:) > 0, ¾
¹ is a constant, and m is the number of
products (which is given in the short run, and endogenously determined in
the long run).
This speci¯cation of utility has two implications:
² Under the assumption that the worker consumes all products in equal
proportions (a condition which, in our symmetric model, holds in equi-

librium), so Cij = Cj =m, the utility function implies Vj = Cj . In other
words, an increase in the number of products does not increase utility
directly. (Technically, this result comes from the presence of m¡1=¾ in
the term in brackets. Absent this term, an increase in the number of
products would increase utility for a given level of consumption.)
² The increase in the number of products however increases the elasticity
of substitution between products, and by implication the elasticity of

demand facing ¯rms. (This result comes from the assumption that ¾,
rather than being constant as in the standard Dixit-Stiglitz framework,
is increasing in m.)

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

7

Thus, to the extent that deregulation leads to a larger number of ¯rms,
and by implication a larger number of products (each ¯rm produces a different product), its e®ect in our model works only through its e®ect on the
monopoly power of ¯rms. This is the e®ect we think is most important, and
we want to capture here.
Each period, worker i can supply either zero or one unit of labor, and
spends his income on consumption (there is no saving, or capital in our
model, and thus no link across the two periods). His budget constraint for
each period, stated in nominal terms, is given by:
m
X
i=1

Pi Cij = Wj Nj + P f(u)(1 ¡ Nj )

where Nj , labor supply, is equal either to zero (if he does not work) or
to one (if he works), f 0 (:) < 0, and P is the price index associated with
consumption:
1=(1¡¾)

m
1 X
P ´(
P 1¡¾ )
m i=1 i

Spending on consumption is equal to labor income if the worker works,
and to non-labor income if he does not. The wage equivalent of being unemployed is taken to be a decreasing function of unemployment, f(u). This
can be thought of as a shortcut to capture the notion that higher unemployment implies a higher individual probability of remaining unemployed (i.e. a
shortcut to a fuller dynamic speci¯cation). Or more cleanly, but somewhat
hypocritically, it can be interpreted as the marginal product from using an
alternative decreasing returns-to-scale common \backyard technology".
Note that under symmetry of consumption (so Cij = Cj =m), and using
the budget constraint, the utility of worker j in each period can be rewritten
as:

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

(

8

Wj
¡ f (u)) Nj + f(u)
P

This expression will be useful below.
Products and ¯rms
Each product is produced by one ¯rm, so i indexes both the product and
the ¯rm. The production function of ¯rm i is simply:
Yi = Ni
There is no capital. And there is no e®ect, direct or indirect, of the
number of products, and thus of competition, on the productivity of labor|
which is identically equal to one.
Each ¯rm is run by an entrepreneur, with utility also given by (1.1). In
each period, the entrepreneur keeps the pro¯t of the ¯rm, and spends it on
consumption goods. Nominal pro¯t in ¯rm i is given by Pi Yi ¡ Wi Ni , or
equivalently:

(Pi ¡ Wi )Ni
Bargaining
Each period, each ¯rm bargains with L=m workers. The workers can
either work in the ¯rm or be unemployed during the period.
We assume Nash bargaining: Together ¯rm i and the workers choose
a wage and a level of employment so as to maximize the (log) geometric
average of their surpluses from employment:
¯ log((Wi ¡ P f(u)) Ni ) + (1 ¡ ¯) log((Pi ¡ Wi )Ni )

(1:2)

where the ¯rst term re°ects the surplus to workers from working in ¯rm

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

9

i (under the assumption of symmetric consumption), the second re°ects the
pro¯t of ¯rm i, and ¯ re°ects the relative bargaining power of workers.
This assumption is known as (privately) \e±cient bargaining". Why
assume e±cient bargaining? First, it seems like a natural assumption in
this context. But also, we want to capture the possibility that ¯rms may
not be operating on their demand for labor. In more informal terms, we
want to allow for the fact that, when there are rents, stronger workers (a
higher ¯) may be able to obtain a higher wage without su®ering a decrease in
employment, at least in the short run. E±cient bargaining naturally delivers
that implication. But any assumption which relaxed the link between the
wage and the marginal revenue product of labor could yield qualitatively
similar results. We return to a discussion of alternative assumptions in
Section 4.
The short and the long run
In the short run, we take the number of ¯rms/products as given. But,
in the long run, we assume the number of ¯rms/products to be determined
endogenously, by an entry condition. Our purpose in doing so is to capture
the e®ect of the short run distribution of rents between ¯rms and workers
on the equilibrium number of ¯rms in the long run.
We assume that ¯rms face a cost of entry equal to c, which we think
of as coming from product market regulation. We make two assumptions
about c:
² We assume that c is a shadow cost. The motivation is our focus on
regulation, and the fact that many regulatory barriers to entry take

the form of legal and administrative restrictions on entry, rather than
direct costs. Except for accounting purposes, this assumption has
no implication for the characterization of the equilibrium. It implies
that, in our long run equilibrium, existing ¯rms make pure pro¯ts; if

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

10

c were an actual cost, these pro¯ts would be dissipated in entry costs.
In looking at the evolution of the pro¯t share over time, it seems
reasonable to think that, in many markets, regulation allows ¯rms to
make positive pure pro¯ts for a long time, if perhaps not forever.
² The second is that c is proportional to output (or employment, as the

two are equal here). The reason for having a proportional rather than
a ¯xed cost is algebraic simplicity: It makes the long run equilibrium
easier to characterize. It trivially implies that, in the long run, the
pro¯t rate (pro¯t per unit of output) must be equal to c, and de-

livers the result that, in the limit, the equilibrium converges to the
competitive equilibrium as c goes to zero. It obviously eliminates the
standard issues examined by models of monopolistic competition, such
as optimality of the number of products and so on. But they are not
the focus here, and either allowing for a non{regulatory ¯xed cost or
allowing the regulatory cost itself to be a ¯xed cost would not make
any substantial di®erence to the results we want to focus on here.

Regulation
We think of regulation as being captured, admittedly in abstract fashion,
by three parameters in the model:
² We think of ¾
¹ and c as re°ecting two dimensions of product market
regulation. In the context of European integration for example, de-

creases in ¾
¹ may re°ect the elimination of tari® barriers, or standardization measures making it easier to sell domestic products in other
European Union countries. Decreases in c may come, for example,
from the elimination of state monopolies, or the reduction of red tape
associated with the creation of new ¯rms.

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

11

² We think of ¯ as re°ecting any aspect of labor market regulation which
increases the bargaining power of workers, ranging, for example, from

the existence and the nature of extension agreements, to closed shop
arrangements, to the rules on the right to strike.
Our goal is to show how these three parameters determine the size and
the distribution of rents, and by implication, the macroeconomic equilibrium.

2

Short and long{run equilibrium

The easiest way to characterize the equilibrium is to do so in three steps,
starting with the short run partial equilibrium, then turning to the short
run general equilibrium, and ¯nally to the long run general equilibrium.
The short run partial equilibrium
Consider the problem faced by ¯rm i, producing good i. Given the
preferences of workers and entrepreneurs, the demand for good i (by workers
and entrepreneurs) is given by:
Yi =

Y Pi ¡¾
( )
m P

(2:1)

where Y is total demand (total output), and Yi the demand for good i.
At a relative price of one, the ¯rm faces a demand equal to one-mth of total
demand. The elasticity of demand with respect to the relative price is equal
to (¡¾).
Taking Y , P , and the unemployment rate u as given, ¯rm i and the
workers associated with ¯rm i choose employment Ni , the price Pi , and the
wage Wi so as to maximize:
¯ log((Wi ¡ P f(u)) Ni ) + (1 ¡ ¯) log((Pi ¡ Wi )Ni )

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

12

where, from the production function, Ni = Yi , and demand Yi is given
by (2.1).2 It follows that:
² The relative price Pi chosen by the ¯rm (and the workers) is given by:
Pi
= (1 + ¹(m)) f(u)
P

(2:2)

where ¹(m), the markup of the relative price over the reservation wage,
is given by:

¹(m) =

1
so ¹0 (m) < 0
¾
¹ g(m) ¡ 1

² The real consumption wage (the wage in terms of the consumption
basket), Wi =P , is given by:

Wi
Pi
= (1 ¡ ¯) f (u) + ¯
P
P
So, using equation (2.2):
Wi
= [1 + ¯¹(m)] f (u)
P

(2:3)

A graphical representation of the partial equilibrium is given in Figure 1.
Employment (equivalently, output) is measured on the horizontal axis, the
relative price, Pi =P , and the real consumption wage, Wi =P , on the vertical
axis.
2

Note the implicit assumption that, when choosing the price Pi , both workers and the

¯rm i ignore the e®ect on the change in Pi on the price of a consumption basket, P .
This{standard{approximation is clearly better the larger the number of goods.

Price,
Wage

Pi/P

= (1+μ) f(u)

Wi/P = (1+ßμ) f(u)
f(u)

A
DD

MRP
Ni

Figure 1. Partial equilibrium

Employment, Output

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

13

The demand curve and marginal revenue product curves are drawn as
DD and MRP. The reservation wage is drawn as the horizontal line, at f(u).
From the point of view of workers and the ¯rm, the e±cient level of
employment is such that the marginal revenue product of labor is equal to
the reservation wage, so at point A, with associated level of employment Ni .
This in turn implies the choice of a relative price, Pi =P , on the demand curve,
so a price equal to one plus a markup ¹, times the reservation wage. In usual
fashion, the markup is related to the elasticity of demand by ¹ = 1=(¾ ¡ 1).

Given the relative price, rents per unit of output are given by (Pi =P ¡

f (u)), or ¹f(u). The workers get a proportion ¯ of those rents, so the real
wage, which plays no allocative role under e±cient bargaining, is equal to
(1 + ¯¹f (u)).
Note that, in partial equilibrium, the real wage is an increasing function
of both ¯ and ¹:
² The higher ¯, the higher the proportion of rents going to workers. And
because the reservation wage is una®ected, the increase in the wage
has no e®ect on employment.
² The higher ¹, thus the higher the real wage. The ¯rm receives larger
rents, of which some proportion goes to the workers.

General equilibrium. Short run.
In partial equilibrium, each ¯rm chooses its relative price Pi =P freely.
But, in general equilibrium, not all ¯rms can have a relative price greater
than one. Indeed, under our symmetric assumptions, all prices must be
equal in general equilibrium. Putting Pi =P = 1 in equation (2.2) implies:
1 = (1 + ¹(m)) f (u)

(2:4)

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

14

In the short run, the number of ¯rms is given, so ¾ = ¾
¹ g(m) is given,
and by implication so is ¹(m). Given ¹(m), equation (2.4) determines the
equilibrium unemployment rate.
Replacing f (u) by 1=(1 + ¹(m)) in equation (2.3), the real wage is given
in turn by:
Wi
(1 + ¹(m)¯)
=
P
(1 + ¹(m))

(2:5)

The equilibrium is characterized in Figure 2. Figure 2 starts by replicating Figure 1. Equilibrium is still at the point where the marginal revenue
product of labor is equal to the reservation wage, at point A. But now, the
implied relative price must be equal to 1. Given that the relative price is a
markup over the reservation wage, and given that the markup is ¯xed in the
short run, this condition determines the reservation wage, and in turn the
equilibrium level of unemployment. The real wage is still set as a weighted
average of the reservation wage and the relative price.
Return to the e®ects of ¯ and ¹ on the real wage, now in the short run
general equilibrium:
² As was the case in partial equilibrium, the real wage is still an increasing function of ¯.

An increase in ¯ increases the proportion of rents going to workers,
and thus leads to a higher real wage. And, because, in the short run,
the real wage is not allocative, this higher real wage has no e®ect on
employment, or unemployment.
² In contrast however to the partial equilibrium case, the real wage is
now a decreasing function of ¹.

This is because there are now two e®ects at work. The ¯rst is the
partial equilibrium e®ect we saw earlier: A higher ¹ means higher

Price,
Wage

In the long run, m must be such
that μ(m)(1-ß)/(1+μ(m)) = c

Pi/P = 1
Wi/P = (1+ßμ)/(1+μ)

profit per worker,
μ(1-ß)/(1+μ)
A
DD

MRP
Ni = L(1-u)/m

Figure 2. General equilibrium

Employment, Output

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

15

rents to the ¯rm where the worker works, leading to a higher real
wage. The second is the general equilibrium e®ect. The rents going
to ¯rms come from consumers, who now pay more for the goods they
buy. So workers gain as workers, but lose as consumers. Because, as
workers, they only get a proportion ¯ of the rents, the second e®ect
dominates the ¯rst. The real wage goes down.
General equilibrium. Long run
In the short run, the real wage is not allocative, and the size of the rents
left to ¯rms has no e®ect on their employment decision. In the long run
however, rents determine entry or exit of ¯rms. In the long run, rents must
cover entry costs.3 Given our assumption that entry costs are proportional
to output, this condition takes the simple form:
¹(m)(1 ¡ ¯)
=c
(1 + ¹(m))

(2:6)

Pro¯t per worker must be equal to the shadow cost c. This equation
determines the equilibrium number of products m. Recall that the number
of products determines the elasticity of substitution between products, and
thus the elasticity of demand facing ¯rms. Thus, the number of products
must be such as to generate a degree of competition consistent with pro¯ts
equal to entry costs.
Using the de¯nition of ¹(m), equation (2.6) can be rewritten as:
¾
¹ g(m) =
3

(1 ¡ ¯)
c

(2:7)

Our two-period model cannot capture the speci¯c dynamics of entry and exit. Pre-

sumably, if rents are less than entry costs, ¯rms which die will not be replaced until rents
have recovered su±ciently to justify entry. If rents are larger than entry costs, ¯rms will
enter until rents have been bid down to entry costs.

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

16

Given that g 0 (:) > 0, the equilibrium number of products is a a decreasing function of ¾
¹ : More competition for a given number of ¯rms decreases
rents, making entry less attractive. The number of ¯rms is also a decreasing
function of ¯: A smaller proportion of rents going to ¯rms also makes entry
less attractive. And the number of ¯rms is a decreasing function of c: Higher
entry costs require higher rents, leading to a smaller number of ¯rms.
Replacing the markup from (2.6) in (2.4), the unemployment rate is
given by:
f(u) = 1 ¡

c
(1 ¡ ¯)

(2:8)

The higher c or the higher ¯, the higher the markup required to cover
entry costs, thus the smaller the equilibrium reservation wage, and, in turn,
the higher the unemployment rate.
Finally, replacing the markup from (2.6) in (2.5), the real wage is given
by:
Wi
=1¡c
P

(2:9)

The intuition is straightforward: Productivity is equal to one. Firms
must receive c per unit in order to cover entry costs. The real wage must
therefore be equal to 1 ¡ c.
Return once again to the role of ¯ and ¹ on the real wage:
² Because the supply of ¯rms is fully elastic in the long run, an increase

in ¯ no longer increases the real wage. The e®ect now shows up in
higher unemployment. Higher ¯ means lower rents for ¯rms, and for

given entry costs, a lower number of ¯rms, a higher markup, a lower
reservation wage, and so a higher rate of unemployment.
² The markup, ¹, is no longer an exogenous parameter, but is now

determined in equilibrium by both ¯ and c, so we must look at the

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

17

e®ects of c instead. An increase in c, which increases the equilibrium
value of ¹, leads to a decrease in the real wage. But, now, it leads also
to an increase in the unemployment rate. A higher c leads to a smaller
number of ¯rms, a higher markup, a lower required reservation wage,
and a lower unemployment rate.
Having characterized the equilibrium, we can now turn to the e®ects
of various dimensions of deregulation. While the results have already been
implicitly given, something is gained from the discussion. We do so in the
next section.

3

Deregulation

Let us start with the two dimensions of product market deregulation, then
turn to labor market deregulation.
Product market deregulation. An increase in ¾
¹
Suppose the government increases ¾
¹ , increasing competition in the product market, for a given number of ¯rms.
In the short run, ¯rms facing more elastic demand decrease their markup,
leading in turn to both an increase in real wages, and a decrease in unemployment.
The favorable e®ects however vanish in the long run. The reason is, given
an unchanged entry cost, the decrease in the pro¯t rate leads a decrease in
the number of ¯rms over time (Because it is not pro¯table to enter, ¯rms
which die are not replaced). In the long run, the pro¯t rate must go back to
its initial, pre-deregulation, level. But for the pro¯t rate to return back to its
initial level, so must the markup. By implication, so do the unemployment
rate and the real wage.
In short, this dimension of product market deregulation is eventually

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

18

self-defeating: The favorable short-run e®ects disappear over time and the
economy returns to its pre-deregulation equilibrium.
These results are probably too strong, in that we take c, the entry cost,
as given, when looking at changes in ¾
¹ . In practice, many deregulation
measures are likely to a®ect c as well. If for example, we think of c as
the shadow cost of a quantitative restriction on the number of ¯rms (for
example, the granting of a market to a monopoly ¯rm), then these ¯rms
will stay in the market even if ¾
¹ increases. More formally, the shadow cost c
will go down one-for-one with the pro¯t rate, leading to the same favorable
e®ects of deregulation in the short-run and the long-run. Netherveless, the
results make an important point: To the extent that rents in the economy
ultimately come from entry costs, then, if nothing is done to decrease entry
costs, attempts to increase competition by other means are likely to be partly
self-defeating.
Product market deregulation. A decrease in c
The previous argument suggests that the second dimension of product
market deregulation, a decrease in entry costs, is more likely to be favorable,
even in the long run. And indeed, it is.
Obviously, from our assumption that the number of ¯rms is ¯xed in the
short run, the decrease in entry costs has no e®ect in the short run. But in
the long run, it leads to entry of ¯rms, thus to a higher elasticity of demand, a
lower markup, and thus lower unemployment and a higher real wage. (What
happens to the size of incumbent ¯rms, an aspect which will be relevant when
we turn to the political economy of deregulation, is theoretically ambiguous:
The number of ¯rms increases, but, as the unemployment rate decreases,
total employment increases as well. To the extent that, as seems plausible,
the relative increase in total employment is smaller than the relative increase
in the number of ¯rms, employment in incumbent ¯rms decreases.)

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

19

In short, this dimension of product market deregulation works because
it attacks the problem at the root, decreasing the rents the ¯rms require to
enter and stay in the market. This allows for more competition, and in turn
lower unemployment and higher real wages.
Note that, for neither dimension of product market deregulation, is there
an intertemporal trade-o® for real wages or unemployment. The ¯rst dimension leads to higher real wages and lower unemployment in the short-run and
no long-run e®ect, the second to no short-run e®ect, and higher real wages
and lower unemployment in the long run. Things are quite di®erent in the
case of labor market deregulation, to which we now turn.
Labor market deregulation. A decrease in ¯
Consider a decrease in ¯, a decrease in the bargaining power of workers.
In the short run, workers give up rents; From (2.5), their real wage
decreases; equivalently, the pro¯t rate increases. But this change in the
factor income distribution has no e®ect on unemployment, which remains
given by (2.4). Thus, workers clearly lose in the short run.
In the long run however, the larger rents left to ¯rms lead to entry, until
pro¯t rates have returned to their initial level, until the pro¯t rate is again
equal to c. As ¯rms enter, competition increases, the markup decreases,
leading to a decrease in the unemployment rate, and an increase in the real
wage. Indeed, in the long run, the unemployment rate is lower than prederegulation. The real wage is back to its initial, pre-deregulation, level:
The short run decrease in real wage due to the decrease in ¯ is exactly o®set
by the decrease in the markup.
In short, labor market deregulation works by changing the distribution
of rents in favor of ¯rms, leading to more competition in the long run, and
lower unemployment. In contrast to product market deregulation, it comes
with a sharp intertemporal trade-o®, lower real wages in the short run in

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

20

exchange for lower unemployment in the long run. This will be relevant when
we discuss the political economy of labor market deregulation in Section 6.

We have shown how di®erent dimensions of deregulation have di®erent
distribution and dynamic e®ects on the economy. We now want to use
these results in two ways, ¯rst to look at recent macroeconomic evolutions
in Europe, then to think about the political economy of labor and product
market deregulation. Before doing so, we discuss two extensions of the basic
model.

4

Extensions

Our model is based on a number of strong simplifying assumptions, from
linear utility, to the form of bargaining. Given our focus on the e®ects
of labor market deregulation later on, we explore two extensions. In the
¯rst, we modify the nature of bargaining in the labor market, with the
implication that the wage is now allocative, even in the short run. The
main purpose is to show, a contrario, the implications of e±cient bargaining
for the e®ects of labor market deregulation. In the second, we consider the
implications of concave utility. In this case, the intertemporal trade-o® faced
by workers in the event of labor market deregulation is even starker than
in our benchmark model: lower real wages and higher unemployment in the
short run, in exchange for lower unemployment in the long run.
Ex-post determination of employment
Under our assumption that bargaining is privately e±cient, the wage
plays only a distributive role in the short run. Under that assumption,
labor market deregulation, in the form of a decrease in ¯, gives rise to a
sharp intertemporal trade-o®, lower wages in the short run, in exchange for
lower unemployment only in the long run.

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

21

Under the alternative assumption that employment is chosen ex-post
by ¯rms so as to maximize pro¯t given the bargained wage|the so called
\right to manage" assumption, things look quite di®erent. There is no
intertemporal trade-o® from labor market deregulation: A decrease in ¯
leads to lower unemployment and unchanged real wages, both in the short
run and in the long run. The reason is that the real wage is now allocative
even in the short run, and a decrease in ¯ now functions as an exogenous
decrease in the reservation wage in the benchmark model.
Consider the partial equilibrium ¯rst.4 If ¯rms can choose employment
ex-post, then workers and the ¯rm maximize (1.2) by choosing a wage equal
to:
Wi
= (1 + ¯¹) f(u)
P

(4:1)

In partial equilibrium, and for a given unemployment rate, the wage turns
out to be the same as under e±cient bargaining. But the relative price is
di®erent, and given by:
Pi
Wi
= (1 + ¹)
= (1 + ¹)[1 + ¯¹] f (u)
P
P

(4:2)

The price is now a markup over the real wage, not the reservation wage.
Because ¯rms take the bargained wage as given when choosing employment,
the wage is now allocative. Equation (4.2) shows the \double marginalization" present in the economy. The wage is equal to (1 + ¯¹) times the
reservation wage, and the price is equal to (1 + ¹) times the real wage.
Turn to the short-run general equilibrium. The unemployment rate must
be such that the relative price in (4.2) is equal to one, so:
1 = (1 + ¹) [1 + ¯¹] f(u)
4

(4:3)

What follows is well travelled ground. See in particular Layard and Nickell [1990].

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

22

This expression di®ers from that in the benchmark model because of the
presence of the term in brackets. This term is greater than one, so, for a
given value of ¹, equilibrium unemployment is higher than under e±cient
bargaining.
Because the price is now a markup over the wage rather than over the
reservation wage, the real wage is lower than under e±cient bargaining (and
depends only on monopoly power in the goods market):
Wi
1
=
P
1+¹
By implication, pro¯t per unit is larger than under e±cient bargaining.
Turn to the long run equilibrium. In the long run, the zero net pro¯t
condition gives:
¹(m)
= c; or equivalently:
1 + ¹(m)

¾
¹ g(m) = 1=c

So, an economy where ¯rms have the right to manage has a larger number
of ¯rms, and thus a higher elasticity of demand, and thus a lower markup.
We saw that, given the number of ¯rms, unemployment was higher. But
the number of ¯rms is larger, leading to a lower markup, and thus lower
unemployment. Replacing ¹(m) in (4.3) by its value from above gives:
f (u) =

(1 ¡ c)2
1 ¡ c + ¯c

(4:4)

Comparing it to the expression for unemployment in the benchmark model,
(2.8), it follows that, if ¯ is positive, the unemployment rate is actually lower
in the long run than under e±cient bargaining.
Finally, the zero pro¯t condition implies that the real wage is the same

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

23

as under e±cient bargaining, namely:5
Wi =P = 1 ¡ c
Now consider the e®ects of labor market deregulation, i.e. of a decrease
in ¯. In the short run, wages do not change, and unemployment decreases.
As the pro¯t rate also does not change, the long run is just like the short
run. Thus, under right to manage, there is no intertemporal trade-o® from
this dimension of labor market deregulation: Workers gain in both the short
and the long run.
This extension makes clear the role of the assumption that wages are
distributive in our benchmark model. We believe that this is indeed the
case: Wages are not fully allocative, and in the short run, a large decrease
in wages may translate in an increase in rents going to ¯rms rather than in
an increase in employment.6
Concave utility
Assuming concave rather than linear utility for workers yields an interesting di®erence in the short run e®ects of labor market deregulation, i.e.
a decrease in ¯. In the short run, deregulation leads to both lower real
wages and higher unemployment (whereas, before, unemployment remained
5

Note the distinct second-best °avor of these results. A shift to privately ine±cient

bargaining leads to unchanged real wages, and lower unemployment in the long run.
6

Allowing for capital in the production function, together with a low short run elasticity

of substitution between capital and labor and costs of adjustment to capital, also delivers
small employment e®ects in the short run. These factors are surely important as well.
(They cannot however deliver the decrease in both wages and employment in response to
a decrease in ¯ that obtains in our next extension.)

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

24

unchanged). This is in sharp contrast to movements along a labor demand
curve, and, we shall argue later, may be relevant to understanding what
happened in Europe in the 1990s.
Let us derive this result formally.7 Suppose that the utility of workers
is given by a power transformation of our previous linear utility function:
V~j =

1
Vj 1¡°
1¡°

where Vj was de¯ned earlier as a CES function of consumptions of individual products, and ° < 1. (We keep the assumption that entrepreneurs
are risk neutral. This is not essential but is convenient).
In partial equibrium, and under e±cient bargaining, the real wage and
the relative price of ¯rm i are now given by:
1

Wi
1 + ¯¹ 1¡°
= f(u) (
)
P
1 + ¯°¹
and
Pi
Wi 1 + ¹
=
P
P 1 + ¯¹
For ° = 0, the results are the same as before. For ° > 0, the solution is
characterized in Figure 3. The contract curve, the set of employment and
real wages for di®erent values of ¯, is no longer vertical, but is now upward
sloping. For ¯ = 0, the equilibrium is the same as before: The wage is
equal to the reservation wage, and employment is such that the marginal
revenue product is equal to the reservation wage. As ¯ increases however,
the contract curve slopes up, with in¯nite slope at point A, and decreasing
slope thereafter.
Thus, in partial equilibrium, a decrease in ¯ implies a movement down
7

Our derivation is a straightforward extension of McDonald and Solow [1983].

Price,
Wage

Contract curve

Pi/P
Wi/P
f(u)
A

DD

MRP
Ni

Employment, Output

Figure 3. Partial equilibrium, with concave utility

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

25

the contract curve, and thus a decrease both in employment and the real
wage.
Turning to general equilibrium and setting Pi =P = 1, the real wage and
unemployment are given by:
Wi
1 + ¯¹
=
P
1+¹
1

1 + ¯¹ 1¡° 1 + ¹
1 = f (u) (
)
1 + °¯¹
1 + ¯¹
The real wage is given by the same expression as before. Unemployment
can be shown to be a decreasing function of ¯. So, the partial equilibrium
result extends to general equilibrium: In the short run, a decrease in the
bargaining power of workers leads to both a decrease in their real wage and
an increase in unemployment.
Turning to the long run general equilibrium, the condition that the pro¯t
rate be equal to c gives:
¾
¹ g(m) =

(1 ¡ ¯)
c

So, just as in the benchmark model, a decrease in ¯ leads to an increase
in the number of ¯rms, and thus a decrease in the markup. As before, the
real wage must be equal to 1 ¡ c. There are now two opposite e®ects of

labor market deregulation on unemployment. On the one hand, for a given
number of ¯rms, the lower value of ¯ leads to higher unemployment. On the
other, the increase in the number of ¯rms, and the lower markup, leads to
lower unemployment. From the equations above, the net e®ect is however
unambiguous: Unemployment decreases in the long run.
To summarize: At the center of discussions of labor market deregulation
are often trade-o®s between short-run and long-run e®ects. In our bench-

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

26

mark model, the trade-o® takes the form of lower wages in the short run,
in exchange for lower unemployment in the long run. The ¯rst extension
shows that to the extent that wages are allocative in the short run, the
trade-o® may be more attractive to workers: Under our speci¯c assumptions, labor market deregulation has no e®ect on real wages, and decreases
unemployment in both the short and the long run. The second extension
shows however that, if workers have concave utility functions, the trade-o®
is even more stark than in the benchmark, with a decrease in real wages
and an increase in unemployment in the short run, in exchange for lower
unemployment in the long run.

5

Interpreting movements in the labor share

We now turn to the evidence. We ¯rst show how our approach leads to a
di®erent interpretation of the evolution of the labor share from that in the
recent literature. We then look at, and interpret, the dramatic evolution of
the labor share in continental Europe over the last 20 years.
The labor share and the markup
A large recent literature has focused on the evolution of the labor share,
with the goal of inferring the evolution of the markup of the price over
marginal cost, and by implication, learning about the pricing behavior of
¯rms in imperfectly competitive markets. The logic of this approach is as
follows:
² Assume a production function of the form Y = F (N; : ), where the
dot stands for all factors other than labor.

² Assume that the measured wage is the correct measure of the cost of
labor to the ¯rm, so nominal marginal cost is given by MC = W=FN .

² De¯ne the markup of price over marginal cost as ¹, so

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

27

P = (1 + ¹) MC = (1 + ¹) W=FN
² The labor share, call it ®, is then equal to:
®´

1
FN
WN
=
PY
1 + ¹ Y =N

The labor share is equal to one over one plus the markup, times the ratio
of the marginal to the average product of labor.
Much of the work has gone into trying to construct accurate measures
of the ratio of marginal to average product, so as to recover ¹.8 Given that
this aspect is not our focus here, let us assume, as we did in our benchmark
model, that the production function is simply given by Y = N, so marginal
and average product are both equal to one, and the labor share and the
real wage are therefore equal. In this case, there is a very simple relation
between the labor share and the markup:
®=

W
1
=
P
1+¹

(5:1)

Variations in the share come entirely from variations in the markup, and
thus from the pricing behavior of ¯rms in the goods market.
This approach (obviously using a more general speci¯cation for the production function) has been used to construct time series for the markup,
and characterize, for example, its cyclical behavior (Rotemberg and Woodford [1999] and references therein), its relation to in°ation in an economy
with nominal price setting (Gali and Gertler [1999], Sbordone [2000]), or the
lower frequency evolution of markups in Europe over the past few decades
(Bentolila and Saint-Paul [1999]).
8

See the careful discussion in Rotemberg and Woodford [1999].

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

28

From the perspective of our paper, the crucial assumption in that line of
research is that the wage is an accurate measure of the cost of labor to ¯rms.
Under e±cient bargaining, and more generally in any model in which the
wage is not fully allocative, this assumption is not correct. Under e±cient
bargaining, the shadow cost of labor is the reservation wage, and the ¯rm
sets its price as a markup over this shadow cost. And this leads, as we have
seen, to a di®erent expression for the real wage|and, by implication, for
the labor share. Instead of being given by equation (5.1), the share is given
by:
®=

W
1 + ¹¯
=
P
1+¹

(5:2)

The labor share now depends on imperfections in both the goods and
the labor market. As in (5.1), it is a decreasing function of the markup,
and thus of the monopoly power of ¯rms. But it is also depends on the
bargaining power of workers. The higher their power, the higher the labor
share.
This has two practical implications. First, if the wage is not fully allocative, the construction of markups in the existing literature is incorrect.
What is interpreted as an increase in the markup may in fact re°ect lower
bargaining power of workers in the labor market. Second, movements in the
labor share may come from changes in the structure of either the goods or
the labor market. In the rest of the section, we show how this approach can
be used to interpret the evolution of the labor share in continental Europe
over the last two decades.
The evolution of unemployment and the labor share in Europe
Figure 4 shows the two macroeconomic evolutions which motivated this
research in the ¯rst place. It plots the unemployment rate, and the labor
share in the business sector, for four major European countries, Germany,

Figure 4. Unemployment rates and labor shares
Germany, France, Italy, and Spain, 1970-2000
Unemployment rate

0.25

FRA_UN
GER_UN
ITA_UN
ESP_UN

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

70

72

74

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

92

94

96

98

100

Labor share

0.800

FRA_AL
GER_AL

0.775

ITA_AL
ESP_AL

0.750
0.725
0.700
0.675
0.650
0.625
0.600
0.575

70

72

74

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

92

94

96

98

100

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

29

France, Italy, and Spain, since 1970. It points to two main facts:
² The increase in unemployment in the 1980s, and the persistence of high
unemployment for much of the 1990s, in all four countries. Only in the
last few years has unemployment started to decline, most dramatically
in Spain, least so in Italy.
² The sharp decrease in labor shares, starting in the early to mid-1980s.

For France, for example, the labor share, which had increased from
70% in the early 1970s to 74% in the early 1980s, has now decreased
to 60%, a decrease of 14% of GDP relative to the peak, 10% relative
to the 1970 value.9

The focus on only four countries is for visual convenience: The decrease
in labor shares has been common to most continental European countries.
This is in sharp contrast however to the United States, where the labor share
has remained extremely stable.
One can think of a number of explanations for these two facts, many of
them having nothing to do with rents, regulation, or deregulation. One is
that an increase in the wage (relative to the level of technology), starting in
the 1970s, led initially to an increase in the labor share and not much adverse
e®ect on employment. But, as ¯rms started substituting away from labor,
the labor share started to fall, and unemployment to rise, the evolution
re°ected in Figure 4. In that interpretation, the low labor share and high
unemployment in the 1990s re°ect too high a wage, and a high elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor in the long run.
The purpose of an earlier paper by one of the authors (Blanchard [1997])
was to examine this and other explanations. The conclusion was that ex9

The business sector data stop in 1998. Based on aggregate rather than business sector

evidence, there is no evidence of substantial change since then.

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

30

planations based on the reaction of ¯rms to wages and the cost of capital in
competitive goods and labor markets just could not explain the data. Readers are refered to that article (and to the follow{up in Blanchard [2000])
for a full treatment. But the basic reason for that conclusion can be shown
simply:
Assume that ¯rms indeed act as pro¯t maximizers in competitive goods
and labor markets. Assume also that, leaving aside adjustment costs, their
production function exhibits constant returns to capital and labor. Assume
¯nally that technological progress is Harrod neutral|the assumption required to obtain a balanced growth path|so the production function can
be written as Y = F (AN; K), where A is the technological level.
Under those two assumptions, and ignoring costs of adjustment, pro¯t
maximization implies the following relation between the labor{capital ratio
and the real wage:
(AN=K) = f(W=A);

f 0 (:) < 0

(5:3)

Call AN labor in e±ciency units, and W=A the wage in e±ciency units.
Then, this relation states, the ratio of labor in e±ciency units to capital
should be a decreasing function of the wage in e±ciency units, with the
property of f (:) deriving from the properties of the production function.
This suggests a simple step, that of building and plotting AN=K and W=A
for each country over the period. This is done in Figure 5, which gives the
evolution of the logarithms of AN=K and of W=A, from 1971 on (not all the
data are available for 1970), for each country. Both series are normalized to
zero in 1971. The ¯gure yields two important conclusions:
² The 1970s were indeed associated with an increase in W=A, thus with
a \wage push". Associated with this increase was a sharp drop in the
labor{capital ratio, in AN=K.
² From the early 1980s on however, W=A started decreasing in all four

Figure 5. log(an/k) and log(w/a).
1970-1998. 1970=0
Germany

0.10

GER_RATIO70
GER_RWAGE70

0.05

Italy

0.10

ITA_RATIO70
ITA_RWAGE70

0.05

-0.00

-0.00

-0.05
-0.05
-0.10
-0.10
-0.15
-0.15

-0.20

-0.20

-0.25
-0.30

71

74

77

80

83

86

89

92

95

98

France

0.10

FRA_RATIO70
FRA_RWAGE70

-0.25

71

74

77

80

83

86

89

92

95

98

Spain

0.25

ESP_RATIO70
ESP_RWAGE70

0.05
0.00
-0.00
-0.05

-0.25

-0.10
-0.50

-0.15
-0.20

-0.75
-0.25
-0.30

-1.00
71

74

77

80

83

86

89

92

95

98

71

74

77

80

83

86

89

92

95

98

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

31

countries. By the late 1980s, it was actually lower than its 1971 value
in all four countries. Yet, and here is the proximate cause for the
decrease in the labor share, this return of W=A to its earlier level
has not been associated with a return of the labor{capital ratio to its
earlier level. The ratio now appears to have stabilized, but at a level
substantially lower than in the early 1970s. Thus, the decrease in the
wage since the mid{1980s has not been associated with an increase in
employment.
Could this evolution be explained by the long lags and the expectational
e®ects coming from a putty{clay technology, or by costs of adjusting factor
proportions more generally? This seems unlikely. Only expectations of large
increases in W=A in the future could explain why the labor{capital ratio
has recovered so little, if at all. Given the emphasis on wage moderation
in Europe today, this seems implausible, and suggests the need to look for
other explanations.
Labor market deregulation?
The model developed in this paper suggests one such explanation,
namely a decrease in the bargaining power of workers, a decrease in ¯,
starting some time in the mid{1980s.10
As we saw, such a shift can initially generate both a decrease in the real
wage and in the labor share, and either no improvement (if the contract
curve is vertical) or an increase (if the contract curve is upward sloping)
in unemployment. Both implications seem to ¯t the facts. Under this in10

This is not the only alternative explanation. Another is that technological progress,

rather than being Harrod neutral, has become biased against labor in the last 20 years in
Europe (but not in the United States). For further discussion of this and other alternatives,
see Blanchard [1997] and Blanchard [2000].

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

32

terpretation, the decrease in the bargaining power of workers, starting in
the mid 1980s, has led to a reduction in the real wage at a given level of
employment, and, by implication, a reduction of the labor share. So far, the
employment e®ects have been limited. But, our model suggests, the future
should be brighter, and employment should eventually more than recover.
Indeed, the steady decline in unemployment since 1998 may be a sign that
these dynamics are now at work.
How plausible is this interpretation? Note that the argument must have
two elements. The ¯rst is that, since the mid 1980s, Europe has gone through
labor market deregulation, at least in the sense of a decrease in the bargaining power of workers. The second is that the e®ects of labor market deregulation have so far dominated the e®ects of product market deregulation. In
terms of our model, to explain the decrease in the labor share, it must be
that the decline in ¯ has dominated the decline in ¹. Otherwise, our model
implies, we would have seen an increase, not a decrease, in the labor share,
and a stronger decline in unemployment.
How much direct evidence is there for each of these two elements? The
honest answer must be: Not much, either for, or against. The main reason for our ignorance comes from a number of conceptual and empirical
issues, ¯rst in developing measures of the relevant institutions, second in
constructing the evolution of these measures over time.
Most of what we know at this point comes from work by the OECD on
changes in product market and labor market regulations in member countries. Initial results from the development and the construction of a number
of measures are reported in Boeri et al. [2000]. Two of ¯ndings of the study
are relevant here:
² First, the quantitative evidence points indeed to deregulation both in
goods and labor markets in Europe since the mid 1980s.

² Second|and this goes against the hypothesis developed here|product

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

33

market deregulation, which has taken place largely as a result of E.U.
initiatives, has been widespread, if slow moving. By contrast, labor
market reforms have been more piecemeal. This second piece of evidence may not be conclusive however. The indicators constructed by
the OECD and examined by Boeri et al for the labor market focus
on employment protection, unemployment bene¯ts, and the generosity of pensions. Of those, only the ¯rst is likely to be related to ¯
in our model. And, going beyond these indicators, the larger picture
appears to be one of a weakening of unions throughout Europe. The
unionization rate has decreased, often substantially, in most European
countries over the last 15 years (see for example Booth et al. [2000].)
The general attitude of governments towards unions also appears to
have changed, and so has the attitude of unions themselves.
Indeed this weakening of unions points to potential interactions between
product market and labor market deregulation, the topic to which we now
turn.

6

Interactions between product and labor market deregulation

Another dimension in which our analysis can be helpful is in thinking about
the political economy of deregulation. The questions are many, ranging from
simple to complex, from positive to normative. Consider the following list:
² Can we explain exactly why workers so strongly oppose labor market

deregulation (in the sense of a decrease in ¯)? Who loses and who
gains? What are the intertemporal trade-o®s?

² Can we explain why workers also so often oppose product market
deregulation|although not always with the same intensity as they
do labor market deregulation?

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

34

² If we think of the degree of regulation as endogenous, say as the result

of lobbying by workers or ¯rms, how are deregulation in the labor
market and the product market likely to interact? Is one likely to help
or hinder the other?

² More pointedly, in light of the macroeconomic facts in the previous

section, could it be the case that the product market deregulation
coming from European integration has naturally led to labor market
deregulation? Might the reaction be strong enough so as to lead to
the observed decrease in the labor share?

Fully answering these questions would require another paper. But our
model gives a number of hints, which we believe are likely to be robust to
further analysis.
We proceed in two steps. The ¯rst, pedestrian, step is simply to characterize utility, for both employed and unemployed workers, together with the
unconditional probability of being unemployed (equivalently the unemployment rate), in the short and the long run. The second is then to return to
the questions above, and point to some of the implications of our results.
Utilities, the Unemployment Rate, and Firm Employment
Denote the (one period) utility of an employed worker by V N , and the
(one period) utility of an unemployed worker by V U . Then, collecting earlier
results:
In partial equilibrium, and in the short run, the utility of being employed
is given by:
V N = (1 + ¯¹)f(u)
Employment in ¯rm i is given by:
Ni = N(1 + ¹)¡¾

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

35

In general equilibrium, and still in the short run, the two utilities are
given by:
VN =

1 + ¯¹
1+¹

VU =

1
1+¹

The unemployment rate, and employment in ¯rm i are given by:
u j f(u) =

1
1+¹

Ni =

L
(1 ¡ u)
m

In general equilibrium, and in the long run, the two utilities are given
by:
VN =1¡c

VU =1¡

c
1¡¯

The unemployment rate, and employment in ¯rm i are given by:

u j f(u) = 1 ¡

c
1¡¯

Ni =

1
L
(1 ¡ u) where mj ¾
¹ g(m) =
m
c

To go from this to a characterization of the e®ects of deregulation on
welfare, we need three more elements:
² First, and obviously, the discount rate used by workers and entrepreneurs to assess utility in the second period|the long run.

² Second, a characterization of when the reform is introduced|for ex-

ample before or after workers know whether they are employed or
unemployed in the ¯rst period|the short run.11

11

These veil-of-ignorance issues are familiar from the research on political economy of

reform. For example, see Fernandez and Rodrik [1991].

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

36

² Third, a characterization of the rules mapping aggregate and ¯rm employment into individual employment probabilities.12 If, for example,
employment status in the long run is unrelated to employment status
in the short run, then all workers need to know is what happens to
the unemployment rate in the long run. If, instead, workers currently
employed by a ¯rm have priority in that ¯rm's employment in the long
run, then they will also care about what happens to employment in the
¯rm: If, for example, reform leads to entry of new ¯rms, employment
in existing ¯rms may decline, even if aggregate employment increases.
We have nothing to add here, nor do we want to give an encyclopedic
treatment of all possible cases. In what follows, we focus on the case where
reforms are announced after the pre-reform equilibrium has been realized|
so workers know their pre-reform employment status. We shall assume that
those workers who are currently employed have priority in employment at the
same ¯rm in the long run|so, if there is no decrease in the employment level
of an incumbent ¯rm, their probability of unemployment is zero. Finally,
we shall concentrate on the welfare of those workers employed pre-reform.
Labor Market Deregulation
The ¯rst two e®ects of labor deregulation (a decrease in ¯) are to decrease
wages in the short run, leave them unchanged in the long run. For a worker
who is sure to be employed in both periods, the e®ect is thus unambiguously
negative.
There are employment e®ects however. In the short run, both aggregate
unemployment and ¯rm employment remain unchanged. But, in the long
run, entry of ¯rms is likely to decrease employment in incumbent ¯rms
12

The issues are familiar from insider-outsider models. They play a central role for

example in the analysis of labor market reform by Saint-Paul [2000].

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

37

(Recall that the e®ect is formally ambiguous, because of the decrease in
aggregate unemployment.) This in turn implies that the currently employed
workers now face a positive probability of becoming unemployed, further
decreasing their utility.
In short, why currently employed workers oppose labor market deregulation is rather straightforward: They lose from it. Those who gain are
those who would have been unemployed in the future: some of them end up
employed, and those who remain unemployed have a higher level of utility.
Product market deregulation
Think of a deregulation as a decrease in ¹. As we have seen, in the short
run, this decrease can be achieved through an increase in ¾
¹ ; in the long run,
it must be achieved through a decrease in c.
In both the short and the long run, the e®ects on the utility of workers,
whether employed or unemployed, are unambiguously favorable: A decrease
in ¹ leads to an increase in both V N and V U in the short run; a decrease in
c also leads to an increase in V N and V U in the long run.
So why don't workers more strongly endorse product market deregulation? The model suggests two reasons.
First, in partial equilibrium, deregulation decreases the rents to the ¯rm,
and thus the rents to the workers. Under symmetry, this partial equilibrium
perception is, as we have seen, misleading, as the decline in prices elsewhere
more than compensates workers for the decrease in rents. But, if deregulation only a®ects part of the economy (because the rest of the economy was
competitive, or because it remains regulated), then the partial equilibrium
argument may extend to general equilibrium. If the deregulated sector is
small enough, the partial equilibrium e®ect will indeed dominate, and make
workers in that sector worse o®.
Second, and as in the case of labor market deregulation, lower markups
come, in the long run, from entry of new ¯rms, and higher competition.

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

38

Thus, employment in incumbent ¯rms is likely to decrease, increasing the
risk of unemployment for currently employed workers. This again may lead
them to oppose product market deregulation, despite higher wages and lower
unemployment.
Interactions
The remarks above suggest that product market deregulation, which
increases the wage, may help implement labor market deregulation, which
initially decreases it. Because both however lead to entry, and a likely
decrease in employment in incumbent ¯rms, this may not be enough to get
the support of employed workers.
We want to explore a di®erent interaction however, based on the notion
that, if product market deregulation decreases total rents, the incentives for
workers to appropriate a proportion of these rents may be decreased, leading
to labor market deregulation.13
To do so, we proceed as follows. We think of product market deregulation
as a decrease in ¾
¹ , which in turn leads to a decrease in ¹. We think of
employed workers as lobbying for a higher value of ¯. We assume that they
maximize the utility of being employed, net of lobbying costs:
1 + ¯¹ a 2
¡ ¯
1+¹
2
The ¯rst term is the short run utility when employed. The second is the
cost of lobbying, which is taken to be quadratic in ¯, and a is a parameter.
Maximization with respect to ¯ yields:
13

This idea has been explored, in a partial equilibrium context, in both the labor and

industrial organization literature. See for example Joskow and Rose [1989], Section 9, for
a survey, or more recently Neven et al. [1998], and articles in the Summer 1999 issue of
the Journal of Economic Perspectives.

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

¯=

39

1 ¹
a 1+¹

So a decrease in ¹ leads to a decrease in ¯. Product market deregulation
leads to labor market deregulation. Having less rents to appropriate, unions
¯ght less hard, or nearly equivalently, workers are less likely to join unions,
making them weaker.
Can product market deregulation in the end lead to a lower, not a higher,
real wage? In other words, can the indirect e®ect, through the decrease in
¯, dominate the direct e®ect through the decrease in ¹ (by the envelope
theorem, we know that net utility above must go up if ¹ goes down)?
The answer is yes. It is straightforward to show that a condition for
product market deregulation to lead to a lower real wage is that (2=a)¹=(1+
¹) > 1 (or equivalently that ¯ > 1=2). This will occur if a is small enough,
so ¯ responds strongly to ¹.
Our formalization is little more than an example. Further steps would
be to endogenize ¹, and to consider both the short and the long run. But it
has two merits. First, it shows some of the complementarities between the
two types of deregulation. Second, it may help explain the macroeconomic
facts we saw in the previous section, the decline in the labor share and the
persistence of unemployment in Europe since the mid 1980s.14
14

A rather di®erent way in which higher product market competition may have a®ected

labor market outcomes is by putting into question \e±cient bargaining" in the labor
market. As is well known, e±cient bargaining is not time consistent: Given that the
wage typically exceeds the marginal revenue product of labor, ¯rms would like, ex-post,
to reduce employment below the level agreed to in the bargain. (In Figure 1, given Wi =P ,
the ¯rm would increase pro¯t in the short run by choosing a level of employment on the
MRP curve, thus to the left of Ni ).

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

7

40

Conclusions

Our main purpose in this paper was to construct a general equilibrium model
with rents and bargaining, and use it to think about the e®ects of product
and labor market deregulation. Our formalization strategy was to construct
what we think is the simplest model required for those purposes. Further
progress clearly requires extending the model, in at least two dimensions:
² First, by °eshing out the relation of the parameters of the model to the
the speci¯c institutions which determine rents in the labor and goods

market. A natural way of doing so is by integrating our approach with
that of Caballero and Hammour (for example Caballero and Hammour
[1998], Caballero and Hammour [1999]).
² Second, by allowing for a richer description of technology, in particular
by allowing for both labor and capital in production, along the lines

of Spector [2000]. Introducing capital would not only lead to a richer
picture, but also allow to capture the ¯ght for rents between workers, entrepreneurs, and rentiers, and, by implication, the interactions
If ¯rms have long enough horizons, they may still decide to choose the e±cient outcome;
by foregoing pro¯ts in the short run, they are able to achieve a more e±cient and more
pro¯table outcome in the long run (see Espinosa and Rhee [1989]). Higher product market
competition, however, may make it more tempting to achieve short{run pro¯ts. Under this
interpretation, what we have seen is a change in the nature of bargaining, leading ¯rms
to reduce employment at a given real wage. If so, the qualitative e®ects are very similar,
both in the short and the long run, to those of a decrease in ¯. Using our earlier results for
the characterization of the economy under e±cient bargaining and ex-post determination
of employment, it follows that this change in bargaining leads to a decrease in the labor
share and an increase in unemployment in the short run, and to lower unemployment in
the long run.

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

41

between labor, product, and ¯nancial market reform.
Building on these two extensions, one should then revisit the issues we
discussed in the previous two sections.
In Section 5, we argued that the evolution of the labor share and unemployment in Europe in the last 20 years was suggestive of a movement
towards labor market deregulation. But here, much work remains to be
done to identify the respective roles of biased technological progress, of the
adjustment of factor proportions to factor prices, and of changes in the distribution and size of rents due to changes in regulation.
In Section 6, we focused on the political economy interactions between
product and labor market deregulation. But, here again, we only scratched
the surface. Progress here also requires focusing on the role of speci¯c institutions, as well as building on and integrating the work already done on
the political economy of labor market and of product market reform.

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

42

References
Bentolila, S. and Saint-Paul, G., 1999, Explaining movements in the labor share,
Working Paper 9905, CEMFI, Madrid.
Blanchard, O., 1997, The medium run, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2,
89{158.
Blanchard, O., 2000, The Economics of Unemployment. Shocks, Institutions, and
Interactions, Lionel Robbins Lectures, MIT Press, forthcoming.
Boeri, T., Nicoletti, G., and Scarpetta, S., 2000, Regulation and labour market
performance, Discussion Paper 2420, CEPR.
Booth, A., Burda, M., Calmfors, L., Checchi, D., Naylor, R., and Visser, J., 2000,
What do unions do in Europe?, mimeo, Fondazione Rodolfo DeBenedetti.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M., 1998, The macroeconomics of speci¯city, Journal
of Political Economy 106(4), 724{767.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M., 1999, Jobless growth: appropriability, factor substitution and unemployment, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy.
Espinosa, M. and Rhee, C., 1989, E±cient wage bargaining as a repeated game,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 104-3, 565{588.
Fernandez, R. and Rodrik, D., 1991, Resistance to reform: Status quo bias in
the presence of individual speci¯c uncertainty, American Economic Review 81,
1146{1155.
Gali, J. and Gertler, M., 1999, In°ation dynamics: A structural econometric analysis, Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 195{222.
Joskow, P. and Rose, N., 1989, The e®ects of economic regulation, Handbook of
Industrial Organization II, 1450{1506, R. Schmalensee and R.D. Willig, eds.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers.
Layard, R. and Nickell, S., 1990, Is unemployment lower if unions bargain over

Macroeconomic e®ects of regulation

43

employment?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 105-3, 773{787.
McDonald, I. and Solow, R., 1983, Wage bargaining and employment, American
Economic Review 73, 896-908.
McKinsey Global Institute, 1997, France and Germany.
Neven, D., Roller, L.-H., and Zhang, Z., 1998, Union power and product market competition: Evidence from the airline industry, CEPR Discussion Paper
(1912).
Rotemberg, J. and Woodford, M., 1999, The cyclical behavior of prices and costs,
Handbook of Macroeconomics 1B, 1051{1133, J. Taylor and J. Rotemberg eds,
Elsevier.
Saint-Paul, G., 2000, The Political Economy of Labor Market Reforms, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, forthcoming.
Sbordone, A., 2000, An optimizing model of U.S. wage and price dynamics, mimeo,
Rutgers University.
Spector, D., 2000, Competition and the capital-labor con°ict, mimeo, MIT.

