% &



    

   

        

  
   !
"# $'()*
$+,,---.#,$$!,-'()*

  / %     
(010 !!23!! 43
.5#6  0)(7'
.3



         
 !              "#  $%&
!  %  '($    )  $   * %&! 
 )    *  #   %& + !          % %   
 %%  , -   .  ( . .          
   % 
 
#$
'  !'  (/
 . !0 &' "! 
 "!,-  %  ( .         * $  
1
 $2$3 ,4  5              
* '   2
% 0 ,
6&4 % 7,"  7,-  % ,) .  ,$  
 5 
5 . %&8   5  %
       .6
  .    ,

#$2 5 22 !!3  # 3  2
   5    !
% "# $  '()*
.3 )00(
/  ))6 (6 (1




-    2! 54# 3$ #     23 - 
-# #$! .- !5# 5 24# #! 5 5#$2 .!   -8-# !5#
#! 952  3##  !3$$   $ 4! ! - ! 52  "#  58
!35 $  25! !! 24: ! - 3!  4  $ 
2 56 .3 5  2 2! !$5   -  !  !2 !   5!  ;<
#= 3 - !!   # 5 . " $2   23! 
!3.8 2 !3##!  >2   ! 2!   -" 54# 2 2!!8.5
# 5 $5 #-   2  3# $ #!6 $$3  $!!3  
!32 .!6 5 $ 22 $2    2! 54# 2 # 
23 #6  5! 5#$2 2!  3$ - 22$5 . !# 22#83$
22 #-   -8-# # #!6  -5 .  ! -5-   585!
5#$2 #- ?6 #! - ! !!  2 56 22 #- !  56
! 2! 4   3 .5  #8-#   5!6 5  !  5#$2
!$5 3$   "# 3 !! !3##!   $!!3  # 3  2 -
!6 !5  $ .  #-# 55  2  #8-#   . "!

  
$  22!
4!  !!>
 2!6 &
@!!>23"

   !
$  22!
45 4!
.5#6 !!23!! 0)(7'
5 %
A- @"3B!!4553

Introduction

Concern has been rising about a potential flood of African migrants penetrating Europe=s
porous southern borders and washing under America=s leaky door. The European response has been
to tighten immigration requirements, stiffen border controls and toughen up on asylum seekers.
Africa=s rapid population growth and poor economic performance imply for many observers that the
pressure for emigration will increase, and the United States= experience with immigration over its
southern border serves to reinforce those concerns. Yet relatively little is known about what
aggregate forces are at work in Africa and precisely what their effects on the demand for emigration
might be in the near future.
History supports the view that African emigration pressure should be building up, has been
building up, and will build up still further. In the age of mass trans-Atlantic migration in the halfcentury before World War I, 55 million emigrants moved from the Old World to the New. This
mass migration began in the more developed countries of northwestern Europe and then spread to the
less developed regions in the south and east. European emigrants were persuaded to move by the
prospect of large earnings gains for themselves and their children, by the pace of development at
home, by demographic pressure on the resource base, and by the cumulative effects of past
migrations through the so-called Afriends and relatives effect@ (Hatton and Williamson 1998, Chp.
3). Once mass migration gained momentum, annual emigration rates as high as 15 per thousand per
annum were recorded for relatively poor countries like Italy and Ireland (Hatton and Williamson
1998, p. 33). The migrations typically began with small streams of pioneers before they grew to a
migrant flood as the friends and relatives effect unlocked the
economic and demographic fundamentals pushing emigrants out of local labor markets. 1 This delay B
poor countries recording at first only modest levels of emigration B seems to be somewhat of a
paradox since simple economics would suggest that poor countries would record the highest rates of
1

Our simulations of the typical European emigration cycle show that migrant stock effects continued
to raise emigration rates even after the economic and demographic forces weakened and as western Europe

1

emigration. The paradox is resolved as soon as we remember that migration is constrained by the
availability of the financial resources to invest in the move. Repatriation of funds back home by
emigrant pioneers helped release that constraint, but only with a lag.
Our purpose in this paper is to examine more fully than has been done thus far the size,
causes, characteristics and future of international migration within and out of Africa. The questions
are guided by our understanding of the mass migrations of a century ago (Hatton and Williamson
1998). What drives Africans to migrate across international borders? Are those forces the same ones
that drove poor peasants and impoverished urban workers in nineteenth century Europe to seek a
better life in the New World? Legal restrictions on immigration into high-wage OECD countries
have certainly choked off observed migrations, but despite these restrictions can the same pressures to
emigrate be observed in modern Africa as were present a century ago in Europe? Do Africans move
across borders mainly in response to political upheaval and civil war, or are the same economic and
demographic forces at work in Africa today that drove Afree@ European mass migration in the past
and that drives Afree@ rural-urban migration in all presently developing countries, Africa included?
Are these forces likely to intensify or weaken in the future? Is migration pressure building up or
easing off?
We argue that African emigration pressure is building up dramatically and that it is driven
by some of the same forces observed in late nineteenth century Europe. The paper first
examines the dimensions of migration within and out of sub-Saharan Africa. It then estimates the
impact of wars and political upheavals on refugee flight. Next, it uses newly available data to
estimate the forces driving net migration within Africa. These estimates are then used to construct a
measure of what we call migration pressure for sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. Finally, the paper
uses what we have learned about past African emigration to project its likely future.

African International Migration

converged on the New World (Hatton and Williamson 1998, pp. 49-51).

2

Students of African migration are confronted with an apparently conflicting mixture of facts.
On the one hand, there is a vast literature on rural-urban migration that paints a picture of a highly
mobile African labor force responding elastically to changing economic incentives between sectors
and regions. On the other hand, given the incentives, African across-border international migration
seems low. This is especially so when it is viewed in the light of the mass migrations from Europe a
century ago.
The same fundamentals that drove European emigration a century ago are even a more
powerful engine in Africa today. Rates of natural increase in Africa are expected to remain above 2
percent for the next two decades, rates that are almost double those of late nineteenth century
Europe. The contrast is even more striking when rates of increase of young adults are compared
(Hatton and Williamson 2000, Table 4), and these are the ones most likely to move. Furthermore,
the wage gaps favoring Europe over Africa today are double those that favored the New World over
Europe in the nineteenth century. If Africans are as responsive to migration fundamentals as
Europeans were a century ago (a point discussed further below), then large outflows should be taking
place now and larger ones should be expected in the future. But restrictions on immigration in highwage OECD countries have so far stemmed much, but certainly not all, of this potential flow. Thus,
the stock of African-born living in the West is still fairly modest.
[Table 1 about here]
Table 1 shows the proportion of immigrants to the United States (excluding those from
Canada) distributed by region of origin. African immigrants to the United States were only a tiny
share of the total in 1955-64 but their share rose to more than 9 percent in 1995-7. By 1997 they had
mounted to an annual inflow of 48,000 immigrants. These African Apioneers@ are now a significant
part of US immigration. Comparisons with immigration from Asia are revealing. Asian immigration
surged up to 1975-84 and then declined B replicating the Alife-cycle@ which the European mass
migrations traced out a century ago B suggesting that the Asian miracle finally started doing its work
in the late 1980s, after a lag choking off the urge to emigrate. African immigration now has the same
foothold that Asian immigration had in the 1950s. Indeed, a third of the African immigrants arriving

3

in the 1990s were classified as close relatives of US citizens and thus it seems likely that the friends
and relatives effect is already serving to erode the poverty and/or legislated constraint on potential
African emigrants.

Migration Within Africa

It is estimated that 2.8 percent of the 1990 resident population of sub-Saharan Africa were
living outside their country of birth (Zlotnik 1998, Table 1, p. 431). This is much lower than
Western Europe (6.1 percent) or the United States (8.6 percent), but, of course, these two are
immigrant regions. Comparisons with other emigrant regions, like Asia or Latin America, would be
more relevant, and by this comparison the African figure looks much higher: of the 1990 resident
populations, 1.4 percent in Asia and 1.7 percent in Latin America were living outside their country
of birth. The Caribbean (2.9 percent) was the only emigrating region that recorded a higher rate than
sub-Saharan Africa, and it wasn=t higher by much. Another relevant comparison might be with
mobility within the United States. It turns out that the African 2.8 percent figure is much lower than
the proportion of resident US-born population living outside their region of birth. These comparisons
suggest that while African across-border migration is higher than it is in other low-wage regions, it is
low compared to Europe=s past as well as to present across-border migration within the United States
and the European Union. The lower migration rate could be explained by any combination of the
following four factors: there are serious political, legal, language, and/or geographic barriers to
international across-border mobility within Africa as well as between Africa and the OECD; African
migration is typically temporary, and this Achurning@ would be grossly understated in the data;
African across-border migration is much less responsive to labor market incentives; or, the labor
market incentives for across-border in Africa are limited since most African labor markets are all
low-wage regardless of location.
While across-border migration within Africa is not as free as it is between United States
regions or between EU members, the barriers within the African continent are far lower than

4

between it and the high-wage industrial world. In West Africa, the treaty which formed the
Economic Community of West African States in 1975 (known as ECOWAS), contained a protocol
providing for free movement of capital and labor. 2 Agreements for trade and economic cooperation
in other regions, such as the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), and the Eastern and Southern African
Preferential Trade Area (PTA) were set up with free factor mobility as an objective but contained no
explicit protocols. 3 Nevertheless, it has been argued that understandings between groups of countries
has facilitated labor migration on an informal level B indeed the effective barriers may be lower in
east Africa than under ECOWAS (Akande 1998, p. 346). But such agreements and understandings
have followed rather than led growing across-border labor migration. With completely porous
borders between most contiguous African countries, a large amount of undocumented migration takes
place and attempts to control migration have been only partial at best (Adepoju 1995, p. 93).
Many of the inter-African migrations involve movement from the more populous and/or less
developed countries such as Burkina Faso, Uganda, Lesotho, Mozambique, Mali, Rwanda and
Burundi. The receiving countries have included Côte d=Ivoire, Gabon, Zaire, Equatorial Guinea,
Nigeria (until recently) and above all the Republic of South Africa (Adepoju 1994, p. 211). These
migrations, often in response to the development of minerals, primary commodities, or oil for
export, have typically reversed when economic fortunes changed. A graphic example is offered by
the flood of migrants into Nigeria from surrounding countries (especially Ghana) during the 1970s in
response to the oil boom. Many of those migrants without papers were expelled in the early 1980s
when boom turned to bust. Another example is offered by the migrants from Botswana, Lesotho,
Malawi, Mozambique and Swaziland recruited for the South African gold and copper mines. These

2

The countries included in ECOWAS are: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea Bissau, Cote d=Ivoire, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo.
Article 2(2) of the 1975 Treaty states that AThe Community shall by stages ensure the abolition as between
the Member States of the obstacles to the free movement of persons, services and capital@ (quoted in
Akande 1998, p. 347).
3
These agreements cover almost the whole of eastern and southern Africa. Members of the PTA
are: Angola, Burundi, Botswana, Comoros, Djibouti, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Namibia, Rwanda, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

5

migrants formed a quasi-permanent labor force much like the guest workers in postwar Germany
(Milazi 1998). But here too, changing economic fortunes slowed recruitment and led many of the
migrants to return.4
These movements suggest no lack of mobility among Africans. Indeed the large literature on
rural-urban migration testifies to high levels of mobility within countries, mobility that often spills
across international borders. One example is Robert Lucas=s (1985) study of migration among the
Batswana, migration to cities within Botswana as well as to South Africa. His results from microdata
indicated highly elastic responses of migration to wage rates and employment probabilities in the
urban sector as a whole, and only slightly smaller negative elasticities with respect to local wage rates
and employment probabilities. Lucas estimated that an increase in the urban employment probability
would draw more than enough migrants to fill the new jobs B supporting the famous hypothesis of
John Harris and Michael Todaro (1970).
Both the Lucas study and one by Richard Adams (1993) of rural urban migration in Egypt
find that, given the incentive to migrate, those with more education were no more likely to migrate
than those with less. The fact that those with education more often migrate simply reflects the greater
economic return to education in the cities. As we pointed out above, these and many other studies
have found that the migrants were young, single males typically in the age range 15-29.5
Furthermore, there is very little evidence suggesting that the poorest laborers were constrained by
poverty; Adams found that laborers without land were the most likely to migrate. He concluded that
Adespite considerable travel and opportunity costs associated with international migration, males who
are both poor and landless are able to find or borrow the money they need@ (1993, p. 162).
4

The number of foreign workers employed by the South African Chamber of Mines fell from an
average of 216,679 in 1985-9 to 178,881 in 1990-3 (Zlotnik 1998, p. 458). In 1988 the South African mining
industry stopped recruiting migrant workers from Malawi because a considerable number had tested positive
for HIV/AIDS, but there were also deeper causes such as the collapse of apartheid and the increased
competition between domestic and foreign workers (Chirwa 1997). Adekayne (1998) argues that, in general,
where expulsion orders were promulgated against immigrants or where recruitment stops were imposed,
these were typically a response to worsening employment conditions.
5
See, for example, Oucho 1996, pp. 12, 44. Migration self-selected by age in the past too. Between
1868 and 1910, young adults aged 15-40 accounted for an enormous 76 percent of the immigrant totals, at a
time when the figure for the United States population was only 42 percent (Hatton and Williamson 1998, p.

6

Most migrants within Africa view their migration as temporary. Surveys of these
migrants indicate that most intend to return to their rural (or, increasingly, urban) origins within a
few years or upon retirement from the labor force. Most migrants send remittances back to their
families in their homelands. Indeed, these remittances have been estimated to account for 10-20
percent of all family incomes in the major cities (Oucho 1996, pp. 16-17). Findlay and Sow (1998)
studied short and long term migration among rural households in the Senegal River valley in Mali.
Here, remittances were a key element in closing the food deficit in rural households and migrants left
for increasingly long periods with about 40 percent migrating to France. The authors found that the
poorer the family, the more likely its migrants would remain in AfricaCsuggesting that the poverty
constraint affected the choice of destination. They also found that households with previous
emigration experience to France were more likely to send new migrants to FranceCsuggesting that
the friends and relatives effect was also important in determining the direction of those migrations.
Growing restrictions on French immigration in 1974, 1981 and the early 1990s did not stop
migration from the Senegal River Valley. Findlay and Sow observe that AEvery year thousands
continue to find a way into France and thousands more who are discouraged have increasingly turned
to other destinations: Zaire or other central African republics; Abidjan and the plantations of the
Ivory Coast; and other countries of coastal West Africa. In the early 1990s, with increased tightening
of immigration restrictions following the break up of the Soviet Union and its massive east-west
migrations, migrants from this region are increasingly making their way to the US, primarily to New
York and the other east coast cities@ (1998, p. 75).
Clearly, migration pressures have been building up, driven by poverty, opportunity and
previous migration experience; and restrictions in one place have diverted flows elsewhere. Of
course, there are big income gains from rural-urban migration. But African across-border migration
generally involves moving from one poor country to another. Big gains by moving from a low-wage
to a high-wage country are simply not typical of across-border migration within Africa. Thus,

11).

7

despite the pressure to migrate, the gains from international migration within Africa may not be very
great. The biggest gains are to migration out of Africa.

African Refugees

Africa is famous for its refugees. While it has 12 percent of the world=s population, in most
years Africa accounts for more than a third of the world=s stock of refugees living in foreign
countries. Recent events in Liberia, Rwanda, Burundi and Sierra Leone are just the most recent in a
long list of tragic population displacements in response to political upheaval and internecine warfare.
Newspaper headlines tell us almost daily about the scale and horror of related atrocities. But
headlines do not place the size and persistence of the displacements in perspective. Furthermore, little
formal analysis has been done on the correlates of such displacements for Africa as a whole or on
their permanence.
The bulk of the displaced refugees do not leave Africa. Despite press coverage about rising
pressure from African asylum seekers beating on the doors of Europe and America, a tiny proportion
of all African refugees end up outside Africa. Ballpark estimates of the total number of displaced
persons in Africa indicates that these are typically about 2.5 percent of the total African population.
About a quarter of these are displaced across international borders, mainly into neighboring states.
Those living in other countries are better documented since, as asylum seekers, they come under the
scrutiny of the governments of the receiving countries and international organizations such as
UNHCR, and, for the most part, they are accorded official refugee status. During the 1990s the
number of refugees in Africa ranged between 5 and 6 million.
Figures documenting the total stock of refugees are collected (or estimated) each year by the
US Committee for Refugees and published in its World Refugee Survey. Although the numbers are
large they are not as large as might have been expected, and for one simple reason: most refugees
return to their country of origin as soon as possible. UNHCR resettlement and repatriation policies
are aimed specifically to this end. But of the millions of refugees repatriated between 1970 and 1990

8

only about one in ten were returned to their homelands under an organized scheme (Rogge 1994, pp.
17, 29). Indeed, the evidence suggests that refugees often return against the advice of the UNHCR.
Thus at least 100,000 refugees from Burundi returned in early 1994 as soon as the fighting receded
but despite continuing instability in the country (US Committee for Refugees 1994, p. 48). In other
cases, they were pushed back by hostile populations or unwelcoming governments in the receiving
countries, and in a few cases they became refugees from the receiving country. Thus, when civil war
erupted in Zaire in 1996, finally overthrowing the Mobutu regime, an estimated 600,000 to 700,000
Rwandan refugees were pushed back across the border in Aan unusual mixture of voluntary and
involuntary repatriations@ (US Committee for Refugees 1998, p. 84).
The high rates of return are much more common in Africa than elsewhere in the world
(Rogge 1994, p. 21). Even among refugees who remained displaced for long periods, such as those
from southern Sudan (1955-72) or those exiled from Burundi (1972-1993), mass returns took place
as soon as conditions permitted. It has been suggested that political motives, tribal and kinship ties,
and the loss of culture and identity all make refugees keen to return (Makanya 1994). But there may
be a more important motive at work: African refugees, often displaced into rural parts of bordering
states, experience even greater deprivation than they do at home. In many cases the refugees are
detained in camps and are unable to seek or obtain a living in the receiving country.
In order to get a clearer picture of the typical effects of war and upheaval on the creation of
refugees we take advantage of the datasets assembled by Robert Bates from a range of sources (see
Appendix). The dataset on violence contains a variety of variables documenting the incidence of
coups, crises, civil wars, guerrilla campaigns, and invasions from hostile neighbors. We use these
variables to Aexplain@ the stock of refugees from a given country at the end of a given year as
estimated by the US Committee for Refugees (available in the Bates data). The sample we select is
annual data for 1987 to 1992 for 41 countries of sub-Saharan Africa. In these data, there are 142
cases where no refugees are observed and another 104 with positive numbers of refugees. We
therefore use tobit estimation where the dependent variable is the number of refugees per thousand
population, while violence dummies are on the right-hand side.

9

[Table 2 about here]
Table 2 documents strong effects arising from each of the violence variables. Since the righthand side variables are in the form of dummies, the coefficients can be read as the number of
refugees per thousand population created as a result of the violence event in question. The
coefficients in column (1) indicate that coups d=etat typically create an efflux of 45 per thousand
while government crises generate over 20 per thousand. Although government crises are not always
associated with widespread violence, perhaps fear of violence accounts for the surprisingly large
effect on refugee creation. Guerrilla warfare creates nearly 30 refugees per thousand. If that figure
seems low, perhaps it can be explained by the fact that guerrilla campaigns are often protracted
affairs that, once initiated, generate few additional refugees per year. Finally, and predictably, civil
wars generate the largest displacement effects, about 64 refugees per thousand.
These violence events vary greatly in size and intensity, all the more so when scaled by the
size of the country. Equation (2) adds an additional variable that measures the number of military
deaths during the civil war (among the armed forces in the conflict) per thousand of population. The
coefficient indicates that, as a proxy for the intensity of war, one military death is associated with 35
refugees. But even including intensity proxies like this, the pseudo-R2 is still less than 0.1, a low
figure reflecting the enormous heterogeneity in the size and intensity of the upheavals, as well as
their refugee-creating effects.
Although the data used here are crude, in principle they represent the stock of refugees at
any one time rather than, say, the annual or monthly average flow. If refugees remain displaced for a
number of years, even after the end of the conflict or crisis, then lagged values should also matter.
Equations (1) and (2) were estimated with one and two lags of each explanatory variable. The
coefficients on these lags were insignificant and in general they were small. The chi-squared test
decisively rejects the joint significance of all the lags in every case (penultimate lines of Table 2).
Thus, refugee migrations appear to be temporary and quickly reversed.

Explaining Net Emigration in Africa

10

Some Preliminaries
While refugee flows clearly dominate the news, other migrations from and within Africa
receive less attention. One reason is the lack of aggregate data on the magnitude of these population
movements. Across-border movements of migrants or long-term visitors is unsystematically recorded
at best, and for the most part, completely absent.6 Thus we have no usable data on the magnitudes of
gross annual flows from and to the countries of Africa. As a substitute, we use the net migration
estimates produced by the United States Census Bureau and listed in its International Data Base. 7
These estimates were generated as residuals from a demographic accounting exercise rather than from
direct observation. Given that they were constructed from census and survey data, themselves often
of doubtful quality, the US census estimates should be regarded as approximations to the true
underlying migration rates.
In order to take account of refugee flows that are part of the net migration estimates, we
construct a variable for the average refugee movement using the estimates for the refugee stock
examined above. To measure the refugee flow we take the change in the stock of refugees emanating
from a country less the change in the stock of refugees from elsewhere living in that country. This is
expressed per thousand of the country=s population to give it the same dimension as the net migration
estimate. Since, as we have seen, refugees are driven to move by wars and political upheavals, these
must be taken into account if the economic and demographic forces driving migration are to be
clearly revealed.
We also need to take into account certain other policy-induced migration flows --particularly
between Ghana and Nigeria. In the 1970s there was mass migration of Ghanaians into Nigeria. This
followed the collapse of the cocoa economy in Ghana, and the oil export boom in Nigeria that was

6

The United Nations Demographic Yearbooks contain compilations of demographic data, including
international migration, but they contain very few entries for Africa. The ILO=s International Migration
Database (www.ilo.org/public/english/protection/migrant/ilmdb/index/htm) also contains remarkably little
on African migration.
7
Available from the Census Bureau=s website: www.census.gov/ipc/www/idbnew.html.

11

accompanied by expansion in both the manufacturing and service sectors. 8 Under the ECOWAS
treaty relatively free movement of documented migrants was permitted. But only about half the
Ghanaian migrants in Nigeria had legal immigrant status and in 1983 the Nigerian government
ordered the removal of those who had migrated across the porous international border without
obtaining official papers. 9 One estimate puts the number returning in 1983 at 900,000 while a further
90,000 returned following a subsequent order in 1985 (Arhin 1994).
Key explanatory variables in most migration studies are unemployment rates and/or
employment growth B short run factors that influence the timing of migration, and real wages B more
fundamental forces that determine whether a permanent move will take place. We use a new dataset
for purchasing parity adjusted unskilled real wage rates in Africa assembled by Davin Chor and
kindly made available by Richard Freeman (see the Appendix below). These data are used to
construct the foreign to domestic wage ratios relevant to the migration decision. The foreign wage
facing potential migrants in a given country is taken to be the combination of a large weight times
the average wage for the African region in which the country resides (reflecting the incentive to
migrate within Africa) plus a small weight times the average wage in Europe and the United States
(reflecting the incentive to migrate overseas). Employment growth at home is proxied by the rate of
growth of real GDP and that for the region by an index of regional GDP growth.
We also want to include measures reflecting the effects of growing demographic supply-side
pressure on the labor market. In particular, we want to assess the impact of a glut of young workers,
those entering an already-crowded labor market who are also those most likely to migrate. For this
we use the share of the population aged 15-29. This and other demographic variables such as
population density are taken from the Census Bureau=s annual data base. Other variables used in the
analysis, such as the proportion of the population living in urban areas and the proportion of adults

8

Economic developments in Ghana and Nigeria during this period are documented respectively by
Frimpong-Ansah (1992) and Bevan, Collier and Gunning (1999).
9
A similar repatriation in the opposite direction occurred in 1969. Nigerians had migrated to Ghana
during the 1950s and 1960s in response to the cocoa boom. In 1969 the Ghanaian government issued the
Aliens Compliance Order which effectively deported Nigerians equivalent to about 5 percent of the labor
force.

12

who are illiterate, are taken from the Bates data base mentioned earlier. The sources, definitions and
construction of the variables are detailed in the Appendix.

Estimating Net Emigration Behavior in Africa
Our panel includes twenty-one countries covering the years 1977 to 1995, in theory yielding
399 observations. Since many country/periods have missing variables, the resulting dataset contains
only 265 observations. We use pooled regression rather than fixed or random effects estimation, a
choice supported by specification tests. 10 The results suggest that African migrations are driven by
much the same forces documented for late nineteenth century trans-Atlantic migration, and the
elasticities are similar as well.
Equation (1) in Table 3 presents an ordinary least squares specification which explains 53
percent of the variation in this unbalanced panel. Furthermore, the net movement of refugees
explains a great deal of total net out-migration. If the net refugee movement had a one-for-one effect
on net migration, then the coefficient would be one. In fact the coefficient is substantially less than
one. This suggests that refugee inflows generate offsetting movements in the opposite direction. If
those offsetting movements are labor market driven, then this result implies that refugees crowd out
others, and that the crowding out is very significant B for every two refugees, one local is pushed out
of the home labor market. The dummies for 1983 and 1985 are significant for Ghana but not for
Nigeria. The coefficient for Ghana in 1983 implies an inward migration of about a million B broadly
consistent with existing accounts. The coefficient for Nigeria, the much bigger country, suggests an
outward movement of about two million.
[Table 3 about here]
The growth of home GDP enters with a negative sign as expected: good economic
performance in local labor markets keeps potential emigrants at home. The estimated coefficient
implies that a one percent increase in GDP is associated with a decline in net out-migration of 0.5 per
10

Test statistics derived from estimating random effects and fixed effects models are: Hausman
specification test P 2 (9) = 11.36; Breusch/Pagan test for random effects, P 2(1) = 0.84; test for fixed effects

13

thousand. Although positive, the coefficient on regional GDP growth B defined as growth in the
region in which the country resides, and thus as growth in contiguous markets B is very small and
insignificant. Perhaps the variable fails to capture the growth of specific sectors (and countries) in the
region that attracts migrants, but we do not know. Lagging these activity variables proved to be
insignificant as did the lagged dependent variable. Variables such as the rate of adult literacy, life
expectancy and the percentage of the population living in urban areas were all highly insignificant
and so they were excluded from the regression. Regional dummies (east, middle and south) could be
jointly rejected and so these were also excluded.
The two most important influences on net out-migration in equation (1) are the foreign to
domestic wage ratio and the share of the population aged 15-29. Both are positive and significant,
and the two combined explain a very large share of the observed net out-migration, as was true of
European emigration before World War I. Furthermore, a comparison of these relative wage and
demographic effects with those estimated for European emigration before World War I should help
put magnitudes in perspective. Based on panel data for 12 European countries, a rise in the foreign to
home wage ratio by ten percent raised gross European emigration in the late nineteenth century by
0.7 per thousand in the short-run and by 1.3 per thousand in the long run (Hatton and Williamson
1998, p. 47). County level panel data for Ireland indicated that an increase of ten percent in the
foreign to home wage ratio increased late nineteenth century Irish emigration by about 0.7 per
thousand. The Irish data also indicated that an increase in the share of the population aged 15-34 by 5
percentage points increased the emigration rate by between 0.7 and 1.0 per thousand (Hatton and
Williamson 1998, p. 89). These relative wage and demographic effects estimated for the late
nineteenth century European mass migrations are strikingly similar to those estimated for late
twentieth century African migrations in Table 3.
Neither the wage ratio nor the young adult population share can, of course, be taken as
completely exogenous. The rapid growth of labor supply implied by expanding cohorts of young
workers would be expected to push down the unskilled wage at home as well as to expand the share

F (20, 235) = 1.04.

14

of workers most likely to move across the border. As a result, the wage gap effect will be downward
biased as a result of migration itself. Similarly, if emigration is selective of young workers, then, as
a result of migration, their share in the population will be smaller (the reverse for in-migration).
Consequently the coefficient on the demographic variable will also be biased towards zero. In short,
there is reason to think that the OLS-estimated wage and demographic coefficients in equation (1) of
Table 3 are understated.
To attack this problem, equation (2) in Table 3 presents instrumental-variable estimates for
net out-migration. The instrument used for the demographic variable is the proportion of the
population aged 10-14 five years earlier, and those used for the home wage are population density,
the adult illiteracy rate and three regional dummies (see further below). As compared with the OLS
results in equation (1) the coefficient on the wage ratio nearly doubles from 5.4 to 9.3 and that on
the share of population aged 15-29 rises from 2 to 2.6. The coefficient on the relative wage implies
that an increase of ten percent in the foreign to home wage ratio increases out-migration by nearly
one per thousand of the population. The coefficient on the demographic variable indicates that a rise
in the share of the population aged 15-29 from, say, 25 percent to 30 percent would increase net outmigration by 0.26x5 = 1.3 per thousand.
The relative wage effects seem to be sensitive to specification, so it might be worth
exploring these a bit further. Table 4 presents estimates for the log of the real unskilled wage (not the
wage ratio) for the home country using the same set of country/year observations. Since these are
purchasing power parity-adjusted real wage rates, comparison across countries is appropriate. The
results strongly support the view that demographic supply-side pressure pushes down the wage in a
manner reflecting classic diminishing returns. Population density has a negative effect: a rise in
density of 10 persons per km2 depresses the real wage by 2 percent. The share of population aged 1525 is also highly significant and it implies that a one percentage point increase in the share of this
young (and less skilled) age group pushes down the wage by 7.6 percent. When the share of
population aged 15-29 is instrumented using the share aged 10-14 lagged five years (equation 2) the
effect increases to nearly 13 percent. These results imply that the age-earnings relationship is steep in

15

Africa.
[Table 4 about here]
In addition to these effects, adult illiteracy also pushed down the wage with a welldetermined coefficient. A fall in the rate of adult illiteracy by one percentage point increases the real
wage by one percent. The only regional dummy that was significant is that for the south. But this has
a large impact: other things equal real unskilled wages were nearly 40 percent higher in the south
than elsewhere. Why are wages 40 percent higher in the south? Only two countries in the sample fall
into our definition of south: these are Lesotho and Swaziland. Both are enclaves, completely
surrounded by South Africa, and have labor markets which are fairly well integrated with those that
surround them. The 40 percent premium is simply a South African premium. A variable measuring
the percentage of the population living in urban areas had no significant effect on the wage rate. Lest
the reader be surprised by this last result, she should remember that our urban wages are not
economy-wide averages that would include wage rates in formal agricultural employment, earnings
in subsistence agriculture, or urban informal sector earnings.

Measuring Emigration Pressure

African international migration is mostly within low-wage Africa rather than from Africa to
the high-wage developed world. Yet it seems likely that if demographic and economic pressures
continue to mount, some part of it will spill over into African intercontinental migration. We have
no way of measuring directly what such spillover effects might be in the future. However, we can
use our estimate of the determinants of net migration movements from (and to) African countries to
generate a measure of migration pressure. This will allow us to assess what the likely future trends in
emigration out of Africa will be.
Our measure of migration pressure is based on the demographic effects that drive migration,
leaving aside for the moment future economic effects. Estimates of demographic variables and their
forecasts into the future are obtained from two sources. In addition to the information we have used

16

in constructing our data base, the US Census Bureau=s International Demographic Database contains
demographic forecasts for future years on an annual basis. The other source is the United Nations=
World Population Prospects, which provides five-yearly forecasts of a similar set of variables. Both
provide estimates of total population, its structure, and vital rates based on data up to 1995. The
estimates of net out-migration from sub-Saharan Africa that emerge from the demographic
accounting exercises up to 1995 are modest. The Census Bureau=s estimate of net emigration shows a
rising trend to 1.2 per thousand in 1995 while the UN=s estimate is even smaller and shows no trend.
After 1995 the Census Bureau estimate shows declining emigration while that of the UN is almost
constant. However, these forecasts are based on essentially arbitrary assumptions: they do not rely on
some estimated migration equation like those in Table 3.
Insofar as demographic pressure will increase for countries within sub-Saharan Africa, then
(by aggregation) they should increase the pressure for out-migration from sub-Saharan Africa as a
whole. Our measure of migration pressure is derived by applying the values of population density
and the proportion of the population aged 15-29 to the coefficients from equation (2) in Table 3,11
allowing for indirect effects on the wage ratio using equation (2) in Table 4. That is, we allow the
demographic variables to have their impact on the home wage, and thus on the foreign to domestic
wage ratio. Demography thus has two effects: first, by directly influencing emigration via its impact
on the young-adult cohort share; and second, by indirectly influencing the home wage by labor
supply-side effects.
It is unlikely that all the additional migration pressure calculated in this way would appear as
emigration from sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. Intercontinental migration is costly, involves longer
distances, and meets more political restrictions, and these factors would attenuate the degree to which
migration pressure would spill over into migration out of Africa. Similarly, the stock of previous
migrants in non-African countries is still relatively small and so the friends and relatives effect is
likely to be limited. In the decade 1985 to 1995 out-migration from sub
11

Using the instrumental variable estimates the generating equation is:
M = [2.59 + 9.33(0.128)] Share 15-29 + 9.33(0.002) Popn Density, where the variables are each

17

Saharan Africa as a whole was about 10 percent of the sum of out-migration for the individual
countries. We therefore generate measures of migration pressure by assuming out-of-Africa spillover
rates of 5, 10 and 15 percent of the increases in total across-border migration that would be generated
by our reduced-form migration equation.12
We also need to take account of the effects of higher projected rates of emigration on the
size and structure of the remaining population. We do this by means of a simulation using five year
survival ratios calculated from the existing population forecasts for 1995 to 2025. Spillovers to outof-Africa emigration are calculated for each year and these are used to adjust the survivor rates of the
(five year) age groups in the range 15-29 at time t to those in the range 20-34 at time t+5. Births are
also affected since births at t+5 are assumed to depend on the population aged 15-29 at time t.
Moving forward in time, these effects gradually seep through the age structure. At each step the
updated age structure (and the overall size of the population) is used to generate the number for
migration pressure in the next period.13
The figures in the first three columns of Table 5 are based on the Census Bureau=s
demographic forecast. Beginning at 0.7 per thousand (the average for 1993-7) and assuming 10
percent spillover, out-of-Africa migration pressure builds up to 1.8 per thousand by 2025. This
projected out-of-Africa emigration rate, if actually achieved by 2025, would be modest by the
standards of pre-World War I mass migrations: the figure for the 1870s was 2.2 per thousand and for
the 1900s 5.4 per thousand. Under the assumption of 15 percent spillover, the rate reaches 2.4 per
thousand by 2025, about the same as Europe in the 1870s, but still less than half
of Europe=s rate for the 1900s. 14 While these projected out-of-Africa emigration rates are modest by
the historical standards of the pre-World War I decades, they still imply sizeable numbers. Assuming

measured from a base year.
12
Thus we multiply the equation in the previous footnote by 0.05, 0.1 and 0.15 respectively.
13
The effects on the forecast populations are relatively modest since only a small amount of the
migration pressure is allowed to spill out. For spillover rates of 10 percent the populations estimated by the
Census Bureau and the UN underlying the calculations in Table 5 would be each be reduced by 2025 by
about 20 million, or less than 2 percent of the total forecast population, as a result of the hypothesiz`ed
emigration.
14
The European emigration rates are weighted averages, based on twelve emigrating countries and

18

10 percent spillover, out-of-Africa emigrants increase by about 1.5 million between 1995 and 2025;
and with 15 percent spillover they increase by about 2.1 million. These significant increases follow
from the rise in the young adult population share from 27.2 in 1995 to 30.1 in 2025, and the rise in
population density from 24.5 to 44.1 per km2 over the same period.
[Table 5 about here]
Table 5 also reports the calculated out-of-Africa migration pressure using the UN=s medium
variant projection. The base of 0.34 per thousand is the UN's estimate of out-migration in 1995. On
these estimates, the growth of out-of-Africa migration pressure is slightly less than when the Census
Bureau's forecasts are used as the base. This is due to the somewhat smaller increase in the share of
population aged 15-29: from 26.8 percent in 1995 to 29.2 in 2025. As with the Census Bureau's
projection, most of the increase in out-of-Africa migration pressure arrives before 2015 and it levels
out thereafter. The absolute numbers in 2025 range from just under a million with 5 percent
spillover to just under two million with 15 percent spillover. Alternative calculations were made
using the UN's low variant projection and the results are very similar. In that case, out-of-Africa
migration pressure in 2025 ranges from 0.84 million with 5 percent spillover to 1.86 million with 15
percent spillover. Thus, even using conservative demographic projections, there is still a substantial
increase in the demographic pressure on future emigration out of Africa.
These out-of-Africa migration pressures would be greater still in the absence of the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. The demographic forecasts, which were constructed in 1998, anticipate the
effects of the epidemic, which will be to decimate a large proportion of the population increase that
would otherwise occur and, to the extent that it is a young adult disease, to alter the age structure.
The UN=s downward revisions of life expectancy between 1995 and 2000 for 29 countries in subSaharan Africa yield a fall from 54 to 47 years (UN 1999, p. 4). More important to our migration
pressure measure, the population share 15-29 rises by less due to the presence of HIV/AIDS and the
same is true of population density. Predictions of the future demographic impact of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic in Africa are, of course, prone to uncertainty. If, as is happening in Uganda, its spread is

their population weights.

19

controlled early, then the UN population forecasts could be much too low. If, on the other hand, it
spreads rapidly, as in Botswana and South Africa, and is not stabilized quickly, then the UN
projections could be much too high.15

Alternative Economic Scenarios

Between 1973 and 1992 GDP per capita stagnated in Africa, while it grew annually at 2
percent in southern Europe. 16 Thus, the relative gap between southern Europe and Africa rose from
5.6 to 8.2 and the incentive for emigration must have increased accordingly. A 2 percent growth gap
in real wages over 20 years increases the relative wage by nearly 50 percent. Surely, the growing
pressure on Europe's southern borders must be one manifestation of Africa=s falling
behind economically. The wage gaps between Africa and the developed world are now more than
twice as large as those that gave rise to mass migration from Europe to the New World in the late
nineteenth century. Our estimates for the late nineteenth century suggest that increasing the wage gap
by 50 percent would increase the (gross) emigration rate by 3.4 per thousand, other things constant.
Applied to sub-Saharan Africa, that would generate something on the order of 1.8 million additional
emigrants.
The stagnation in African living standards is confirmed by our purchasing power parity
adjusted real wage rates. A weighted index of unskilled wage rates for sub-Saharan Africa indicates
that the real wage was exactly the same in 1995 as it had been in 1976. Our wage equation suggests
one reason for this stagnation: demographic pressure. Using the coefficients from equation (2) in
Table 4, we calculate that growing demographic pressure reduced the real wage by 17 percent over
this period. Capital accumulation (physical and human) together with technical progress was only
sufficient (0.8 percent per year) just to offset the effects of downward demographic pressure on the

15

Caldwell (2000) argues that more active government intervention could bring HIV/AIDS under control
more quickly.
16
Among the many recent papers on Africa=s growth failure, see three: Bloom and Sachs (1998), Collier and
Gunning (1999), and Deaton (1999).

20

wage.
If the real wage in the developed OECD countries grows at the same rate up to 2025 as it did
from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s (1.35 percent per year), then it will be 40 percent higher by
2025. Based on the UN=s medium projection, demographic pressure alone will reduce the wage in
sub-Saharan Africa by about 40 percent. Thus, African labor productivity would need to grow at 2.7
percent per annum in order to keep the emigration incentive constant. If African labor productivity
growth just kept pace with demographic pressure, then there would still be additional migration
pressure coming from the OECD-growth-induced expanding wage gap. Giving OECD wages as little
as a 10 percent weight in the foreign wage construction for African countries, this would generate
additional migration pressure of 0.31 per thousand by 2025, or about 140 thousand migrants B other
things equal. A higher weight would raise the figure accordingly B other things equal.
But other things are not equal now, nor will they be in the future. Immigration restrictions
are tight, although they are clearly not as effective as governments in Europe and
America would like. In addition, the so-called friends and relatives effect which operated so
powerfully in the nineteenth century -- as previous immigrants drew new immigrants across the
Atlantic -- is weaker now, given that the stock of African emigrants in high-wage OECD countries is
still relatively small. But this just means that a trickle now could become a flood later as the migrant
stock grows. It might also be true that many Africans are constrained from long-distance emigration
by poverty. But poverty and low income were also features of late nineteenth century Europe.
Insofar as the poverty trap did operate, it was released for many migrants by the friends and relatives
effect, manifested by remittances homeward, help with job search abroad, and rising exploitation of
family reunification loopholes in immigrant restrictions. If these forces are still important, as seems
likely, they suggest that emigration out of Africa could cumulate further into the future more than
our measures of migration pressure imply.
Rapid economic development in Africa would stem this migration pressure. Over the last 20
years structural adjustment programs (SAPs) launched in a number of countries by international
organizations like the World Bank have aimed at doing just that. Assessments of the results vary.

21

While some observers claim that they have seen some success, others are less sanguine. In any case
the effects on labor demand seem to have been modest. In the case of Ghana, an SAP pioneer since
1983, the economic performance since the mid-1980s has been described as Ajobless growth.@ A
recent United Nations report suggests that while job cuts in government and in state owned
enterprises have depressed the labor market in Ghana, the benefits of economic liberalization have
done little to raise wages and incomes elsewhere, or to alleviate poverty (UN 1997, pp. 45, 61).
SAP programs typically include the realignment of overvalued exchange rates and the
liberalization of restrictions on trade in the hope that the gains from trade will help lever up living
standards. Indeed the basic 2 by 2 Heckscher-Ohlin trade model suggests that opening an economy to
trade will raise the income of the relatively abundant factor in that country. Thus trade could be a
substitute for migration. But generalizations of this model which include more factors, specific
factors (such as land), or differences in technology, generate ambiguous results. Furthermore,
history confirms theory: evidence from the Atlantic economy between 1870 and 1940 suggests that
trade and migration were not substitutes (Collins, O=Rourke, and Williamson 1999)
Although the long-term deterioration in Africa=s terms of trade driven by declining primary
goods prices identified by Angus Deaton (1999) might be reversed, trade liberalization seems
unlikely to have significant effects in stemming migration pressure. A recent general equilibrium
analysis of trade policies for low income countries like those in sub-Saharan Africa by Riccardo
Faini, J-M. Grether and Jaime de Melo (1999) supports that view. The results from policy
simulations of their multisectoral model are that trade liberalization by the low income country
generates increased emigration because of the sharp fall in the real exchange rate. On the other hand,
agricultural trade liberalization by developed countries, or worldwide liberalization, would tend to
stem the flow of emigrants.
In a previous paper (Hatton and Williamson 2000), we have elaborated in more detail the
possible economic scenarios for Africa, and traced out their emigration implications. Like others, we
reach a pessimistic conclusion about the likelihood of rapid African growth in the near future. If the
income gap between Africa and the OECD continues to increase then this will add further fuel to

22

out-of-Africa migration pressure, pressure which may continue long after those driven by
demographic forces have eased.

Conclusion

The two underlying fundamentals that drove European emigration in the late nineteenth
century were the size of real wage gaps between sending and receiving regions -- a gap that gave
migrants the incentive to move, and demographic booms in the low-wage sending regions -- a force
that served to augment the supply of potential movers. These two fundamentals are even more
prominent in Africa today, and Africans seem to be just as responsive to them as were Europeans a
century ago. Although this is no longer an age of Afree@ intercontinental migration, our new estimates
of net migration for the countries of sub-Saharan Africa suggest that exactly the same forces are at
work driving African across-border migration today. Rapid growth in the cohort of young potential
migrants, population pressure on the resource base, and poor economic performance are the main
forces driving African emigration. In Europe a century ago, more modest demographic increases
were accompanied by strong catching-up economic growth in low-wage emigrant regions.
Furthermore, the sending regions of Europe eventually underwent a slowdown in demographic
growth serving to choke off some of the mass migration. Yet, migrations were still mass. Africa
today offers a contrast: economic growth has faltered, its economies have fallen further behind the
leaders (no catch up here), and there will be a demographic speed up in the near future (no slow
down here). Our estimates suggest that the pressure on African emigration will intensify, including a
growing demand for entrance into high-wage labor markets of the developed world. Indeed, there is
an excellent chance that by 2025 Africa will record far greater mass migrations than did nineteenth
century Europe. The demographic unknown in this equation is, of course, African success in
controlling the spread of the HIV/AIDS. If it is controlled early, then these emigration predictions
are more likely to prevail. If it spreads rapidly, then some, but not all, of the emigration pressure
will subside.

23

Appendix: Data Sources
Refugees
Stock of refugee data by country of origin and destination were taken from the Robert Bates datafiles
for 46 sub-Saharan countries, available at http:www.gov.harvard.edu/rbates/data. These series were
supplemented from the original source, World Refugee Survey, published annually by the US
Committee for refugees. The dataset on violence also contains dummy variables for coups, crises,
civil and guerrilla wars which were used in the analysis of refugee movements. The dataset omits
South Africa and we also excluded the islands around Africa.
Net Migration
Net migration series were taken from the US Census Bureau=s on-line demographic aggregation at:
www.census.gov/ipc/www/idbnew.html. We eliminated country-years where either no data or
strings of zeros are given. The final dataset was further constrained by lack of wage data for some
country years (see below). The final dataset of 265 observations comprises: Angola, 1982-95;
Burkina Faso, 1986-95; Burundi, 1980-95; Cameroon, 1980-95; Central African Republic, 198995; Chad, 1980-95; Côte d=Ivoire, 1989-95; Gabon, 1977-90; Ghana, 1977-95; Lesotho, 1981-90;
Malawi, 1987-95; Mali, 1987-95; Nigeria, 1977-95; Rwanda, 1979-95; Senegal, 1989-95; Sierra
Leone 1991-5; Sudan, 1984-95; Swaziland, 1978-95; Togo, 1982-93; Zambia, 1981-95; and
Zimbabwe, 1983-95.
Real Wages
Unskilled real wage rates at 1990 purchasing power parities come from a larger international dataset
made available by Richard Freeman. The data are compiled from wage rates and earnings for a wide
range of specific occupations reported annually by the International Labor Organization. These are
adjusted for differences in measurement and coverage (see Freeman and Oostendorp 2000; Chor
2000). Wage indices for Sub-Saharan African were compiled from these series by Davin Chor. We
construct the foreign wage rate for a given African country as a combination of the average wage of
other countries in the same region (weighted by population in 1990) for four regions, west, east

24

middle and south, and an unweighted average of principal developed countries which receive
migrants from Africa. These countries are: Belgium, France, Germany, Spain, Sweden, Italy,
United Kingdom and United States. The wage indices for these were taken from Williamson (1995),
updated to 1995 using the same sources, and converted to purchasing power parities of 1990. The
unweighted average of these developed country wage rates is given a weight of 0.1 in the foreign
wage index for each African country.
Other Data
Indices of real GDP growth were taken from the Bates file of economic data. Regional GDP growth
was calculated as an a weighted average of rates of growth by country with 1990 population weights
for the four regions, west, east, middle and south. Data on population and age structure used in the
regression analysis was taken from the US Census Bureau=s database which provides annual data.
This source also contains annual demographic forecasts used to assess migration pressure. Other
variables, such as the proportion of the adult population who were illiterate and the share of the
population living in urban areas, were taken from the Bates data base.

25

References

Adams, R. H. (1993), AThe Economic and Demographic Determinants of International Migration in
Rural Egypt,@ Journal of Development Studies, 30, pp. 146-167.
Adekayne, J. >Bayo (1998), AConflicts, Loss of State Capacities and Migration in Contemporary
Africa,@ in R. Appleyard (ed.), Emigration Dynamics in Developing Countries, Vol 1: SubSaharan Africa, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Adepoju, A. (1994), APreliminary Analysis of Emigration Dynamics in Sub-Saharan Africa,@
International Migration, 32, pp. 197-216.
Adepoju, A. (1995), AMigration in Africa,@ in J. Baker and T. A. Aina (eds.), The Migration
Experience in Africa, Stockholm: Nordiska Africainstitutet.
Addo, N. O. (1987), APopulation, Migration and Employment: The Case of Ghana,@ in H. Jemai
(ed.), Population et Developpment en Afrique, Dakkar: CODESRIA.
Akande, J. (1998), AInternational Legal Treaties and Instruments Relating to Migration in SubSaharan Africa,@ in R. Appleyard (ed.), Emigration Dynamics in Developing Countries, Vol
1: Sub-Saharan Africa, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Arhin K. (1994), AThe Re-accommodation of Ghanaian Returnees from Nigeria in 1983 and 1985,@
in T. Allen and H. Morsink (eds.), When Refugees Go Home, London: Africa World Press.
Bevan, D. L., Collier, P. and Gunning, J. W. (1999), Nigeria and Indonesia: The Political
Economy of Poverty, Equity and Growth, Washington: Oxford University Press.
Bloom, D. E. and Sachs, J. D. (1998), AGeography, Demography and Economic Growth in Africa,@
Brookings Papers in Economic Activity, 2, pp. 207-273.
Caldwell, J. C. (2000), ARethinking the African Aids Epidemic,@ Population and Development
Review, 26, pp. 117-135.
Chirwa, W. C. (1997), A>No Teba,....Forget Teba@: The Plight of Malawian Ex-Migrant Workers
to South Africa,@ International Migration Review, 31, pp. 628-654.
Chor, H. P. D. (2000), ASkilled and Unskilled Wages in a Globalizing World: New Cross-

26

Country Evidence (1968-1998),@ Senior Honors Thesis, Harvard University.
Collier, P. and Gunning, J. W. (1999), AWhy Has Africa Grown Slowly,@ Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 13, pp. 3-22.
Collins, W., O=Rourke, K. and Williamson, J. G. (1999), AWere Trade and Factor Mobility
Substitutes in History?@ in R. Faini, J. de Melo and K. F. Zimmermann (eds.), Migration:
The Controversies and the Evidence, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Deaton, A. (1999), ACommodity Prices and Growth in Africa,@ Journal of Economic Perspectives,
13, pp. 23-40.
Findlay, S. and Sow, S. (1998), AFrom Season to Season: Agriculture, Poverty and
Migration in the Senegal River Valley, Mali,@ in R. Appleyard (ed.),
Emigration Dynamics in Developing Countries, Vol 1: Sub-Saharan Africa,
Aldershot: Ashgate.
Faini, R., Grether, J-M. and de Melo, J. (1999), AGlobalisation and Migratory Pressures from
Developing Countries: A Simulation Analysis,@ in R. Faini, J. de Melo and K. F.
Zimmermann (eds.), Migration: The Controversies and the Evidence, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Freeman, R. B. and Oostendorp, R. H. (2000), AWages Around the World: Pay Across Occupations
and Countries,@ NBER Working Paper 8058, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Mass. (December).
Frimpong-Ansah, J. H. (1992), The Vampire State in Africa: The Political Economy of Decline in
Ghana, London: Africa World Press.
Harris, J. R. and Todaro, M. P. (1970), AMigration, Unemployment and Development: A Two
Sector Analysis,@ American Economic Review, 60, pp. 126-142.
Hatton, T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (1998), The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and
Economic Effects, New York: Oxford University Press.
Hatton, T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (2000), AOut of Africa: Using the Past to Project Future African
Demand for Emigration,@ paper presented to the conference on Globalization: Trade,

27

Financial and Political Economy Aspects, Delphi, Greece (May 24-26, 2000).
Lucas, R. E. B. (1985), AMigration Among the Batswana,@ Economic Journal, 95, pp. 385-382.
Makanya, S. T. (1994), AThe Desire to Return,@ in T. Allen and H. Morsink (eds.), When Refugees
Go Home, London: Africa World Press.
Milazi, D. (1998), AMigration within the Context of Poverty and Landlessness in Southern Africa,@
in R. Appleyard (ed.), Emigration Dynamics in Developing Countries, Vol 1: Sub-Saharan
Africa, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Oucho, J. (1996), Urban Migrants and Rural Development in Kenya, Nairobi: University of Nairobi
Press.
Rogge, J. R. (1994), ARepatriation of Refugees,@ in T. Allen and H. Morsink (eds.), When Refugees
Go Home, London: Africa World Press.
United Nations, Population Division (1999), World Population Prospects: The 1998 Revision,
Washington: United Nations.
United Nations, Development Programme (1997), Ghana Human Development Report, Accra:
United Nations.
United Nations, Population Division (1997), Demographic Yearbook, Washington: United Nations.
United States Committee for Refugees (1994, 1998), World Refugee Survey, Washington: USCR.
Williamson, J. G. (1995), AThe Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1930: Background
Evidence and Hypotheses,@ Explorations in Economic History, 32, pp. 141-196.
Zlotnik, H. (1998), AInternational Migration, 1965-96: An Overview,@ Population and Development
Review, 24, pp. 429-486.

28

Table 1
US Immigrants (Excluding Canadians) by Source and Period, 1955-1997
(in percent)
Region
Europe
Asia
Oceania
Africa
South America

1955-64
78.3
12.0
0.6
1.1
8.0

1965-74
49.3
37.1
1.2
2.5
9.9

1975-84
20.2
65.2
1.2
3.6
9.9

1985-94
21.2
61.9
1.0
5.0
11.0

1995-97
25.4
54.1
0.9
9.3
10.3

Source: US Immigration and Naturalization Service, Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service 1997 (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1997), p. 20.
Notes: More than one-third of US immigration is Canadian, and the figures here exclude them.
Columns may not add to 100 percent due to rounding.

Table 2
Tobit Estimates of Number of African Refugees per 1000 Population
(annual data, 1987-92, 41 countries)
Eq. (1)
-46.65
(7.05)
44.96
(2.94)
21.36
(2.01)
28.69
(3.39)
63.73
(6.29)
0.08
-604.33
1.02
1.08
246

Constant
Coups d=Etat
Government Crises
Guerrilla Warfare
Civil War
Military Deaths in Civil War
Pseudo-R2
Log Likelihood
Restrictions, 1 lag (P
P 2(4,5))
Restrictions, 2 lags (P
P 2 (8,10))
Number of observations
Note: >t= statistics in parentheses.

29

Eq. (2)
-32.36
(4.75)
35.74
(1.89)
18.32
(1.89)
25.23
(3.29)
35.35
(2.88)
35.36
(4.40)
0.07
-595.64
2.19
2.01
246

Table 3
Determinants of African Net Out-Migration (per thousand population)
(unbalanced panel, 21 countries, 1977 to 1995)
Eq. (1) OLS
-55.48
(3.38)
5.42
(2.88)
2.01
(3.22)
-0.51
(3.46)
0.02
(0.11)
0.48
(11.95)
-88.18
(5.81)
-32.36
(2.14)
26.50
(1.77)
15.73
(1.05)
0.53
265

Constant
Log Wage Ratio (foreign/home)
Share of Population aged 15-29
Growth of GDP per capita at home
Growth of GDP per capita in region
Net Refugee Outflow (per 1000 popn)
Dummy: Ghana, 1983
Dummy: Ghana, 1985
Dummy: Nigeria, 1983
Dummy: Nigeria, 1985
R2
Number of Observations
Note: >t= statistics in parentheses.

30

Eq. (2) IV
-73.18
(3.42)
9.33
(2.37)
2.59
(3.07)
-0.55
(3.67)
0.06
(0.25)
0.47
(11.55)
-94.56
(5.95)
-37.84
(1.87)
28.33
(1.87)
15.16
(1.14)
0.51
265

Table 4
Determinants of the Log of Unskilled Real Wages
(unbalanced panel, annual data, 1977 to 1995)
Eq. (1) OLS
2.631
(4.93)
-0.002
(5.70)
-0.076
(4.00)
-0.010
(4.87)
0.392
(3.83)
0.33
265

Constant
Population per Square Kilometer
Percentage of Population Aged 15-29
Percentage of Adult Population Illiterate
Dummy: Southern Africa
R2
Number of Observations
Note: >t= statistics in parentheses.

31

Eq.(2) IV
4.061
(6.06)
-0.002
(5.07)
-0.128
(5.33)
-0.011
(5.33)
0.387
(3.73)
0.31
265

Table 5:
Calculation of Pressure on Emigration Out of Sub-Saharan Africa

Year
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025

US Census Bureau Demographic Projection
Emigration
Emigration
Emigration
spillover =
spillover =
spillover =
5%
10%
15%
Per Thousand Population
0.70
0.70
0.70
0.82
0.94
1.07
0.97
1.23
1.49
1.13
1.54
1.94
1.25
1.78
2.30
1.29
1.87
2.45
1.26
1.83
2.40
Absolute Number (Millions)
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.54
0.62
0.70
0.72
0.91
1.10
0.92
1.25
1.57
1.11
1.58
2.03
1.26
1.81
2.36
1.34
1.91
2.50

UN Demographic Projection Medium Variant
Emigration
Emigration
Emigration
spillover =
spillover =
spillover =
5%
10%
15%
Per Thousand Population
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.48
0.61
0.75
0.65
0.96
1.21
0.77
1.19
1.58
0.81
1.25
1.68
0.81
1.27
1.74
0.81
1.30
1.80
Absolute Number (Millions)
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.31
0.39
0.48
0.47
0.69
0.90
0.62
0.95
1.26
0.72
1.11
1.49
0.80
1.25
1.70
0.88
1.40
1.92

Source: Calculations are based on demographic projections using the demographic coefficients from equation (2) in Table
1 and equation (2) in Table 2. The predictions are based on the reduced form migration equation, assuming that 5, 10 or
15 percent of additional migration pressure spills over into emigration from Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. The survival
rates, calculated from the existing demographic projections, are adjusted to take account of the higher levels of outmigration. Births are also scaled down so that the ratio of births to population aged 15-29 five years previously, is held
constant.

