$







  

      
 
 
 


 !"#%&'(
)**#+,,---.!/.,#"#0,-%&'(



$    
&1'1 "00"2)30**0 4!3
"5/ 6
17&(%
"2)

 
           
     
           !  "
          
 # $ %   
&'(  ) *   +   ",  " ! , 
' - ! "      ,  &  ,     

)2*0 5 5 *0"!6*)8 2)"!0!8"0"!6 !25
5!5"8"66"5 8 0

$ !"# .%&'(
"2)711&
  . (




"88*)-8"50*)"*- 5#85!*663 !*)&991:0* 58 5 *05"
#0!**)0 !8"*0*/"5#"0*#8 2.) 0#"#;#"!60!-)"* 0!-!"/3**) 0
5#*"!*-8"55"03/;#8 * !*)#6 2* !05"!6

2)"8#380

<&999=*0* 5"**)2*0* 58 5 *0!-8"305#85!*8"/03##8"! !0"!6
!25"5!5"8)"66"5 8 0.038*0/"06!6"*"5*) "2)3!*#38"* !
34030**)"** 58 5 *0)"4)"6 5#*"!*2*0!-8"30"!6-"223!* !
"/3*! )*)*)628 ! !-8"30"!6"/3*>#2!**) 0 !5#85!*0 !2
&99(.))"4)"6!0 !  2"!*2*!"! !0 !25)-4.)"!"80 0"800)-0
*)"**)2882* 42*0*)50)"4)"6 5#*"!* 5#"2*0!5#85!*"!68"/
03##8.3*)5 * 6!*  0*)"!6 !25";6 *< ="0"#"* 238"8 5#*"!*
2!* /3**/*)*)2!*62"0 !-8"30"!6*)2!* !2"0 !5#85!*8"/
03##8"!6"! !0.


#"*5!*8 2*36 0
(7'13/8 28 2$3 86 !

?1' 8"6 4!3
0 !80 9119'&@'@
5" 8+AB328".63
<(&1=%7'&9@1<4 2=
<(&1=71@1((><";=

I. Introduction
Of all of the welfare reforms that were implemented during the 1990's, time limits
may represent the single greatest break from past policy. Prior to welfare reform, poor
single-parent families with at least one child under age 18 were entitled to receive cash
assistance under the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program. Since
AFDC was replaced by the Temporary Aid to Needy Families (TANF) program
following the passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Restoration
Act (PRWORA) in late 1996, eligibility for cash aid has become time-limited. Families
generally may receive federally-funded benefits for no more than 60 months during their
lifetimes. Indeed many states have imposed even shorter time limits.
Although early evidence from administrative caseload data suggested that time
limits had little effect on welfare use1, Grogger and Michalopoulos' (2000; hereafter,
GM) analysis of data from a Florida welfare reform demonstration found them to have
substantial effects. This discrepancy was studied by Grogger (2000), who showed it
could be explained largely by two factors: the relatively restrictive controls for policy
endogeneity that were employed in the caseload studies, and the implicit assumption
maintained in the caseload studies that the effects of time limits were invariant with
respect to the age of the youngest child in the family.
The effects of time limits should vary by the age of the youngest child in the
family for a simple reason. Although all families receive the same time limit, or benefit
stock, when time limits are initially imposed, they have different horizons over which to
allocate those benefits. The reason for this is that eligibility for aid under TANF, as
under AFDC, ends when the youngest child in the family turns 18. Thus families with

younger youngest children have longer eligibility horizons than families with older
youngest children. Among forward-looking families facing both wage uncertainty and
credit market constraints, families with younger children have longer horizons over
which their fixed stock of benefits could be used to cushion adverse wage shocks.
Therefore they should be more reluctant to utilize benefits today, preferring to preserve
their benefits for the future (GM). Thus, once time limits are imposed, families with
younger youngest children should be less likely to use welfare than families with older
youngest children.
However, there is one group that is unaffected by time limits: families whose
youngest children exceed a threshold age, which is 13 in the case of the federal five-year
time limit. A family whose youngest child is 13 or older has five or fewer years
remaining before its youngest child turns 18 and renders the family categorically
ineligible for aid. For families whose youngest children exceed the threshold age, time
limits amount to a non-binding constraint.
GM's model shows that time limits should decrease welfare use, increase
employment, and increase work, in each case by the greatest amount among families with
the youngest children. In this paper I exploit these predictions to estimate the effects of
time limits on a wide range of welfare and labor market outcomes. Although both GM
and Grogger (2000) find time limits to have important effects on welfare use, analyses of
welfare use alone provide only one piece of the information that is necessary to assess the
success of this important welfare reform. Beyond welfare use, it is important to
understand the effects of time limits on such outcomes as employment, labor supply,
earnings, and family income in order to better assess the success of this important policy
.1 See Council of Economic Advisors [CEA] (1997); CEA (1999), and Ziliak, et al. (1997).
2

measure. In this paper I estimate how time limits affect these various measures of
behavior among female-headed families.
Although the primary goal of this paper is to estimate the effects of time limits on
welfare use, work, and income, I also contribute to the literature on the effects of other
anti-poverty measures, particularly the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). The EITC
provides a wage subsidy to the lowest-income workers. Once a worker's earnings exceed
a threshold that depends on the subsidy rate and the maximum credit, the EITC
effectively provides a lump-sum transfer. Once earnings exceed a further threshold, the
credit is phased out until it reaches zero at the break-even level of earnings. In recent
years, the subsidy rate, the maximum credit, and the beginning of the phase-out range
have been increased substantially.2
Research has shown that the expansions of the EITC have substantially increased
the employment of female family heads (Eissa and Liebman 1996; Dickert, Houser, and
Scholz 1995; Meyer and Rosenbaum 1999; Ellwood 2000). To date, however, there have
been no direct estimates of the effects of the EITC on welfare use, and no estimates at all
of the effects of the EITC on earnings or income.3 I provide such estimates here.
In the next section, I discuss the data that I analyze. Following that, I describe a
number of identification issues that arise and how I attempt to solve them in estimating
the effects of time limits. Results follow in section IV. In section V I present some
estimates of the extent to which time limits, other welfare policies, the EITC, and the
business cycle explain the recent decline in welfare use and increase in work among

2

Hotz and Scholz (2000) provide detailed descriptions of the EITC and its recent expansions.
Dickert, Houser, and Scholz (1995) provide indirect estimates by using observed wages and EITC
parameters to construct a net wage measure, then estimating the effect of net wages on welfare use.
3

3

female-headed families. I conclude by noting that the different policy changes appear to
have affected different aspects of behavior.
II. Data
A. Welfare and Labor Market Data from the CPS
Data from the March CPS provide the key pieces of information required to
estimate age-dependent effects of time limits: information on welfare utilization and
labor market outcomes and information on family composition, from which I can
determine the age of the youngest child. I use data from all March CPS surveys fielded
between 1979 and 2000. Since the welfare utilization measure and labor market
outcomes are constructed from questions about the family's sources of income over the
previous calendar year, I refer to the data by the year to which the information pertains,
rather than by the survey year. Therefore the sample period extends from 1978 through
1999.
My unit of observation is the family. I limit the sample to female-headed families
because female-headed families are the primary target for cash aid under U.S. welfare
law. They accounted for 90 percent of all cash welfare expenditures and constituted 93
percent of the families using welfare in 1993 (Committee on Ways and Means 1994).
Restricting the sample in this way may give rise to a type of sample selection bias
because time limits, and welfare reform generally, may alter marriage and childbearing
incentives in a way that changes the composition of the women who constitute the
population of female family heads. Some researchers have dealt with this issue by
studying the effect of welfare reform on the entire population of women rather than
female heads of families (Moffitt 1999; Schoeni and Blank 2000). Although this

4

approach clearly solves the sample selection problem, it introduces a parameter
heterogeneity problem, which is another type of specification error.
The parameter heterogeneity problem arises because both married and childless
women are ineligible for welfare. Thus, none of the welfare reform variables affects their
welfare use or labor market behavior. Put differently, in a regression of welfare use or
labor market outcomes on welfare reform measures, all of the welfare reform coefficients
should equal zero for married women. Since women who are ineligible for welfare
outnumber those who are eligible, analyzing the effect of welfare reform on all women
could lead one to conclude that welfare reform had little or no effect on behavior, even if
its effect on eligible women were substantial.
Perhaps the ideal way to solve this "targeting" problem (Ellwood and Bane 1985)
would be to fit a sample selection model that predicted whether a woman was a female
family head and then use those predictions to obtain consistent estimates of the effects of
welfare reform from the sample of female-headed families. However, this approach
would require an instrumental variable, that is, a variable that predicted female headship
but did not predict welfare use or labor market behavior conditional on headship.
Lacking any plausible candidates for such an instrument, it may be useful to discuss the
bias that is likely to result from limiting the analysis to female-headed families.
Moffitt and Pavetti (1999) have noted that time limits reduce the generosity of the
welfare system, and as such may result in fewer women forming female-headed families,
either by increasing marriage or reducing out-of-wedlock childbearing. Presumably, the
women who are induced to marry (or forego out-of-wedlock childbearing) as a result of
time limits are the most "marriageable" of those at risk of female headship. If

5

marriageability and labor market productivity are positively correlated, then the women
who compose the population of female family heads after the imposition of time limits
will be more welfare-prone, and less work-prone, than the women who compose the
population of female family heads prior to time limits. In other words, the composition
effect that results from time limits may actually cause welfare utilization among femaleheaded families to rise, and their employment and labor supply to fall, all else equal,
since the women with the best non-welfare alternatives are no longer observed as female
family heads. Thus the sample selection problem may lead me to understate the effects
of time limits on welfare use and labor market behavior.
The top panel of table 1 plots recent trends in many of the outcome variables that
I analyze below. Over the full 1978-1999 sample period, 30 percent of female-headed
families used welfare on average. The welfare utilization rate has fallen greatly in recent
years, however. After peaking at 33 percent in the early 1990's, it fell to 15 percent by
1999. This 55 percent decline corresponds reasonably well to figures from administrative
data, which show a decrease of 49 percent between fiscal 1994 and fiscal 1999 and a 59
percent decrease between fiscal 1994 and June 2000 (Administration for Children and
Families, 2000).
At the same time that welfare use was falling, employment and labor supply were
rising. Employment rose by 14 percentage points, or 20 percent, from 1993 to 1999. 4
Weeks worked rose by 7.2 weeks per year, or 24 percent, over the same period.
The family head's earnings and family income, both measured in constant 1998
dollars, rose as well. Earnings increased by over $4260, or 35 percent, between 1993 and

4

These figures are similar to those reported by Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999).

6

1999. Income rose by $4240, suggesting that, on average, the income losses due to
decreased welfare utilization were just offset by increases in labor market earnings.
An important question is, what roles did welfare reform, the business cycle, and
other factors play in these substantial changes in welfare and labor market outcomes?
Assessing the contributions of these various factors to the decline in the welfare caseload
has been a central focus of the caseload literature on welfare reform.5 Below I present
similar calculations for a broader range of outcomes. In the next section I describe the
explanatory variables that I use to measure these effects.
B. Determinants of Welfare Use
To estimate the effects of time limits and distinguish the effects of time limits
from the effects of welfare reform more generally, I utilize state-level variation in welfare
reform policy. Such polices vary along two important dimensions. First, states vary
considerably as to when they initiated welfare reform. Although PRWORA became
effective in October, 1996, many states had received waivers prior to the passage of
PRWORA that allowed them to adopt welfare reforms similar to those that would be
adopted later under PRWORA.
The first row of panel B in Table 1 shows such variation in timing by reporting
the number of states first implementing a major statewide welfare reform program for
each year between 1990 and 1999. By this measure, states began serious welfare reform
activities as early as 1992. By the end of 1995, 19 states had implemented some sort of
statewide welfare reform. All states had implemented statewide reform, under either
waivers or TANF, by early 1998.

5

See CEA (1997, 1999); Wallace and Blank (1999); Ziliak, et al. (1997); Moffitt (2000), Schoeni and
Blank (2000).

7

Beyond varying as to the timing of welfare reform, states also varied as to the
bundle of specific policy measures that made up their welfare reform packages. Many
states decreased their benefit reduction rates, which are the implicit tax rates at which
benefits are reduced when welfare families earn labor market income (Blank, Card, and
Robins, 1999). Other popular reforms included work requirements and increased
sanctions for failing to satisfy them (CEA, 1997). The second row of panel B shows that
time limits were first implemented (in Iowa) in 1993; five other states followed suit in
1995. Of the 42 states that implemented time limits in 1996 or 1997, 15 states had
previously implemented a welfare reform program that did not include time limits. I use
this variation to distinguish the effects of time limits from the effects of welfare reform
more generally.6
Panel C of Table 1 shows the growth in two key parameters of the EITC: the
subsidy rate and the maximum credit. Between 1990 and 1999, the subsidy paid to the
lowest-income workers with more than one child rose from 14 to 40 percent; the
maximum credit, expressed in constant 1998 dollars, rose from $1209 to $3734. Since
1996, both the phase-in credit rate and the real value of the maximum credit have been
constant. Beginning in 1991, families with two or more children faced a higher subsidy
rate and a higher maximum credit than families with only one child. I utilize this
between-family-size variation to estimate the effects of the EITC.
Panel D shows recent trends in three other variables that are included in the
regression models below. In real terms, the maximum welfare benefit for a family of
three fell throughout the decade. After falling for some time, the real value of the
6

There is effectively no time limit in Michigan, since the state has announced that it will use state-only
funds to pay for any welfare months in excess of the federal 60-month limit. Vermont continues to operate

8

minimum wage rose beginning in 1997.7 The annual state-level unemployment rate rose
from 1990 to 1992, then fell substantially thereafter.
III. Identification and Estimation
The variation available in the data to estimate the effects of time limits stems from
the variation in the timing and composition of states' welfare reform policies. Using
state-level policy variation to estimate the effects of the policy, however, gives rise to an
important identification issue. If unobservable characteristics of the state's population of
female-headed families both affect welfare use (or labor market outcomes) and the timing
or nature of the state's welfare reform effort, then a regression model that fails to control
for such unobservables could yield biased estimates of the effects of welfare reform
generally and time limits specifically. This "policy endogeneity" problem has received
considerable attention in the caseload literature.
Another problem involves distinguishing the effects of time limits from the
effects of the business cycle. As shown above, unemployment rose until 1992, then fell
sharply. Since these changes in the business cycle occurred at the same time that the
states were implementing welfare reform, it is natural to ask whether their independent
effects can be disentangled.
A similar problem has to do with distinguishing the effects of time limits from the
effects of other provisions of welfare reform. The states did not implement time limits in
isolation, but rather in conjunction with other reforms such as work requirements and
reduced benefit reduction rates. Ideally, one would like to characterize each of the

the welfare program that it implemented under waivers, which does not include a time limit.
7
The minimum wage variable used here is the same as that used in CEA (1999). It is equal to the earnings
from a job paying the minimum wage for 30 hours/week and 50 weeks/year, expressed in constant 1998
dollars.

9

welfare reforms initiated by the states and identify their separate effects. This would
allow one to isolate the effects of time limits from the individual effects of each of these
other reforms.
Characterizing each reform is a difficult enterprise, however, which in
conjunction with significant collinearity issues leads me to take a somewhat less
ambitious approach here. Rather than attempting to distinguish the effects of time limits
from the specific effects of other reforms, I attempt to distinguish the effects of time
limits from the collective effects of other reforms. Essentially, I use the information in
the top row of panel B in Table 1 to code states as having implemented welfare reform or
not, then use the information from the second row in the panel to code states as having
implemented time limits. Thus the question that I address in the regression models below
is whether time limits have a significant (and age-dependent) effect that interacts with the
effect of welfare reform generally.
A further specification issue arises from the possibility that other determinants of
welfare use and labor market outcomes have effects that vary by the age of the youngest
child. The theory in GM indicates that time limits should have age-varying effects on
welfare use and employment; however, nothing about the theory rules out the possibility
that other determinants of welfare use and labor market behavior could have age-varying
effects as well. To avoid attributing to time limits the effects of other factors that may
vary with age, I interact a number of important determinants of welfare use and labor
market outcomes with the age of the youngest child.
My approach to these problems is best explained by way of a regression model,
which is given by:

10

*
yist = βTA Aist
Tst + βT Tst + β R Rst + Eitϕ + Z st γ+ X istδ+ µ st + εist

(1)

for i = 1,...,nst; s = 1,...,S; t = 1,...,N, where yist is the dependent variable for the ith family
in state s at time t; Xist is a vector of family attributes that influence welfare use; and the
data include S states, N time periods, and nst families in the s, t-th state-year cell. The
variable Tst is the time limit variable. For each state, Tst is a "modified dummy" variable
equal to one in all years after time limits are implemented. It is equal to zero for all years
prior to implementation; in the year of implementation, it is equal to the fraction of the
year during which time limits were in effect. The variable Rst is the general welfare
reform variable. For each state, this variable is a modified dummy that is equal to one in
all years after the state first implemented state-wide welfare reform under either waivers
or TANF. It is constructed from the "Any waiver" and "TANF" variables used in both
CEA (1999) and Schoeni and Blank (2000).8
The time limit variable interacts with the age of the youngest child Aist via the
variable Aist* , where Aist* = ( Aist − 13) if Aist < 13 and Aist* = 0 if Aist ≥ 13 .9 With this
specification, the age-dependent effect of time limits on families whose youngest children
are below the threshold age is a function of βTA.10 The model from GM predicts that βTA
should be positive in the welfare use regressions, indicating that families with older
youngest children are more likely to use welfare after time limits are imposed, and
negative in the employment and labor supply regressions, indicating that families with
8

I am grateful to Bob Schoeni for kindly providing me with his data, which I updated with 1999 values.
In preliminary work I also fit the "step-function" specification presented in GM and Grogger (2000). In
those models, families are categorized into age groups and the age-group dummies are interacted with the
time limit dummy. Results from the step-function specification were not as strong as the results from the
"linear-interaction" specification presented here, but in all cases, the linear-interaction specification
provided the superior fit to the data as measured by the adjusted R-square.
9

11

older youngest children should work less once time limits are imposed. Its sign in the
other regressions is not clearly predicted by GM's model.
The effect of time limits on families whose youngest children exceed the
threshold age is given by βT. Because time limits amount to a non-binding constraint for
such families, βT should be zero. The economic logic underlying this prediction suggests
that it should hold for all of the outcomes to be analyzed below.
The variable Eit measures the generosity of the EITC. It varies among families i
at a given time t because subsidy rates and the maximum credit vary by family size.11 In
the regressions reported below, I use the maximum credit to measure the generosity of
the program. Although this does not fully capture the complex effect that the EITC has
on the family's budget constraint (Meyer and Rosenbaum, 1999; Hotz and Scholz, 2000),
this simple specification yields generally similar results as a specification that includes
the subsidy rate as the measure of the EITC's generosity, as well as a specification that
includes both the subsidy rate and the maximum credit. Moreover, it yields estimates that
are similar in an important way to those of Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999), whose
approach arguably does a better job of capturing the complex effects of the EITC on the
family's budget set. I elaborate this point further in section V.
The vector Zst includes other time-varying state-level variables that influence
welfare utilization. These include the (logarithm of the) maximum welfare benefit
payable to a family of three, the (logarithm of the) real minimum wage, and the

10

This implicitly assumes that all states imposed the federal five-year time limit. Since some states
imposed shorter time limits, I discuss in section VI estimates that are based on an age variable that reflects
each state's actual time limit.
11
The EITC measure included in the regressions is based only on the federal program and ignores the tax
credit programs in place in about a dozen states. Measures based on both federal and state programs
yielded very similar results, however.

12

unemployment rate. All of these variables appeared in the CEA (1999) analysis of the
welfare caseload. The vector Xist includes information on the mother's education level,
her age, her race, the number of children in her family, and the age of her youngest child.
The policy endogeneity problem involves the composite disturbance term, which
consists of two independent components: a state-year-specific component µst and an
idiosyncratic component εist. If µst, which captures the unobservable determinants of
welfare use or labor market outcomes that vary between states and over time within a
state, is correlated with the time limit variable Tst, then OLS estimates of equation (1)
may be biased.
Most studies of welfare reform have offered two potential solutions to this
problem. The first is to assume that the state-year error component can be further
decomposed as
µ st = α s + τ t + ν st
where the αs terms are state-fixed effects and the τt terms are period effects. Under the
assumption that the νst terms are independent of the welfare reform variables, adding
state dummies (and year dummies) to the regression model controls for the state-fixed
effects and solves the policy endogeneity problem. The implicit assumption under which
this approach is valid is that the only unobservable determinants of welfare use that
influence welfare reform are time-invariant, varying only between states. If time-varying
unobservables influence the timing of welfare reform, however, then the state-fixed
effects approach may yield inconsistent estimates.
A generalization of this approach allows for state-specific trends, positing that
µ st = α s + θs t + η st .

13

Under the assumption that ηst is uncorrelated with Tst, adding state dummies and statespecific trends to the regression solves the policy endogeneity problem. This formulation
accounts not only for state-specific time-invariant unobservables, but also for statespecific time-varying unobservables that trend smoothly over the sample period. I
generalize this approach in the regression models that I estimate, allowing for quadratic
as well as linear state-specific trends.
I can also generalize my controls for policy endogeneity further, including an
unrestricted set of state-year dummy variables in the model to control for all time varying
unobservables that could be correlated with the timing or nature of the state's welfare
reform effort. The reason is that, due to age dependence, the effects of time limits vary
among families even in the same state and year. Of course, this state-year-fixed effects
estimator also absorbs the effects of all other variables that vary only by state and year.
Since this includes the variables in Zst, such as the unemployment rate, the state-yearfixed effects model can be thought of as providing more general controls for the business
cycle than the state-fixed effects and state-specific trends models. The state-year-fixed
effects model also absorbs the effect of other welfare reforms Rst.
For the same reason, the state-year-fixed effects approach has one important
drawback. Because the time limit variable Tst also varies only by state and year, the stateyear-fixed effects estimator cannot be used to test whether βT = 0, as predicted by GM's
model. Only the estimates from the models that include state-specific quadratic trends
can be used to construct these tests.
Although age dependence in the effects of time limits allows me to pursue more
general controls for business cycle effects and policy endogeneity than could other

14

analysts, age-dependence introduces another issue that need to be addressed. As
discussed above, the effects of other aspects of the environment besides time limits could
depend on age as well. The other reforms could have age-varying effects, as could
welfare benefits and the unemployment rate. Thus I generalize equation (1) below by
allowing the reform variable Rst and all of the variables in Zst to interact with the age of
the youngest child.
I construct these other age interactions using the age of the youngest child Aist
rather than the transformation Aist* . The reason for this is that, whereas theory indicates
that time limits should have no effect on families whose youngest children exceed the
threshold age, no theory imposes any such restrictions on age interactions involving other
variables in the model. This affects the interpretation of the results below in two ways.
First, the "main effect" for the time limit variable, that is, the coefficient on Tst, measures
the effect of time limits on families whose youngest children exceed the threshold age.
The main effect for the other variables, however, measures the effects of those other
variables on families whose youngest children are infants less than one year old. Second,
whereas Aist* is always non-negative, Aist is always non-positive, which affects the sign of
the coefficients on the various age interactions.12
IV. Estimation Results
A. Welfare Use
Regression results for welfare use, employment, and labor supply appear in Table
2. These estimates, and those in Table 3, are based on the specifications that control for
12

In preliminary work I also estimated models that relaxed the restriction that the effects of time limits are
constant in age among families whose youngest children exceed the threshold age. Estimates from this
specification, which is equivalent to an interaction between Tst and Aist, were very similar to the results
presented below.

15

policy endogeneity by including state dummies and state-specific quadratic trends.
Models that include the full set of state-year-fixed effects are discussed in section VI
below.13
The welfare use model in column (1) differs from the specifications reported in
Grogger (2000) in two ways: it is based on a sample that extends through 1999, and it
includes the EITC maximum credit, as discussed above. Including the EITC maximum
credit in the model has little effect on the time limit coefficients. The main time limit
effect is insignificant and the interaction between the time limit and the age of the
youngest child in the family is positive, as predicted by GM's theory. It indicates that the
average family whose youngest child is 10 years old reduces its welfare use by 2
percentage points, relative to families whose youngest children exceed the threshold age,
after time limits are imposed.14 Among families whose youngest child is three, the
average reduction is 6.6 percentage points. These are fairly sizeable effects.
The main effect of reform generally is somewhat larger and more significant than
that reported by Grogger (2000). It indicates that families with infants reduce their
welfare use by 3.7 percentage points, on average, after their state implements any sort of
welfare reform. The age interaction is positive, suggesting that reforms other than time
limits lead to the greatest reductions in welfare use among families with the youngest
youngest children. Indeed, the estimates indicate that other reforms lead families with
youngest children greater than about seven years old to increase their welfare use, on
average. This is plausible because many states reduced their benefit reduction rates as

13

Because the unit of observation in these regressions is the family, whereas most of the key policy
variables vary only by state and year, the standard errors reported here have been corrected for "clustering,"
or possible dependence, among families within state-year cells.
14
The calculation is (10-13)*.0066 = -.0198.

16

part of their welfare reform programs. Unlike many other reform measures, lower benefit
reduction rates actually provide an incentive for families to increase their welfare use, all
else equal, by providing a greater incentive for the family to combine welfare and work
(Blank, Card, and Robins, 2000). The result here is thus roughly consistent with the
evidence from GM that reductions in the benefit reduction rate actually raised welfare use
among families with older youngest children.
The main effect of the EITC maximum credit is negative but insignificant. The
age interaction, however, is quite significant and indicates that the EITC reduces welfare
use the most among families with the oldest youngest children. Together, the coefficients
indicate that a $1000 increase in the maximum credit would reduce welfare use by an
average of 1.5 percentage points among families whose youngest child was three and by
3.1 percentage points among families whose youngest child was ten. To my knowledge,
these are the first direct estimates of the effects of the EITC on welfare utilization. They
suggest that the EITC has been an important factor in reducing welfare use in recent
years.
The effects of benefit levels, minimum wages, and the unemployment rate are
similar to those presented in Grogger (2000). Higher benefits raise welfare use, and this
effect is greatest among families with the youngest children. Higher minimum wages
increase welfare use among families with younger youngest children, but reduce welfare
use among families with older youngest children. Higher unemployment rates increase
welfare use in a manner that is greater for families with younger youngest children than
for families with older youngest children.

17

B. Employment
Like the results for welfare use, the estimated effects of time limits on
employment are also consistent with the simple theory proposed by GM. The time limitage interaction is at least marginally significant and indicates that families with younger
youngest children increase their employment by a greater amount than families with older
youngest children once time limits are imposed. The magnitudes of the estimates imply
that, relative to families with youngest children age 13 or over, families whose youngest
children were three increased their employment by 3.4 percentage points, on average,
whereas families whose youngest children were ten increased their employment by only
one percentage point. These estimates are smaller, both absolutely and relatively, than
the corresponding estimates of the effects of time limits on welfare use; I provide an
interpretation of these differences at the end of section V below. The estimated effect of
time limits on families whose children all exceed age 12 is insignificantly different from
zero, which is consistent with the prediction from GM.
The main effect of other reforms on employment is positive and significant. It
indicates that, collectively, the average effect of reforms other than time limits is to
increase employment by about 2.6 percentage points. There is some evidence that this
effect is actually strongest among families with the youngest children, although the
reform-age interaction is of borderline significance.
The main EITC effect indicates that a $1000 increase in the maximum credit
results in a 3.6 percentage point increase in employment. The age interaction coefficient
is zero to four decimal places and is insignificant. The main effect by itself implies that a
$2000 increase in the maximum EITC credit, such as that enjoyed by multiple-child

18

families between 1993 and 1999, would lead to a 7.2 percentage point increase in
employment among female family heads, an amount that corresponds to 10.4 percent of
the 1993 employment rate. This corresponds well with the findings of Meyer and
Rosenbaum (1999) and Ellwood (2000), both of whom found the EITC to have a sizeable
effect on the employment of single mothers.
Higher welfare benefits appear to decrease employment, at least among families
whose youngest children are 14 or younger. For families with older youngest children,
however, the estimates suggest that higher benefits actually increase employment. This
may be reasonable in light of the dual role played by the maximum welfare benefit. On
the one hand, it indicates the payment received by families with no other income. In this
role, higher benefits should decrease employment. On the other hand, however, for a
given benefit reduction rate, the maximum benefit determines the breakeven income
level. In this role, higher benefits expand eligibility for aid, since families can earn more
income and yet remain eligible for at least a partial benefit payment. This allows more
families to combine work and welfare, potentially increasing employment.
Minimum wages appear to have no significant effect on employment among
female family heads. The main effect of the unemployment rate on employment is
roughly double its effect on welfare use. Whereas a one-percentage-point increase in
unemployment reduces welfare use by about .9 percentage points, it increase employment
by 1.7 percentage points. The age interaction coefficient indicates that the only families
not affected by rising unemployment are those whose youngest children are 15 or older.

19

C. Labor Supply
The main time limit effect in the weeks worked regression in column (3) is
insignificant, which is consistent with the prediction that time limits should have no
effect on families whose youngest children exceed the threshold age. Moreover, the
interaction between age and the time limit variable indicates that time limits have the
greatest positive effect on annual labor supply among families with the youngest
children. This estimate is not significant, however.
At first glance, the insignificant age interaction appears to be at odds with the
prediction from GM's simple model. The result appears sensible, however, if one allows
for a small and fairly intuitive extension to the theory. The transition from welfare to
work involves a period of job search which is not accounted for explicitly by GM's
model. Allowing for search, one could readily imagine that time limits hasten the
process, and lead welfare recipients to take jobs more readily than they would without the
pressure of time limits. If so, then one would expect the typical job to be accepted after
time limits to provide a worse match for the worker, all else equal, than the typical job
accepted prior to time limits. Poorer matches likely would lead to less durable jobs, on
average, which could explain the insignificant effect on weeks worked despite the
significant effect on employment.
In contrast to the effects of time limits, other reforms have significant effects on
labor supply. The main reform coefficient indicates that reforms other than time limit
increase labor supply among families with infants by an average of about 2.4 weeks per
year. Relative to mean weeks worked over the entire sample period, this amounts to an
increase of about 8 percent. This effect is greatest for families with the youngest

20

children, however, and disappears for families whose youngest children are about eleven
years old. Work requirements are an important component of those other reforms; to the
extent that women with young children were the least likely to work while on welfare
prior to reform, one might expect work requirements to have their greatest effects on such
women. In addition, many states increased their funding for child care as part of their
welfare reform packages. Presumably, this would also have its greatest effect on women
with young children.
The main EITC coefficient shows that each $1000 increase in the maximum credit
results in an increase of about 1.2 weeks of work among families with infants, on
average. Although the age interaction is insignificant, it is positive, suggesting that this
effect may be even greater for families with older youngest children. The main effect by
itself implies that a $2000 increase of the EITC maximum credit would have raised labor
supply by about 2.5 weeks, or roughly 8 percent of mean labor supply in 1993. Again,
these results are roughly consistent with the large labor supply effects that Meyer and
Rosenbaum (1999) attribute to the EITC.
The main welfare benefits coefficient shows that higher benefits lead to lower
labor supply, albeit by a marginally significant amount. Moreover, the positive age
interaction shows that any negative effect that exists obtains only for families with young
children. Again, the implied positive effect on families with older children could reflect
the eligibility effects of higher benefits.
The main minimum wage effect is negative and marginally significant, suggesting
that higher minimum wages reduce the labor supply of female family heads. A onepercentage-point rise in the unemployment rate leads to a decrease in labor supply of

21

about half a week among single mothers with infants. This effect is statistically
significant, but it falls among families with older youngest children.
D. Earnings
Regression results for the family head's earnings and total family income are
reported in Table 3. Whereas GM's model provides clear predictions regarding the
effects of time limits on welfare use and work, its predictions regarding earnings and
income are less obvious. It seems unlikely that time limits should have any effect on the
earnings or income of families whose youngest children exceed the threshold age. Their
effects on families whose children are younger are less clear, since earnings involves the
product of labor supply and wages whereas income involves not only earnings but
income from non-labor sources, such as welfare, as well.
Column (1) presents results for which earnings is the dependent variable, whereas
column (2) presents results from a log-earnings regression. The estimates in column (1)
include families with zero earnings, whereas those in column (2) exclude them. Column
(2) captures the effects of the policy variables on families with some labor earnings,
whereas column (1) incorporates the effects that stem from the work/no work decision as
well.
In both specifications, the main time limit coefficients are insignificant, as
expected. However, the age interactions are insignificant as well. Conceivably, this
could result from the effects of time limits on search behavior, as discussed above. If the
jobs accepted in response to time limits are less durable on average than those accepted
previously, then the earnings from such jobs would be lower as well. Moreover, if time
limits hasten job search, then they could have an additional effect on wages. Beyond

22

accepting jobs that provide a poorer match, workers motivated by time limits may accept
lower-paying jobs as well. In other words, time limits may affect earnings by affecting
both labor supply and wages. This could explain why the effects of time limits are even
less significant for earnings than they are for weeks worked.
The main effect of other reforms is marginally significant in the earnings
regression in column (1) and significant at the 5 percent level in the log earnings
regression in column (2). The coefficients indicate that other reforms increase earnings
by $830, on average, which amounts to 6.7 percent of mean earnings in 1993, and by
about 10.2 percent among families with positive earnings. There is little evidence of an
age interaction in the earnings regression in column (1), although the age interaction in
column (2) is marginally significant.
The main EITC effect in column (1) is significant and suggests that each $1000
increase in the maximum credit is associated with an increase in earnings of about $610.
The insignificance of the main EITC effect in column (2) suggests that most of the
increase in earnings stems from increases among families who previously had zero
earnings. The age interactions suggest that such effects increase in the age of the
youngest child in the family, although only the coefficient in column (2) is significant.
The welfare benefit coefficients indicate that higher benefits reduce earnings, at
least for families with children under age 13. Again, this is consistent with the fact that
higher benefits imply higher breakeven levels of income, which in turn could lead to
higher earnings among families combining work and welfare.
Minimum wages appear to have a significant positive effect on earnings, albeit
one that decreases as the age of the youngest child increases. The main effect in the

23

earnings regression is significant, whereas the main effect in the log earnings regression
is not. This suggests that much of the minimum wage effect works through increases in
earnings among families that previously had zero earnings.
The main effects of the unemployment rate on earnings are significant. They
imply that each one-percentage-point increase in the unemployment rate decreases
earnings by $147 overall and about two percentage points among families with positive
earnings. There is a significant age interaction in the log earnings regression but none in
the earnings regression, suggesting that any age interactions are limited to families with
positive earnings.
E. Income
Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 report results from income and log income
regressions, respectively. This is the broadest measure of the family's economic wellbeing that is available in the CPS. None of the time limit coefficients is significant. This
is somewhat surprising in light of previous results. Time limits appear to have strong
effects on welfare use, which presumably reduce welfare income. At the same time,
however, they have smaller effects on employment and apparently no effect on earnings.
By themselves, these results would lead one to expect time limits to have negative effects
on income. The fact that they have no effect suggests that income from other transfer
programs, such as Supplemental Security Income (SSI), or earnings from family
members other than the head, increase to make up the difference.
The main effects of other reforms are positive, suggesting that other reforms raise
income on average among families with infants. The coefficient in the income regression
is insignificant, whereas the coefficient in the log income regression is significant and

24

nearly identical in magnitude to the corresponding coefficient in the log earnings
regression in column (2). The interaction term shows that this effect falls with the age of
the youngest child, however.
The EITC coefficients in the next two rows are completely insignificant,
indicating that expanding the EITC has no net effect on income. This seems plausible,
since the estimates discussed above indicate that EITC expansions decrease welfare use
while increasing work and earnings. Although this interpretation seems reasonable,
however, there may be another explanation for this finding as well. Unlike other sources
of income, which are collected in detail on the March CPS questionnaire, EITC income is
not reported at all. Nor does the CPS ask any questions regarding the receipt of tax
refunds. Families could report their EITC credits as "other" income, but I am aware of no
evidence on the extent to which they do so. Before concluding that the net effect of the
EITC on income is zero, therefore, it seems important to better understand where EITC
income is reported in the CPS, to the extent that it is reported at all.
F. Summary
Given the large number of regression results discussed above, it seems
worthwhile to summarize some of the key findings briefly. One prediction from GM's
model is borne out throughout the results: time limits have no effect on families whose
children exceed the threshold age. Beyond that, time limits appear to have substantial
effects on welfare use. They have somewhat lesser effects on employment. In both
cases, however, the effects of time limits are greatest among families with the youngest
youngest children. The effects of time limits on labor supply and earnings are weaker,

25

which one might expect if time limits lead to hastened job searches that result in poorer
matches and lower wages. Time limits have no significant effect on income.
Other reforms result in reduced welfare use, increased employment, increased
labor supply, and greater earnings and income, at least among those with positive
earnings and income. The EITC appears to have substantial effects on welfare use,
employment, and labor supply. Welfare benefits, minimum wages, and the business
cycle also have important effects on the welfare use and labor market behavior of femaleheaded families.
Because the various policy measures have different metrics, and because the
models in tables 2 and 3 involve extensive age interactions, the quantitative importance
of some of the recent policy changes is difficult to assess directly from the regression
coefficients. It is also difficult to assess the relative importance of each of the various
policy changes. To aid in such comparisons and provide some further insights into the
effects of the various policy measures, I present some calculations below of the
contributions of the policy changes to the decline in welfare use and the improvement in
labor market outcomes that have taken place since the early 1990's.
This is not the only way that one could quantify the effects of the different
policies and put them on a common footing. Indeed the approach has an important
drawback: in principle one could "explain" either more than 100 percent of the observed
change or even a negative proportion of it. Nevertheless, the approach has the advantage
that it allows me to compare a subset of my results to those from previous studies. Many
of the caseload studies have computed the relative contributions of the business cycle and
welfare reform in explaining the declining welfare caseload; Meyer and Rosenbaum

26

(1999) provide similar calculations for the employment rate and add the EITC to the list
of potential explanatory factors. In the next section, I engage in a similar exercise for all
of the outcomes discussed above.
V. Explaining Recent Changes in the Welfare Use and Labor Market Behavior of
Female Family Heads

Panel A of Table 4 reports changes in welfare use, employment, and labor supply
between 1993 and 1999 in both levels and percentages. This information largely
reiterates what was shown in table 1. Panel B decomposes these changes into
components attributable to time limits, other welfare reforms, the EITC, welfare benefits,
the minimum wage, and the business cycle. The effect of time limits on welfare use is
calculated by multiplying the 1993-1999 change in the mean value of the time limit and
time limit-age interaction variables by their respective coefficients and adding the results.
The effects of other explanatory factors on the various outcomes are calculated similarly.
The results of this exercise indicate that time limits account for a reduction in
welfare use of 2.1 percentage points. This amounts to 6.4 percent of the 1993 welfare
utilization rate or 12 percent of the 1993-1999 decline in welfare use. This is smaller
than the 16-to-18 percent range reported by Grogger (2000). As noted above, there are
two differences between the welfare use regression reported here and that reported in
Grogger (2000): this analysis includes data through 1999 and accounts for the EITC,
whereas the earlier study included data only through 1998 and included no EITC
controls.
Some experimentation revealed that the main reason for the difference in the
results is the addition of the 1999 data. In other words, time limits explain more of the

27

1993-98 decline in welfare use than of the 1993-99 decline. This suggests that time
limits had their greatest effects shortly after they were imposed, which is generally
consistent with the notion that consumer's responses to time limits involved anticipatory
behavior.
Other reforms had a smaller effect on welfare use. This is not altogether
surprising. The other reforms include work requirements, which would be likely to
reduce welfare use, but also decreased benefit reduction rates, which actually serve to
increase welfare use by providing families with an incentive to combine work and
welfare. Taken as a whole, other reforms may have had offsetting effects on welfare use.
The EITC expansions, in contrast, had quite important effects. This is largely
because the expansions over the 1993-1999 period were so large. Altogether, the EITC
expansions explain 15.8 percent of the decline in welfare use over this period.
Real benefit levels were falling over this period, while minimum wages were
rising. Together, these two factors explain about 6 percent of the decline in welfare use.
The unemployment rate had an important effect on welfare use, explaining about 10
percent of the 1993-99 decline.
It is instructive to compare these estimates with those from the caseload literature.
Ziliak, et al. (1997) estimate that welfare reform accounted for 6 percent of the decline in
welfare use between 1993 and 1996, whereas CEA (1997) puts the figure at 30 percent.
Wallace and Blank (1999) report that welfare reform explains about 20 percent of the
1994-1996 drop in welfare caseloads, whereas CEA (1999) estimates that reform
accounted for about one-third of the decline between 1996 and 1998. These include the
effects of all reforms, and hence should be compared to the sum of the effects of time

28

limits and other reforms from my models. My estimate suggests that 14.3 percent of the
decline from 1993 to 1999 is explained by welfare reform, which is in the middle of the
range provided by previous work.
Regarding the effects of the business cycle, I find that reductions in the
unemployment rate explain about 10 percent of the 1993 - 1999 decline in welfare use.
CEA (1997), CEA (1999) and Ziliak, et al. (1997) report a range of 26 to 78 percent. Part
of this difference may have to do with differences in sample periods. CEA (1999) report
that falling unemployment accounts for 26 to 36 percent of the 1993 - 1996 decline in
welfare caseloads, but only 8 to 10 percent of the 1996 - 1998 decline. Their estimate for
the full 1993 - 1998 period presumably would lie somewhere in between, as does the
estimate from Wallace and Blank (1999), who attribute about 20 percent of the 19941998 reduction in caseloads to declining unemployment rates.
Turning to the employment results, in columns (4) - (6) of the table, one sees that
the most important factors for explaining the changes in welfare use are not always the
most important factors for explaining the changes in employment. Time limits have
about half the proportionate effect on employment as they have on welfare use. Other
reforms, in contrast, explain over 6 percent of the rise in employment, whereas they
explained only 2 percent of the decline in welfare use. This is not altogether surprising.
Above I argued that two of the most important reforms, work requirements and reduced
benefit reduction rates, should have offsetting effects on welfare use. They both
encourage employment, however, which could explain why the other reforms are more
important for explaining employment than welfare use.

29

The effect of the EITC on employment is roughly double its effect on welfare use.
The decomposition indicates that it explains 34 percent of the observed increase. Indeed,
the sizable expansions of this particular anti-poverty tool appear to be the most important
single factor in explaining why female family heads increased their employment over the
1993-1999 period.
Although the estimated effects are sizable, they are consistent with other estimates
from the literature. Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999) estimate that the EITC accounts for 37
percent of the increase in employment among female-headed families between 1992 and
1996. The similarity between our results is all the more striking when one considers that
Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999) pay particular attention to capturing the non-linear effects
of the EITC expansions on families' budget constraints, whereas I use a single program
parameter to model its effects. Ellwood (2000) also suggests that the EITC explains an
important share of the recent rise in employment among single mothers.
Benefit levels and minimum wages had small and partially offsetting effects on
employment over this time. In contrast, the business cycle played an important role in
driving employment changes. Changes in the unemployment rate account for 21 percent
of the change in employment, making it the second-most important observable factor
underlying the sharp upward trend in work.
For the most part, the factors that have the relatively largest effects on
employment have similarly large effects on labor supply. The only real exceptions
include time limits and other reforms. Time limits explain none of the rise in labor
supply, whereas other reforms explain a fair amount.

30

Table 5 presents similar decompositions for earnings and income. In total, the
various policy variables included in the regression models account for less of the changes
in earnings and income over the 1993-99 period than they explain of the changes in
welfare use and work. Whereas 45 percent of the change in welfare use, and 71 percent
of the change in employment, can be accounted for by changes in welfare policy, the
EITC, and the business cycle, these same factors explain only 24 percent of the
corresponding change in earnings and only 21 percent of the change in income over the
same time period.
The top row of panel B shows that time limits actually may have detracted from
the earnings and income growth that occurred over this period. Relative to 1993 levels,
the ceteris paribus effects of time limits decreased earnings by 22 percent and to decrease
income by 16 percent. However, one should exercise caution in interpreting these
estimates, since they are based on regression coefficients which are completely
insignificant. A more conservative interpretation that is consistent with both the
regression estimates and the calculations in Table 5 is that time limits did not contribute
positively to the growth in earnings or income among female-headed families that took
place between 1993 and 1999.
The effects of other reforms account for 13 percent of the increase in earnings and
7 percent of the increase in income that occurred during this time. The EITC expansions
account for over one-fifth of the increase in earnings, but for less than 5 percent of the
increase in income. Again, this could indicate that the EITC induced roughly offsetting
changes in labor and welfare income, or could stem from the reporting issues discussed
above. Benefit levels and minimum wages contributed little to the increase in earnings or

31

income. The business cycle, in contrast, made an important contribution, accounting for
about 8 percent of the increase in earnings and about 13 percent of the increase in family
income.
A final use for these decomposition estimates is to provide some further insights
into the nature of the effects of policy changes on behavior. For this I focus on columns
(2), (5), and (8) of Table 4. These present changes in welfare use, employment, and labor
supply in relation to their 1993 levels. They thus permit quantitative comparisons of the
effects of policy changes across the different outcome variables.
The figures in the first row of panel B in Table 4 show that time limits had
sizeable effects on welfare use but relatively small effects on employment and essentially
no effect on labor supply. This suggests that time limits reduced welfare use largely by
moving women off of the welfare rolls who previously had been working while they were
collecting welfare. Such moves evidently involved little change in labor supply.
The second row of the table shows that the proportionate effects of other reforms
on welfare use and employment were of the same magnitude but of opposite sign. This
suggests that the one effect of the other reforms has been to move families which had
only been receiving welfare (i.e., not combining work and welfare) into employment.
They may have had an additional effect on families that previously had been working,
however, since they had about twice the effect on labor supply that they had on
employment. Finally, the EITC had a slightly larger proportionate effect on welfare use
than on employment, suggesting that most, but not all, of the effect of the EITC stemmed
from moving non-working welfare recipients into the workforce.

32

VI. Robustness of the Regression Estimates
In this section I discuss the results of some robustness checks, the goal of which is
to assess whether the estimates in Tables 2 and 3 above are sensitive to a number of
specification issues. I first present results from a set of regression models that include a
full set of state-year dummies. As discussed above, these models provide more general
controls for policy endogeneity and for the business cycle than the state-specific
quadratic trends included in the models above. For brevity I present only the results for
the key variables in the analysis: time limits, other reforms, and the EITC. Because time
limits and other reforms vary only by state and year, their main effects are unidentified.
The main EITC is identified, however, because its parameters vary by family size. With
the exception of the EITC, these estimates do not allow me to assess the robustness of the
main effects, but they do allow me to assess how sensitive the key age interactions are to
the specification of controls for policy endogeneity and the business cycle.
The estimates are presented in Table 6. For the most part, the coefficients are
quite similar to the corresponding estimates in Tables 2 and 3. None of the estimates that
were significant in Tables 2 or 3 become insignificant; indeed, none of the estimates that
were significant above change much at all. The one change worth noting concerns the
age-time limit interaction in the labor supply regression, reported in column (3) of panel
A. The coefficient is similar to that reported in Table 2, but it is now marginally
significant. If anything, the results of this less restrictive specification provide somewhat
greater support for the central prediction from GM that time limits should have their
greatest effects on the families with the youngest children.

33

Beyond fitting models that included state-year effects, I also estimated other
specifications to further assess the robustness of the estimates. Since the welfare use and
employment outcomes are dichotomous, it is natural to ask whether logit estimates of
those models yield the same results as the linear regression estimates presented in
columns (1) and (2) of Table 2. In both cases, the logit results were generally similar to
the linear regression results.
I also estimated models that incorporated information about each state's actual
time limit rather than implicitly assuming that all states imposed the federal five-year
time limit. To do this, I replaced Aist* with Aist' , where Aist' = Aist − Ast' and Ast' is the
threshold age in state s in year t as defined by the actual length of the state's time limit.
For the most part, this change had little effect on the estimates. However, the coefficient
(standard error) on the age-time limit interaction in the employment model fell to -0.0025
(0.0017), which is insignificant at conventional levels.
This could arise from the fact that states' time limit policies vary in ways other
than the lengths of their time limits. For example, some states drop only the adult from
the welfare rolls when the time limit is reached, whereas others drop the entire family.
Also, some states are more lenient in granting exemptions and extensions than others.
Moreover, it appears that many states that are relatively strict in terms of the length of
their time limits are relatively lenient in some of these other dimensions (Administration
for Children and Families 1998). Thus the length of the time limit may be proxying for a
bundle of policies that have different effects on employment. Ideally, one would want to
characterize the various dimensions of states' time limit policies and estimate their
separate effects. Since the data appear to be just sufficient to distinguish the effects of

34

having a time limit at all, however, it will probably be some time before there are enough
data to distinguish the individual effects of the components of states' time limit policies.
I also estimated a set of models to check whether the time limit results were being
driven by anticipatory responses to the time limit, rather than by families merely reaching
their limits and being dropped from the rolls. To do this I estimated a set of models using
a sample that excluded all state-year cells that include people who potentially could have
exhausted their benefits.15 Dropping these observations had no substantial effect on the
estimates.
Finally, I estimated models that included linear and quadratic terms in an
interaction between a time trend and the age of the youngest child in the family. Bavier
(1999) reports that underreporting of welfare use may have risen over time in the CPS. If
this change in underreporting occurred independently of the age of the youngest child in
the family, then it should difference out by age and have no effect on my age-dependent
estimates of the effects of time limits. If it occurred differentially by age, however, then
the estimates could be biased, although the direction of the bias cannot be assessed a
priori. There are no direct measures of the extent of underreporting; to account for this
problem at least to some extent I have allowed for differential quadratic time trends by
age. The age-time trend interaction terms were jointly significant only in the models for
welfare use, income, and log income. Their inclusion had no material effect on the
estimates, however.

15

I dropped 1999 observations from Arkansas, Connecticut, Idaho, Ohio, Texas and Utah and 1998
observations from Connecticut. All of these states have particularly short time limits.

35

VII. Conclusions
One of the purposes of this analysis is to ask whether the data provide support for
the predictions of GM's simple model of work and welfare use under time limits. One of
those predictions is that families whose youngest children exceed the threshold age
should be unaffected by time limits, because time limits amount to a non-binding
constraint for those families. The other prediction, which pertains to welfare use,
employment, and labor supply, is that time limits should have the greatest effects on
families with the youngest children. These predictions hold for welfare use and labor
supply. To the extent that time limits hasten job search and lead to poorer job matches, it
may not be surprising that the effects of time limits on labor supply are less significant
than their effects on employment.
Another goal of this analysis is to understand the broader effects of time limits.
The regression estimates show that they have substantial effects on welfare use and
employment, somewhat lesser effects on labor supply, and little if any effect on earnings
or income. Relative to families whose children exceed the threshold age, the estimates
indicate that the average family whose youngest child is three years old reduces its
welfare use in response to time limits by 6.6 percentage points and increases its
employment by 3.4 percentage points. Effects on labor supply and earnings are smaller,
which again seems reasonable. If time limits hasten job search, the result may be jobs
that are both less durable and less remunerative. Time limits have had no significant
effect on family income, which involves not only the work of the family head, but also
the family's living arrangements and the work behavior of other family members.

36

The analysis reveals that other recent policy changes have had important effects
on the behavior of female-headed families. Other reforms taken collectively have had
small net effects on welfare use but important effects on employment, labor supply, and
to some extent, earnings and income. The recent EITC expansions have had substantial
effects on almost all dimensions of behavior. The EITC may be the single most
important policy measure for explaining the rise in work and earnings among femaleheaded families in recent years.
Comparing the effects of the policy changes across different outcomes suggests
that different policies may have affected different components of the welfare caseload.
Time limits have substantial effects on welfare use but smaller effects on employment,
suggesting that time limits primarily move families off of the welfare rolls who were
previously combining work and welfare. Other reforms and the EITC, in contrast, had
similar effects on welfare use and employment, suggesting that they primarily moved
non-working welfare families into the workforce. This suggests that different policies
may be useful for achieving different policy objectives, such as reducing caseloads versus
increasing work among welfare recipients. It would be useful to explore this issue further
in future work.
Although this analysis contributes in a number of ways to our understanding of
the effects of time limits and other recent policy changes, it leaves a number of questions
wide open. A full assessment of the effects of welfare reform will require information on
its effects on the well-being of children in poor families. It will also require information
about the effects of other specific reforms, such as work requirements, sanctions policies,

37

and reduced benefit reduction rates. The work presented here contributes in only a
limited way to our of the broader question of whether welfare reform has been successful.

38

References
Administration for Children and Families, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF), 1936-1999. http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/news/stats/3697.html, August 22, 2000.
Administration for Children and Families (1998), Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF): First Annual Report to Congress.
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/news/welfare/congress/index.htm.
Bavier, Richard. "An Early Look at the Effects of Welfare Reform." Mimeo, Office of
Management and Budget, March 1999.
Blank, Rebecca, David Card, and Philip K. Robins (2000). "Financial Incentives for
Increasing Work and Income Among Low-Income Families," in David E. Card and
Rebecca M. Blank, eds., Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, 373-419.
Council of Economic Advisers (1997). Technical Report: Explaining the Decline in
Welfare Receipt, 1993-1996. Washington, DC: Council of Economic Advisers.
Council of Economic Advisers (1999). The Effects of Welfare Policy and the Economic
Expansion on Welfare Caseloads: An Update. Washington, DC: Council of Economic
Advisers.
Committee on Ways and Means. 1994 Green Book. Washington: Government Printing
Office, 1994.
Dickert, Stacy, Scott Houser, and John Karl Scholz (1995). "The Earned Income Tax
Credit and Transfer Programs: A Study of Labor Market and Program Participation." In
James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Ellwood, David T. (2000). "The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social
Policy Reforms on Work, Marriage, and Living Arraignments." Mimeo, Kennedy School
of Government.
Ellwood, David T. and Mary Jo Bane (1983). "The Impact of AFDC on Family Structure
and Living Arrangements." In R. Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics 7, 137207.
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey Liebman (1996). "Labor Supply Response To The Earned
Income Tax Credit." Quarterly Journal of Economics 11, 605-637
Figlio, David N. and James P. Ziliak (1999). "Welfare Reform, the Business Cycle, and
the Decline in AFDC Caseloads." In Sheldon Danziger, ed., Welfare Reform and the
Economy: What Will Happen When a Recession Comes? Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research.

Grogger, Jeff. "Time Limits and Welfare Use." National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper no. 7709, March (2000).
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Charles Michalopoulos. "Welfare Dynamics under Time Limits."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 7353, September 1999.
Hotz, V. Joseph, and John Karl Scholz. (2000) "The Earned Income Tax Credit." Mimeo,
July 15, 2000.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. (1999) "Welfare, the EITC, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7363.
Moffitt, Robert A. (1999) "The Effect of Pre-PRWORA Waivers on AFDC Caseloads
and Female Earnings, Income, and Labor Force Behavior." In Sheldon Danziger, ed.,
Welfare Reform and the Economy: What Will Happen When a Recession Comes?
Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Moffitt, Robert A. and LaDonna A. Pavetti (2000). "Time Limits." in David E. Card and
Rebecca M. Blank, eds., Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Schoeni Robert, and Rebecca Blank. (2000) "What has Welfare Reform Accomplished?
Impacts on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7627.
Wallace, Geoffrey and Rebecca M. Blank (1999). "What Goes Up Must Come Down?
Explaining Recent Changes in Public Assistance Caseloads." In Sheldon Danziger, ed.,
Welfare Reform and the Economy: What Will Happen When a Recession Comes?
Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 49-90.
Ziliak, J.P., Figlio, D.N., Davis, E.E., and Connolly, L.S. "Accounting for the Decline in
AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or Economic Growth?" Journal of Human Resources
35, Summer 2000.

40

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics for Female-Headed Families, by Year
A. Welfare use and labor market outcomes among female-headed families
Year
90
91
92
93
94
95
Welfare use
0.32
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.31
0.28

96
0.26

97
0.22

98
0.19

99
0.15

Total,
19781999
0.30

Employment

0.71

0.69

0.69

0.69

0.72

0.74

0.76

0.78

0.80

0.83

0.71

Weeks worked

29.7
(23.0)

29.6
(23.2)

29.6
(23.4)

29.5
(23.5)

30.7
(22.9)

31.9
(22.9)

32.5
(22.5)

33.9
(22.2)

35.3
(21.6)

36.7
(20.9)

30.4
(23.1)

Earnings
($1,000's)

12.28
(14.46)

12.29
(14.47)

12.27
(14.77)

12.30
(15.48)

13.05
(15.67)

13.69
(18.45)

13.94
(21.23)

14.28
(17.63)

15.42
(18.72)

16.56
(20.08)

12.79
(15.91)

Income ($1,000's)

18.66
(18.24)

18.24
(16.75)

18.01
(17.20)

18.62
(22.27)

19.08
(18.23)

20.23
(22.46)

19.90
(24.56)

20.37
(21.65)

21.28
(22.21)

22.86
(24.60)

19.32
(19.53)

5091

5185

5273

5211

5066

4537

4582

4445

4424

4387

103,786

98
1

99
0

Total1
52

50

Observations

B. Number of states newly implementing various state-wide reforms, by year of implementation
Year
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
Any state-wide
0
0
3
4
4
8
19
13
reform2
Time limit3

0

0

0

1

0

5

21 (7)

21 (8)

2 (2)

0

91
16.7

92
17.6

93
18.5

94
26.3

95
34.0

96
34.0

97
34.0

98
34.0

99
34.0

14.0

17.3

18.4

19.5

30.0

36.0

40.0

40.0

40.0

40.0

2. Maximum credit ($)
Year
90
One-child
1209
families

91
1431

92
1549

93
1625

94
2253

95
2251

96
2252

97
2245

98
2271

99
2262

1483

1620

1712

2794

3344

3722

3713

3756

3734

D. Other determinants of welfare use and labor market outcomes
Year
90
91
92
93
94
Maximum welfare
492
478
453
443
431
benefit ($)
(207)
(201)
(183)
(173)
(165)

95
423
(162)

96
404
(156)

97
390
(146)

98
388
(144)

99
387
(151)

Total
484
(206)

Minimum wage
($1000s)4

6.14
(0.34)

6.48
(0.12)

6.44
(0.13)

6.29
(0.22)

6.13
(0.24)

5.99
(0.25)

5.98
(0.23)

6.48
(0.15)

6.71
(0.14)

6.69
(0.33)

6.66
(0.72)

Unemployment
(%)

5.68
(0.86)

6.90
(1.13)

7.53
(1.29)

7.01
(1.34)

6.21
(1.26)

5.67
(1.14)

5.48
(1.04)

5.04
(0.97)

4.59
(0.94)

4.30
(0.82)

6.45
(1.97)

C. Key EITC parameters
1. Phase-in subsidy rate(%)
Year
90
One-child
14.0
families
Multiple-child
families

Multiple-child
families

1209

41

Notes to Table 1: All monetary magnitudes are expressed in 1998 constant dollars, deflated by the CPI-U. In panels A and
D, numbers in parentheses are standard deviations. In panel A, figures are weighted by the CPS supplement weights. In
panel D, figures are averages of annual state-level aggregates that are weighted by the number of female-headed families in
the sample (which in turn are weighted by the CPS supplement weights). In panel B, numbers in parentheses give the
number of states newly implementing time limits that already had some type of state-wide reform in effect. Thus of the 21
states first implementing time limits in 1996, 7 already had other state-wide reforms in place.
1 - Washington, DC is counted as a state.
2 - New Mexico implemented TANF (its first state-wide reform) in 1997 and again in 1998 after its first plan was ruled
unconstitutional. Thus it is counted twice, accounting for the totals of 52.
3 - Michigan and Vermont use state funds after federal funds are exhausted. These two states effectively have no time
limit. Because New Mexico is counted twice (see note 3), the total is 50.
4 - Expressed in terms of annual income from a job paying the minimum wage for 52 weeks at 30 hours/week.

42

Table 2
Welfare Use, Employment, and Labor Supply Regressions
Welfare use
(1)
0.0066
(0.0015)

Employment
(2)
-0.0034
(0.0018)

Weeks worked
(3)
-0.1161
(0.0978)

Time limit

0.0236
(0.0157)

-0.0141
(0.0171)

-0.8300
(0.9230)

Reform x age

0.0049
(0.0011)

-0.0023
(0.0013)

-0.2160
(0.0733)

Reform

-0.0366
(0.0109)

0.0262
(0.0123)

2.4246
(0.5997)

EITC max credit (000s) x age

-0.0022
(0.0006)

0.0000
(0.0006)

0.0448
(0.0307)

EITC Max Credit (000s)

-0.0088
(0.0063)

0.0359
(0.0067)

1.2268
(0.3062)

Log(maximum benefit) x age

-0.0072
(0.0007)

0.0065
(0.0007)

0.2920
(0.0354)

Log(maximum benefit)

0.0821
(0.0365)

-0.0911
(0.0379)

-3.5754
(1.9892)

Log(minimum wage) x age

-0.0097
(0.0032)

-0.0038
(0.0032)

-0.1159
(0.1649)

Log(minimum wage)

0.0891
(0.0518)

-0.0127
(0.0679)

-4.9048
(2.7370)

Unemployment rate x age

-0.0004
(0.0002)

0.0011
(0.0002)

0.0254
(0.0094)

Unemployment rate

0.0087
(0.0022)

-0.0170
(0.0021)

-0.5842
(0.0976)

Variable
Time limit x age*

R-squared
0.229
0.189
0.246
*
*
Notes: Sample size is 103,786. Note that age = age - 13 if age < 13 and age = 0 if age ≥ 13, where age
denotes the age of the youngest child in the family. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions
include a quartic polynomial in the mother's age, a quartic polynomial in the age of the youngest child,
dummies for the mother's education (dropout, some college, college or more), dummies for the mother's race
(black, other non-white), dummies for the number of children in the family (2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or more), year
dummies, state dummies, and state-specific quadratic trends. Figures in parentheses are standard errors that
are corrected for clustering within state-year cells.

43

Variable
Time limit x age*

Table 3
Earnings and Income Regressions
Earnings
Log earnings
(1)
(2)
0.0386
-0.0017
(0.0730)
(0.0047)

Income
(3)
0.0306
(0.0847)

Log income
(4)
0.0004
(0.0034)

Time limit

-0.7049
(0.8622)

-0.0785
(0.0538)

-0.4795
(0.9860)

-0.0561
(0.0395)

Reform x age

-0.0210
(0.0683)

-0.0076
(0.0043)

-0.0546
(0.0811)

-0.0072
(0.0029)

Reform

0.8299
(0.5005)

0.1015
(0.0457)

0.7021
(0.5702)

0.0976
(0.0279)

EITC max credit (000s) x age

0.0138
(0.0207)

0.0036
(0.0018)

0.0096
(0.0270)

-0.0006
(0.0012)

EITC Max Credit (000s)

0.6113
(0.2266)

0.0006
(0.0182)

0.0972
(0.2782)

0.0018
(0.0136)

Log(maximum benefit) x age

0.2090
(0.0233)

0.0113
(0.0020)

0.1564
(0.0289)

-0.0063
(0.0014)

Log(maximum benefit)

-2.5454
(1.2314)

-0.0303
(0.1095)

-2.2937
(1.6118)

0.1020
(0.0976)

Log(minimum wage) x age

-0.4268
(0.1093)

-0.0231
(0.0096)

0.1093
(0.1255)

0.0037
(0.0066)

Log(minimum wage)

3.7186
(2.0232)

0.0944
(0.2279)

2.6891
(2.7577)

-0.0254
(0.1433)

Unemployment rate x age

0.0026
(0.0060)

0.0014
(0.0006)

-0.0174
(0.0069)

0.0003
(0.0004)

Unemployment rate

-0.1466
(0.0562)

-0.0209
(0.0069)

-0.1084
(0.0695)

-0.0160
(0.0045)

R-squared
0.254
0.219
0.266
0.292
Sample Size
103,786
73,038
103,786
100,039
Notes: Sample sizes vary because logged regressions are conditioned on having positive earnings and
income. Note that age* = age - 13 if age < 13 and age* = 0 if age ≥ 13, where age denotes the age of the
youngest child in the family. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions include a quartic polynomial
in the mother's age, a quartic polynomial in the age of the youngest child, dummies for the mother's
education (dropout, some college, college or more), dummies for the mother's race (black, other non-white),
dummies for the number of children in the family (2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or more), year dummies, state dummies, and
state-specific quadratic trends. Figures in parentheses are standard errors that are corrected for clustering
within state-year cells.

44

Table 4
Changes in Welfare Use, Employment, and Labor Supply Attributable to Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Factors
A. Means and changes in welfare use, employment, and labor supply, 1993-1999
Welfare use

Year
1993

Means
0.331

1999

0.153

Employment

Change,
93-99

Percent
change,
93-99

-0.178

-0.538

Means
0.689
0.829

Weeks worked

Change,
93-99

Percent
change,
93-99

0.139

0.202

Means
29.5
36.7

B. Changes in welfare use, employment, and labor supply explained by independent variables
Change in:
Welfare use
Employment

Percent
change,
93-99

7.2

0.245

Weeks worked

In levels
(7)

As
percent
of 1993
level
(8)

As
percent
of 93-99
change
(9)

0.066

-0.023

-0.001

-0.003

0.013

0.064

0.818

0.028

0.113

0.047

0.068

0.335

1.938

0.066

0.268

0.045

0.010

0.014

0.069

0.359

0.012

0.050

-0.006

0.012

-0.004

-0.006

-0.027

-0.398

-0.013

-0.055

-0.017

-0.052

0.097

0.029

0.042

0.205

1.193

0.040

0.165

-0.081

-0.244

0.454

0.099

0.144

0.712

3.887

0.132

0.539

In levels
(4)

As
percent
of 1993
level
(5)

As
percent
of 93-99
change
(6)

0.119

0.009

0.013

-0.013

0.024

0.009

-0.028

-0.085

0.158

Maximum benefits

-0.008

-0.024

Minimum wage

-0.002

Unemployment rate
Total

In levels
(1)

As
percent
of 1993
level
(2)

As
percent
of 93-99
change
(3)

Time limits

-0.021

-0.064

Other reforms

-0.004

EITC

Expressed:
Attributable to

Change,
93-99

C:\home\time_limits\wrknwlfr\jan01\tlwwi.doc

Table 5
Changes in Earnings and Income Attributable to Time Limits, the EITC,
and Other Factors

A. Means and changes in earnings and income ($1,000s), 1993-1999
Earnings
Percent
Year
Change, change,
Means
93-99
93-99
Means
1993
1999

12.30
16.56

4.26

0.346

18.62
22.86

B. Changes in earnings and income explained by independent variables
Change in:
Earnings

Expressed:

As percent As percent
of 1993 of 93-99
In levels
level
change

Income
Change,
93-99

Percent
change,
93-99

4.24

0.228

Income

As percent As percent
of 1993 of 93-99
In levels
level
change

Attributable to
Time limits

(1)
-0.934

(2)
-0.076

(3)
-0.219

(4)
-0.665

(5)
-0.036

(6)
-0.157

Other reforms

0.546

0.044

0.128

0.277

0.015

0.065

EITC

0.900

0.073

0.211

0.200

0.011

0.047

Maximum benefits

0.255

0.021

0.060

0.244

0.013

0.058

Minimum wage

-0.104

-0.008

-0.024

0.254

0.014

0.060

Unemployment rate

0.357

0.029

0.084

0.562

0.030

0.132

Total

1.020

0.083

0.239

0.873

0.047

0.206

C:\home\time_limits\wrknwlfr\jan01\tlwwi.doc

Table 6
Regressions with State-Year Effects
A. Welfare Use, Employment, and Labor Supply
Welfare Use
(1)

Employment
(2)

Weeks Worked
(3)

Time limit x age*

0.0067
(0.0013)

-0.0033
(0.0013)

-0.1170
(0.0640)

Reform x age

0.0045
(0.0011)

-0.0022
(0.0011)

-0.2104
(0.0526)

EITC max credit (000s) x age

-0.0021
(0.0005)

-0.0000
(0.0005)

0.0430
(0.0234)

EITC Max Credit (000s)

-0.0097
(0.0048)

0.0365
(0.0049)

1.2301
(0.2402)

0.236

0.196

0.253

R-squared
B. Earnings and Income

Earnings
(1)
0.0416
(0.0438)

Log Earnings
(2)
-0.0027
(0.0042)

Income
(3)
0.0284
(0.0533)

Log income
(4)
0.0003
(0.0029)

Reform x age

-0.0187
(0.0361)

-0.0076
(0.0035)

-0.0491
(0.0439)

-0.0071
(0.0024)

EITC max credit (000s) x age

0.0107
(0.0160)

0.0037
(0.0015)

0.0058
(0.0195)

-0.0007
(0.0010)

EITC Max Credit (000s)

0.6484
(0.1646)

-0.0004
(0.0159)

0.1368
(0.2003)

0.0013
(0.0108)

R-squared
Sample Size

0.260
103,786

0.228
73,038

0.273
103,786

0.298
100,039

Time limit x age*

Notes: Sample sizes vary because log regressions are conditioned on having positive earnings and
income. Note that age* = age - 13 if age < 13 and age* = 0 if age ≥ 13, where age denotes the age of the
youngest child in the family. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions include a quartic
polynomial in the mother's age; a quartic polynomial in the age of the youngest child; dummies for the
mother's education (dropout, some college, college or more); dummies for the mother's race (black, other
non-white); dummies for the number of children in the family (2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or more); year dummies;
interactions between age and the (log) maximum benefit, (log) minimum wage, and unemployment rate;
and state-year dummies. Figures in parentheses are standard errors.

C:\home\time_limits\wrknwlfr\jan01\tlwwi.doc

