                                 "#    




                                                


                                          
                                          
                                         


                                          !$%&'
                                (!)**+++,, *!!*+$%&'



                         "   - .
                                %/&/-(0
                                  1 2-/3%4$
                                      -(




                 !    "
   # "$%&  '(&%)( * +
   & ,    -  "" .%+/"
      *   0  )   #&.


1*% 23 % -%.   .  
 /   / +" "*4  +  /"  ""    
  1     .
!
 2
  "  ! ,$%&'
-(3//%
5 , 62.%2%


                                                     

        !717819(0
0119!29++27(7
1!70 (+719!,7(
(27 !9999(711!91
(1! 1($/:0!0! ;1,1!
       1(2  +  <!1 1, (
0+(((10+(!!,. 07
9102+9( 0 =(+
7=+(!2+( (991!7
=(07=+(1!, (2
!!    +( 1 !2  0  0 !7   (
1992+((1 99,




                                                     
91                        
  (1 07                                              " 07
 2  "                                                   <
,!>,,                                          ,><,




.0 07
>9,(0,
1. Introduction
Elected politicians have ample opportunities to abuse their political powers at
the expense of voters. Corruption, or rent extraction, is not only a problem in
developing countries and recent democracies, but also in developed and mature
democracies. Moreover, available measures indicate that the incidence of cor-
ruption varies substantially among countries with similar economic and social
characteristics.
     This variation suggests that corruption may be systematically related to po-
litical institutions. As voters can hold their elected representatives accountable at
the polls, it is natural to ask whether diﬀerent electoral rules work more or less well
in imposing accountability on incumbent politicians. Indeed, perceptions among
voters of widespread abuses of power by the ruling political elite were a major
factor behind the electoral reforms in Italy and Japan during the mid-nineties.
     Is corruption systematically related to electoral rules? A few theoretical stud-
ies have attempted to formally address this important question. We describe the
main ideas behind the existing theoretical models and their testable implications
in Section 2 below.
     The main purpose of the paper is empirical, however. A number of studies
have tried to uncover economic and social determinants of corruption: we outline
some of their results in Section 3, when describing the data we will use. As far
as we know, however, nobody has yet investigated how electoral rules correlate
with corruption in a large cross section of countries. We try to Þll this lacuna in
the literature by relating corruption to diﬀerent features of the electoral system
in a sample from the late nineties, encompassing data from more than 80 (devel-
oped and developing) democracies. Our corruption variable is based on the data
compiled by Transparency International, measuring perceptions of the degree of
corruption, as seen by business people, risk analysts and the general public.
     We confront these corruption data with data on political institutions in two
alternative ways. Section 4 reports on estimates obtained from traditional re-
gression analysis. In Section 5, we instead present non-parametric estimates to
address possible selection bias in the choice of electoral rules and to allow for
possible non-linearities. SpeciÞcally, we use two propensity-score methods that
have recently begun to make their way into the tool box of labor economists, but
have not yet been applied in the literature on political economics.
     The evidence is consistent with the theoretical hypotheses outlined in Section
2. Holding constant a variety of economic and social variables, we Þnd that spe-


                                          2
ciÞc features of proportional electoral rules are associated with more widespread
perceptions of corruption. In particular, corruption tends to be higher in those
countries where a larger fraction of candidates is elected via voters over party
lists rather than over individual candidates, that is where there is less individual
accountability. We also Þnd that larger voting districts–implying lower barriers
to entry–are associated with less corruption, but this result is less empirically
robust. Proportional electoral systems tend to combine these two opposite eﬀects.
Thus, they typically have large district magnitude with citizens voting for party
lists rather than for individual candidates. But the second dimension is empiri-
cally more important than the Þrst: according to the data, proportional electoral
rules are associated with more corruption than majoritarian elections.


2. Theory
What can economic and political theory say about the mapping from the electoral
rule to corruption or rents for politicians? To the best of our knowledge, only a
few studies have tried to model this relation formally.
    One idea is that an electoral system promoting the entry of new parties or new
candidates better protects voters against corruption. The clearest formalization
is perhaps the model suggested by Myerson (1993). He assumes, on the one hand,
that candidates (parties) and voters have opposite interests regarding the level
of corruption. On the other hand, interests diverge within the set of voters as
well as within the set of candidates along another ideological dimension. In this
setting, corrupt incumbents may still cling on to power if voters sharing the same
ideological preferences cannot Þnd a good substitute candidate (party). Given
how other voters behave, an individual voter may also Þnd it too costly to vote
for another party representing her own ideological group, as that may raise the
probability of victory for a candidate on the other side of the ideological scale.
Thus the voters’ ability to hold corrupt incumbents accountable is better the lower
are the barriers to entry in the electoral system.
    In Myerson’s model, voting behavior is endogenous to the electoral system,
whereas corruptibility is assumed to be an exogenous feature of each candidate
(party). Ferejohn (1986) instead endogenizes the behavior of incumbents, by
letting them choose a level of eﬀort, given that voters hold incumbents accountable
for their performance through a retrospective-voting rule. As shown by Persson,
Roland and Tabellini (2000), however, one can easily reformulate Ferejohn’s model
such that deterrence of rent extraction takes the place of promotion of eﬀort.

                                         3
In the model, electoral defeat is less fearsome the higher the probability that
an ousted incumbent will return to oﬃce in the future. While Ferejohn treats
this probability as an exogenous parameter, he points out that it is likely to be
negatively related to the number of parties, or the number of candidates. This
brings us back to the barriers of entry raised by the electoral system.
    To summarize, these analyses predict that voting in single-member constituen-
cies should be less beneÞcial in containing corruption than electoral systems with
large districts. More speciÞcally, district magnitude and thresholds for representa-
tion become the critical features of the electoral system. Because larger electoral
districts and lower thresholds imply lower barriers to entry, they should be asso-
ciated with less corruption, ceteris paribus.
    But electoral systems diﬀer in another important dimension, namely in the
electoral formula translating vote shares into seat shares. Plurality rule awards
the seats in an M seat district to the individual candidates receiving the M highest
vote shares. In proportional representation (PR) systems, voters instead choose
between diﬀerent party lists and candidates are selected from these lists depending
on the vote share of each party.
    Persson and Tabellini (2000, Ch. 9), building on the career-concern model of
Holmström (1982), suggest a model of rents and corruption which rests precisely
on this distinction between plurality and PR. The main idea is that voting over
individual candidates creates a direct link between individual performance and
reappointment, which gives an individual incumbent strong incentives to perform
well by putting in eﬀort or avoiding corruption. When voters choose among
party lists, politicians’ chances of re-election primarily depend on their ranking
in the list, not on their performance. If lists — as is commonly the case — are
drawn up by party leaders, the ranking will most likely reßect criteria unrelated
to competence in providing beneÞts to voters, such as party loyalty, or eﬀort
within the party (rather than in oﬃce). Then, the incentives to perform well are
much weaker. Persson and Tabellini’s analysis therefore suggests that corruption
should be positively associated with the proportion of representatives elected on
lists as opposed to individually assigned seats.1
    A Þnal set of formal political models of corruption can be found in Polo (1998),
   1
    Recently, Golden and Chang (2000) have suggested that the list system itself may induce
more or less corruption. Electoral systems with open lists may induce corruption as they produce
intra-party competition for oﬃce and thus give candidates from the same party stronger incen-
tives to raise resources, including money from corruption. They Þnd support for this proposition
in an empirical study of the Italian Christian Democrats.



                                               4
Svensson (1998) and Persson and Tabellini (1999). These are all models of elec-
toral competition predicting that the extraction of rents is increasing in political
instability, as more instability makes the perceived probability of winning less
sensitive to rent extraction. Persson and Tabellini (1999) also contrast equilib-
rium behavior by politicians in two stylized electoral systems: one with PR in
a single nation-wide district, another with plurality rule in a number of single-
member districts. Electoral competition becomes stiﬀer in the latter system, as
the candidates are induced to focus their attention on winning a majority, not in
the population at large, but in “ marginal districts” containing a large number of
swing voters. As these voters are more willing to switch their votes in response
to policy, candidates become more disciplined and extract less equilibrium rents.
This prediction is less precise than those above, in that the argument does not
distinguish well between district magnitude and the electoral formula.
    Countries with “majoritarian electoral systems” typically combine single-member
districts and plurality rule, however. At the opposite extreme, some “proportional
systems” indeed have large districts and voters choose among party lists (Israel e.g.
have just one nation-wide district where all representatives are elected and very
low thresholds). But in between these polar cases one Þnds intermediate systems,
involving diﬀerent district magnitudes, diﬀerent size thresholds, and multi-tier
systems mixing plurality rule and PR.2
    This institutional variation is fortunate in that it allows us to test separately
the diﬀerent hypotheses outlined above. These can be summarized as follows:

       H1: Ceteris paribus, countries with larger district magnitude and
       lower thresholds for representation should have less corruption (the
       barriers-to-entry eﬀect).
       H2 : Ceteris paribus, countries with a larger share of representatives
       elected as individuals rather than as members of lists should have less
       corruption (the career-concern eﬀect).
       H3 : Ceteris paribus, plurality rule in single-member districts should
       be associated with less corruption than PR in large districts; more-
       over, corruption should be larger, the larger is political instability (the
       electoral-competition eﬀect).
   2
    Cox (1997), as well as Blais and Masicotte (1996), give recent overviews of the electoral
systems across the world’s democracies.




                                             5
3. Data
This section discusses the key variables used in the empirical analysis and our
speciÞcation, while the Data Appendix gives a precise description of the data
sources.

3.1. Corruption
Finding an empirical measure of political corruption and rents is not an easy task.
As Tanzi (1998) observes, it is diﬃcult to deÞne corruption in the abstract and —
as the act is illegal — violators try to keep secret its speciÞc instances. Further-
more, cultural and legal diﬀerences across countries make it hard to investigate
corruption without taking country-speciÞc features into account. A good proxy for
political corruption should thus oﬀer reliable information on the unlawful abuse
of political power, and a high degree of comparability across diﬀerent countries.
    The Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI ) is perhaps the best measure to meet
these requirements. Produced by Transparency International, a world-wide or-
ganization and leader in anti-corruption research, this index measures the ”per-
ceptions of the degree of corruption as seen by business people, risk analysts and
the general public”. It is computed as the simple average of a number of diﬀer-
ent surveys assessing each country’s performance. The index ranges between 0
(perfectly clean) and 10 (highly corrupt).3 Lambsdorﬀ (1998) gives an extensive
description of the statistical characteristics of the CPI. We have taken an average
of CPI scores for the three years in 1997-1999, which restricts our sample size to
about 85 countries. In the 1997 CPI, 7 diﬀerent surveys are considered from 6
diﬀerent institutional sources, in 1998, 12 surveys from 7 institutions, and in 1999
14 surveys from 10 sources. For most countries analyzed in this paper, at least 3
surveys are available in the CPI for each of the 3 years. As discussed at length
in Lambsdorﬀ (1998), the results of these surveys are highly positively correlated:
the pair-wise correlation coeﬃcient among diﬀerent surveys on average exceeds
0.8. This suggests that the surveys, though independently done, really measure
some common features of the country in question. Dispersion in the ranking for
an individual country is an indicator of measurement error in the average score
making up the CPI. For this reason, we weigh the observations with the inverse
of the standard deviation among the diﬀerent surveys available for each country,
   3
    The score in the original surveys was rescaled so that all of them rank countries on a range
from 0 to 10.



                                               6
STDEV, in the regression analysis to follow.
    A number of recent empirical studies of corruption have employed this index,
including Fisman and Gatti (1999), Treisman (2000) and Wei (1997a and 1997b).
Our rationale for using CPI is that it explicitly includes measures of so-called
”grand” or large corruption (see Lambsdorﬀ, 1998, for the speciÞc composition).
Corruption at the highest level in the public sector fulÞls this particular deÞnition
(see Rauch, 1995 and Tanzi, 1998) and approximates illegal political rents, which
would be our ideal dependent variable, given the theory discussed in Section 2.4
    Unfortunately, the CPI measure is only available for the last half of the
nineties. Meaningful panel data analysis is thus ruled out.

3.2. Political Data
We have developed a few continuous explanatory variables to test the hypothe-
ses formulated in Section 2. Data on legislative institutions were mainly taken
from the Inter-Parliamentary Union, based in Geneva, from Kurian (1998), and
from the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (1997),
based in Stockholm. For most of the countries in the sample, our data refer to
institutions in the mid-nineties.
    To test the barriers-to-entry eﬀect (H1 ), we Þrst develop an index of the
average magnitude of each constituency in diﬀerent countries. District magnitude
(DISMAG) is a measure of the average number of representatives elected in each
district (see e.g., Cox, 1997). As is well known, the lower is district magnitude, the
higher a party’s electoral strength must be to gain representation in the legislative
body. In this paper, we measure average district magnitude by the formula
                                                  CON ST IT
                             DISMAG = 1 −                   ,
                                                    MPS
where MPS denotes the number of elected representatives in the lower or sin-
gle house of the Parliament and CONSTIT — the number of constituencies — is
obtained by adding up the number of single-member and multi-member districts
within each country. DISMAG thus ranges between 0 and 1, taking a value of 0
for a system with only single-member districts, and close to 1 for a system with
a single electoral district. Note that CONSTIT (and hence DISMAG) does not
   4
     A speciÞc justiÞcation is a high correlation among the perception of bureaucratic and po-
litical corruption. Lambsdorﬀ (2000) reports a correlation of 0.88 between the assessment of
politicians and of public administrators in the Gallup International survey, one of the sources
of the CPI.

                                              7
distinguish between single tier and upper tier districts (in multi-tier systems). In
fact, CONSTIT identiÞes only all “geographic areas within which votes are ag-
gregated and seats allocated” (Cox, 1997).5 Column 2 in Table 1 lists the values
of DISMAG for the countries in our sample.
    The career-concern eﬀect (H2 ) instead focuses on the electoral formula. To
test this second prediction, we construct another continuous explanatory variable:
                                              LIST M P S
                                 P LIST =                ,
                                                MPS
where LISTMPS is the number of representatives elected through party list sys-
tems. Thus, PLIST measures the percentage of representatives elected on a party
list. As DISMAG, PLIST ranges between 0, under plurality rule in every district,
and 1, in a system with full proportionality. Column 1 of Table 1 lists the values
of PLIST for the countries in our sample.
     By construction, this variable lumps together several diﬀerent mechanisms
for voting over lists of representatives. The Political Science literature usually
classiÞes list systems into one of three diﬀerent types: closed list, preference (or
open list) vote, and panachage (see Cox, 1997). Closed lists do not allow the voters
to express a preference for individual candidates. If a preference is allowed, the
party list is still the default option for the voter (e.g., in Finland). The panachage
is the least restrictive list system, since it allows the voter to express preferences
across parties (e.g., in Switzerland). As these alternatives are still quite distinct
from the personal selection under plurality rule, they were all included in our
variable LISTMPS.
     A Þnal point is worth noting. Most PR systems use party list allocation for-
mulas in distributing seats within each district (like the D’Hondt, the modiÞed
St. Laguë, or the LR-Hare; see LeDuc, Niemi, and Norris (1996) for a comprehen-
sive survey). The precise mechanism does not immediately aﬀect the individual
candidate’s career concern. But a few PR systems do not rely on party lists. The
proportional system adopted for the Dáil Eireann in Ireland e.g. is based on the
Single Transferable Vote. Here, we set PLIST = 0.
   5
    In Greece, for example, the legislative body consists of 300 deputies. By current electoral
law, 282 of the total MPS are elected by party list vote from 50 multi-seat constituencies, 6
are elected by majority rule from single-seat constituencies, and 12 are elected by party list
vote (with a 3% threshold) from a national constituency, in order to warrant proportional
representation. In this case, CONSTIT would be 57, obtained by adding up 50 multi-member
districts, 6 single-member districts, and 1 upper-tier national district, and DISMAG 0.81.



                                              8
    The electoral competition eﬀect (H3 ) really combines the two dimensions mea-
sured by PLIST and DISMAG. To test it, we rely on an indicator variable taking
a value of 1 only for countries which rely exclusively on plurality (or majority) rule
in their legislative elections. Countries with either a fully proportional electoral
formula, or a mixed system, we code by 0. This variable, MAJ, is thus a broad
proxy measure of majoritarian elections.
    According to the electoral competition hypothesis outlined in Section 2, cor-
ruption should also be positively related to political instability. Here, we use a
measure, INSTAB, taken from Treisman (2000) which proxies for political insta-
bility in the executive by the number of government leaders in a recent period
(1980-1993 for almost all countries in the sample).
    Finally, we also include a measure of the respect for basic political rights
taken from the Freedom House Annual Surveys. We use an average for the years
1990/91-1998/99. Fisman and Gatti (1999) also used this variable, denoted by
POLRIGHT, as a control in their study of Þscal centralization and corruption.
We expect corruption to be higher in less democratic regimes (a higher value of
POLRIGH T), since the voters Þnd it harder to remove corrupt leaders and to
punish corruption in general.

3.3. Other explanatory variables
On the basis of the empirical strategy described in the next section, the other de-
terminants of corruption can be classiÞed in two main categories, namely standard
economic and social controls, and legal and colonial history.
    Standard economic controls are those included in the basic speciÞcation shown
in column 1 of Table 3. To control for poverty, we consider the logarithm of
GNP per capita, adjusted for purchasing power (LOG(Y )). The variable OPEN
is deÞned as the sum of merchandise exports and imports divided by the value
of GDP measured in current US. dollars. Openness of the market was found to
be a signiÞcant negative determinant of corruption by Ades and Di Tella (1999)
(although with doubts about the direction of causation). Data on population
(in millions) are converted to logarithms and indicated by LOG(POP). All these
data are collected from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators for the
second half of the nineties (see Data Appendix for details). The population’s
education level is proxied by the secondary school gross enrolment ratio (for male
and female population), taken from UNESCO and indicated by EDU. Data on
ethno-linguistic fractionalization (ELF ) are taken from La Porta et al. (1999),


                                          9
as are the religious variables. These authors investigated how the ICRG Index
of corruption was inßuenced by religion, while Treisman (2000) found evidence
of a signiÞcant negative impact of Protestant tradition on corruption measured
by CPI. We include the population share with a Protestant or Catholic religious
tradition. Discrete religious variables (for e.g. Confucian dominance) are from
Wacziarg (1996), as are regional dummy variables. Empirical studies of corruption
including regional dummy variables can be found in Leite and Weidmann (1999),
for Africa, and Wei (1997a), for East Asia.
    Legal origin dummies are from La Porta et al. (1999), who extensively analyzed
their impact on various measures of government eﬃciency. They found French and
Socialist legal origin in particular to have a signiÞcant impact on some measures
of the quality of government, although not on corruption. Treisman (2000) stud-
ied the eﬀect of legal origin on corruption carefully, attempting to separate the
legal framework, as such, from colonial inßuences on a country’s “legal culture”
(expectations on the eﬃciency of the legal system as a whole). Colonial variables
(for British, French, and Spanish colonies, plus colonies of other types) are from
Wacziarg (1996). To adjust the strength of colonial forces, we weight these data
by the extent of colonial dominance in the last 250 years.
    Table 2 shows the partial correlations among the main variables. Some of
them are highly correlated, as expected. Richer economies have less corruption,
more education and better political rights. Note, however, that the two political
variables of most interest, PLIST and DISMAG, are not highly correlated with
other independent variables, suggesting that multicollinearity may not be a Þrst
order problem in interpreting our results. On the other hand, as Tables 1 and 2
show, PLIST and DISMAG are highly correlated with each other. Proportional
elections tend to have both a large number of candidates elected on party lists and
large district magnitudes, while the opposite is true for majoritarian elections.
Since these two variables are expected to have opposite eﬀects on corruption,
including both of them is important to avoid speciÞcation bias due to omitted
variables.


4. Regression estimates
This section gives the results of our regression analysis, testing the hypotheses
outlined in Section 2 by help of the data described in Section 3. The next section
presents our non-parametric estimates.



                                        10
4.1. Economic and social determinants of corruption
We start by a regression relating corruption, as measured by CPI, to the economic
and social determinants discussed in Section 3. Estimation is by weighted least
squares, the weights being the (inverse) standard deviation of the CPI score,
STDEV — see Section 3 and the Data Appendix for a precise deÞnition. The
estimates are reported in Table 3, column 1. Table 4 reports parallel unweighted
(OLS) regressions with White-corrected standard errors. The results are very
similar for all speciÞcations.
    Corruption is lower in richer (Y ), more open (OPEN ) and smaller (POP)
economies and in the OECD, in countries where citizens are better educated
(EDU ) and where there is more fractionalization as measured by (ELF ). Religion
also has an important eﬀect on corruption: Catholic (CATH ) countries tend
to be more corrupt, Protestant (PROT ) countries less corrupt, while Confucian
(CONFU ) religion seemingly has no eﬀect — though this last variable becomes
statistically signiÞcant in the regressions reported below.
    The results conform to earlier studies and prior expectations (see, in particular,
Treisman, 2000). Altogether, the basic economic and social variables explain be-
tween 85 and 90% of the variation in the data. The residual variation is displayed
in Table 1, where column 3 reports the CPI score and column 4 reports the
residuals from this regression. The residuals range from - 2.5, for Chile, to + 2.3,
for Belgium. Other countries with large residuals include Costa Rica and Israel
(both negative) and Czech Republic, Greece and Turkey (all positive). Clearly,
our basic controls eliminate the most striking diﬀerences across countries. In fact,
holding these variables constant, dummy variables for geographic location (such
as Africa, Asia and Latin America) do not have a statistically signiÞcant impact
on corruption.

4.2. Political determinants of corruption
Next, we ask whether political institutions indeed contribute to explaining cor-
ruption. We focus on the electoral rule as measured by PLIST and DISMAG. As
suggested by hypothesis H3, we also include our measure of political instability
INSTAB. Finally, we include the extent of political rights by POLRIGHT. We
continue to control for the same list of economic and social variables as in col-
umn 1. The results, displayed in column 2, are consistent with the predictions
of the theory. First, the coeﬃcient on PLIST is highly signiÞcant and positive,
suggesting that voting over party lists rather than over individuals leads to more

                                         11
corruption. The standardized beta coeﬃcient of PLIST is 0.27, one of the high-
est in the set of explanatory variables, suggesting that the eﬀect of this variable
is quantitatively important, and not just statistically signiÞcant. The estimated
coeﬃcient on DISMAG is negative, suggesting that the barriers to entry due to
small districts also lead to more corruption, but it is statistically signiÞcant only
at the 10% conÞdence level. INSTAB also has an estimated coeﬃcient with the
expected positive sign, albeit borderline signiÞcant at the 5% level. POLRIGHT
has the expected sign, but a t-statistic only around 1.5. Finally, coeﬃcients on
the other variables remain quite stable, despite the addition of the new variables,
suggesting that multicollinearity is not driving the results.
    The coeﬃcient on PLIST remains stable to changes in the speciÞcation, such
as dropping the variables in column 2 with the lowest t-statistics, such as CATH,
CONFU, ELF and POP, dropping the political variables POLRIGHT and IN-
STAB, and even dropping the variable DISMAG. The estimated coeﬃcient on
DISMAG, on the other hand, is less stable, and its statistical signiÞcance is af-
fected by the details of the speciÞcation. As Table 4 shows, we obtain similar
results in the unweighted regressions.
    So far, we have discussed the eﬀect on corruption of two separate but related
dimensions of electoral systems: PLIST and DISMAG. As already noted, how-
ever, these two variables are highly correlated: majoritarian electoral systems
typically have small district magnitudes and a large fraction of seats allotted by
votes for individual candidates, i.e. they have small values of both PLIST and
DISMAG. Since these two variables are predicted and found to have opposite ef-
fects on corruption, it is natural to ask which is the prevailing eﬀect. For this
purpose, in column 6 of Tables 3 and 4 we have replaced PLIST and DISMAG
with the dummy variable MAJ, taking a value of 1 in majoritarian electoral sys-
tems — see Section 3 and the Data Appendix for a precise deÞnition. This also
allows us to test the other aspect of the electoral competition eﬀect (H3 ), derived
from models (such as Persson and Tabellini, 1999) that only distinguish crudely
between majoritarian and proportional elections. The data suggest that PLIST
has the stronger inßuence: the estimated coeﬃcient of MAJ is negative and sta-
tistically signiÞcant. Overall, majoritarian electoral systems thus seem to induce
less corruption than proportional elections.6
   6
     In the case of quite a few countries, the classiÞcation between majoritarian and proportional
elections is ambiguous. These countries were thus deÞned as semi-proportional, and included
with a separate dummy variable (SEMI ). The estimated coeﬃcient on this dummy variable,
not reported in the Tables, was not signiÞcantly diﬀerent from zero, suggesting that these semi-


                                               12
4.3. Other institutional determinants of corruption
An important test of whether our results are robust is to check how they survive
the inclusion of other institutional variables. As documented in other empirical
studies (in particular Treisman, 2000), perceptions of corruption are correlated
with dummy variables reßecting a country’s legal and colonial origin. Do the
eﬀects of PLIST and other political institutions survive, once we control for dif-
ferent historical origins in our sample of countries? The answer is displayed in
columns 3—5 of Table 3. Column 3 adds the legal origin variables; French and so-
cialist legal origin is associated with more corruption compared to UK legal origin.
The other political variables, INSTAB and POLRIGHT now become statistically
insigniÞcant, but the estimated coeﬃcient on PLIST remains remarkably stable
and that on DISMAG becomes clearly statistically signiÞcant.
    Column 4 adds the colonial origin variables. French colonial origin is associated
with less corruption, thereby counteracting the positive eﬀect on corruption of
having a French legal system.7 Otherwise, the results are not much aﬀected.
The estimated coeﬃcients on PLIST and DISMAG drop somewhat, but remain
statistically signiÞcant. The results are also quite similar if colonial origin is
measured as a 0—1 variable, irrespective of when independence was obtained.
Finally, column 5 reports the eﬀect of colonial origin, without also controlling
for legal origin. Now, the estimated coeﬃcient of PLIST drops further, though it
remains statistically signiÞcant at the 10% conÞdence level, while the estimated
coeﬃcient of DISMAG becomes insigniÞcant. Curiously, none of the colonial
origin variables is statistically signiÞcant.
    Overall, we conclude that the eﬀect of PLIST on corruption is quite robust
to the inclusion of these institutional variables, while the eﬀect of DISMAG, as
before, is less robust. Given the number of right-hand side variables included in
these regressions, the statistical signiÞcance of PLIST is pretty remarkable. The
estimated coeﬃcient on PLIST is most sensitive to the inclusion of the colonial
origin variables without the legal origin dummies, and in particular to UK and
French colonial origin. It is really these two variables together that matter for the
estimated coeﬃcient of PLIST ; if either of them is dropped, or if they are entered
together with the legal origin variables, the coeﬃcient on PLIST is not aﬀected.
We do not have a good explanation for this feature of the data, other than that
it may reßect collinearity among the regressors.
proportional countries could be lumped together with the clearly proportional ones.
   7
     Several countries have a French-type legal system without being former French colonies.



                                             13
    Do the results of including institutional dummy variables also extend to the
blunter classiÞcation into majoritarian and proportional elections according to
the MAJ dummy? When either legal origin dummy variables, or colonial origin
dummy variables, or both, are included among the regressors, the t-statistics
on MAJ drops to just below -1.5 (not shown in the Tables). With this cruder
classiÞcation it is thus harder to disentangle the eﬀect of the electoral system from
that of other institutional variables. The reason may again be multicollinearity,
as many countries classiÞed as majoritarian according to MAJ also have an UK
legal and/or colonial origin.

4.4. Simultaneity problems?
To what extent can we regard our political variables as truly exogenous? This
question is obviously highly pertinent for the variables INSTAB and POLRIGHT.
Politicians appearing as more corrupt would behave more myopically, and for
this reason, could be thrown out of oﬃce more frequently. And more corrupt
politicians could be more likely to interfere with the democratic process in order to
extract additional rents from their citizens. If so, the estimates of our regressions
on these two coeﬃcients would be biased. This is not too troublesome for our main
results concerning the electoral rule, however. As already noted, the estimated
coeﬃcients on PLIST and DISMAG are robust to omitting the other two political
variables, INSTAB and POLRIGHT from the speciÞcation. Moreover, judging
from their pair-wise correlation coeﬃcients in Table 2, INSTAB and POLRIGHT
seem to be uncorrelated with our two variables of interest, PLIST and DISMAG.
    But what about the electoral rule itself? If some electoral rules were conducive
to more corruption, would not malevolent and corrupt politicians be more likely
to choose exactly those rules? There could, of course, also be reverse causation
from corrupt politicians to electoral rules conducive to less corruption if voters
fed up with crooked politicians — rather than the crooked politicians themselves
— manage to push through electoral reform. The recent electoral reforms in Italy
and Japan mentioned in the Introduction seem to be examples of the latter type.
    An argument in defence of regarding PLIST and DISMAG as exogenous is the
fact that electoral reforms are very rare. In the last 25 years only about 10 struc-
tural changes in the electoral system have been implemented in the 85 countries
of our sample. Most of these changes have led to a mixed electoral law combin-
ing single-member districts with corrections for proportional representation, but
shifts in the direction both of more pronounced PR or Plurality have also been


                                         14
recorded.8 This stability suggests considerable institutional inertia. Indeed, this
inertia has been such a common feature of this century’s political history that Po-
litical Scientists refer to an “iron law” of political self-preservation in the context
of comparative electoral systems analysis. Changing the electoral regime is diﬃ-
cult because it requires support from a large majority in most democracies, even
if the constitution does not explicitly say so. For all practical purposes, therefore,
we think that the electoral rule may be regarded as determined by chance and
history.
     This defence of our results is not watertight, however. Even if electoral rules
are determined by history and are unlikely to change in response to corruption,
how do we know that we have not left out some important historical determinant
of both the electoral rule and corruption itself? One standard way of coping with
this problem is to rely on instrumental variable estimation. Unfortunately, we
have not been able to Þnd any suitable instruments in this case. Any plausible,
and observable, historical determinant of the electoral rule we could imagine might
also have an independent eﬀect on corruption.
     We have shown that our results are robust to controlling for the colonial ori-
gin of a country and other historical variables. But what if these observables also
inßuence the choice of the electoral regime? Our OLS estimates are still unbiased
under two assumptions: (i) the model is recursive (i.e., the error term of the re-
lation determining the electoral rule as a function of observables is uncorrelated
with the error term of the corruption relation); (ii) the relationships are linear
with homogenous coeﬃcients. As discussed, the Þrst assumption is critical, but
we can do little to relax it in the absence of reliable instruments. The assumption
of linearity is also restrictive, however. Suppose that the impact of the electoral
rule on corruption is systematically related to some observables that also deter-
mine the electoral rule. If this non-linearity is important, the OLS estimates could
be severely biased, particularly if these observables diﬀer across countries under
diﬀerent electoral rules. This problem can be addressed, however. We can check
whether the results hold up under non-parametric estimates, free from strong as-
sumptions about functional form and we can also allow the historical determinants
   8
    We are here considering only radical transformations in the electoral law. That is, we look
at changes in the allocation mechanism of at least one third of the total number of legislative
seats in the lower or single house for the period 1975-95. SigniÞcant recent examples would be
the brief electoral reform in France in 1986 (from Majority to PR, and back), the New Zealand
electoral reform (from FPTP to mixed member) in 1993, the same year’s Italian reform (from
PR to mixed member system), or the 1994 Japanese reform (from Plurality with SNTV in 3-5
member districts to mixed-member system).


                                              15
to inßuence the choice of electoral rule. The next section deals with these issues.

5. Non-parametric estimates
Non-parametric estimates of the eﬀects of a particular treatment in the absence
of experimental data have been used in the medical sciences for some time (see
Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983 for a systematic analysis). More recently, such
methods have been introduced into economics, especially as tools for evaluating
labor market and education programs (see for instance Dehejia and Wahba, 1999,
and Heckman, Ichimura and Todd, 1997). In this section, we apply so-called
propensity score estimation to our task of evaluating how electoral rules aﬀect
corruption. As the typical reader may not be familiar with such estimation, we
begin with a brief summary of the main ideas. A useful and accessible survey,
which puts the methodology in context, can be found in Blundell and Costa Dias
(2000).

5.1. A brief introduction
For simplicity, we only consider the two groups of countries deÞned by our bi-
nary dummy variable MAJ, namely those with strict plurality (or majority)
rule, M AJ = 1, and all the others with either proportional or mixed systems,
M AJ = 0. Maintaining the same terminology as in the evaluation literature,
we deÞne as “treated” the countries that do not have majoritarian elections, and
denote this set by T . The set of majoritarian countries is not subject to treat-
ment and will make up our “control” group, denoted by C. As our prior is that
treatment causes more corruption, we would like to estimate the average eﬀect
of “treatment on the treated”. Indexing our corruption measure CPI for treated
and non-treated countries by T and C superscripts, we can deÞne this by

                   τ = E(CP IiT | i ∈ T ) − E(CP IiC | i ∈ T ) ,              (5.1)

where subscripts denote countries and the E operator denotes expectations, con-
ditional on the distribution of CPI in the group with majoritarian elections. The
problem is that the last term on the right-hand side is not observable: we cannot
directly observe the corruption level a country with majoritarian elections would
have, if it hypothetically had proportional elections.
    How can we exploit the information in our control group, allowing for the
fact that — in this non-experimental setting — the choice of the electoral rule is

                                        16
not likely to be random? Suppose selection is aﬀected by a set of observable
variables, X, such as colonial origin or religious tradition; variables which could
also have an independent eﬀect on corruption. To exploit the control group,
we then need a central identifying assumption, “conditional independence” also
known as the ”selection on observables” assumption (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983,
Rubin, 1974, 1977). This assumption asserts that, conditional on X, corruption
and the choice of electoral rule are independent. In other words, no omitted
or unobserved variable inßuences both the choice of the electoral rule and the
corruption outcome, once we have controlled for X, formally:
                  E(CP IiT | i ∈ T, , Xi ) − E(CP IiC | i ∈ T, Xi ) .
This assumption allows us to replace the unobservable counterfactual in (5.1) and
write:
             τ (X) ≡ E(CP Ii | i ∈ T, Xi ) − E(CP Ii | i ∈ C, Xi ) .         (5.2)
    In fact, we implicitly relied on a version of the conditional independence as-
sumption already in our OLS estimation — the recursiveness assumption (i) in
Section 4.4. Here, it is reformulated in a context more general in two respects: we
now explicitly consider the possibility of selection into the electoral rule, and we do
not impose any precise functional forms on the relation between electoral rules and
corruption. Our parameter of interest can thus be written as τ = E[τ (X)], where
the expectation is now taken over the possible realizations of X. A non-parametric
test of our central hypothesis could be obtained from (5.2), by combining obser-
vations in T and C with similar values of X, and then evaluating τ . But if X is
multidimensional and has non-trivial distributions in T and C this is very hard,
particularly in a small sample like ours.
    The propensity-score literature (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983) shows that,
under further assumptions, (5.2) can be restated on a more parsimonious form.
SpeciÞcally, let p(Xi ) be the probability of selection into treatment (i.e., non-
majoritarian electoral rule), conditional on the observable variables Xi . Further-
more, assume that 0 < p(Xi ) < 1, for all Xi ; that is, the distribution of Xi has a
common support. Then, we can rewrite (5.2) as:
            τ (X) ≡ E(CP Ii | i ∈ T, p(Xi )) − E(CP Ii | i ∈ C, p(Xi )) .        (5.3)
The probability p(Xi ) is also called the propensity score of country i. A non-
parametric test of τ = E[τ (X)] > 0 is obviously much easier if τ (X) is obtained
from (5.3) rather than (5.2), as the propensity score is uni-dimensional and has
values constrained to lie between 0 and 1.

                                          17
   In the following two subsections, we discuss estimation of the propensity score
and test our central hypothesis using two alternative, non-parametric estimators.

5.2. Estimating the propensity score
The Þrst step is to estimate the propensity score. We do that by running a linear
probit regression of the treatment indicator (1 − MAJ) on a number of observed
variables, the vector X in the previous section. We include eight variables in
X : log per capita income (LOG(Y )), our three dummy variables for religious
beliefs (CATH, PROT, CONFU ), and our four dummy variables for colonial origin
(COLOES, COLOFR, COLOUK, COLOTH ). These are the main variables that
we think might inßuence both the choice of electoral rules as well as corruption.
    Next, we want to verify that conditioning on the estimated propensity score,
as in (5.3), is indeed equivalent to conditioning on the full vector X, as in (5.2).
That is, we ask whether the distribution of X is the same across the treatment
and control groups, conditional on the propensity score. Following the procedure
in Dehejia and Wahba (1999), we rank the full set of countries according to their
estimated propensity scores. Based on this ranking, we group the observations
into Þve strata: the Þrst stratum includes countries with an estimated probability
between 0 and 0.2 of having the treatment of proportional elections, the next
includes countries with an estimated probability of 0.2 to 0.4, and so on. We then
test for equality of means between the treatment and the control group, within
each stratum, and for each of the eight variables in X. In no case can we reject
the null hypothesis that the means are equal, at the 5% conÞdence level. When
the same test is performed on the whole sets T and C, rather than within each
stratum, we reject equal means for Þve out of eight variables.9
    Before proceeding, we want to verify another aspect of comparability across
the treatment (MAJ = 0) and control (M AJ = 1) groups, namely the com-
mon support condition discussed in the previous section. For Þve countries with
majoritarian elections (Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Nigeria, and Tanzania), the
estimated propensity score was lower than the lowest score among the proportional
countries. These majoritarian countries were thus discarded as non-comparable
to any proportional country. There was no need for discarding countries at the
top of the ranking.
  9
      Results for these tests as well as the probit estimates are available upon request.




                                                 18
5.3. Estimating the treatment eﬀect
In this subsection, we use two diﬀerent non-parametric estimators to estimate
the treatment eﬀect τ = E[τ (X)]. Details of the estimators and their standard
errors are given in the appendix. Here, we describe their properties and report
the results of testing τ > 0.
    Consider Þrst the stratiÞcation estimator, which relies on the same grouping
into strata as in the prior subsection. This estimator of τ computes the average
diﬀerence in CPI between the proportional (treatment) and majoritarian (control)
countries within each stratum and forms the weighted average of these diﬀerences,
weighing each stratum by the number of treated observation it contains. It thus
balances the treatment and control countries group-wise, within the Þve strata.
    Graph 1 illustrates the overlap between control (M AJ = 1) and treatment
(M AJ = 0) countries within each stratum by a simple histogram. As expected,
we gain treatment observations and lose control observations as the estimated
propensity score increases. But some overlap of treatment and controls is present
in every stratum. The small overlap in the extreme bins (0-0.2 and 0.8-1) does
not bias our estimates, as long as the two groups are homogeneous in terms of
the covariates (as is the case here).10 But the low number of controls relative to
treatments in the higher strata raises the standard error of our estimate (see the
Appendix).
    Consider next the matching estimator, or more precisely, the method of near-
est matching with replacement of controls. Here, instead of utilizing the full set of
controls on the common support (like in stratiÞcation), we discard the more dis-
tant controls and instead use some controls more than once. In a Þrst step, every
treated (M AJ = 0) country is matched with the most similar control (MAJ = 1)
country; i.e., the nearest match in terms of propensity score. In our case, this en-
tails dropping 13 majoritarian countries from the control group.11 We thus obtain
53 pairs, equivalent to the number of treated countries. The matching estimator
is just the average diﬀerence in corruption outcomes across these pairs of treated
and control countries.
    The rationale for this estimator is to reduce the bias, due to diﬀerences in the
observables, by Þnding the nearest match in the control group for every treated
country. As a certain control can be the nearest match for more than one treat-
 10
   See Dehejia and Wahba (1999).
 11
   The countries excluded in the matching process are Botswana, Ghana, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius, Morocco, Singapore, Uganda, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.



                                          19
ment country, it should be matched more than once (and then replaced in the
control set). Graph 2 shows that the Þt of the propensity score across pairs is
generally very close. The ßats of the dashed line represent control countries used
several times. For instance, the majoritarian country with the highest estimated
propensity score (of 0.93) is Chile. Quite intuitively, Chile is the nearest match
for most of the remaining countries in South America, which have proportional
elections. Similarly, France (with a propensity score of 0.87) is matched with
many of the proportional countries in Europe. While such multiple use of certain
controls is desirable in terms of reducing bias, it has a cost in terms of less precise
estimates (see Appendix).
    Table 5 reports the estimates obtained with these two methods. The matching
estimator yields a mean diﬀerence in corruption of 0.95, while the stratiÞcation
estimator yields a diﬀerence of only 0.28. Recall from Table 4 (last column)
that the OLS estimator of the mean diﬀerence in corruption was 0.58 (there, the
dummy variable was M AJ, so the sign of the coeﬃcient should be reversed). Our
two non-parametric estimates thus conÞrm the previous Þnding, namely that non-
majoritarian countries are more corrupt. The estimated eﬀect of the electoral rule
on corruption is larger than the OLS estimate according to one estimator, smaller
according to the other.
    We also note that the standard errors are much larger than the OLS standard
errors; even though the matching estimator gives a higher estimate than OLS,
it is not statistically signiÞcant at conventional conÞdence levels. As already
discussed, however, the idea behind our non-parametric estimators is precisely
to trade oﬀ reduced bias due to speciÞcation error against less eﬃciency. High
standard errors thus come as no surprise, particularly in such a small sample of
countries. To obtain more precise estimates, we have to make more restrictive
assumptions about functional forms. An example can be found in the second
column of Table 5, where we report estimates of the treatment eﬀect by linear
regression on the balanced samples. The variables in these regressions — in addition
to the (1 − M AJ) dummy — are the same as those entering the probit, and we
use the matched and stratiÞed samples, respectively.12
    All in all, we conclude that — subject to the identifying assumptions stated
in this section — the inference from our regression analysis in Section 4 appears
robust to possible speciÞcation bias.
  12
    The estimation method is OLS for the stratiÞed sample, WLS for the matched sample (each
observation in the control group is weighted by the number of times it is used in the matching).



                                              20
6. Concluding remarks
This paper has presented new results on how electoral rules aﬀect corruption. Our
empirical results are consistent with theoretical models suggesting that voting on
party lists (the career-concern eﬀect) or in relatively small electoral districts (the
barriers-to-entry eﬀect) reduce the eﬀectiveness with which voters can exploit the
ballot to deter corruption. The estimated eﬀects of the electoral system are non-
trivial. For instance, they suggest that Chile’s low corruption outcome — a CP I
value of 3.42 compared to values well over 5 for most other South American democ-
racies — might to a considerable degree be attributed to its electoral rules, combin-
ing dual-majority rule (P LIST = 0) in two-member districts (DISM AG = 0.5).
Similarly, Belgium — an outlier with much higher corruption than predicted —
could cut its corruption level towards that of France by introducing plurality rule
in place of PR. Our results also suggest that each feature of Japan’s recent elec-
toral reform — scrapping plurality rule in some districts and diminishing average
district magnitude — might actually increase corruption. Italy’s electoral reform
— abandoning PR in favor of plurality for 75% of the legislature — instead appears
as a step in the right direction.
    Future work on electoral rules and corruption might consider additional aspects
of the electoral law, such as the eﬀects of thresholds for representation. According
to the discussion in Section 2, such thresholds should allow for more corruption,
ceteris paribus, by raising barriers to entry. It would also be interesting to study
the eﬀect of electoral reforms over time in a true panel data set. Unfortunately,
this seems infeasible in the light of available data. The problem is not so much
to measure changes in the electoral rules over time (even though coding available
documentation into time-variable measures corresponding to PLIST and DIS-
MAG would require a non-trivial amount of work), but the lack of relevant and
comparable measures of corruption over time.
    Future work should also further investigate the statistical robustness of our
results. In particular, other non-parametric estimators than the matching and
stratiÞcation estimators used here might strike a better balance between bias and
eﬃciency in samples as small as ours.13 More generally, we believe that this kind
of non-parametric approach might be a promising avenue for empirical work on
international cross-section and panel data in the Þeld of political economics. Al-
  13
    Heckman, Ichimura and Todd (1998) and Heckman et al. (1998) discuss and evaluate the
properties of diﬀerent non-parametric and semi-parametric estimators in the context of the
treatment literature.


                                           21
lowing for systematic selection and non-linearities might be particularly important
in the kind of international comparisons considered here.




                                        22
References

Ades, A. and R. Di Tella (1999), “ Rents, Competition and Corruption”, Amer-
    ican Economic Review 89: 982-993.

Blais, A. and L. Masicotte (1996), “ Electoral Systems”, in LeDuc, L., R. Niemi,
     and P. Norris (eds.), Comparing Democracies, Sage.

Blundell, R. and M. Costa Dias (2000), “ Evaluation Methods for Non-Experimental
    Data,” mimeo, University College London.

Cox, G. W. (1997), Making Votes Count: Strategic Coordination in the World’s
    Electoral Systems, Cambridge University Press.

Dehejia, R., and S. Wahba (1999), “ Causal Eﬀects in Non-Experimental Stud-
    ies: Re-evaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of the
    American Statistical Association 94: 1053-1062.

Ferejohn, J. (1986), “ Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control”, Public
     Choice 50: 5-25.

Fisman, R. and R. Gatti (1999), “ Decentralisation and Corruption: Cross-
    Country and Cross-State Evidence”, mimeo, World Bank.

Golden, M. and E. Chang (2000), “ Competitive Corruption: Factional Conßict
    and Political Corruption in Postwar Italy Christian Democracy”, mimeo,
    UCLA.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1997), “ Matching as an Econometric
    Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Program”,
    Review of Economic Studies 64: 605-654.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1998), “ Matching as an Econometric
    Evaluation Estimator”, Review of Economic Studies 65: 261-294.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, J. Smith, and P. Todd (1998), “ Characterizing Se-
    lection Bias Using Experimental Data,” Econometrica 66: 1017-1098.

Holmström, B. (1982), “ Managerial Incentive Problems - A Dynamic Perspec-
    tive”, in Essays in Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck,
    Helsinki, Swedish School of Economics.

                                      23
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (1997), Handbook
     of Electoral System Design, Stockholm, Sweden.
Inter-Parliamentary Union (various issues), “ Chronicle of Parliamentary Elec-
     tions” Geneva, Switzerland.
Kurian, G. ed. (1998), World Encyclopedia of Parliaments and Legislatures,
    Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers.
Lambsdorﬀ, J.G. (1998), “ Corruption in Comparative Perception”, in The Eco-
   nomics of Corruption, Jain, A. K. ed., Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Lambsdorﬀ, J. G. (2000), “ The Transparency International Corruption Per-
   ceptions Index. 1. edition 1995” Transparency International (TI) Report
   1996, 51-53. “ 2. edition 1996”, Transparency International (TI) Report
   1997,61-66. “3. Edition 1997”,Transparency International (TI) Newsletter,
   September 1997. “4. Edition”, September 1998. “5. edition”, October 1999.
   Transparency International (TI) Source Book, 2000. A complete documen-
   tation of the methodology and the data can be obtained at: http://www.uni-
   goettingen.de/~uwvw.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1999), “The
    Quality of Government”, The Journal of Law, Economics and Organization
    15: 222-79.
Le Duc L., G. Niemi, and P. Norris, eds. (1996), Comparing Democracies, Sage.
Lechner, M. (2000), “ IdentiÞcation and Estimation of Causal Eﬀects of Multi-
    ple Treatments under the Conditional Independence Assumption,” mimeo,
    University of St. Gallen.
Leite, C. and J. Weidmann (1999), “ Does Mother Nature Corrupt? Natural Re-
     sources, Corruption, and Economic Growth”, International Monetary Fund
     Working Paper, 99/85, July.

Myerson, R. B. (1993), “ Eﬀectiveness of Electoral Systems for reducing Gov-
   ernment Corruption: A Game Theoretic Analysis”, Games and Economic
   Behaviour 5: 118-132.
Persson, T., G. Roland, and G. Tabellini (2000) “ Comparative Politics and
    Public Finance”, Journal of Political Economy 108: 1121-1141.

                                     24
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (1999), “ The Size and Scope of Government: Com-
    parative Politics with Rational Politicians, 1998 Alfred Marshall Lecture”,
    European Economic Review 43: 699-735

Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2000), Political Economics: Explaining Economic
    Policy, MIT Press.

Polo, M. (1999), “ Electoral Competition and Political Rents”, IGIER Working
    Paper n.144.

Quain, A., ed. (1999), The Political Reference Almanac, 1999/2000 Edition,
    Keynote Publishing Co. US. Available at www.polisci.com.

Rauch, J. E. (1995, “ Choosing a Dictator: Bureaucracy and Welfare in Less
   Developed Polities” NBER Working Paper 5196.

Rosenbaum, P. and D. Rubin (1983), “ The Central Role of the Propensity Score
    in Observational Studies for Causal Eﬀects,” Biometrika 70: 41-55.

Rosenbaum, P. and D. Rubin (1984), “ Reducing Bias in Observational Studies
    Using SubclassiÞcation on the Propensity Score,” Journal of the American
    Statistical Association 79: 516-524.

Rubin, D. (1974), “ Estimating Causal Eﬀects of Treatments in Randomized and
    Nonrandomized Studies,” Journal of Educational Psychology 66, 688-701.

Rubin, D. (1977), “ Assignment to a Treatment Group on the Basis of a Covari-
    ate,” Journal of Educational Statistics 2: 1-26.

Svensson, J. (1998), “ The Control of Public Policy: Electoral Competition, Po-
    larization and Primary Elections”, mimeo, The World Bank.

Tanzi, V. (1998), “ Corruption Around the World: Causes, Consequences, Scope,
    and Cures”, IMF Staﬀ Papers 45: no.4.

Treisman, D. (2000), “ The Causes of Corruption: A Cross-National Study,”
     Journal of Public Economics 76: 399-457.

UNESCO (various issues), World Communication and Information Report, UN-
   ESCO Publishing.



                                     25
Wacziarg, R. (1996), “ Information to Create Colonization Dummies”, mimeo,
   Harvard University.

Wei, S.J. (1997a), “ How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors”, NBER
    Working Paper 6030.

Wei, S.J. (1997b), “ Why is Corruption so Much More Taxing Than Tax? Arbi-
    trariness Kills”, NBER Working Paper 6255.

World Bank (1997-99), World Development Report, New York, Oxford University
    Press.




                                     26
                              DATA APPENDIX


Dependent variable and weight
CPI = Proxy for Political Corruption and “Grand” Bureaucratic Corruption.
Corruption Perceptions Index published by Transparency International, NGO for
worldwide Þght against corruption, describes the level of perceived corruption
in the public sector using a poll of political risk indexes. Original scores range
from 0 (completely corrupt) to 10 (clean). Average of CPI indexes for years
1997, 1998, and 1999. Source: Transparency International. With regard to the
1997 Corruption Perceptions Index, data for a larger sample were taken from
Lambsdorﬀ (1998), although the original limit of four surveys was not satisÞed
for all the observations. The index is inverted in the scale by subtracting values
from 10 to make the results more intuitive.
STDEV = The standard deviation mentioned is referred to the diﬀerent rank-
ings given to a speciÞc country by the diﬀerent polls considered in the CPI. Its
inverse is used as a weight to adjust for measurement error in corruption. Source:
Transparency International.

Socio-Economic Variables
EDU = Proxy for the expected level of schooling and education in the country.
Data show total enrollment in primary and secondary education, regardless of
age, expressed as a percentage of the population age-group corresponding to the
national regulations for these two levels of education. Average on the period
1994-96. Source: UNESCO.
ELF = Index of Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization approximates for the level of
lack of ethnic and linguistic cohesion within a country. It ranges from 0 (ho-
mogeneous) to 1 (strongly fractionalized) and averages 5 diﬀerent indexes. The
components are: 1) Atlas Narodov Mira, 1960; 2) Muller, 1964; Roberts, 1962; 4)
and 5) Gunnemark, 1991. Source: La Porta et al. (1999). For Central and East-
ern Europe countries computations follow Mauro (1995) with data from Quain
(1999).
OPEN = Trade as a share of PPP. GDP is the sum of merchandise exports and
imports measured in current U.S. dollars divided by the value of GDP converted
to international dollars using purchase power parity conversion factors. It is a
proxy for the level of openness of the national market to competition (see Ades
and Di Tella, 1999). Data are average for years 1996 and 1997. Source: World


                                       27
Development Indicators (WDI, World Bank). We computed observations for Bel-
gium, Botswana, Iceland, and Tanzania with World Bank’s alternative data and
same methodology.
POP = Population in millions. It is based on the de facto deÞnition of population,
which counts all residents regardless of legal status or citizenship - except for
refugees not permanently settled in the country of asylum, who are generally
considered as part of the population of the country of origin. The values shown
are the average of midyear estimates for the period 1996-1999. Source: World
Development Indicators (WDI, World Bank).
Y = Gross National Product converted to international dollars using purchase
power parity rates. An international dollar has the same purchasing power over
GNP as a U.S. dollar in the United States. The values shown are the average of
midyear estimates for the period 1996-1999. Source: World Development Indica-
tors (WDI, World Bank).

Geographic and institutional variables14
CATH = Percentage of the total population belonging to the Roman Catholic
religion for the period 1980-1990. Source: La Porta et al. (1999).
COLO(ES, FR, or UK ) = Dummy variable taking value 1 if the country has, for
a signiÞcant time, been a colony of Spain (or Portugal) (ES), United Kingdom
(UK), or France (FR), and 0 otherwise. Source: Wacziarg (1996). The COLOTH
dummy was computed as COLOTH = EVERCOL - COLES - COLUK - COLFR.
In order to weight for the colonial exposition, we multiplied these dummy variables
by (250 -TIME IND)/250, where 250 was the default time of independence value
for non-colonies.
CONFU = Religious tradition dummy, taking value 1 if the main religious tradi-
tion in the country is Confucianism, 0 otherwise. Source: Wacziarg (1996).
EVERCOL = Dummy variable taking value 1 if the country has ever been a
colony since 1776, 0 otherwise. Source: Wacziarg (1996)
LEGOR_(UK, FR, GE, SO, SC ) = Dummy variable for the origin of the legal
system and, consequently, of the original electoral law for each country. Five
possible origins are considered: Anglo-Saxon Common Law (UK ), French Civil
Law (FR), German Civil Law (GE ), Socialist Law (SO), and Scandinavian Law
(SC ). Source: La Porta et al. (1999).
  14
    We are grateful to Rafael La Porto et al. and to Romain Wacziarg for sharing their data
with us.



                                            28
OECD = Dummy variable for OECD member countries, taking value 1 if a coun-
try is OECD member, 0 otherwise. Source: Persson and Tabellini (1998).
PROT = Percentage of the total population belonging to the Protestant religion
for the period 1980-1990. Source: La Porta et al. (1999).
TIME IND = Years of independence of the country since 1748. (Note that we
considered the default value of 250 for the non-colonies and the USA). Source:
Wacziarg (1996).

Political Variables
CONSTIT = Total number of primary and secondary (plus tertiary, if indicated)
electoral districts in the country. Only territorial districts are considered in the
computations. A 1 is added only when national district is explicitly mentioned.
Sources: Quain (1999).
INSTAB = Average number of government leaders per year (number of govern-
ment leaders in the recent period divided by the length of period in years).
    Recent period: most countries = Jan. 1980 - Dec. 1993; former USSR =
Jan. 1991 - Dec. 1994; post communist Europe = Jan. 1990 - Dec. 1994.
Must be > 14 days to count. Leader is PM in parliamentary systems, presi-
dent or head of state in presidential or non-democracy. Source Rulers database:
http//www.geocities.com/Athens/1058/rulers.html.
LISTMPS = Number of legislators in lower or single chamber for the latest legis-
lature that has been appointed through party list voting mechanisms (open and
closed) and diﬀerent formulas (D’Hondt; Saint Lagüe; Hagenbach-Bischoﬀ; LR-
Hare; LR-Droop). Note that we had to deal with some ambiguous cases. We
included Switzerland’s panachage because of the strong weight of party inßuence,
but excluded Chile’s dual majority list allocation because of the clear plurality-
type rationale. Appointed or ex oﬃcio members of the Parliament are excluded.
Sources: Quain (1999) and Kurian (1998).
MAJ = Dummy variable taking value 1 in the presence of either a majority or a
plurality electoral rule, 0 otherwise. In ambiguous cases we used the presence of
party list vote or not to make a distinction between MAJ and SEMI. For example,
dual majority in Chile is classiÞed as 1, while Italy, with a 14 of total seats PR
allocated, is classiÞed as 0 (and SEMI = 1). Only legislative elections for lower
or single house are considered. Sources: Cox (1997), International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance (1997), Quain (1999), and Kurian (1998).
MPS = Number of elected legislators in lower or single chamber for the latest
legislature of each country. Appointed or ex oﬃcio members of the Parliament are


                                        29
excluded. Source: International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance
(1997), Quain (1999), and Kurian (1998).
POLRIGHT = Proxy for the level of respect of the basic political rights (such as
the right of free political association). The index ranges from 1 (max freedom)
to 7 (complete absence of political liberties). Average of data from 1990/91 to
1998/99 assessments. Source: Freedom House.
SEMI = Dummy variable taking value 1 in the presence of speciÞc types of semi-
proportional representation, 0 otherwise. Semi-proportional electoral rule identi-
Þes those mixed electoral systems characterized by both PR and FPTP represen-
tation for allocating seats (for example Bolivia, Germany, Italy after the reform,
etc.). The share of the total number of seats allocated under the Proportional rule
can be greater or smaller than the complementary plurality-allocated share. Only
legislative elections are considered. Sources: Cox (1997), International Institute
for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (1997), Quain (1999), and Kurian (1998).




                                        30
                               Statistical Appendix


The matching estimator
Consider matching (with replacement) on the nearest unit, in terms of estimated
propensity scores, yielding a set of controls i ∈ C matched to the group of treated
i ∈ T, on the common support of the propensity score. The estimator for the
diﬀerence in means is given by:
                               1 X           1 X
                      τM =      T
                                    CP IiT − T    wi CP IiC ,                       (A1)
                              N i∈T         N i∈C

where N T denotes the size of the treated group and wi the number of times a
particular control i ∈ C is used in the matching.
   Assume that these observations are independent and treat the weights wi as
Þxed. Furthermore, assume that the variance of CP I is the same within each
group C and T , but potentially diﬀerent across these groups. Then we can com-
pute (as in Lechner, 2000) the variance of τ M as:
                               1 2X                 X
          Var(τ M )   =   (     T
                                  ) [ Var(CP IiT ) + (wi )2 Var(CP IiC )]           (A2)
                              N      i∈T            i∈C
                                                P             2
                         1                        i∈C (wi )
                      =    [Var(CP IiT ) +                        Var(CP IiC )] .
                        NT                          NT
As is evident from (A2), there is a relatively strong penalty from ”overusing”
some observations, particularly in small samples. Note that if the matching yields
a single control for each treated unit, we get the conventional formula:
                                  1
                   Var(τ M ) =     T
                                     [Var(CP IiT ) + Var(CP IiC )] .
                                 N
Our standard errors are computed from (A2). As Lechner (2000) notes, the result
is only an approximation as it does not take into account the estimation of the
propensity score, and hence the uncertainty about the weights wi .

The stratiÞcation estimator
Consider now the cruder stratiÞcation estimator (as e.g., in Deheija and Wahba,
1999), which forms a weighted average of the diﬀerence in means across the dis-
crete bins, b = 1, ...B, produced by the propensity score estimation. Its formula


                                          31
is:
                         1 X T X 1                    X 1
              τS =         [ N b (        T
                                            CP Ii
                                                 T
                                                   −        C
                                                              CP IiC )]         (A3)
                        NT b       i∈Tb Nb           i∈Cb Nb

                         1 X       T
                                        X NbT X
                    =     T
                            [ CP Ii  − (    C
                                                   CP IiC )],
                        N i∈T            b Nb i∈Cb


where Tb , Cb are the sets of treated and control observations in bin b and NbT , NbC
the corresponding number of observations.
   With the same assumptions as above, we can derive the variance of τ S :

                             1 2 T                 X NbT 2 C
        Var(τ S )   =   (      ) [N Var(CP Ii
                                             T
                                               ) +  ( C ) Nb Var(CP IiC )]      (A4)
                            NT                     b Nb
                         1           T
                                           X NbT NbT
                    =      [Var(CP Ii  ) +     T NC
                                                     Var(CP IiC )] .
                        NT                 b N    b

As is evident from (A4), there is a penalty for a small number of controls relative
to treatments in a bin, particularly if that bin includes a signiÞcant share of the
treated units in the sample. Suppose that NbT = NbC for all b. Then, (A4) again
produces the conventional formula:
                                   1
                    Var(τ S ) =      [Var(CP IiT ) + Var(CP IiC )] .
                                  NT
Our (approximate) standard errors of the stratiÞcation estimates are computed
from (A4).




                                           32
                       Table 1 (begins)
                Political and corruption data
    Country          PLIST      DISMAG         CPI       RESIDUAL
   Argentina          1.00          0.91         7.06         0.89
    Australia         0.00          0.00         1.25        -1.13
     Austria          1.00          0.95         2.43        -0.46
 Bangladesh           0.00          0.00         8.20        -0.71
    Belarus           0.00          0.00         6.77         0.71
    Belgium           1.00          0.87         4.68         2.30
     Bolivia           n/a          0.93         7.55         n/a
   Botswana           0.00          0.00         4.73         0.06
      Brazil          1.00          0.95         6.11        -0.80
    Bulgaria          0.50          0.87         6.62         0.30
   Cameroon           0.68          0.68         8.28         1.09
    Canada            0.00          0.00         0.83        -1.28
      Chile           0.00          0.50         3.42        -2.56
   Colombia           1.00          0.80         7.56         0.71
  Costa Rica          1.00          0.88         4.28        -2.10
  Cyprus (G)          1.00          0.89         3.39        -1.20
Czech Republic        1.00          0.96         5.13         1.56
   Denmark            0.98          0.91         0.02        -0.40
    Ecuador           0.85          0.74         7.30         0.40
      Egypt           0.00          0.50         7.29         0.36
  El Salvador         1.00          0.82         6.56        -1.09
    Estonia           1.00          0.89         4.15         0.53
    Finland           1.00          0.93         0.37        -0.25
     France           0.00          0.00         3.35         0.15
   Germany            0.50          0.48         1.96        -0.33
     Ghana            0.00          0.00         6.91        -0.19
     Greece           0.98          0.81         4.95         1.52
  Guatemala           0.20          0.71         6.61        -0.86
   Honduras           1.00          0.86         8.17         0.63
    Hungary           0.54          0.49         4.87         0.96
    Iceland           1.00          0.87         0.62         0.46
      India           0.00          0.00         7.15        -0.62
   Indonesia          1.00          0.94         7.86         1.30
     Ireland          0.00          0.75         1.94        -0.56
      Israel          1.00          0.99         2.71        -1.55
       Italy          0.25          0.20         5.22         1.35
  Ivory Coast         0.00          0.12         7.45         0.02
    Jamaica           0.00          0.00         6.20         0.97
      Japan           0.40          0.38         3.88         0.49
     Jordan           0.00          0.75         5.54         n/a
      Kenya           0.00          0.00         7.73         0.36
      Latvia          1.00          0.95         6.26         0.75
 Luxembourg           1.00          0.93         1.30         n/a
 Note: The residuals refer to the regression in Table 3, Column 1




                                 33
                     Table 1 (concludes)
                 Political and corruption data
    Country          PLIST      DISMAG          CPI      RESIDUAL
     Malawi            0.00          0.00        5.90        -1.26
    Malaysia           0.00          0.00        4.87        -0.01
   Mauritius           0.00          0.68        5.05         0.18
     Mexico            0.40          0.40        6.88         0.26
    Morocco            0.00          0.00        6.25        -0.83
    Namibia            1.00          0.68        4.70         0.66
  Netherlands          1.00          0.88        0.99        -0.29
 New Zealand           0.46          0.45        0.66        -1.39
   Nicaragua           1.00          0.80        6.57        -1.26
     Nigeria           0.00          0.25        8.25         0.48
    Norway             1.00          0.88        1.06         0.82
    Pakistan           0.00          0.00        7.52        -0.55
    Paraguay           1.00          0.78        8.27         1.32
      Peru             1.00          0.99        6.03        -0.68
  Philippines          0.00          0.00        6.68         0.15
     Poland            1.00          0.88        5.37         0.44
    Portugal           0.98          0.90        3.28        -0.65
    Romania            1.00          0.88        6.75         0.39
     Russia            0.50          0.50        7.64         1.33
     Senegal           0.50          0.64        6.65        -1.05
   Singapore           0.00          0.74        1.05        -0.47
Slovak Republic        1.00          0.97        6.25         0.63
  South Africa         1.00          0.98        4.95         0.52
  South Korea          0.15          0.15        5.90         0.76
      Spain            0.99          0.85        3.80         0.21
   Sri Lanka           1.00          0.88        5.83        -0.85
     Sweden            1.00          0.91        0.58        -0.31
  Switzerland          0.98          0.87        1.20        -0.29
     Taiwan            0.20          0.86        4.69         n/a
    Tanzania           0.00          0.00        7.98        -0.74
    Thailand           0.00          0.61        6.91         0.51
     Tunisia           0.12          0.84        5.32        -0.75
     Turkey            1.00          0.86        6.60         1.88
    Uganda             0.00          0.00        7.84        -0.52
    Ukraine            0.00          0.00        7.33         0.70
United Kingdom         0.00          0.00        1.49        -0.84
 United States         0.00          0.00        2.46         0.07
    Uruguay            1.00          0.81        5.72        -0.05
   Venezuela           0.99          0.88        7.44         0.84
    Vietnam            0.00          0.65        7.37        -0.71
   Yugoslavia          1.00          0.74        7.18         n/a
     Zambia            0.00          0.00        6.84        -0.45
   Zimbabwe            0.00          0.00        5.98        -0.37
Note: The residuals refer to the regression in Table 3, Column 1




                                 34
                                                    Table 2
                                              Partial Correlations
           CPI      Y      POLRIGHT   EDU         ELF     PROT       CATH     CONFU    PLIST   DISMAG   INSTAB


   Y       -0.86
POLRIGHT   0.66    -0.66
  EDU      -0.69   0.62      -0.66
  ELF      0.40    -0.45     0.55     -0.53
 PROT      -0.57   0.34      -0.31    0.38        -0.05
 CATH      0.06    0.09      -0.26    0.14        -0.22     -0.33
 CONFU     -0.01   0.14      0.13     -0.03       -0.13     -0.13     -0.24
 PLIST     -0.17   0.18      -0.37    0.36        -0.30     0.19      0.32     -0.23
 DISMAG    -0.20   0.20      -0.26    0.31        -0.34     0.08      0.28     -0.03    0.86
 INSTAB    0.02    0.01      -0.27    0.07        -0.17     0.02      -0.04    0.06     0.14    0.14
  MAJ      0.18    -0.21     0.38     -0.35       0.39      -0.11     -0.33    0.12    -0.86    -0.82    -0.23
                                             Table 3
                                              WLS
                                       Dependent Variable: CPI
                       (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)

  Intercept           16.23           14.33            14.25            13.62           15.40            15.55
                     (10.45)          (7.74)           (7.60)           (6.23)          (7.05)           (8.21)

  LOG(Y)              -0.97            -0.85            -0.84           -0.75            -0.89            -0.96
                     (-4.77)          (-3.95)          (-3.63)         (-3.15)          (-3.84)          (-4.49)

LOG(POP)               0.12            0.10             0.13             0.13            0.07             0.14
                      (1.39)          (1.10)           (1.47)           (1.29)          (0.72)           (1.56)

    EDU               -0.02            -0.02            -0.02           -0.03            -0.02            -0.02
                     (-2.18)          (-2.12)          (-2.72)         (-2.98)          (-2.67)          (-1.98)

   OECD               -1.59            -1.58            -1.54           -1.27            -1.37            -1.57
                     (-4.39)          (-4.59)          (-4.42)         (-0.99)          (-3.55)          (-4.55)

   OPEN               -0.01            -0.01            -0.01           -0.01            -0.01            -0.01
                     (-2.73)          (-2.79)          (-2.41)         (-3.00)          (-2.66)          (-2.73)

    ELF               -0.79            -0.80            -0.50           -0.47            -0.81            -0.67
                     (-1.68)          (-1.75)          (-1.04)         (-0.99)          (-1.74)          (-1.47)

   PROT               -0.02            -0.02            -0.01           -0.01            -0.02            -0.02
                      (3.00)          (-3.81)          (-1.86)         (-1.25)          (-3.77)          (-3.38)

   CATH                0.01            0.01             0.01             0.01            0.01             0.01
                      (2.36)          (1.45)           (0.93)           (0.79)          (1.21)           (1.62)

  CONFU                 0.3             0.50            0.81             1.27            0.48             0.16
                      (0.60)          (0.961)          (1.51)           (2.42)          (0.88)           (0.33)

   PLIST                               1.49             1.51             1.35            1.04
                                      (2.67)           (2.72)           (2.25)          (1.70)

  DISMAG                               -1.10            -1.48           -1.33            -0.86
                                      (-1.67)          (-2.17)         (-1.98)          (-1.30)

POLRIGHT                               0.17             0.10             0.19            0.22             0.11
                                      (1.55)           (0.90)           (1.70)          (1.91)           (1.05)

  INSTAB                               0.86             0.70             0.44            0.50             0.78
                                      (1.92)           (1.31)           (0.83)          (1.03)           (1.71)

    MAJ                                                                                                   -0.60
                                                                                                         (-2.44)

  LEGAL               NO               NO               YES             YES              NO               NO

COLONIES              NO               NO               NO              YES              YES              NO



   Adj. R 2           0.87             0.89             0.89            0.90             0.89             0.89
   N. Obs.             82               80               80              80               80               81



Notes: Weights are the Inverse of STDEV for CPI observations. T-statistics in parentheses. LEGAL= YES means
that we are controlling for legal origin. COLONIES = YES means that we are controlling for colonial origin.
                                                Table 4
                                                  OLS
                                          Dependent Variable: CPI
                         (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)                  (6)

  Intercept            15.74             12.99            13.15             11.94             13.87               14.43
                       (9.34)            (6.94)           (7.01)            (5.49)            (6.31)              (7.25)

  LOG(Y)                -1.02            -0.82             -0.85             -0.73            -0.84                -0.95
                       (-4.26)          (-3.76)           (-3.82)           (-3.14)          (-3.47)              (-4.09)

 LOG(POP)               0.16              0.15             0.18              0.20              0.13                0.18
                       (2.03)            (1.77)           (2.32)            (2.21)            (1.46)              (2.22)

    EDU                 -0.01            -0.01             -0.02             -0.02            -0.02                -0.01
                       (-1.58)          (-1.89)           (-1.91)           (-2.62)          (-2.53)              (-1.49)

   OECD                 -1.27            -1.30             -1.28             -1.10            -1.12                -1.30
                       (-2.95)          (-3.51)           (-3.52)           (-2.95)          (-2.75)              (-3.31)

   OPEN                 -0.01            -0.01             -0.01             -0.01            -0.01                -0.01
                       (-3.91)          (-3.35)           (-2.54)           (-3.04)          (-2.97)              (-3.51)

     ELF                -0.37            -0.25             0.08              0.07             -0.22                -0.11
                       (-0.84)          (-0.48)           (0.14)            (0.12)           (-0.38)              (-0.23)

   PROT                 -0.02            -0.02             -0.02             -0.01            -0.02                -0.02
                       (-3.40)          (-3.88)           (-1.95)           (-1.31)          (-3.92)              (-3.33)

   CATH                 0.01              0.01             0.01              0.01              0.01                0.01
                       (2.06)            (1.47)           (1.04)            (1.14)            (1.40)              (1.43)

  CONFU                 0.48              0.57             0.91              1.18              0.51                0.33
                       (1.22)            (1.38)           (1.78)            (2.58)            (1.44)              (0.83)

   PLIST                                  1.43             1.38              1.20              1.03
                                         (2.73)           (2.48)            (1.93)            (1.67)

  DISMAG                                 -1.04             -1.33             -1.12            -0.82
                                        (-1.85)           (-2.25)           (-1.76)          (-1.27)

POLRIGHT                                  0.19             0.11              0.19              0.23                0.12
                                         (1.85)           (1.02)            (2.05)            (2.18)              (1.18)

  INSTAB                                  1.14             0.88              0.69              0.72                1.00
                                         (3.10)           (1.95)            (1.61)            (1.57)              (2.78)

     MAJ                                                                                                           -0.58
                                                                                                                  (-2.05)

   LEGAL                NO                NO               YES               YES              NO                   NO

COLONIES                NO                NO               NO                YES              YES                  NO



   Adj. R 2             0.84              0.87             0.88              0.89             0.87                 0.87
   N. Obs.               82                80               80                80               80                   81


Notes: White corrected t-statistics in parentheses. LEGAL = YES means that we are controlling for legal origin.
COLONIES = YES means that we are controlling for colonial origin.




                                                          38
                                            Graph 1
     Histogram of Estimated Propensity Score Strata for treated and controls
40


35


30


25


20


15


10


5


0
          0-0.2              0.2-0.4             0.4-0.6         0.6-0.8   0.8-1

                                           Estimated p(Xi)

              5 units discarded, first bin contains 9 controls
              Solid = Treated (MAJ = 0)
              Dashed = Control (MAJ = 1)




                                                39
                                             Graph 2
                    Propensity Score for Treated and Matched Countries


1


0.8



0.6



0.4


0.2


0
      1   3   5 7     9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53



                    Treated units indexed from lowest to highest estimated p(Xi)

                    Solid = Treated (MAJ = 0)
                    Dashed = Control (MAJ = 1)




                                                   40
                                             Table 5
Estim ates of Average Effect on CPI of N on-M ajoritarian Elections
                    N on-param etric                   Param etric                   N um ber of
                                                                                     controls
                    M ean difference                   R egression
                                                       coefficient

M atching                    0.95                            0.43                         13
                            (1.14)                          (0.19)



Stratification               0.28                            0.17                         26
                            (0.82)                          (0.29)



Standard errors in parentheses.
M ean differences computed as in the Appendix.
Regression coefficients from linear regression of CPI on (1 –M AJ) and all variables that enter the Probit,
estim ated by O LS on stratified sample and b y W LS on the matched sam ple, the weights on each control
reflecting the num ber of tim es it is used in the m atching.




                                                  41
