                                                         Table of Contents

I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

II. Models of Individual and Aggregate Labor Supply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      Consumption Side of the Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      Lucas and Rapping’s Divisible Representative Agent Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      Micro-level Indivisible Labor, Employment Lotteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      Aggregation of Problem (IN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Divisible and Indivisible Models Generate the Same Macro Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
      Divisible and Indivisible Models Have the Same Welfare Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

III. Interpreting the Analytical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 13
        Just a Bit of Aggregation Renders Indivisibility Invisible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                           13
        Lotteries and Contingent Claims – Realistic or Analytically Convenient? . . . . . . . . . . .                                        16
        Other Dimensions of Heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      18
        Aggregate Studies of Employment have a Simple Microeconomic Interpretation . . . . .                                                 20
        The Logical Possibility of Backward-Bending Aggregate Labor Supply . . . . . . . . . . . .                                           23

IV. Two Generalizations of the Indivisible Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
      “Intensive” and “Extensive” Margins in Divisible and Indivisible Economies . . . . . . . . . 26
      Time-Aggregated Nonlinear Tax Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

V. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

VI.       Appendix I: Individual and Aggregate Labor Supply with Consumption-Leisure
          Nonseparabilities
           . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

VII. Appendix II: The Distribution of Reservation Wages without Transfers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

VIII. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
“A small fall in the price of hats or watches will not affect the action of everyone; but it will induce
a few persons, who were in doubt whether or not to get a new hat or a new watch, to decide in favor
of doing so. ...But the economist has little concern with particular incidents in the lives of individuals
...the variety and fickleness of individual action are merged in the comparatively regular aggregate
of the action of many.” Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics, III.iii.5.




I. Introduction
        Employment is an important “margin” of labor supply (Coleman 1984, Heckman 1993) and
many have emphasized the micro-econometric implications of discrete choice in the labor market.
But what are the implications of “indivisible labor” for aggregate data – measures of economic
activity that are aggregated over time and across people? Some such as Hansen (1985), Hansen and
Sargent (1988), Rogerson (1988), Plosser (1989), Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991), Kydland and
Prescott (1991), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992), and Cho and Cooley (1994) have argued that
the indivisibility of labor means that there is a lot – even infinite – substitution of work over time.
Others (e.g., Ashenfelter 1980, p. 547) suggest that the importance of the employment margin relative
to the “hours” margin reflects labor market inflexibilities permitting little substitution of work over
time. Others (e.g., Ben Porath 1973, Heckman 1978) do not take a stand on this issue, emphasizing
instead that aggregate labor supply is necessarily a complicated function of individual behavior and
heterogeneity, although Ben Porath agrees that the substitution effect of a wage change on aggregate
employment must in theory exceed its wealth effect.
        The purpose of this paper is to analytically characterize, for an indivisible economy which has
some of the above models as special cases, the relationship between individual heterogeneity and
aggregate “labor supply.” This analytical characterization, when compared with that of a “divisible”
labor model, shows how (a) micro-level indivisibility of labor per se need not have implications for
aggregate data and (b) the classic aggregate studies of labor supply by Bowen and Finegan (1969),
Lucas and Rapping (1969), Mincer (1962), and others are consistent with the apparent importance
of the “employment margin” and have a simple microeconomic interpretation. In a sense, my proofs
are labor supply cousins of proofs in the production literature (e.g., Houthakker 1955) showing how
aggregate production functions can be simple, smooth, and regular even when firm-level production
possibilities are not smooth.
                                                       Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 2


        One definition of “indivisibility” is common in the labor and macroeconomics literatures (e.g.,
Diamond and Mirrlees (1978, 1986), Hansen (1985), Rogerson (1988), Hamilton (1988), Christiano
and Eichenbaum (1992)): work during some time interval must occur for exactly &
                                                                              n units of time or
there be no work at all. For example, the time interval might be a week with a person working
exactly forty hours during a week or not working at all. This indivisible environment can be
contrasted with the “divisible” labor environment described by Lucas and Rapping (1969, hereafter
LR) where workers may choose to work any fraction of any time interval. I show how any aggregate
data generated by the divisible labor economy can be generated by a similar parameterization of the
indivisible economy. Conversely, any aggregate data generated by the indivisible labor economy can
be generated by a similar parameterization of the divisible economy. Hence, the micro-level
indivisibility of labor does not by itself justify the constant marginal disutility of work assumed by
Hansen (1985), Hansen and Sargent (1988), Rogerson (1988), Plosser (1989), Greenwood and
Hercowitz (1991), Kydland and Prescott (1991), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992), Cho and Cooley
(1994), Crucini and Kahn (1996), Wu and Zhang (2000), and others in the literature. Moreover, my
result is stronger than Marshall’s claim that micro-indivisibility is “regularly merged” in the aggregate:
the equivalent pair of divisible and indivisible economies can be so similar in other micro-dimensions
that the continuous and regular aggregate labor supply function generated by the economy with
micro-level indivisibilities has a very simple microeconomic interpretation. This means, for example,
that the substitution effect of a wage change on aggregate employment may in theory be less than its
wealth effect. Such “backward-bending” aggregate labor supply can occur even when all labor is
supplied on the extensive margin, as long as some wage income is pooled over time or across
persons, because the extra wage income enjoyed in some working periods (or by some working
people) is used to finance nonwork in some other working period (or by some other workers).
        My basic results leave open the possibility that generalizations of the indivisible model might
have aggregate implications. I explore two such generalizations. The first shows how a model of
time aggregation and indivisible labor, while consistent with any nonnegative aggregate wage
elasticity of labor supply, might imply restrictions on the aggregate relation between employment
rates and hours – namely that hours per employee be less wage sensitive than employment rates at
low employment rates and more wage sensitive at high employment rates. Nonlinear and time-
aggregated tax rules are the second and more interesting generalization, suggesting that divisible and
                                                       Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 3


indivisible models may be different in terms of their predictions for responses to distortionary taxes.
This is not a point made by Hansen (1985) and those in the literature who have followed, but the
interactions between indivisibility and government policy may imply that labor supply is relatively
unresponsive to marginal tax rates.


II. Models of Individual and Aggregate Labor Supply
II.A. Consumption Side of the Models
       Individuals in the models care about their lifetime consumption and its allocation over time.
However, the intertemporal consumption allocation is not of particular interest here, so my analysis
uses a “consumption value function” U(c) to summarize this part of a consumer’s decision problem:


                                                        s.t. j e &D(t & 1) Qt ct # c
                                                               T
                     U(c) / max u(c1 , c2 , ÿ , cT)
                                  T                           t'1
                             {c t }t'1




where T $ 1 and e-D(t-1)Qt is the period t interest rate factor. The function U(c) depends on the rate
of time preference D and sequence of interest rate factors {Qt}, but its dependence is not relevant for
the results to be proved and is therefore suppressed by my notation. c may be interpreted as the
lifetime present value of consumption.
       Implicit in my use of a consumption value function in the analysis of labor supply is the
assumption that consumption and leisure are separable: a different rate of growth of consumption
(leisure) does not mean a different intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of leisure
(consumption). My Appendix I extends the analysis to utility functions that are not separable in
consumption and leisure; consumption-leisure separability is featured in the main text in order to
derive more transparent results and to facilitate comparisons with previous studies of indivisible labor
which typically have assumed separability.


II.B. Lucas and Rapping’s Divisible Representative Agent Model
       As a contrast to the indivisible labor model, it is useful to begin by introducing a divisible labor
environment. During a time interval – whose length I normalize to one – the representative individual
                                                         Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 4


may work from anywhere from 0 to nmax units of time. Time interval t work is paid at wage rate wt.
The present value of lifetime consumption C is financed out of the present value of lifetime earnings
and an initial asset stock a.
        The problem (LR) describes the representative agent's labor supply decisions when labor is
perfectly divisible. I denote the choice variables with capital letters C, N1, N2, etc to emphasize that
the LR model is a model of aggregates.


(LR) Optimal Divisible Labor in Discrete Time


                                   max U(C) & j e & D(t& 1) g t v( Nt )
                                                   T

                                     T
                                 C,{Nt }t'1       t '1


                                              , C ' a % j e & D(t& 1) Q t wt Nt
                                                               T
                       s.t. Nt 0 [0, nmax ]
                                                              t '1




where Nt is aggregate time worked during time period t, D is the rate of time preference, gt is an
aggregate preference parameter, a is the consumer's initial asset holdings, wt is the period t wage rate,
and Qt is the period t interest rate factor (defined net of the rate of time preference).
        Because of the assumed separability over time and the assumed separability of consumption
and leisure, (LR) is a special case of the LR (1969) model.1 Like LR’s (1969) model, any amount
of time worked in the interval [0,nmax] is feasible in each time interval for a (LR) consumer.
        For simplicity, I assume that the function v(N) does not vary over time although the marginal
disutility of work schedule varies over time to the extent that the parameter gt varies. I make two
assumptions (A1)-(A2) and one normalization (A3) about the disutility of work v(N) defined on
[0,nmax]:2
(A1)    v'(N) > 0


        1
        LR’s empirical specifications implicitly assume something like separability within and
across periods.
        2
         (A3) is a normalization because, if ln v'(N) integrated to some number g … 0, then same
marginal disutility of work could be represented by redefining the parameter g as geg and
redefining v(N) as ge-gv(N).
                                                            Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 5


(A2)   v''(N) > 0
        nmax


         m
(A3)           ln v )(N) dN ' 0
         0



(A4)   U'(C) > 0, U''(C) # 0


(A4) are the usual assumptions about the marginal utility of wealth.
       It will be useful to define a “parameterization” of (LR) to be (a,D,nmax,{wt,gt,Qt}) 0 ú2×ú+3T+1.
Wages and interest rates may be determined as part of a general equilibrium (as they are in Hansen
(1985) and Rogerson (1988)), but they are parameters from the point of view of a consumer's
decision problem.
       The first order conditions for the problem (LR) equate the marginal disutility of work to the
marginal utility of wealth times the discounted wage:

                              g t v )(Nt) ' U )(C) Q t wt       t ' 1, ÿ , T                            (1)




Together with the intertemporal budget constraint, the first order conditions (1) determine the optimal
lifetime sequence of labor supply.
       According to equation (1), the date t Frisch labor supply curve (namely, the graph of Nt vs.
ln wt holding the marginal utility of wealth UN(C) constant) is just the inverse of the log of the
marginal disutility of work schedule (i.e., the inverse of ln vN(@)). The Frisch labor supply curve is
worth noting because, as I show below, an analysis of it permits some mathematically simple
comparisons of divisible and indivisible economies.


II.C. Micro-level Indivisible Labor, Employment Lotteries
       In the indivisible model, an individual must either work 0 or &
                                                                     n hours during a time interval.
                                                          Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 6


Any amount of work between 0 and &
                                 n is not feasible for an individual.3 Time interval t work is
productive at rate wt, so an individual’s labor product during time interval t can be either 0 or wt&
                                                                                                    n.
Of course, the average time worked for a group of people during a time interval can be between 0
and &
    n , and average labor product between 0 and wt&
                                                  n.
        In order to model an individual labor’s supply in an indivisible environment, one might write
down an individual-level replicate of the (LR) model, and add the restriction that work in each time
interval be chosen from the set {0,&
                                   n }. Aggregates could then be modeled by integrating individual
choices across individuals. However, this approach is analytically inconvenient because the individual
choice problem is nonconvex. An alternative approach for modeling individual behavior in such an
environment is to allow for trade in lotteries.
        Consider consumers who choose a sequence of lotteries {Lt} offered by employers. The date
t lottery is: (1) an allowance Tt and (2) a probability of working B t. Consumers receive their
allowance at the beginning of the period regardless of the outcome of the lottery. The firm has
property rights over the labor output w&
                                       tn produced by each consumer chosen by the lottery to work.

The market for lotteries is competitive, so the only lotteries that will be traded are the actuarially fair
ones, which must satisfy Tt = Btwt&
                                  n . In words, the allowance equals the expected labor product.
        As a result of separable utility and trade in these lotteries, an individual’s labor supply is
stochastic, but his consumption is deterministic. Given a sequence of lotteries and a lifetime
preference profile, an individual’s expected lifetime utility is calculated as:


                 E U(c) & j e & D(t&1) (t nt /0 {Bt, (t}t'1 ' U(c) & j e &D(t &1) (t Bt n̄
                             T                                          T

                                              00
                                                      T

                          t '1                                       t'1




where nt is period t time worked and (t is a preference parameter. Here I am building a model of
individual labor supply, so my notation distinguishes nt, (t and c from the aggregates Nt, gt, and C in


        3
         Hansen (1985, p. 312) and others suggest that this indivisibility derives from fixed costs
of traveling to work, setting up the work day, or obtaining a job. Based on the suggestions of
Chapman (1909), Mulligan (1999) builds an explicit continuous time mathematical model of fixed
costs and the optimal bunching of work in time, and shows how aggregates (over time and across
persons) of such a model are indistinguishable from the (IN) and (LR) models. He notes one
exception, which I note in Section IV.A below.
                                                           Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 7


problem (LR).
        Notice that I have used an individual utility function that has linear disutility of work (tn. But
also notice that this linearity is of no consequence in an indivisible environment: we could start with
                                                                                 n ) = (t&
any nonlinear disutility of work function vt(nt), normalize vt(0) = 0, define vt(&       n , and have
exactly the utility function above.
        With this notation, it is straightforward to mathematically model an individual’s behavior in
an indivisible environment where there is trade in such lotteries. The problem (IN) is such a model:


(IN) Indivisible Labor in Discrete Time


                                      max U(c) & j e &D(t &1) (t Bt n̄
                                                      T

                                        T            t'1
                                    C,{Bt }t'1


                                           , c ' a % P(') % j e & D(t&1) Q t wt Bt n̄
                                                                   T
                     s.t. Bt 0 [0, 1]
                                                                  t '1




where a + P(') is the consumer’s initial wealth (more on P(') below). As in (LR), wt is the period
t wage rate and e-D(t-1)Qt is the period t interest rate factor. Notice that the marginal disutility of work
during time interval t e-D(t-1)(t can, in addition to a constant rate of discount, vary over time.


II.D. Aggregation of Problem (IN)
        In order to model aggregate labor supply in the indivisible environment, I aggregate the
behavior of heterogeneous individuals solving problem (IN). Two assumptions are used in the
aggregation, the first of which is (A5):


(A5) There are a continuum of individuals solving the problem (IN) who differ only according to
their life cycle disutility of work profile ' = {(1,(2,...,(T} 0 ú+T. The geometric mean preference
parameter in period t, gt, varies over time but the distribution F of preferences around that mean is
the same every period:
                                                      Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 8


                                       ln (t & ln g t ~ F    all t


                                             m
                                              x dF(x) ' 0



F is assumed to be once differentiable and strictly increasing on its support [x1,x2], and known to all
agents.


          Notice that (A5) requires consumers to have the same market value of time wt and same
interest rate factor Qt at each date as well as the same rate of time preference D. These might be
sources of heterogeneity that are potentially interesting for macroeconomics, but Section III.C shows
that this heterogeneity is not particularly related to the indivisibility of labor. Also notice that (A5)
makes no restrictions on the lifetime serial correlation of an individual’s marginal disutility of work.
          Consumers also have one component of their wealth, a, the same. Assumption (A6) describes
the heterogeneity of the other component, P(').


(A6)      Before their lifetime preference profiles ' = {(1,(2,...,(T} are revealed at date 0, (IN)
consumers choose an insurance contract P(') that has expected value zero and maximizes the
expected value of the problem (IN), where expectations are with respect to '. Ex ante, each
consumer has the same probability of drawing any particular preference profile.


          There will be heterogeneity of tastes in an economy generated by aggregating (IN) according
to (A5). Some consumers are “unlucky” enough to hate work in those periods when it is most
profitable, luck which affects the marginal utility of wealth U(c) in the problem (IN). The insurance
contracts specified by (A6) compensate unlucky consumers (and penalize lucky consumers) in just
the right amounts to guarantee the solutions to (IN) have the same marginal utility of wealth
regardless of '.
          In this model, consumer i's date t choice of employment lottery is determined according to:
                                                       Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 9



                                           ' 0 if (t > Qt wt U )(c)
                                                       i


                                   Bt
                                    i
                                        0 (0,1) if (t ' Qt wt U )(c)
                                                       i

                                                       i
                                           ' 1 if (t < Qt wt U )(c)



Because of the date zero trade in insurance contracts, consumption c and the marginal utility of
wealth UN(c) does not vary across consumers and is therefore not indexed by i. In the three cases
listed above, two of them are the “trivial” lotteries B=0 and B=1. Nontrivial lotteries occur only
when (t = QwUN(c)
           t t    which – given the continuity of F and the equality of QtwtUN(c) across consumers
– is a measure zero event.
       It is convenient to define the date t “reservation wage” person i to be the marginal adjusted

present value4 of nonwork time for the consumer, or ŵt / (t / U )(c) .5 Work occurs with positive
                                                           i       i



probability at date t whenever Qtwt (namely, the adjusted present value of the market wage) equals
                i
or exceeds ŵt .

       The fraction At of consumers working at date t is F( ln(QtwtUN(c)/gt) ). Define Nt to be the
date t average labor supply. Nt is computed according to:

                                                               Q t wt U )(c)
                         Nt ' At @ n̄ % (1 & At) @ 0 ' F ln                    n̄                  (2)
                                                                       gt




       Since the average insurance premium or award paid at date zero must be zero, an average


       4
         As in most life cycle models, “adjusted present value” reflects discounting at the interest
rate net of the rate of time preference. Recall that the interest rate factor making this adjustment
is denoted Qt in my model.

       5                                                                              i
           There are a variety of reasonable definitions of “reservation wage,” but ŵt is most
                                                   i
convenient for my purposes. Also notice that ŵt is, holding constant the wages for all other
persons in the economy, the highest wage for person i for which a utilitarian planner would assign
work to person i with probability zero.
                                                   Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 10


budget constraint can easily be computed by averaging the (IN) budget constraint across consumers:


                                  C ' a % j e & D(t& 1) Qt wt Nt
                                             T
                                                                                                   (3)
                                            t '1




Notice the similarity of this average budget constraint with the budget constraint for the divisible
problem (LR). The average budget constraint (3), the equations (2), and the equation c = C
determine average labor supply at each date.




II.E. Divisible and Indivisible Models Generate the Same Macro Data
        According to equation (2), the date t aggregate Frisch labor supply curve (namely, the graph
of Nt vs. ln wt holding the marginal utility of wealth UN(c) constant) is just the CDF for the taste
parameter ln (. As discussed above, the (LR) model’s Frisch labor supply curve is just the inverse
of the log of the marginal disutility of work schedule. Hence, a comparison of the Frisch labor supply
curves for the two economies suggests that the aggregate “disutility of work” is isomorphic with the
cross-sectional distribution of tastes.
        In order to prove this more rigorously, it is useful to define an aggregate “parameterization”
                   n ,{wt,gt,Qt}) 0 ú2×ú+ 3T+1. Notice that, like the aggregate problem (LR), the
of (IN) to be (a,D,&
aggregation of the problem (IN) has exactly 3T+3 parameters. Propositions 1 and 2 below show
how, when (LR) and (IN) are parameterized in the same way, they generate the same aggregate data.


Proposition 1 When aggregated across individuals according to (A5) and (A6), aggregate data on
earnings and hours {Ntwt,Nt} for any parameterization of the problem (IN) are identical to the
aggregate data {Ntwt,Nt} generated by some parameterization of the problem (LR).


                                            n ,{wt,gt,Qt}) 0 ú2×ú+3T+1 for the problem (IN).
Proof (i) Choose any set of parameters (a,D,&
(ii) When aggregated according to (A5) and (A6), average hours {Nt} satisfy (2) and (3), and c =
C.
(iii) Choose the same parameters (a,D,nmax,{w,g
                                             t t,Qt}) for the problem (LR) and choose any disutility
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 11


of wealth function v(N) that satisfies:
                                                         &1
                                          v )(N) / e F        ( N/ n̄ )




with F-1 defined at the end points according to F-1(0) = x1 and F-1(1) = x2. Notice that any such v(N)
is continuous and satisfies v'(N)>0, v''(N)>0, and the normalization (A3).
(iv) According to the first order conditions of the problem (LR), average hours {Nt} must satisfy
equation (1).
(v) By definition of the problem (LR), average hours {Nt} satisfy equation (3).


Proposition 2 The aggregate data {Nw,N
                                   t t t} generated by any parameterization of the problem (LR)

are identical to the aggregate data {Ntwt,Nt} obtained by aggregating some parameterization of the
problem (IN) across individuals according to (A5) and (A6).


Proof (i) Choose any set of parameters (a,D,nmax,{wt,gt,Qt}) 0 ú2×ú+3T+1 for the problem (LR)
(ii) According to the first order conditions of the problem (LR), average hours {Nt} must satisfy
equation (1).
(iii) By definition of the problem (LR), average hours {Nt} satisfy equation (3).
(iv) Choose the same parameters (a,D,&
                                     n ,{w,g
                                          t t,Qt}) for the problem (IN) and choose the distribution

function F according to:

                                          0   if x < ln v )(0)
                                    N (e )
                                        x
                           F(x) /             if x 0 [ ln v )(0) , ln v )(nmax)]
                                     nmax
                                          1   if x > ln v )(nmax)




where N is the inverse of v'(N), the marginal disutility of work. Notice that any such F(x) satisfies
F0[0,1], F'(x)>0, and the normalization for F displayed in (A5).
(v) When aggregated according to (A5) and (A6), average hours {Nt} from (IN) satisfy equations
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 12


(2), (3), and c = C.


II.F. Divisible and Indivisible Models Have the Same Welfare Implications
       Because there is some heterogeneity in the indivisible model but not in the divisible model,
it is only meaningful to compare aggregate welfare calculations for the two models. Propositions 3
and 4 show there are at least two sensible ways of aggregating welfare in the indivisible model to
produce calculations identical to their divisible counterparts:


Proposition 3 When the problem (IN) with rate of time preference D, maximum hours &
                                                                                  n , interest rate
factors {Q},
          t and average preference profile {gt} is aggregated across individuals according to (A5)

and (A6), the average willingness to pay for wage increase at any date t is the same as the willingness
to pay in problem (LR) with rate of time preference D, maximum hours &
                                                                     n , interest rate factors {Qt},
and preference profile {gt}.


Proof (i) In current value terms, the willingness to pay for a marginal increase in wt is Nt in the
divisible model. This follows from Roy's Identity.
(ii) In current value terms, the willingness to pay for a marginal increase in wt (taking his insurance
premium P(') as given) is Bt&
                            n for an individual in the indivisible model who purchases a date t
employment lottery offering probability Bt. This follows from Roy's Identity.
(iii) The average willingness to pay in the indivisible model is the average of Bt&
                                                                                  n , which is Nt.
(iv) Propositions 1 and 2 show that both models generate the same average labor supply Nt, so the
average willingness to pay is the same.


       Notice that the wage change hypothesized by Proposition 3 is not insured and the willingness
to pay varies across individuals in the indivisible model. Proposition 4 considers the willingness to
pay for insurable wage changes before each individual's preferences are revealed, defining “indirect
utility functions” for each model. V(a,{w})
                                         t  denotes the maximized value of the representative agent's
problem (LR) and Ṽ (a,{wt}) the maximized value of (IN) averaged across individuals.


Proposition 4 When the problem (IN) with rate of time preference D, maximum hours &
                                                                                  n , interest rate
                                                                Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 13


factors {Q},
          t and average preference profile {gt} is aggregated across individuals according to (A5)

and (A6), each individual's ex ante expected indirect utility Ṽ (a,{wt}) has the same derivatives as the
indirect utility V(a,{w})
                       t  for problem (LR) with rate of time preference D, maximum hours &
                                                                                         n , interest
rate factors {Qt}, and preference profile {gt}.


Proof (i) Note that, for the problem (LR), MV/Ma = U'(C) and MV/Mwt = U'(C)e-D(t-1)QtNt .
(ii) The expected indirect utility for the problem (IN) is:

                                                                                            ln 8Q t wt

                              ' U a % 'e                              & je
                                        T                                T

                                                                                               m
                        T                    & D(t &1)                         &D (t&1)
             Ṽ   a,{wt}t'1                              Q t wt Nt                        n̄             e x dF(x)
                                       t'1                               t'1
                                                                                               &4



                                   8 / U ) a % ' e &D (t&1) Qt wt N t
                                                          T

                                                         t '1




(iii) Using the expression above and the definition of Nt for the problem (IN), it is straight-forward
to show M Ṽ /Ma = U'(C) and M Ṽ /Mwt = U'(C)e-D(t-1)QtNt .
(iv) Since Nt is the same function of (a,{wt}) for the two models, higher order derivatives are the
same for V and Ṽ .


        Proposition 4 derives an equivalence between the indirect utility function for (LR) and an
aggregate indirect utility function defined for (IN). Thus Proposition 4 displays another sense in
which the aggregate willingness to pay for an aggregate wage change is the same in the two models.


III. Interpreting the Analytical Results
III.A. Just a Bit of Aggregation Renders Indivisibility Invisible
        When aggregated across individuals, the indivisible models of Diamond and Mirrlees (1978,
1986), Hansen (1985), Hamilton (1988), Rogerson (1988), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992) and
many others are equivalent to the divisible model of Lucas and Rapping (1969) defined over
aggregated measures. Thus, I argue that labor indivisibility (as modeled by these authors) per se has
no implications for aggregate labor market data. Although such an aggregation result may not be
particularly surprising – for example, Marshall suggests this in his Principles of Economics
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 14


(1920/1990), Hamermesh (1990) derives a smooth labor demand function in a micro model of lumpy
adjustment costs, and Hildenbrand (1974) demonstrates the smoothness of aggregate behavior in
economies with a continuum of agents – I am able to be precise about the mapping between the
heterogeneity and the smoothness of well known models of aggregate behavior. Indeed, the marginal
disutility of work schedule from the divisible model is nothing more than the inverse CDF from the
indivisible model, and vice versa.       Houthakker's (1955) proof – that the input demands of
heterogeneous Leontief firms can aggregate to a smooth industry demand – is in this regard a closer
and more well-known analytical cousin to my result. Houthakker's “fixed proportion” is analogous
to my labor indivisibility &
                           n while each of his firm's profit is analogous to my reservation wage.
Houthakker generates Cobb-Douglas input demand by aggregating across firms with identical profits
(namely zero) and fixed proportions distributed Pareto. My Proposition 1 generates (in a special case)
Cobb-Douglas labor supply by aggregating across consumers with identical “fixed proportions” (&
                                                                                              n)
and reservation wages distributed exponential. My proof requires trade in contingent claims, and
Houthakker’s does not, because we suppose that consumers maximize a nonlinear objective (utility)
while firms maximize a linear one (profits). Both models place upper limits on the amount supplied
by a particular agent (workers in mine, producers in his), limits which may be more realistic in my
application than in his.
        If we construct an economy of individuals solving the problem (IN) with preferences constant
over time and across persons, and with production depending on aggregate labor input, we have the
deterministic version of Hansen's (1985) model. To see this, notice that a nontrivial measure of
agents may demand nontrivial employment lotteries. Furthermore, because each agent has the same
ex post preference profile ', the only equilibrium date zero insurance contract is P(') = 0. In this
homogeneous special case, there exists a sequence of wages and interest rates {wt,Qt} so that, in
Hansen's (1985, p. 318) words, “the elasticity of substitution between leisure in different periods for
the 'representative agent' is infinite.” Hansen also shows that indivisibility is not necessary to deliver
this result – a quasilinear version of LR's divisible model (i.e., v(N) linear in N) also implies infinite
substitutability over time (see also my Proposition 1). However, my Proposition 2 shows that
indivisible labor is not sufficient to deliver infinite or even substantial substitution over time, or to
deliver the aggregate wealth effects that are to be expected when agents have quasilinear utility (i.e.,
no pure wealth effect on consumption). This point is important and quite contrary to the spirit of
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 15


Hansen's and Rogerson's papers (as well as later papers by Cho, Cooley, Kydland, and Prescott), so
I demonstrate it in an example.
                                         n ,{wt,gt,Qt}) 0 ú2×ú+3T+1 for the problem (IN) and
       Choose any set of parameters (a,D,&
aggregate solutions across individuals according to (A5) and (A6), taking the distribution function
              n with support [-4, 100 ln &
F(x) = ex/100/&                          n ]. Proposition 1 shows that the same aggregate data can be
generated by the LR model with v'(N) / N100. This model has practically no scope for substitution
over time: the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is 1/100. Furthermore, wealth effects in this
model are very different than they are in Hansen-Rogerson quasilinear special cases of the LR model.
       My proofs therefore show how Hansen's (1985) and Rogerson's (1988) findings of an infinite
equilibrium aggregate labor supply elasticity are not a consequence of indivisibility, but of (a) the
homogeneity of micro-level decisions, and (b) their definition of equilibrium. My Propositions
contradict Rogerson's (1988, pp. 3, 14) claims that indivisibility implies large aggregate labor supply
elasticities even when agents are heterogeneous in terms of their reservation wages. Nor is it true
that substitution along the “extensive” margin must be greater than substitution along the “intensive”
margin. Rogerson (1988, p. 14) defends his claims with a parametric example, but a comparison that
example with my Proposition 2 shows how Rogerson’s example still has a degenerate distribution of
reservation wages6 despite the existence of some heterogeneity of tastes. Indeed, any nonnegative
aggregate labor supply elasticity can be generated by either a divisible or an indivisible model.
       In a sense, Hansen's and Rogerson's lotteries are a source of preference heterogeneity because
they divide the population into two groups – those who work and those who do not. But the
“heterogeneity” is not revealed until after agents have made their decisions for the period.7 Hence
Hansen-Rogerson agents must all make the same decisions and, when those decisions are discrete,
aggregate behavior must be discrete. Under this interpretation, my departure from Hansen and
Rogerson is that heterogeneity is revealed before decisions are made and, as a result, agents make
different decisions which are continuous in the aggregate even when discrete at the micro level.




       6
        Recall that, in the context of a model with employment lotteries, I define a person’s
“reservation wage” to be his utility cost of a marginal increase in the probability of employment.
       7
        I owe this point to Robert Lucas, Jr.
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 16


III.B. Lotteries and Contingent Claims – Realistic or Analytically Convenient?
       The (IN) model is a simple and analytically convenient way to think about aggregate labor
supply in economies with indivisibilities and utility maximization because the aggregate labor supply
is the same as an otherwise equivalent (LR) economy, and the aggregate labor supply curve is nothing
more than a cumulative distribution function. Including employment lotteries in the model also
facilitates comparisons with Hansen’s and Rogerson’s models in which workers also trade
employment lotteries. But can the (IN) model, with its employment lotteries and “tastes insurance,”
be empirically relevant? After all, many sources of labor market data (e.g., the CPS), do not appear
to say much about employment lotteries or tastes insurance. Regarding the employment lotteries, it
is worth noting that, according to the (IN) model, only the trivial lotteries B=0 and B=1 are demanded
in the competitive equilibrium. This happens in the model because heterogeneity of consumer tastes
and date zero trade in consumption insurance8 result in a continuous distribution of gaps between
market and reservation wages, and nontrivial lotteries are demanded only by those with no gap. If
in fact nontrivial employment lotteries are rarely (if ever) observed, then employment lotteries are not
only analytically convenient, but their use the (IN) model also fits the facts.
       The transfers resulting from the (IN) model’s trade in tastes insurance are greater than
measure zero. Assessing the empirical relevance of this prediction raises two questions:
       C       How much “tastes insurance” is observed in fact?
       C       What is the quantitative importance of tastes insurance in the (IN) model?
In order to answer these questions, one needs to interpret heterogeneity of the marginal disutility of
work – remember that “tastes insurance” is the net lifetime transfer from workers who, especially
when the wage is high, happen to have low reservation wages to nonworkers who happen to have
high reservation wages. “Real world” counterparts to these nonworkers might be women, the sick,
or the disabled. Or they might be a generation of men who were unlucky enough to have a low
reservation wage when wages were low and a high reservation wage when it was high (e.g., the
generation of men of working age during the Great Depression and of retirement age after World War
II). “Real world” counterparts to the “tastes insurance” therefore include the sharing of resources



       8
         That the date zero trade in consumption insurance eliminates the demand for nontrivial
lotteries (B0(0,1)) in later periods is shown by Cole and Prescott (1997).
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 17


by husbands and wives,9 sick pay, disability insurance, and intergenerational transfers (both public and
private), respectively. Such transfers are easily a couple of percentage points of GDP in industrialized
countries. In some of these examples, it can even be argued that the real world transfers equalize
consumption between payer and recipient – as the transfers literally do in the (IN) model.10
        There are probably good empirical examples of consumption that varies with the reservation
wage in a way that is technically at odds with the (IN) model’s predictions. But models are by
definition an approximation of “reality,” so the real question is not whether differences between
observed transfers and the model’s taste insurance are literally zero but whether these differences are
quantitatively important and whether they are robust to otherwise innocuous modeling changes. On
the second point, my Appendix I shows how allowing for nonseparable utility can reduce the
magnitude of (IN) model tastes insurance, without sacrificing two key results derived from the
separable case: that (a) aggregate labor supply is the same as in an otherwise equivalent (LR) model
and (b) the aggregate supply curve takes its shape from a cumulative distribution function.
        On the first point, suppose for the sake of argument that we observe literally no transfers from
those with low reservation wages to those with high reservation wages. How would the analysis –
the Frisch labor supply curve in particular – be different if transfers in the model were restricted to
be literally zero? Appendix II shows how the aggregate labor supply curve takes its shape from the
distribution of reservation wages regardless of whether there is trade in tastes insurance. What
simplifies the analysis with tastes insurance is that the shape of the cross-sectional distribution of log
reservation wages is “exogenous,” taking its shape only from the cumulative distribution function F.
The reservation wage distribution departs from F without tastes insurance, and the magnitude of the
departure depends on the number of periods in a lifetime (T), the degree to which the marginal utility
of consumption diminishes, and the individual-level serial correlation of labor force status. The
Appendix calculates the magnitude of this difference for some interesting life cycle examples, and
suggests that it is quantitatively unimportant.
        In other words, an indivisible economy without tastes insurance and populated by life cycle


        9
         I owe this point to Yona Rubenstein.
        10
         Eg., Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999) look at some recent American and French data
suggesting that Social Security equalizes the consumption of workers and retirees in those two
countries.
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 18


savers can generate similar, although not identical, aggregate data to a similarly parameterized (LR)
model. This result is not surprising, since labor supply is not all that “indivisible” in a life cycle
context. The smallest labor supply decision has an infinitesimal effect on lifetime consumption and
the marginal utility of wealth in the (LR) model, and a small-but-larger-than-infinitesimal effect on
the marginal utility of wealth in the (IN) model – as long as the effect on lifetime consumption
(namely, e-D(t-1)Qtwt) is a small of lifetime income or the marginal utility of wealth does not diminish
too rapidly.


III.C. Other Dimensions of Heterogeneity
       Everyone in the Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988) economies has their “reservation wage”
(i.e., their marginal value of nonmarket time) exactly equal to their market wage. My (IN) model
generalizes that case to allow reservation wages to differ from market wages, and as a result implies
inelastic aggregate labor supply whenever the distribution of reservation wages is not particularly
dense in the neighborhood of market wages. But notice that preference heterogeneity is neither
necessary nor sufficient11 to derive such an implication. For example, preferences could be
homogeneous across persons and over time but the aggregate labor curve be smooth as a
consequence of heterogeneity across persons of market labor productivity. A variety of two sector
labor market models in the literature have this feature12 – such as Roy’s (1951) model or Heckman
and Sedlacek’s (1985) extension of that model. However, interpreting labor supply functions in Roy
models is complicated (consider, for example, the combination of the 2nd equation on Heckman and
Sedlacek’s p. 1081 with their 1st equation on p. 1082), even though heterogeneity is normally
distributed, and the models exclude life cycle components. Cho's (1995) simulation results also
suggest that smooth labor supply in the presence of indivisible labor might result from wage


       11
          To see that preference heterogeneity is not sufficient produce a nondegenerate joint
distribution of market and reservation wages, consider a special case in which persons have
different tastes and labor productivity in such a way that the two are perfectly correlated (I owe
this point to an anonymous referee). Or consider a one period special case of my (IN) model
without taste insurance (i.e., a model like Rogerson’s (1988, p. 14) example), for which the
distribution of tastes is homogeneous enough that everyone demands nontrivial lotteries.
       12
         At least if we depart from the original interpretations of these models, and think of one
sector as the market sector and the other sector as the nonmarket or leisure sector.
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 19


heterogeneity in a dynamic economy, although he considers only temporary heterogeneity and does
not show whether or not similar indivisible and divisible models can be distinguished with aggregate
data. Mulligan (2000) has a life cycle model with wage heterogeneity and indivisible labor and, by
allowing for trade in contingent claims, derives a set of results analogous to those derived here.
Namely it can still be shown that, with heterogeneous labor productivity and indivisible labor, labor
market aggregates can be interpreted as if they were generated by an otherwise similar divisible and
homogeneous model and that the aggregate Frisch labor supply function is a simple transformation
of the productivity-CDF from the heterogeneous economy.
        My basic analytical result is that any aggregate data generated from a model with micro-level
indivisibilities can be generated from an otherwise similar divisible model, and vice versa. Up to this
point, I have proven the result in an indivisible model with only one dimension of heterogeneity –
namely, the preference parameter dictating the marginal disutility of work. But my result can be
derived from models with a variety of dimensions of heterogeneity. To see this, consider the new
Assumption (A7):


(A7) In both the (LR) and (IN) economies, there are a continuum of individuals who differ according
to their life cycle wage profile W = {w1,w2,...,wT} 0 ú+T and their initial assets a. G(a,W) denotes the
joint distribution of those characteristics. For simplicity, these differences are known to individuals
prior to the trade in “tastes insurance” specified in (A6) and, in the (IN) model, G is independent of
the distribution of tastes F.


With Assumption (A7), and adjusting Assumption (A5) to eliminate the word “only,”
parameterizations of the (LR) and (IN) models are now (a,D,nmax,{wt,gt,Qt},G) and
(a,D,&
     n ,{w,g
          t t,Qt},G), respectively; the parameterizations include functions describing the distribution

of wages and assets. We now have Proposition 5:


Proposition 5 The data on aggregate hours and earnings generated by any parameterization of the
(LR) model aggregated across individuals according to (A7) are identical to data on aggregate hours
and earnings obtained by aggregating some parameterization of the (IN) model across individuals
according to (A5), (A6), and (A7).
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 20


Proof (i) Choose any feasible set of parameters (a,D,nmax,{wt,gt,Qt},G) for the problem (LR).
(ii) For each group of individuals with the same (a,W), apply the proof of Proposition 2.
(iii) Choose the same distribution G for the (IN) model as for the (LR) model, and obtain aggregates
for both models by integrating across groups using the distribution G.


I leave it to the reader to prove that the converse of Proposition 5 is also true, and that Proposition
5 can be generalized to allow for other dimensions of heterogeneity, including some taste
heterogeneity that is revealed prior to trade in tastes insurance.
        In words, similar indivisible and divisible economies generate the same aggregate data even
when there is heterogeneity in a variety of dimensions other than the disutility of work, as long as this
additional heterogeneity is the same in the divisible and indivisible economies. In this case, the date
t Frisch labor supply function for the group of people with the same marginal utility of wealth and the
same date t wage takes its shape from the CDF for tastes, F. What is no longer necessarily true in
this case is that prices and quantities aggregated across groups appear as if they were generated by
a representative agent. But this paper does not claim a representative agent always exists, only that
indivisible and divisible economies are indistinguishable with aggregate data. Moreover, while the
nonexistence of a representative agent may complicate the interpretation of economic aggregates
(problems which are the basis of criticisms of aggregate studies by Smith (1977, p. 249) and Pencavel
(1986, p. 34)), aggregation may also simplify the interpretation because the aggregates can be
understood without regard for micro-level discontinuities.13


III.D. Aggregate Studies of Employment have a Simple Microeconomic Interpretation
        Some of the most well known empirical studies of labor are studies of aggregates, such as
Mincer’s (1962) intercity and time series studies of female labor force participation, Bowen and
Finegan’s (1969) intercity and other aggregate studies of labor force participation by various
demographic groups, and Lucas and Rapping’s (1969) study of national employment over time.
These and many other studies look at the covariance over time, across cities, or across demographic
groups between a group’s employment or participation rate, and proxies for that group’s earnings


        13
         I emphasize the benefits of aggregation of micro-level discontinuities. See Grunfeld and
Griliches (1960) for examples of potential benefits of aggregating micro-level specification errors.
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 21


potential, nonlabor income, household situation, etc. How can the aggregate studies be interpreted?
Their authors often interpret the aggregates in terms of microeconomics’ basic consumer theory –
as if they were “chosen” by a single consumer operating in a convex environment – and view the
various control variables as proxies for the wage rate and the marginal utility of wealth. Ben Porath
(1973), Heckman (1978), and others question such an interpretation on the grounds that first order
conditions emphasized by the convex consumer theory cannot be expected to hold at the individual
level and that, as a consequence, aggregate labor supply is necessarily a complicated function of
individual behavior and heterogeneity.
        Ben Porath (1973), Heckman (1978), and Mincer and Ofek (1979) all raise the possibility that
an individual’s employment decision might indeed be an “intensive” one when viewed in a lifetime
context, although they disagree about the empirical relevance of such an interpretation. The debate
among these authors revolves around the magnitude of a person’s lifetime serial correlation of tastes
and/or employment status. But notice that, in my aggregation of (IN), I assume nothing about the
serial correlation of an individual's marginal disutility of work (. I assume for convenience that the
distribution of ( across persons is the same every period (up to an aggregate shifter of the geometric
mean gt), but this could result from each individual's drawing a single deviation from the population
mean for his entire lifetime, from many independent draws for each individual, or draws that are
imperfectly serially correlated over time for each individual. Formally, the difference between my
result, Ben-Porath's, and Heckman's, is that Ben-Porath and Heckman do not allow for “tastes
insurance,” employment lotteries, or a constant marginal utility of wealth UN. Taken literally, my
approach views the employment decision not only in a life cycle context, but also in an extended
household context – I cite sick pay, Social Security, and spousal resource sharing as examples of the
so-called taste insurance in the model.
        The fact that my Propositions 1-2 are consistent with any serial correlation of tastes means
that Mincer's (1962) use of a divisible model to interpret his empirical studies of employment rates
is consistent with a more general class of life cycle behaviors than Mincer initially supposed, as long
as the utility function of a group’s “representative agent” is interpreted in terms of within-group taste
heterogeneity rather than as a replicate of one person’s utility function. In other words, aggregate
labor supply equates “the” marginal value of time with the wage rate and, because of the trade in
securities among consumers, that marginal value of time is a stable function of a few aggregate
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 22


variables such as aggregate consumption and the employment rate. But unlike an economy of
identical individuals making choices on the intensive margin, my (IN) model does not suggest that
“the” value of time can be read off of the indifference map of one consumer, but rather is the rate of
substitution in utility for the worker indifferent between working or not – a worker whose identity
changes over time!
       Without taking literally its extended household interpretation, my model still offers some
support for Mincer’s interpretation of the aggregate studies because its so-called “taste insurance”
is mainly an analytical convenience. I demonstrate above and in Appendix II how the divisible model
of the employment rate can well approximate aggregate behavior in a model, without “tastes
insurance,” of micro level discrete choices. My demonstration again revives Ben Porath’s (1973, p.
700) quantitative question of the magnitude of a person’s lifetime serial correlation of tastes and/or
employment status, but I obtain two additional results. First, the serial correlation of employment
status is less relevant, in terms of creating a gap between labor supply curves with and without tastes
insurance, the less steep is the marginal utility of wealth schedule. Second, even with a reasonable
magnitude of the serial correlation, labor supply with tastes insurance may closely approximate labor
supply without it.
       My (IN) model, and thereby my interpretation of the (LR) model, are not without implications
for micro data. To see some of these implications, consider the contrast between my (IN) model and
Hansen’s (1985) indivisible labor model. Hansen describes aggregate fluctuations as infinitesimal
movements along a perfectly elastic labor supply curve, and the identities of workers are
unpredictable ex ante. The (IN) model has employment fluctuations as discrete movements along an
imperfectly elastic supply curve, with each agent almost surely strictly preferring his chosen labor
force status to the alternative. And it takes a larger wage change to alter the decision of a person
whose reservation wage is further from the market wage. While Hansen (1985) cannot name who
will work as a function of the equilibrium wage, I predict that (to the extent that we can infer
reservation wages independently of observing labor market status) the elderly, children, married
mothers of young children, and others with date t reservation wages higher than their “normal” date
t market wage will not work unless the date t market wage is substantially higher than what is
“normal” for them. Indeed, the elderly, children, and (although much less so in recent years) married
mothers of young children typically do not work except in extreme circumstances such as wartime
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 23


(Mulligan 1998b).
       Hansen’s (1985) paper also revisits the question of how to calibrate macro models in a way
that is consistent with microeconomic observations (in particular, observations that not all labor
supply is in the so-called “intensive” margin). Considering the various dimensions of this question
is beyond the scope of this paper – Hansen and Heckman (1996) are among those papers offering
more comprehensive answers – but my results offer some simple answers to this question. Namely,
if the indivisible model is right, then there are in principal two ways to calibrate labor supply
elasticities for the LR model: (1) estimate the distribution of tastes or (2) look at the covariance
between aggregate manhours and aggregate earnings using data where wage variation is arguably
independent of wealth effects and other sources of manhours variation. Method (1) probably begs the
question, but method (2) may be practical. Method (2) is essentially the approach of Mincer’s famous
1962 study, which looks at female labor force participation and earnings across cities to calibrate a
time series model of national female labor force participation. It is also the approach of Mulligan
(1998a) who suggests looking at earnings and aggregate manhours (a.k.a., the product of the
“employment rate” and “hours per employee”) across groups defined by their year of birth – rather
than restricting the analysis to hours among employees as in Ghez and Becker (1975) or by following
continuously-employed individuals over time as in MaCurdy (1981) – in order to calibrate LR-type
models of national manhours.


III.E. The Logical Possibility of Backward-Bending Aggregate Labor Supply
       Ben-Porath (1973, p. 702) claims that, when labor is supplied on the so-called “extensive”
margin, economic theory allows us to sign the relative aggregate wealth and substitution effects of
a wage change in a way that is not possible with a divisible model. In other words, his claim is that
aggregate labor supply might bend backward when labor is supplied on the intensive margin, but in
theory cannot when it is supplied on the extensive margin. The claim is familiar to students of labor
economics, and is implicitly strengthened by Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988) who suggest that
aggregate wealth and substitution effects are like those from a quasilinear utility model (i.e., the LR
model with v(N) linear in N).
       My Proposition 2 shows how aggregate data generated by any parameterization of a divisible
model – including those for which aggregate labor supply bends backwards – can be generated by an
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 24


indivisible model (a.k.a., a model for which all labor is supplied on the extensive margin). It follows
that Ben-Porath’s claim is incorrect, or at least incorrectly applied to aggregate studies like Mincer’s,
because Ben-Porath assumes that an aggregate wage change has no effect on the distribution of
nonlabor income. In other words, Ben-Porath can sign the relative wealth and substitution effects
not from hypotheses about the indivisibility of labor, but from hypotheses about (1) the pooling of
earnings over time and across people and (2) what is the meaning of a “wage change.” To see this,
consider three simple illustrations that show how the indivisibility of labor is neither necessary nor
sufficient to rule out backward bending labor supply. First, suppose that we have a continuous time
model of finite duration (e.g., one year). Wages are initially constant over time, and the same across
persons. Tastes vary over time and across persons, in such a way that everyone works at least some
amount of time, and takes leisure some amount of time. Hence, any labor supply in this economy is
on the “intensive” margin. Now consider an across-the-board wage increase at some point in time
t (e.g., December 25th) that is marginal for at least some people and inframarginal for nobody. If the
pooling of earnings over time and across persons is limited enough, then we have a Ben-Porath type
result even though all labor is supplied on the “intensive” margin: aggregate labor supply must in
theory increase because the additional date t earnings of some people cannot be used to finance
leisure time at some other date s (e.g., in January) for those people with increased earnings, or for
others.14
        As a second example, consider a one period economy with indivisible labor and wages that
are the same for everyone in the economy. Tastes are different, so some people work and others do
not. If we increase wages across-the-board and people are sufficiently sharing their earnings, then
aggregate employment can fall, depending on the rate at which the marginal utility of wealth declines
with wealth – this is just an application of my Proposition 2 with T = 1.
        To make this second example more concrete, consider the application of most interest to
Mincer (1962) and Ben-Porath (1973) – interpreting cross-city differences in the labor force
participation of women. For simplicity, let’s suppose that each city is its own one-period economy
as described above, with each city having the same within-city distribution of tastes. Wages can differ


        14
        Yet another “intensive margin” example for which the substitution effect may be
expected to dominate the wealth effect of a wage change occurs when in life cycle models when
wage changes (e.g., Ghez and Becker 1975).
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 25


across cities, but only for half of the residents – the women (i.e., men have the same wage in every
city). Do women work more or less in the cities with high female wages? They can work less, if
some women are pooling earnings with other women. For example, middle aged women may work
in every city, but only the high female wage cities can “afford to” let elderly women be retired.
       As a third example, consider a two period economy with indivisible labor, and wages the same
over time and across persons. Tastes differ across persons and over time. Individuals do not directly
share resources with each other, but they can borrow and lend. In order to have some consumption,
people therefore work at least one period; the interesting labor supply question is who works two
periods rather than one. If we increase wages for all persons and all time periods, then aggregate
employment can fall, depending on the rate at which the marginal utility of wealth declines with
wealth. In layman’s terms, it is possible that the effect of a higher wage is that more people can
afford to retire (i.e., work one period rather than two).
       Returning to the application to cross-city female employment, the third example implies that
cities with the highest female wages may have the lower employment rates because women in those
cities use their extra wage income to save for retirement. This third example is related to Heckman’s
(1978, p. 205) discussion of labor force participation over the life cycle, but comparing it with my
second example shows that it is the sharing of resources in one form or another, and not life-cycle
savings per se, that allows employment rates to “bend backwards.” Of course, my examples do not
suggest that aggregate labor supply must bend backward in either the (LR) or (IN) models, only that
such an observation cannot be used to determine whether labor is supplied on the “extensive” or
“intensive” margin.


IV. Two Generalizations of the Indivisible Model
       My results leave open the possibility that generalizations of the indivisible model might have
aggregate implications. One approach is to modify the two models so that they generate aggregate
data on earnings, employment rates, and hours per employee. I do so in Section IV.A, introducing
“hours” margins into the indivisible model by time-aggregating individual-level choices on the
“extensive” margin. A second generalization of the indivisible model features government policies
                                                      Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 26


that are affected by the indivisibility of labor.15


IV.A. “Intensive” and “Extensive” Margins in Divisible and Indivisible Economies
          Labor supply is almost always measured as a time aggregate: the total time worked during
a particular time interval such as a day, week, or year. My Section II follows the previous literature
and presumes that the time interval over which labor is indivisible coincides with the interval of time
aggregation. That is, if labor supply is measured by calendar month, then the calendar month is the
time interval during which labor supply must be either 0 or &
                                                            n . By relaxing that assumption, we can
modify the model (IN) so it generates time-aggregated aggregate data that appears to have
“intensive” and “extensive” margins.
          Let the “measurement period” be an aggregate of K periods (or “potential work sessions”)
in the model (IN). Work sessions are indexed t = 1, ..., TK and measurement periods j = 1, ..., T.
Thus j = 1 denotes an aggregate of sessions t = 1, ..., K; j = 2 denotes an aggregate of sessions t =
K+1, ..., 2K, etc. As an example, if the potential work session were a month and adult life span equal
to 50 years, then K = 12 and T = 50 would model the Census Bureau's annual measures of labor
supply.
          A person is said to be “employed” during measurement period j if positive hours are worked
during any of the sessions t = (j-1)K+1, ..., jK. Since nt 0 {0,&
                                                                n /K} for t = 1, ..., TK, an individual's
measured labor supply must be from the set {0, &
                                               n /K, 2&      n /K, ..., &
                                                      n /K, 3&          n }. 16 Assuming that the wage
rate Qtwt, the degree of indivisibility &
                                        n /K, and the geometric average marginal disutility of work
parameter gt are constant throughout the measurement period, then the fraction of people “employed”
during the measurement period j is:



heterogeneity in the degree of indivisibility &
          15
         Two other generalizations are explored by Mulligan (1999). The first allows

and hence why &
                                              n , and second explicitly models the labor indivisibility,
                n might vary across persons. In some cases, there is data on aggregate hours,
employment, and earnings that can be generated by divisible models of intensive and extensive

implications are rather subtle, especially when the process determining &
margins (such as (LR)N below), but not by the indivisible models. However, these aggregate
                                                                          n varies across workers,
and the parameters of that process are unobserved.
          16
          To facilitate the comparison with the time-disaggregated models, the degree of

period is &
indivisibility is expressed in units such that the maximum labor supply during the measurement
          n.
                                                                Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 27


                                                                           wj Q j 8   K
                                 Aj ' 1 & 1 & F ln                                                           (4)
                                                                             gj




As in the time disaggregated model, aggregate hours measured for period j are:

                                                                wj Q j 8
                                            Nj ' F ln                         n̄                             (5)
                                                                  gj




“Hours per employee” for measurement period j can then be calculated as the ratio Nj/Aj. In words,
time-aggregating the (IN) model produces a model for which “employment” and “hours” are
meaningful statistical distinctions, even if they are not meaningful economic distinctions.
       How do employment and hours from the indivisible economy compare with employment and
hours from a divisible economy? To answer this, I follow Hanoch (1980), Kydland and Prescott
(1991), Cho and Cooley (1994), and others to generalize the divisible (LR) model to have both
“extensive” and “intensive” margins. This generalization is denoted (LR)N, and has the marginal
disutility of work depending separately on the employment rate A and hours conditional on
employment n:


(LR)' Divisible Labor with “Intensive” and “Extensive” Margins


                                              U(C) & j e & D(j& 1) gt v( At , n t )
                                                          T
                                max
                                        T                 j'1
                             C,{Aj ,n j}t'1
                                 s.t. Aj 0 [0, 1 ]               , nj 0 [0, nmax ]


                                    C ' a % j e & D(j& 1) Qj wj Aj nj
                                                     T


                                                    j'1




The only difference between (LR) and (LR)N is that (LR)N makes predictions for the decomposition
of each date's aggregate hours Nj into an employment rate Aj and hours conditional on employment
nj. In particular, optimal Aj and nj are time-invariant functions of Nj. I interpret (LR)N as an
                                                               Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 28


aggregation across persons (as with (LR)) and as an aggregation of work sessions within a
measurement period (hence, the j indices in (LR)N). Hanoch (1980) considers (LR)' with T = 1 and
interprets it as a time-aggregated model of individual-level decisions. In his interpretation, Aj is the
fraction of the 52 weeks in year j during which some work occurs and nj is average hours worked
during those 52*Aj weeks.
        This time aggregation of (IN) produces a special case of the divisible model (LR)N. In
particular, it is the special case with utility function:

                                                           A
                                                                 1 & (1 & x)1/K
                                                     z 60 m x 1 & (1 & x)1/K & x/K
                                      n        1            1
                   v(A , n) ' v̂ ln        &       % lim                           dx                       (6)
                                      n̄       K
                                                          z




with v̂(@) an increasing function (a transformation of the CDF F). Equations (4)-(6) reveal four
common implications of (LR)N and the time-aggregated indivisible models with K > 1. First, equation
(6) need not be linear in A or n,17 so that both models are consistent with wage inelastic employment
and hours. Second, since both models have upward sloping aggregate Frisch supply curves for
employment and hours, and both define “employment” and “hours” so that their product is aggregate
hours, both imply that the wage elasticity of aggregate hours must exceed both the wage elasticity
of employment and the wage elasticity of hours per employee.
        Third, either model can have aggregate (Marshallian) hours and employment supply curves
that bend backwards. To see this for the (IN) model (with K > 1), combine equations (4) and (5) to
eliminate F and calculate average hours n per person employed during the measurement period j:

                                                     1 & (1 & Aj)1/K
                                           nj ' n̄                                                          (7)
                                                               Aj




        17
         Cho and Cooley (1994, p. 241) also note the connection between a divisible model of
intensive and extensive margins and a time-aggregated indivisible model. Since they consider only
the case of homogeneous reservation wages, they find the time-aggregated indivisible model to be
isomorphic with a special case of (LR)N – one with disutility linear in A.
                                                    Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 29


Like the model (LR)N, there is a time-invariant monotonic relationship between employment, hours
per employee, and aggregate hours in the time-aggregated (IN) model. Since the aggregate
(Marshallian) supply of aggregate hours can bend back in either model, this implies that employment
rates and average hours per employee can bend backward in both models. Fourth, both models can
have more labor supplied on the “extensive” margin, or more on the “intensive” margin, depending
on the model parameters. Equation (7) shows how the former occurs in the (IN) model when K or
N are small, and how the latter occurs when K or N are large.
       There is some behavior inconsistent with indivisible labor (i.e., inconsistent with the disutility
function (6)). Not surprisingly, equation (7) requires that hours per employee n be no less less than
&
n /K in the indivisible model. Perhaps more importantly, hours per employee n tends to be less wage
sensitive at low employment rates and more wage sensitive at high employment rates.
       The time-disaggregated model (IN) has a rather trivial Frisch labor supply curve for each
individual – namely, a single-step function with the step occurring when the market wage equals the
reservation wage (with both consistently adjusted for discounting). As compared with the aggregate
labor supply curve, the individual’s curve is less elastic at any any wage not equal to his reservation
wage, and more elastic at the reservation wage. Individual labor supply for the measurement period
is more interesting when the (IN) model is time-aggregated as suggested above – namely, a multiple-
step function with each step occuring when the market wage equals one of the K reservation wages
for the measurement period. The individual’s curve is therefore reflects his own distribution of
reservation wages (see also Lucas 1970, p. 25), while the aggregate curve reflects the cross-sectional
distribution F. Hence, the conceptual distinction between cumulative distribution functions and
individual labor supply curves is more blurry than even suggested by my Propositions 1 and 2.


IV.B Time-Aggregated Nonlinear Tax Rules
       We might expect government policy to have different effects on aggregate labor and
consumption in the (LR) and (IN) models, at least when those policies are distortionary and
sufficiently nonlinear. To see this, consider the introduction of a simple government sector. A
dictator levies labor income taxes on each citizen according to his earnings for the accounting period,
consumes the revenue, and otherwise has no other contact with consumers. For simplicity, let the
government accounting period (a “year”) be equal to the time interval during which labor is
                                                              Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 30


indivisible, namely 1. Let Jt(e)t denote the tax schedule, namely, the mapping from a person’s period
t earnings et to his period t tax liability. Let J tN(e t) denote the marginal tax rate (i.e., the derivative
                                      Jt (e) & Jt (0)
of the function Jt(@)) and J̄t(e) /                     the “average tax rate.”
                                            e


        Of course, when facing such a government, the representative consumer from the divisible
economy equates his date t marginal rate of substitution to the after-marginal-tax wage,
wt[1-JtN(Ntwt)], because he is concerned with the marginal effect of work on consumption. The
marginal worker in the indivisible economy, however, has marginal rate of substitution equal to the
after-average-tax wage w[1-
                        t   J̄t(n̄wt) ], because he is concerned with the effect of the smallest change

in work on his consumption. If tax schedules are linear – even if they vary over time – average and
marginal tax rates are the same at any point in time and behavior is the same in the divisible and
indivisible economies as long as the other conditions of Propositions 1 and 2 hold. If tax schedules
are nonlinear, then average and marginal tax rates are different,18 and behavior in divisible and
indivisible economies is different even when both economies have the same parameters and the same
tax schedules.
        This behavior has significant relevance for public finance. For example, it has been extensively
argued (e.g., Hall and Rabushka 1995) that a revenue neutral flat tax would dramatically increase the
efficiency of taxpayers' time allocations.               But, of course, this analysis relies heavily on the
presumption that – holding constant tax revenue – labor supply depends on the marginal tax rate. My
simple model suggests that perhaps only the average tax rate matters in a model of indivisible labor
when the “indivisibility” is at least as long as the tax accounting period. Second, the distinction
between average and marginal tax rates matters for the estimation of labor supply elasticities (which
are used for, among other things, tax reform simulations). As argued above for the indivisible model,
the observations of MaCurdy (1992) and others that micro or aggregate labor supply is unresponsive
to marginal tax rates is quite consistent with wage-elastic aggregate labor supply. Hoynes (1996),
Leibman and Eissa (1996), and Mulligan (1998a) study applications of this result, suggesting that
average rather than marginal tax rates explain labor supply.



        18
         See Barro and Sahasakul 1983 for a demonstration that they have been quite different
for the U.S. personal income tax
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 31


        This reasoning suggests another potential difference between divisible and indivisible labor
models: in a population of heterogeneous individuals facing the same labor income tax schedule, the
former predicts that the cross-sectional distribution of a year t’s earnings has mass points at any
“kink” in the tax schedule, whereas the mass points in the indivisible model are at 0 and wt&
                                                                                            n t. Unless
the degree of indivisibility &
                             n itself responds to tax incentives, wt&
                                                                    n t does not necessarily coincide with
any kinks in the tax schedule even if the distribution of tastes is equal enough that aggregate labor
supply is quite elastic. Thus the findings of Hausman (1986) and others that the income distribution
does not seem to be concentrated at kinks in the individual income tax schedule, might be expected
when labor is indivisible, and is consistent with large wage elasticities of aggregate labor supply.
        Some features of my simple indivisible labor model of government policy are quite crucial,
even though at first glance they appear innocuous. For example, it is crucial that the nonlinear tax
is on labor rather than consumption because while a person’s labor income is indivisible, his
consumption is not because he pools his earnings over time, and is sharing some earnings with others
via lotteries and tastes insurance. Hence, even nonlinear consumption taxes have the same
implications for divisible and indivisible models. It is also crucial that my model of taxes does not
allow the pooling of earnings over time or across persons for tax purposes, even while such pooling
occurs for the purpose of financing consumption expenditure. If pooling across persons did occur
for tax purposes, and the tax schedule was globally weakly convex, then everyone would have the
same date t taxable earnings (even those not working!) equal to Ntwt and the same marginal tax rate
– just as in the divisible model.19 Since a rigorous analysis of indivisible labor and taxable income
pooling, let alone interpreting such trades in terms of “real world” transactions, is well beyond the
scope of this paper, I leave this to future research and leave here only the caveat that there are some
conditions under which divisible and indivisible economies generate the same aggregate data even
when labor income tax schedules are nonlinear.


V. Conclusions
        I follow a number of previous studies (e.g., Diamond and Mirrlees (1978, 1986), Hansen


        19
         The pooling of nontaxable income does not have to be complete in order to obtain
equivalence between divisible and indivisible models – it can occur in many separate small groups,
such as the groups pooling earnings in the economy of Proposition 5.
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 32


(1985), Hamilton (1988), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992)) and model the micro-level
“indivisibility” of labor in a life cycle context. Namely, a lifetime is divided into time intervals and
during each of those intervals work must occur for exactly &
                                                           n units of time or there be no work at all.
This indivisible environment is contrasted with the “divisible” labor environment described by Lucas
and Rapping (1969). Mathematically, and perhaps also economically, the indivisible model has clear
implications for individual-level observations of labor market activity. These micro implications have
been studied extensively in previous literatures and include, for example, the likely possibility that an
individual’s marginal value of nonmarket time is not equal to his market wage. But what are the
implications of such indivisibilities for aggregate market data?
        I suggest that the micro-level indivisibility of labor, as modeled in the literature, has no
implications for aggregate labor market data, at least in the absence of nonlinear labor income taxes.
More precisely, I show how any data on aggregate hours and earnings generated by my model of
micro-level indivisible labor can be generated by an otherwise similar divisible labor model, and vice
versa. For example, micro-level indivisible labor is consistent with the same variety of Frisch labor
supply functions that can be derived from divisible models, and hence with the same variety of wealth
and substitution effects that are feasible in divisible models.
        The proof of the equivalence of divisible and indivisible models is interesting and relevant for
interpreting aggregate studies of the labor market. It shows how group labor supply can be
interpreted as if chosen by a group representative who cares about average group consumption and
work, thereby equating the group’s market wage to “the” nonmarket value of time, even though
nearly all of the group’s members have a personal nonmarket value of time that differs from the
market wage. The “utility function” of a group’s “representative” is interpreted in terms of within-
group taste heterogeneity rather than as a replicate of any one person’s utility function. The group’s
date t nonmarket value of time cannot be read from the indifference map of a particular consumer,
but rather is the rate of substitution in utility for whichever worker happens to be indifferent between
working or not at date t – a worker whose identity changes over time. This group nonmarket value
of time is not an unpredictable variable, but rather a stable monotonic function of group consumption
and work hours, just as an individual’s nonmarket value of time is a stable monotonic function of his
consumption and work hours in divisible models of individual labor supply. The “stable monotonic
function” derives from the cross-sectional CDF for tastes in the former case, and from an individual’s
                                                      Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 33


disutility of work function in the latter case.
        Indivisible models can be used to derive separate implications for “employment” and “hours”
by time-aggregating individual-level choices on the “extensive” margin to obtain aggregate and
individual-level measures of “employment” and “hours.” Such a model is consistent with any
nonnegative Frisch wage elasticity of aggregate employment and hours, and consistent with
backward-bending Marshallian supply curves for aggregate employment and hours. Depending on
the model parameters, more labor can be supplied on the employment margin, or more can be
supplied on the hours margin. Furthermore, the time-aggregated model further blurs the distinction
between divisible and indivisible models, because even an individual’s “disutility of work” schedule
can be interpreted in terms of a distribution function for tastes. The time-aggregated indivisible model
does require that hours be wage insensitive relative to employment at low employment rates and
relatively wage sensitive at high employment rates, a requirement not shared with models of
employment and hours built on divisible choices.
        Indivisible models may also have aggregate implications when there is some economically
significant time aggregation in the economy. One quite interesting case is the almost universal
government practice of levying taxes on time aggregates of earnings. Indivisible labor therefore has
important implications for public finance, one of which is the relative insensitivity of labor supply to
marginal tax rates.
        Labor productivity cannot be directly observed when a person is not working. Moreover, a
sample of workers is certainly a sample selected according to labor productivity. This paper does not
deny these realities. However, a number of authors in the literature have taken this fact a step further,
suggesting that studies of the “hours” margin are immune to (or at least less sensitive to) the problem
of inferring missing wages than are studies of the “employment” margin.20 Their suggestions may be
true, but cannot be derived as a matter of logic. Just as we do not know the current labor
productivity of a woman who has been out of the labor force for five years, we do not know the
summer labor productivity of a school teacher or the late-night labor productivity of a banker who
is continuously employed during normal business hours. Since the important econometric problem
of inferring labor productivity for those times when a person does not work need not be related to



        20
             See Heckman (1993) for a clear statement of this claim and a survey of the literature.
                                                     Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 34


the divisibility of labor or to the distinction between “employment” and “hours,” I have neglected any
discussion of that issue in my attempting to answer the question “What are the Aggregate
Implications of Indivisible Labor?”




VI.   Appendix I: Individual and Aggregate Labor Supply with Consumption-Leisure
Nonseparabilities
        It is easy to show that the two main results from the text can be derived for economies in
which each individual’s utility fails to be separable in consumption and leisure. Namely, any
aggregate data generated by the indivisible economy can be generated by an otherwise similar
divisible economy, and the Frisch labor supply function takes its shape from the CDF for tastes. The
proof of these claims is more complicated than for the separable case, so my proof is limited to a one
period planner economy. I leave it to the reader to verify that the results generalize to many period
economies and the planner’s chosen allocations can be decentralized via trade in contingent claims.
        For the indivisible economy, each individual has utility function U(c,n;() = u(c,n)-(n. For
simplicity I set &
                 n = 1, so that only n 0 {0,1} is feasible for any individual in the indivisible economy.
U’s cross derivative is nonzero, so it can model any conceivable nonseparability between c and n,
subject to the usual restrictions that c is a good, n is a bad, and indifference maps are convex. ( >
0 is a utility parameter that varies across consumers, with ln ( - F as in the main text (except with
g = 1). While this specification allows for consumption-leisure nonseparability, and a lot of
heterogeneity in marginal disutility of work schedules, all consumers with the same work status n
have the same marginal utility of consumption schedule.
        All consumers are endowed with assets a and have a market wage rate of w, which are known
prior to revelation of their taste parameter (. They engage in trade in employment lotteries and tastes
insurance, maximizing expected utility, so the welfare theorems tell us that the equilibrium allocations
for this economy can be calculated as solutions to the utilitarian planner problem below:
                                                                  Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 35


                                                 x2


                                                 m
                                     max          U c( e x ) , n( e x ) ; e x dF(x)
                                    c(@), n(@)
                                                 x1
                                        s.t. n(() 0 {0, 1} for all (                                        (A-1)
                                        x2


                                        m
                                         [c( e x ) & wn( e x )] dF(x) # a
                                        x1




I leave it to the reader to verify that a competitive equilibrium implementing the “planner’s” choices
can involve trade in tastes insurance and employment lotteries and that, unlike the employment
lotteries in the main text, the allowance paid to lottery participants varies with the outcome of the
lottery.


I consider the interesting cases in which the wage rate w and distribution of tastes F are such that at
least some people work and at least some people do not work. In these cases, we have:


Proposition A1 The marginal utility of consumption is equalized across persons, while consumption
varies according to work status.
Proof The planner’s first order condition with respect to c(() implies that Mu/Mc is equalized across
persons. Since all persons have the same marginal utility of consumption schedule conditional on
work status, work status shifts this schedule, and work status varies across persons, consumption
must vary across persons according to their work status.


Proposition A1, together with the fact that consumers are identical in every way except (, suggests
that the planner will in effect choose a critical (* such that all workers have ( # (* and all nonworkers
have ( > (*. Defining N = F(ln (*) as the aggregate work chosen by the planner, (A-1) becomes a
choice problem (A-2) for three scalars (c0,c1,N):

                                                                           F &1(N)

                                                                             m
                       max          Nu(c1, 1) % (1& N) u(c0, 0) &                    e x dF(x)
                      c0 , c1 , N                                                                           (A-2)
                                                                              x1
                                      s.t. Nc1 % (1 &N) c0 & wN # a
                                                          Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 36




The planner’s problem (A-2) makes it easy to prove the next two propositions:


Proposition A2          Any aggregate consumption C and aggregate work N generated by the
indivisible economy (A-1) can be generated by an otherwise similar divisible economy.

Proof It suffices to show that there exists a function Ũ(C, N) such that:

(i)     C,N from the indivisible economy with assets a and wage w solve:

                                 argmax Ũ(C, N) s.t. C & wN # a
                                    C, N


(ii)    The cross-derivative of Ũ(C, N) has the same sign as the cross-derivative of the indivisible

economy’s U(c,n).
The characterization (A-2) of the planner’s problem for the indivisible economy makes it clear that

the following Ũ(C, N) is such a function:

                                                                               F &1(N)

                                                                                 m
                   Ũ(C, N) / max Nu(c1, 1) % (1& N) u(c0, 0) &                          e x dF(x)
                                c0 , c1
                                                                                 x1
                                          s.t. Nc1 % (1 &N) c0 # C




Proposition A3          The Frisch labor supply curve from the indivisible economy takes its shape
from the CDF for tastes, F.
Proof (i) Let 8 denote the marginal utility of consumption. By definition, the Frisch labor supply
curve is the function N(8,w) implicitly defined by the system of first order conditions from (A-2):

                                           Mu                   Mu
                                                (c1, 1) ' 8 '        (c0, 0)
                                           Mc                   Mc
                      ln[u(c1, 1) & 8c1 & u(c0, 0) % 8c0 % 8 w] ' F &1(N(8,w))




(ii) Inverting the first order condition with respect to N, we have a closed form solution for the Frisch
                                                   Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 37


labor supply curve:

                                   N(8, w) ' F ln[)(8) % 8w]

                   )(8) / u(c1(8, w), 1) & 8c1(8, w) & u(c0(8, w), 0) % 8c0(8, w)




(iii) Note that )(8) is independent of w, and is zero when utility is separable. Hence the Frisch
relation between N and w for a given 8 takes its shape only from the CDF F.
       Propositions A2 and A3 show that indivisible economies still look like divisible economies,
even when utility is not separable in consumption and leisure. Furthermore, nonseparable indivisible
economies can have elastic, or quite inelastic, aggregate Frisch labor supply curves. The aggregate
wealth effect of a wage change can exceed its substitution effect in nonseparable indivisible
economies. However, as I have modeled nonseparability in the indivisible economy, there are some
aggregate consumption-leisure interactions that are possible in a divisible economy but not in an
indivisible one (eg., Proposition A2 shows how aggregate leisure time must interact linearly with
aggregate consumption in my version of the nonseparable indivisible model). I leave it to future
research to determine whether generalizations of the indivisible model might widen the scope of
possible consumption-leisure interactions.


VII. Appendix II: The Distribution of Reservation Wages without Transfers
       How would the analysis – the Frisch labor supply curve in particular – be different if transfers
in the model were restricted to be literally zero? To answer this, consider again the (IN) model’s
condition for working for person i at date t:

                                                   i
                                   i      0 if (t > Qt wt U )(c i )
                                 nt '
                                          1 if (t < Qt wt U )(c i )
                                                   i




Since lifetime consumption is indexed by i, this condition applies regardless of whether tastes
insurance is traded. And this condition just says that person i works at date t when his date t
                                                            Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 38


                          i
reservation wage ŵt is less than the wage wt in adjusted present value, where the reservation wage

is defined as:

                                          ln ŵt / ln (t & ln U )(c i )
                                               i       i
                                                                                                      (A-3)




        In other words, the aggregate labor supply curve takes its shape from the distribution of
reservation wages regardless of whether there is trade in tastes insurance. What simplifies the analysis
with tastes insurance is that the shape of the cross-sectional distribution of log reservation wages is
“exogenous,” taking its shape only from the cumulative distribution function F because the marginal
utility of wealth is constant in the cross-section. Without tastes insurance in the model, we have to
worry about inequality of the marginal utility of wealth (UN(c)) and have to calculate the joint
distribution of marginal utility and tastes.
        A closed form solution for this joint distribution is not available, but we can analytically
characterize the variance of the distribution of log reservation wages for some interesting examples
and compare it to the variance of F and thereby make a quantitative comparison of the elasticity of
Frisch or “consumption-constant” aggregate21 labor supply curves in indivisible economies with and
without tastes insurance. Equation (A-3) implies that, without tastes insurance, the standard
deviation of date t reservation wages are:

             sd2(ln ŵt ) ' sd2(ln (t) % sd2(ln U )(c i )) & 2sd(ln (t) sd(ln U )(c i )) r 0
                      i               i                                   i

                                                       2                                              (A-4)
                          sd(ln (t) & sd(ln U )(c i )) , sd2(ln (t) % sd2(ln U )(c i ))
                                 i                                i




where sd(@) denotes the cross-section standard deviation, and r is the cross-section correlation


        21
          Since the marginal utility of wealth varies across persons in the absence of tastes
insurance, more needs to be said about the definition of “Frisch” aggregate labor supply in such
economies. Let date t Frisch aggregate labor supply be the graph of aggregate work versus ln wt,
holding aggregate lifetime consumption C constant – a graph which would be literally be
interpreted as a Frisch supply curve by someone modeling the aggregates with the (LR) model.
                                                      Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 39


between ln ( and ln marginal utility of wealth. With tastes insurance, date t reservation wages have
standard deviation sd(ln (). Equation (A-4) shows that reservation wages can vary more or less
when there is tastes insurance, and places bounds on the difference of this variance between
economies with and without tastes insurance. The next step is to make a numerical calculation of
those bounds for an interesting example.
        To make such a numerical calculation, consider a special case of the (IN) environment with
finite lifetimes partitioned in T periods, interest and discount rates equal zero, zero initial assets, and
a wage w that is constant over the life cycle. Normalize &
                                                         n =1 and w&
                                                                   n T = 1, so that maximum possible
lifetime earnings is 1. The distribution F of ln ( is normal at each date t, and let the mean of F be
zero so that N = 1/2 in the economy with tastes insurance. Clearly, aggregate work is constant over
time regardless of whether there is tastes insurance, and average lifetime consumption C in this
economy is equal to average lifetime work N.
        If effect, tastes insurance contracts in this economy make a transfer in the amount -1/(2T) for
each period a person has ( # 1 and +1/(2T) for each period a person has ( > 1. The cross-sectional
distribution of net lifetime transfers therefore depends on the individual-level serial correlation of
labor force status. If, for example, there were no serial correlation, then each person’s net lifetime
transfer would be practically be zero since each person would typically spend half of his life working
and half not working. At the other extreme, perfect serial correlation means that half of the
population spend all of their life working while the other half do not ever work, and tastes insurance
transactions would be large in order to equalize consumption of workers and nonworkers. In order
to study intermediate situations, let the lifetime profile of tastes ' be assigned such that ex ante each
worker has the same probability of transition into or out of employment in any two adjacent periods,
and let * denote the fraction of the population making such a transition at any point in time. The
cross-sectional standard deviation of net lifetime transfers P('i) is therefore:

                                                 T % 2 't'1 (T &t) (1&*)t
                                                         T
                                        i
                                 sd(P(' )) '
                                                             2T




which, as expected, reduces to practically zero (1/ T ) when there is no serial correlation (*=1) and
                                                         Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 40


quite large (equal to aggregate consumption) when there is perfect serial correlation (*=0).
        Using the fact that the cross-sectional standard deviation of lifetime consumption in the
economy without tastes insurance is bounded above by the standard deviation of P('i),22 and using
a Taylor approximation of the marginal utility of wealth in the neighborhood of UN(C), we can
compute the cross-sectional standard deviation of log marginal utility of wealth in the economy
without tastes insurance:

                                                                         T % 2 't'1 (T & t) (1&*)t
                                                                                 T
                      & U ))(C)              & U ))(C)
   sd(ln U (c )) .
             )   i
                                  sd(c ) #
                                      i
                                                         sd(P(' )) ' F
                                                                i                                    (A-5)
                        U )(C)                U )(C)                                 T




where the strict equality derives from the above expression for standard deviation of net lifetime
transfers, and denotes as F the elasticity of UN. Marginal utility is more equal when marginal utility
is less elastic (i.e., smaller F), relevant lifetimes are longer (i.e., higher T), or a person’s work status
is less correlated over time on account of tastes (i.e., larger *).
        To numerically compare the distributions of reservation wages with and without tastes
insurance, we need only to choose numerical values for F, *, T, and sd(ln () to use in the formulas
(A-4) and (A-5). Take, for example, T = 40 years and logarithmic utility (F=1). With these
parameters, the cross-sectional standard deviation of log marginal utility is about 0.3, and fairly
insensitive to * except near the extremes *=0 and *=1, so I set * = 0.4.
        sd(ln () = 0.8 implies that the Frisch wage elasticity of labor supply is one in the
neighborhood of w = 1/T and less than one elsewhere. Using these numerical parameters and the
formula (A-4), we have that the standard deviation of reservation wages without taste insurance is,
as a fraction of the standard deviation with taste insurance, in the interval [0.63,1.07]. A 0.3
correlation between marginal utility of wealth and one period’s disutility of work implies that

sd(ln ŵt ) is 0.77, or 96% percent of sd(ln ().
        i




        22
          Leisure is a normal good, which implies that tastes insurance enhances (lowers) the
lifetime consumption of high ( (low () persons by no more than the amount of the transfer P(').
                                                 Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 41


VIII. References


Ashenfelter, Orley. “Unemployment as Disequilibrium in a Model of Aggregate Labor Supply.”
       Econometrica. 48(3), April 1980: 547-64.
Barro, Robert J. and Chaipat Sahasakul. "Measuring the Average Marginal Tax Rate from the
       Individual Income Tax." Journal of Business. 56 (October 1983): 419-52.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. “Labor-Force Participation Rates and the Supply of Labor.” Journal of
       Political Economy. 81(3), May-June 1973: 697-704.
Bowen, William G. and T. Aldrich Finegan. The Economics of Labor Force Participation.
       Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1969.
Chapman, Sir Sydney John. "Hours of Labor." Economic Journal. 19, September 1909: 354-79.
Cho, Jang-Ok. “Ex post Heterogeneity and the Business Cycle.” Journal of Economic Dynamics
       and Control. 19(3), April 1995: 533-51.
Cho, Jang-Ok and Thomas F. Cooley. “Employment and Hours over the Business Cycle.” Journal
       of Economic Dynamics and Control. 18(2), March 1994: 411-32.
Christiano, Lawrence and Martin Eichenbaum.         “Current Real-Business-Cycle Theories and
       Aggregate Labor-Market Fluctuations.” American Economic Review. 82(3), June 1992:
       430-50.
Cole, Harold L. and Edward C. Prescott. "Valuation Equilibrium with Clubs." Journal of Economic
       Theory. 74(1), May 1997: 19-39.
Coleman, Thomas Sedgwick. “Essays on Aggregate Labor Market Business Cycle Fluctuations.”
       PhD dissertation, University of Chicago, December 1984.
Cooley, Thomas F. and Gary D. Hansen. “The Inflation Tax in a Real Business Cycle Model.”
       American Economic Review. 79(4), September 1989: 733-48.
Crucini, Mario J. and James Kahn. “Tariffs and Aggregate Economic Activity: Lessons from the
       Great Depression.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 38(3), December 1996: 427-67.
Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees. "A Model of Social Insurance with Variable Retirement."
       Journal of Public Economics. 10(3), December 1978: 295-336.
Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees. "Payroll-Tax Financed Social Insurance with Variable
       Retirement." Scandinavian Journal of Economics. 88(1), 1986: 25-50.
                                                 Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 42


Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111(2), May 1996: 605-37.
Ghez, Gilbert R. and Gary S. Becker. The Allocation of Time and Goods over the Life Cycle. New
       York: Columbia University Press (for the NBER), 1975.
Greenwood, Jeremy and Zvi Hercowitz. “The Allocation of Capital and Time over the Business
       Cycle.” Journal of Political Economy. 99(6), December 1991: 1188-1214.
Grunfeld, Yehuda and Zvi Griliches. “Is Aggregation Necessarily Bad?” Review of Economics and
       Statistics. 42(1), February 1960: 1-13.
Hall, Robert E. and Alvin Rabushka. The Flat Tax. 2nd edition. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution
       Press, 1995.
Hamermesh, Daniel S.      “Aggregate Employment Dynamics and Lumpy Adjustment Costs.”
       Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. 33(0), Autumn 1990: 93-130.
Hamilton, James D. “A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Real Business Cycle.”
       Journal of Political Economy. 96(3), June 1988: 593-617.
Hanoch, Giora. "Weeks and Hours in the Theory of Labor Supply." in James P. Smith, ed. Female
       Labor Supply. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980: 119-65.
Hansen, Gary D. “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics.
       16(3), November 1985: 309-27.
Hansen, Gary D. and Thomas J. Sargent. "Straight Time and Overtime in Equilibrium." Journal of
       Monetary Economics. 21(2,3), Mar/May 1988: 281-308.
Hansen, Lars Peter and James J. Heckman. “The Empirical Foundations of Calibration.” Journal
       of Economic Perspectives. 10(1), Winter 1996: 87-104.
Hausman, Jerry A. “Taxes and Labor Supply.” in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, eds.
       Handbook of Public Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985.
Heckman, James J. “A Partial Survey of Recent Research on the Labor Supply of Women.”
       American Economic Review. 68(2), May 1978: 200-7.
Heckman, James J. “What has been Learned about Labor Supply in the Past Twenty Years?”
       American Economic Review. 83(2), May 1993: 116-21.
Heckman, James J. and Guilherme Sedlacek. “Heterogeneity, Aggregation, and Market Wage
       Functions: An Empirical Model of Self-Selection in the Labor Market.” Journal of Political
                                                 Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 43


       Economy. 93(6), December 1985: 1077-1125.
Hildenbrand, Werner. Core and Equilibria of a Large Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
       University Press, 1974.
Hoynes, Hilary Williamson. “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and Welfare
       Participation under AFDC-UP.” Econometrica. 64(2), March 1996: 295-332.
Houthakker, Hendrik S. "The Pareto Distribution and the Cobb-Douglas Production Function in
       Activity Analysis." Review of Economic Studies. 23, 1955: 27-31.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. “Capacity, Overtime, and Empirical Production Functions.” American
       Economic Review. 60(2), May 1970: 23-27.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Leonard A. Rapping. "Real Wages, Employment, and Inflation." Journal
       of Political Economy. 77(5), September 1969.
Kydland, Finn and Edward C. Prescott. "Hours and Employment Variation in Business Cycle
       Theory.” Economic Theory. 1(1), January 1991: 63-81.
MaCurdy, Thomas E. "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life Cycle Setting." Journal of
       Political Economy. 88 (December 1981): 1059-85.
MaCurdy, Thomas E. "Work Disincentive Effects of Taxes: A Reexamination of Some Evidence."
       American Economic Review. 82 (May 1992): 243-49.
Marshall, Alfred. Principles of Economics. 8th edition. Philadelphia: Porcupine Press, 1920/1990.
Mincer, Jacob. “Labor Force Participation of Married Women: A Study of Labor Supply.” in H.G.
       Lewis, ed. Aspects of Labor Economics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962.
Mincer, Jacob and Haim Ofek. “The Distribution of Lifetime Labor Force Participation of Married
       Women: Comment.” Journal of Political Economy. 87(1), February 1979: 197-201.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Substitution over Time: Another Look at Labor Supply over the Life Cycle.”
       Macroeconomics Annual 1998, 1998a.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Pecuniary Incentives to Work in the U.S. during World War II.” Journal of
       Political Economy. 106(5), October 1998b: 1033-77.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Microfoundations and Macro Implications of Indivisible Labor.” NBER
       Working paper #7116, May 1999.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Aggregate Implications of Composition Bias.” Working paper, University of
       Chicago, October 2000.
                                                 Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor - 44


Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier X. Sala-i-Martin. “Social Security in Theory and Practice I.” NBER
       working paper no. 7118, May 1999.
Ohanian, Lee E. “The Macroeconomic Effects of War Finance in the United States: World War II
       and the Korean War.” American Economic Review. 87 (March 1997): 23-40.
Pencavel, John. "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey." in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds.
       Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986.
Plosser, Charles I. "Understanding Real Business Cycles." Journal of Economic Literature. 3(3),
       Summer 1989: 51-77.
Rogerson, Richard.      “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium.”   Journal of Monetary
       Economics. 21(1), January 1988: 3-16.
Roy, Andrew D. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers. 3,
       1951: 135-46.
Smith, James. "Family Labor Supply over the Life Cycle." Explorations in Economic Research.
       4(2), Spring 1977: 205-76.
Wu, Yangru and Junxi Zhang. “Endogenous Markups and the Effects of Income Taxation: Theory
       and Evidence from OECD Countries.” Journal of Public Economics. 77(3), September
       2000: 383-406.
