     !!



 

  
 "#$%
&'(()))*(+()"#$%



,, -  . ! /
#010 .++&++ 2
3*45 . 06#%"
.&


             
  
!  "#"$ %  &    ' (     
)*' (  +           ' , -   
         (   +  )  .  
/("   0$    ' %    - - ,
 
 ( # , -   '    / ' 
  

 7
  
     "#$%
.& 600#
  /$




 7 +  43 +   8+ + + & 7 22+
4+* ++ ++ + 4    + & *4 
7 & 238+ *+ &+ &  & +4 4   
   
   +&)+ &)  7 )+5 &) 8+ 3+45 4 &) 3&  3+ 
2 + ) +  3+
& & +&)+ & 9:+3    7  & ++ 
7 & 4 *) +7 4  + 4  + 3+ & *7
  + *+ + ) + & ++4 + +5 4 & *4 45
 ; 2+5 4  + 73+ -75  ++ & 2+ ++ 
 75 4 + ; &+5  *4 4+5  2+3
2+5 4 ;4 7:+:7::4 + +7
 &+ ;3 &+ * 345 & & +&)+ & + +++ * & *7
  + *+   &7 7  7 ++ 34 )&  3
+ 4  3 ++ &+ 43+ ++ & +  & 4+5
+5 4 <    & &8+  ++ +  +3
34  +  75 +4 & & 4 3 +  4 +
4 <25 4+++ 23 + +& 4 + 35 4 +339 +++
4

  
=3  3+
+ ,2+7
6>0 7 ! 4
+5 . 066#1
4  
?*4

I. Introduction
Generational policy – the government’s treatment of current and future
generations -- is a fundamental aspect of a nation’s fiscal affairs.

The policy involves

two actions – redistributing resources across generations and allocating to particular
generations the burden of paying the government’s bills. Taking from one generation to
help another or forcing one generation to pay for another’s public goods raises a host of
ethical as well as economic questions. How much of the government’s bills should future
generations be forced to pay? How should the government treat today’s elderly versus
today’s young? Should those born in the future pay more because they will benefit from
improved technology? Can the government redistribute across generations? If so, how
does this work?

Does relieving current generations of fiscal burdens let them consume

more and, thereby, reduce or crowd out national saving and domestic investment? Should
the government try to pool risks across generations?
Generational morality is the province of philosophers. But the positive questions
surrounding the treatment of the old, the young, and unborn have captivated economists
since the birth of the discipline.

Their work has firmly embedded the analysis of

generational policy within the broader theory of fiscal incidence.1 This theory has three
central messages. First, those to whom the government assigns its bills or designates its
assistance are not necessarily those who bear its burdens or enjoy its help. Second, the
incidence of policies ultimately depends on the economic responses they invoke. Third,
apart from changes in economic distortions, generational policy is a zero-sum game in

1

For surveys of tax incidence see Kotlikoff and Summers (1987) and Fullerton and Metcalf (this volume).

2

which the economic gains to winners (including the government) equal the economic
losses to losers.2
Because the gulf between policy goals and policy outcomes can be so large,
incidence analysis is both important and intriguing.

This is particularly true for

generational policy where a range of private responses can frustrate the government’s
initiatives.

These include intra-family intergenerational redistribution, private changes in

saving and labor supply, and the market revaluation of capital assets.
The admonishment of incidence theory that policy descriptions bear no necessary
relationship to policy outcomes is particularly apt in considering the traditional measure
of generational policy, namely official government debt.

Notwithstanding its common

use, official government debt is, as a matter of neoclassical economic theory, an artifice
of fiscal taxonomy that bears no fundamental relationship to generational policy.
In contrast to deficit accounting, which has no precise objective, a relatively new
accounting method, Generational accounting, attempts to directly assess generational
policy.

Specifically, it tries to measure the intergenerational incidence of fiscal policy

changes as well as understand the fiscal burdens confronting current and future
generations under existing policy.
Generational accounting represents but one way of trying to quantify the
economic impacts of generational policy. Another is computer simulation.

Each passing

year sees the development of ever more sophisticated and carefully calibrated dynamic
computer simulation models.

These virtual environments are simplifications of economic

2

Changes (including reductions) in economic distortions include policy-induced changes in the economy’s
degree of risk sharing to the extent that marginal rates of substitution and production are not equated across
states of nature.

3

reality. But they allow economists to conduct stylized controlled experiments in studying
the dynamic impacts of generational policies.
This chapter shows how generational policy works, how it is measured, and how
much it matters to virtual as well as real economies. To make its points as quickly and
simply as possible, the chapter employs a two-period, overlapping generations model.
This model is highly versatile.

It illustrates the central controversies surrounding

generational policy, including its potential impact on national saving and its potential
impotency due to Ricardian Equivalence. It exposes the vacuity of deficit accounting.
And it elucidates the government’s intertemporal budget constraint that provides the
framework for generational accounting.
Section II begins the analysis by presenting the two-period life-cycle model,
defining generational incidence, and showing the zero-sum nature of generational policy.
Section III illustrates generational policy with a simple example, namely a policy of
redistributing, in a non-distortionary manner, to the contemporaneous elderly from the
contemporaneous young as well as all future generations.

This example clarifies the

difference between statutory and true fiscal incidence. It also illuminates, as described in
Section IV, the arbitrary nature of fiscal labels as well as their resultant fiscal aggregates,
including the budget deficit, aggregate tax revenues, and aggregate transfer payments.
Finally, it illustrates the various guises of generational policy, including structural tax
changes, running deficits, altering investment incentives, and expanding pay-as-you-gofinanced social security.
Once this example has been fully milked, the chapter shows that its lessons about
fiscal labels are general.

They apply when fiscal policy, in general, and generational

4

policy, in particular, is distortionary, when it is uncertain, when it is time inconsistent,
and when segments of the economy are credit constrained.

Indeed, they apply to any

neoclassical model with rational economic agents and rational economic institutions
(including the government).

This demonstration sets the stage for Section V’s

description, illustration, and critique of generational accounting.

This section also lays

out the implications of generational policy for monetary policy.
Because generational policies play out over decades rather than years and can
have major macroeconomic effects, understanding their impacts is best understood
through computer simulation analysis.

Section VI presents results from simulating two

major generational policies – changing the tax structure and privatizing social security.
The messages of this section are that generational policies can have significant effects on
the economy and the well being of different generations, but that such policies take a long
time to alter the economic landscape.
Having illustrated generational policy, its measurement, and the potential
magnitude of its effects, the Chapter turns, in Section VII, to Ricardian Equivalence – the
contention that generational policy, despite the government’s best efforts, just doesn’t
work. The alleged reason is that parents and children are altruistic toward one another
and will use private transfers to offset any government attempts to redistribute among
them.

Ricardian Equivalence has been assailed by theorists and empiricists.

attacks have paid off.

These

As Section VII discusses, there are very good theoretical and

empirical reasons to doubt the validity of Ricardian Equivalence, at least for the United
States.

Section VIII considers the government’s role in improving or worsening

5

intergenerational risk sharing.

The final section, IX, summarizes and concludes the

chapter.
To conserve space, the chapter makes no attempt to survey the voluminous
literature on generational policy.

But any discussion of the modern analysis of

generational policy would be remiss if it failed to identify the four major postwar
contributions

to

the

field,

namely

Samuelson’s (1958) consumption-loan model,

Diamond’s (1965) analysis of debt policies, Feldstein’s (1974) analysis of unfunded
social security, and Robert Barro’s (1974) formalization of Ricardian equivalence. These
papers and their hundreds, if not thousands, of offspring collectively transformed the field
from a collection of intriguing, but poorly posed questions to an extremely rich and
remarkably clear set of answers.

II. The Incidence of Generational Policy
The Life-Cycle Model
Consider a two-period, life-cycle model in which agents born in year s have utility
Us defined over consumption when young, cys, consumption when old, cos+1 , leisure when
young, lys, and leisure when old, los+1 .
(1)

U s = u( c ys , cos +1 , l ys , los +1 )

For this dynamic economy, consumption and leisure from a point in time, say the
beginning of time t, onward is constrained by a constant returns production function
satisfying
(2)

F ( cot + c yt + g t , cot +1 + c yt +1 + gt +1 ,..., l ot + l yt − 2T , lot +1 + l yt +1 − 2 T ,..., k t ) = 0 ,

6

where gs is government consumption in year s, k t is the capital stock at the beginning of
time t (before time-t production or consumption occurs), and T is the time endowment
available to each generation in each period.3 Since there are two generations alive at each
point in time, the aggregate time endowment in each period is 2T. The arguments of (2)
are the net (of endowments) demands for consumption and leisure at time t and in all
future periods plus the beginning of time t endowment of capital.
Output is non-depreciable and can be either consumed or used as capital. Since
there are no future endowments of capital, only the time-t endowment of capital enters
(2). The fact that all of the leisure being demanded in a given period enters as a single
argument independent of who enjoys this leisure implies that the amounts of labor
supplied by different agents are perfect substitutes in production.

Finally, the fact that

the aggregate time endowment (T) is constant through time reflects the simplifying
assumption that each cohort is of equal size – the value of which is normalized to unity.
Using the constant returns-to-scale property, the production function can be
written as:
(3)

( cot + c yt + gt ) + Rt +1 ( cot +1 + c yt +1 + g t +1 ) +...+ wt ( l ot + l yt ) + Rt +1 wt +1 ( l ot +1 + l yt +1 )...+
=

kt
+ wt 2T + Rt +1 wt +1 2T +... ,
Rt

where Rs+1 is the marginal rate of transformation of output in period s into output in
period s+1 (the cost of an extra unit of output in period s+1 measured in units of output in
period s); i.e.,

3

To keep the notation simple, this presentation abstracts from uncertainty in leaving out subscripts that
denote state of nature. Indexing commodities by the state of nature is straightforward.

7

(4)

R s +1 ≡

Fcs+1
,
Fcs

and ws is the marginal rate of transformation of output in period s into leisure in period s
(the cost of an extra unit of leisure in period s measured in units of output in period s),
i.e.,
(5)

ws ≡

Fls
Fcs

The terms Rs+1 and ws – the respective time-s marginal products of capital at time s+1 and
labor at time s -- are referenced below as pre-tax factor prices.
Equation (3) is the economy’s intertemporal budget constraint. It requires that the
value of current and future consumption and leisure, all measured in units of current
consumption, not exceed the value of the economy’s current and future endowments, also
measured in units of current consumption.
In choosing their consumption and leisure demands, agents born in year s≥t
maximize (1) subject to:
(6)

c ys + Rs +1 c os +1 + ws l ys + Rs +1 ws +1l os +1 = ws T + Rs +1 ws +1 T − h ys − Rs +1 hos +1 ,

where hos is the net payment of the old at time s.
Those agents born in t-1 maximize their time-t remaining lifetime utility subject
to:
(7)

cot + wt lot =

a ot
+ wt T − hot
Rt

In (6) and (7), hys is the net payment to the government by the young at time s, and aot
represents the net worth of the initial elderly at the beginning of time t.

8

The Government’s Intertemporal Budget Constraint
Substitution of (6) and (7) into the economy-wide budget constraint (3) yields the
government’s intertemporal budget constraint:
(8)
hot + h yt + Rt +1 (hot +1 + h yt +1 ) + Rt +1 Rt + 2 ( hot + 2 + hyt + 2 ) +... = gt + Rt +1 gt +1 + Rt + 1 Rt + 2 gt + 2 +...+

a ot − k t
Rt

The right-hand side of (8) is the government’s bills -- the present value of it current and
future projected consumption plus its net debt, which equals the difference between total
private-sector net worth and the economy’s aggregate capital stock, (aot - k t)/Rt.

The

government’s intertemporal budget constraint requires that either current or future
generations pay for the government’s bills, where its bills represent the sum of its
projected future consumption plus its initial net debt. As discussed below, different ways
of labeling government receipts and payments will alter hot (the remaining lifetime net
payment, or generational account, of the time-t elderly) and (aot - k t) /Rt by equal
amounts.

In contrast, the lifetime net payments (the generational accounts) facing initial

young (hyt+Rt+1 hot+1 ) and future generations (hys+Rs+1 hos+1 , ,for s>t) are invariant to the
government’s vocabulary; i.e., the fiscal burden on current and future newborns is well
defined, whereas the government’s net debt is not.

The Incidence of Generational Policy
Suppose that at time t the government changes policy.

The policy change will

affect the generation born at time t-1 (the initial elderly), the generation born at time t
(the initial young), and all generations born after time t (the future generations).

9

The

incidence of the policy for an affected generation born in year s is found by
differentiating (1):
(9)

dU s = ucys dc ys + ucos+1 dcos +1 + u lysdl ys + ulos +1 dl os +1

For the initial elderly, s=t-1, and dcyt-1 =0 and dlyt-1 =0, since consumption and leisure that
occurred before the policy changed is immutable.
The incidence experienced by each generation born at for s ≥ t can be expressed
in units of consumption when young by dividing (9) by the marginal utility of
consumption when young.
(10)

ulys
dU s
u
u
= dc ys + cos+1 dc os+1 +
dl ys + los +1 dl os +1
ucys
ucys
ucys
ucys

Equation (10) traces generational incidence to changes in each generation’s consumption
and leisure when young and old valued in terms of their consumption when young.

In

the case of the initial elderly, the change in utility can be normalized by the marginal
utility of consumption when old.

The Zero-Sum Nature of Generational Policy
Policy-induced changes in consumption and leisure experienced by the various
generations alive at time t and thereafter must satisfy (11), which results from
differentiating (2).
(11)
( dcot + dc yt + dgt ) + Rt +1 ( dcot +1 + dc yt +1 + dgt +1 ) + Rt +1 Rt + 2 (dc ot + 2 + dc yt + 2 + dg t + 2 ) +...
+ wt (dl ot + dl yt ) + Rt +1 wt +1 ( dlot +1 + dl yt +1 ) + Rt +1 Rt +2 wt + 2 ( dlot + 2 + dl yt+ 2 ) +... = 0

10

Let Et stand for the sum over all generations alive from time t onward (including the
initial elderly born in t-1) of policy incidence measured in units of time-t consumption.
(12)

Et =

dU t −1 dU t
dU t +1
dU t +2
+
+ R t +1
+ R t +1 R t +2
+...
ucot
u cyt
u cyt +1
ucyt + 2

Using (10) and (11), rewrite (12) as
(13)
E t = ( R tn+ 1 − R t + 1 ) dc o t + 1 + R t + 1 ( R tn+ 2 − R t + 2 ) dc o t + 2 + ... ( w on t − w t ) dl o t + ( w ny t − w t ) dl y t +
( wotn +1 Rtn+1 − wt +1 Rt +1 ) dl ot +1 + Rt +1 ( w nyt +1 − wt +1 )dl yt +1 + Rt + 1 ( wotn +2 Rtn+ 2 − wt + 2 Rt + 2 ) dlot + 2 +
R t + 1 R t + 2 ( w ny t + 2 − w t + 2 ) d l y t + 2 + . . . − d g t − R t + 1 d g t + 1 − R t + 1 R t + 2 d g t + 2 − . . .
where
(14)

Rsn ≡

u lys
ucos
u
, wnys ≡
, and wosn ≡ los
ucos−1
ucos
u cys

There are two sets of terms on the right-hand-side of (13).

The first set involves

differences between marginal rates of substitution (MRS) and marginal rates of
transformation (MRT) multiplied by a) the change in the economic choice being distorted
and b) a discount factor.

These MRS-MRT wedges arise from distortionary fiscal

policies and are often referred to as marginal tax wedges.

This first set of terms is

related, but not strictly identical to, the present value of the marginal change in economic
efficiency (the change in excess burden) arising from the policy. The second set of terms
measures the present value of the policy-induced change in the time-path of government
consumption.
Thus (13) shows that fiscal-policy incidence summed over across all current and
future generations equals a) the present value of the time-path of terms related to policy-

11

induced changes in excess burden and b) the increase in the present value of government
consumption.

Thus, apart from efficiency effects, any change in government

consumption must be fully paid for in terms of reduced welfare experienced by current or
future generations.

If the policy entails no efficiency change and no change in

government consumption, Et equals zero, and the policy simply redistributes fiscal
burdens across generations.

Hence, ignoring efficiency effects, policy changes are,

generationally speaking, zero-sum in nature.

Either current or future generations must

pay for the government’s spending and holding government spending fixed, any
improvement in the wellbeing of one generation comes at the cost of reduced wellbeing
of another generation.
It’s important to note that (13) takes into account policy-induced changes in the
time-path of factor prices.

Apart from efficiency considerations, (13) tells us that all

intergenerational redistribution, be it direct government intergenerational redistribution,
arising from changes in the constellation of net payments it extracts from various
generations, or indirect intergenerational redistribution, arising from policy-induced
changes in the time-path of factor prices, is zero-sum in nature.

Stated differently, the

benefits to particular generations arising from policy-induced changes in wage and
interest rates are exactly offset by losses to other generations from such factor-price
changes.
Although the first set of terms in (13) involving MRS-MRT wedges arise only in
the presence of economic distortions, their sum represents a precise measure of the
change in excess burden only if the policy being conducted compensates all generations
for the income effects they experience.

To show how this compensation could be

12

effected, take the case of a policy change that a) does not alter the time-path of
government consumption, b) compensates members of each generation by keeping them
on their pre-policy-change budget constraints, and c) does not require resources from
outside the economy (i.e., leaves the economy on its intertemporal budget constraint).4
Since each generation remains on its initial budget constraint (defined in terms of
its slope and intercept) the policy serves only to alter the choice of the position on that
constraint.

This change in the consumption/leisure bundle arises because of the policy’s

alteration in relative prices (i.e., because of changes in incentives).

Hence, each

generation’s change in utility arises due to a change in how it allocates its budget, rather
than a change in the size of its budget. The resulting change in utility is a pure change in
economic distortion.

Because these utility changes are measured in units of time-t

output, adding them up, as (13) does, across all current and future generations indicates
the amount (positive or negative) of time-t output that could be extracted from the
economy by engaging in the policy, but using generation-specific non distortionary net
payments that keep each generation at its pre-policy change level of utility.
To keep each generation on its initial budget constraint, the government must alter
the net amounts it takes from each generation when young and old to offset all policyinduced income effects, including those arising from changes in relative prices of
consumption and leisure when young and old. Assuming, without loss of generality, that
the amount of distortionary net payments made by each generation are offset by non
distortionary net payments of equal magnitude, the only income effects to be offset are
those arising from changes in relative prices. This means setting dhot such that
(15)
4

dhot = dwt T − dwt l ot

This is a Slutsky’s compensation in an intertemporal setting.

13

and setting dhys and dhos+1 for s≥t such that

(16)
dh ys + Rs +1 dhos +1 = dws T + d ( Rs +1 ws +1 ) T − dRs +1 hos +1 − dRs +1 c os+ 1 − dws l ys − d ( Rs +1 ws +1 ) los +1
Does this compensation policy satisfy the government’s intertemporal budget
constraint? The answer is yes.

To see why, take the differentials of (3), (6), and (7).

These equations plus (15) and (16) generate the differential of the government’s budget
constraint.

Intuitively, the constant-returns property of the production function implies

that factor-price changes are zero-sum in nature. Hence, the government can redistribute
resources from generations experiencing beneficial factor-price changes to those
experiencing adverse factor-price changes.

This leaves each generation on its initial

budget frontier, although, potentially, at a different point on that frontier.
When one applies (15) and (16) in conjunction with a policy change that leaves
government spending unchanged, the resulting consumption and leisure differentials in
(13) are compensated ones. For discrete, as opposed to infinitesimal, policy changes, one
can integrate Et over the range of the policy change. The resulting expression will be the
present value sum of each period’s Harberger excess burden triangle, if there are no
initial distortions in the economy.5

III. Illustrating Generational Policy
A Cobb-Douglas Example
5

Were one to expand the above analysis to incorporate uncertainty about future states of nature, all
commodities at a particular point in time would be indexed by their state of nature and the discrepancies
between marginal rates of substitution and marginal rates of transformation would capture the absence of
risk-sharing arrangements associated with incomplete insurance markets.

14

A very simple Cobb-Douglas two period life-cycle model suffices to illustrate
how generational policy works and why it cannot be uniquely described with
conventional fiscal taxonomy. Let the utility of the young born at time s, Us, be given by:
U s = α log c yt + (1 − α) log c ot +1 .

(17)

In (17), we make the assumption that labor supply is exogenous. Specifically the young
work full time, and the elderly are retired. Also let the production function for output per
worker satisfy:
y t = Ak tβ

(18)

Each cohort has N members, so there is no population growth. Finally, assume that the
−

government takes an amount h from each member of each young generation and hands
the same amount to each member of the contemporaneous old generation.
At any time t+1, capital per old person equals capital per worker, k t+1 , because the
number of old and young are equal. The amount of capital held at t+1 by each old person
is what she accumulated when young; i.e.,
−

(19)

k t +1 = wt − h − c yt .

Given that consumption when young equals a share, α, of lifetime resources, we can
write (19) as:

−

(20)

k t +1

−

r h
= wt − h − α( wt − t +1 )
1 + rt +1

15

Finally, using the fact that factor prices equal marginal products, we can express (20) as:

(21)

k t +1

−

βAt +1 k tβ+1−1 h
= (1 − β)(1 − α) At k − h + α(
).
1 + βAt +1 k tβ+−1 1
β
t

−

Equation (21) represents the transition equation for the capital labor ratio. Knowing the
value of k t, one can solve (by nonlinear methods) for the value of k t+1 .

The Crowding Out of Capital
Consider introducing the policy at time 0. Because α is between zero and one, the
−

−

derivative of k t+1 for t = 0 with respect to h is negative evaluated at h equals zero.
Hence, if we assume the policy is introduced at time 0, it reduces the economy’s capital
stock at each future date. What is the explanation for this crowding out of capital? The
answer is the increased consumption of those who are old at the time of the reform – time
−

−

0. This cohort receives h for free; i.e., without being forced to hand over h when young.
−

And the cohort immediately increases its consumption by h per person.

This present

value gain to the initial old is offset by a present value loss to the initial young and future
−

generations of interest on h ; i.e., if one discounts, at the time path of the marginal
−

product of capital, the sum of all the losses of interest on h by the initial young and future
−

generations, the total equals - h .

16

If the losses to the current young and future generations are equal in present value
to the gains to the initial old, why is there an initial (time 0) net increase in consumption
and a decline in national saving? The answer is that the increased consumption by the
elderly at time 0 is only partially offset by the reduced consumption of the
contemporaneous young.

As just indicated, the contemporaneous young pay for only a

small portion of the transfer to the initial elderly. Moreover, their propensity to consume,
α, is less than one – the propensity to consume of the initial elderly.

So the positive

income effect experienced by the initial elderly exceeds in absolute value the negative
income effect experienced by the initial young, who, in any case, have a smaller
propensity to consume. Hence, consumption of the initial elderly rises by more than the
consumption of the initial young falls, thereby reducing national saving and investment.
Although all future generations will be forced to reduce their consumption once
they are born, that doesn’t matter to the time-0 level of national consumption and saving.
Moreover, the reason this policy has a permanent impact on the economy’s capital stock
is that there are always generations coming in the future whose consumption has not yet
been depressed because of the policy; i.e., at any point in time, say t, the cumulated
policy-induced net increase in the economy’s aggregate consumption from time 0
through time t is positive. Another way to think about the policy is to note that as of time
0 the old are the big spenders, whereas the young and future generations are the big
savers. Indeed, future generations have a propensity to consume at time 0 of zero. So the
policy redistributes resources at time 0 from young and future savers to old spenders.

17

The Policy’s Incidence
The incidence of the policy can be described as follows. The elderly at time 0
−

receive h , and since factor prices at time 0 are unchanged, they experience no reduction
in the return they earn from their capital.

Hence, the policy unambiguously makes the
−

initial elderly better off.

Next consider the young at time 0.

They give up h when
−

young, but receive the same amount when old. On balance, they lose interest on the h .
This reduction in lifetime income is somewhat counterbalanced by the fact the policy
drives up the return they receive on their savings. The reason is that the policy reduces k 1
relative to what it would otherwise have been. (Note that while the policy alters k 1 and
subsequent levels of capital per workers, it doesn’t change k 0 , which means it doesn’t
change the wage earned by the initial young.) Finally, consider those born at time 2 and
−

thereafter. Each of these generations loses interest on h . In addition, each earns a lower
wage on its labor supply and a higher rate of return on its saving than in the absence of
the policy. On balance, these factor price changes make these generations worse off.
Since there is neither government consumption nor economic distortions in this
example, the policy, according to (13), is zero-sum across generations with respect to
welfare changes. Now the derivative of each generation’s utility has two components –
−

the change due to raising h (above zero) and the change due to policy-induced factor
price changes. If we measure these two components in present value (in units of time-0
consumption) and add them up across all generations, equation (13) tells us that their sum
is zero. However, as indicated above, the sum across all initial and future generations of

18

−

the first component – the utility changes from raising h is, by itself, zero.6 Hence, the
present value sum of the utility changes experienced by initial and future generations
from factor-price changes must also sum to zero. In concrete terms, this means that the
gain to the initial young from receiving a higher rate of return in old age, measured in
units of time-0 consumption, equals the sum of the net losses, measured in time-0
consumption, incurred by subsequent generations from receiving a lower real wage when
young plus a higher return when old.

IV. Deficit Delusion and the Arbitrary Nature of Fiscal Labels
In presenting generational policy in the Cobb-Douglas model, no use was made of
the terms “taxes,” “transfer payments,” “interest payments,” or “deficits.”

This section

points out that there are an infinite number of equally uninformative ways to label the
above policy using these words. Each of these alternative sets of labels use the words
“taxes,” “transfers,” “spending,” and “deficits” in conventional ways. Consequently, no
set of labels has a higher claim to relevance than any other.
The choice of a particular set of fiscal labels to use in discussing the model (the
choice of fiscal language) is fundamentally no different than the choice of whether to
discuss the model in English or French.

The message of the model lies in its

mathematical structure. And no one would presume that that message would differ if the
model were discussed in English rather than French.

6

−

Recall that the present value sum of the loss of interest on
−

equals - h -- the gain to the initial elderly.

19

h by the initial young and future generations

Showing that fiscal labeling is, from the perspective of economic theory, arbitrary
establishes that the “deficit” is not a well defined measured of generational or, indeed,
any other aspect of fiscal policy. It establishes the same point with respect to “taxes,”
“transfer payments,” and “spending,” where spending consists of “transfer payments” and
“interest payments on government borrowing.”

Since the “deficit,” “taxes,” “transfer

payments,” and “spending” are, from the perspective of economic theory, content free, so
too are ancillary fiscal and national income accounting constructs like “debt,” “national
income,” “disposable income,” “personal saving,” and “social security.”

Given the

ubiquitous use by governments and economists of these verbal constructs to discuss,
formulate, and evaluate economic policy, the import of this point cannot be overstated.

Alternative Fiscal Labels
−

Consider first labeling the payment of h by members of the initial young and
−

future generations as a “tax” and the labeling of the receipt of h by the initial and
subsequent elderly as a “transfer payment.” With these words, the government reports a
balanced budget each period since “taxes” equal “spending.” This is true despite the fact
that the government is running a loose fiscal policy in the sense that it redistributes
toward the initial old from the initial young and future generations.

Furthermore, the
−

budget remains in balance regardless of whether the policy is extremely loose (h is very
−

large) or extremely tight ( h is negative and very large in absolute value).
−

As a second example, let the government (1) label its payment of h to the elderly
−

at time 0 as “transfer payments,” (2) label its receipt of h from the initial young and

20

−

subsequent generations as “borrowing,” and (3) label its net payment of h to each elderly
generation from time s=1 onward as “repayment of principal plus interest in the amount
−

−

of (1+rs) h less an old age tax of rs h .” While each old person starting at time 0 still
−

−

receives h and each young person still hands over h , with this alternative set of words
−

the government announces that its running a deficit of h at time 0 since time-0 spending
−

on transfer payments equals h and time-0 taxes equal zero. At time 1 and thereafter, the
deficit is zero since the old age tax equals the government’s interest payments (the only
−

government spending).

Hence, the stock of debt increases from 0 to h at the beginning

of time 1 and stays at that value forever.
The above two examples are special cases of the following general labeling rule:
−

−

1) label the receipt from the young of h as net borrowing from the young of mh less a
−

−

net transfer to the young of (m-1) h , 2) label the payment of h to the initial old as a
−

transfer payment, and 3) label the payment of h to the old in periods s≥1 as return of
−

−

−

principal plus interest of m(1+rs) h less a net old age tax of (m-1) h +mrs h . Note that in
the first example, m equals 0. In the second, m equals 1. Also note that regardless of the
−

value of m, the government, on balance, extracts h from the young each period and
−

hands h over to the old each period.
−

The government’s reported deficit at time 0 is m h . At time s≥1, the reported
−

deficit equals government spending on interest payments of mrs h plus net transfer

21

−

−

−

payments of (m-1) h minus government net taxes of (m-1) h +mrs h ; i.e., the reported
−

deficit in s≥1 is zero. Hence, from time 1 onward, the stock of government debt is mh .
Since m can be any positive or negative integer, the government can choose language to
make its reported debt for s≥1 any size and sign it wants.
For example, if the government makes m equal to –30,000, it will announce each
−

−

period that it is “taxing the young 30,001 h and lending the young 30,000 h and, in each
period s≥1, that it is “receiving from the old principal and interest payments of
−

−

−

30,000(1+rs) h and making a transfer payment to the old of 30,001 h +30,000rs h . In this
−

case, the government reports a surplus at time 0 of 3000 h .
Thus, each choice of m corresponds to a different choice of fiscal language. And
since the government and private sector are always fully repaying those payments and
receipts that are described as “government borrowing” and “government loans,” one
choice of m is no more natural than any other from the perspective of everyday parlance.
From the perspective of economic theory, the choice of m is completely arbitrary as well;
i.e., the equations of the model presented above do not contain m.
In addition to not pinning down the choice of m at a point in time, the model’s
equations provide no restrictions on changes in the choice of m through time.

Let ms

−

stand for the choice of m applied to the receipt of h from the young at time s as well as
−

the receipt of h by the old at time s+1. So ms references the language used to describe
the fiscal treatment of generations s.

In this case, the deficit at time s will equal the

−

quantity (ms–ms-1 ) h .

22

To summarize, regardless of the true size and nature of generational policy as
−

determined by the size and sign of h , the government can announce any time-path of
deficits or surpluses it chooses. For example, the government can choose a sequence of
ms that makes its reported debt grow forever at a faster rate than the economy. This
means, of course, that the debt to GDP ratio tends to infinitely. It also means that the
invocation in economic models of a transversality condition, which limits the ratio of
debt to GDP, is a restriction about permissible language, not a restriction on the
economy’s underlying economic behavior.
At this point, an irritated reader might suggest that the above is simply an exercise
in sophistry because as long as the government chooses its fiscal language (its m) and
sticks with it through time, we’ll have a meaningful and consistent language with which
to discuss fiscal policy.
This is not the case. Even if the government were to choose an m and stick with it
through time, the resulting time path of government deficits would have no necessary
connection to actual fiscal policy.

As we’ve seen in the above example, if the
−

government chooses a large (in absolute value) negative value of m to label the h policy,
it will announce over time that it has a huge level of assets, despite the fact that it is
conducting loose policy.

Moreover, the government’s choice of fiscal labels isn’t

sacrosanct. The fact that the government has chosen a particular time-path for the value
of m doesn’t preclude each individual in society from choosing her or his own time-path
of ms in describing the country’s past and projected future fiscal affairs. Each of these
alternative time paths has the same claim (namely zero) to explaining the government’s
actual past, present, and future fiscal position.

23

Indeed, those who wish to show that

deficits crowd out capital formation need only define a time path of ms that produces a
negative correlation between investment and the deficit. And those who wish to show the
opposite can choose a time path of ms that produces a positive correlation.
Finally, unless the government’s fiscal policy is described in label-free terms,
there is no way for the public to know what m the government has chosen or whether it is
maintaining that choice through time. In our simple model, the reported deficit depends
on the current period’s choice of m, the previous period’s choice of m, as well as the size
−

−

of h .

Without independent knowledge of h , the public can’t tell if the deficit is

changing because of changes in fiscal fundamentals or simply because of changes in
fiscal labels. Nor can the public tell if the same labels are being used through time.

Other Guises of Generational Policy
−

In the above discussion, we’ve indicated that the our h

intergenerational

redistribution policy can be conducted under the heading “pay-as-you-go” social security,
“deficit-financed transfer payments,” or “surplus-financed transfer payments,” where the
deficits or surpluses can be of any size. This is not the limit of the language that could be
used to describe the policy. The policy could also be introduced under the heading of
“structural tax reform.”

To see this, suppose the government initially has in place a

consumption tax that it uses to make transfers to the young and old which precisely equal
their tax payments.

Now suppose the government switches from consumption to wage

taxation as its means of collecting the same amount of revenue to finance the transfer
payments.

Since the initial elderly are retired and pay no wage taxes, they will be

relieved of paying any net taxes over the rest of their lives.

24

Hence, this reform

redistributes to them from the initial young and future generations.

These latter

generations find that the present value (calculated when young) of their lifetime net tax
payments has been increased.
Our final example of fiscal linguistic license is particularly artful. As discussed in
Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), it involves the government engineering a stock market
boom and, thereby, raising the price at which the elderly sell their capital assets to the
young.

In so doing, the government can claim that market revaluation, rather than

government policy, is responsible for improving the well being of the initial elderly at the
cost of lower welfare for the initial young and future generations.

Since we want to

−

describe this outcome as a particular labeling of our h policy, we need to clarify the
difference between capital assets and consumption goods.

The difference arises not in

the physical property of the two, since our model has only one good, but rather in the date
the good is produced. The economy’s capital stock at time t consists of output that was
produced prior to time t. And the government can tax or subsidize the purchase of output
produced in the past differently from the way it taxes or subsidizes output produced in the
present.
−

In terms of the equations of our model, h stands for the higher price of capital
(measured in units of consumption) that the young must pay to invest in capital. It also
stands for the higher price (measured in units of consumption) that the old receive on the
sale of their capital to the young.
How can the government engineer a stock market boom of this kind? The answer
is by announcing a tax on the purchase of newly produced capital goods by the young.
Since the young can either invest by buying new capital goods or by buying old capital

25

from the elderly (the capital valued in the stock market), this will drive up the price of the
capital the elderly have to sell to the point that the young are indifferent between the two
options. To avoid the government retaining any resources, we can have it return to the
young the equivalent of their investment tax payments, but in a lump-sum payment (a
payment that is not related to the level of that investment.

This, plus a couple of

additional elements that leave the effective tax rate on capital income unchanged, will
make the “investment tax policy” differ in name only from conducting our benchmark
policy under the alternative headings “pay-as-you-go social security,” “deficit-financed
transfer payments to the elderly,” “surplus-financed transfer payments to the elderly,”
and “structural tax change.”7

Generalizing the Point that the Deficit is Not Well Defined
The above illustration of the arbitrary nature of deficit accounting was based on a
simple framework that excluded distortionary policy, economic as well as policy
uncertainty, and liquidity constraints.

Unfortunately, none of these factors provide any

connection between the measured deficit and fiscal fundamentals.

7

To make this policy fully isomorphic to our benchmark policy, we need to include six elements: 1) a
subsidy to capital income received by generation s when old that is levied at the same rate as the tax
generation s pays when young on new investment, 2) a lump sum transfer paid to the elderly equal to the
subsidy to capital income, 3) a lump sum transfer to the young equal to the proceeds of the investment tax,
4) the setting of the investment tax rate each period to ensure that the net cost of purchasing the capital rises
−

by exactly h , 5) if the elderly consume their own capital, the government provides them a subsidy at the
same rate as the investment tax, and 6) if the young invest their own capital (the output they receive as
wages), they will be forced to pay the investment tax. Element 1 ensures that there is no change in the
effective rate of capital income taxation under this description of the policy. Elements 2 through 4 ensure
that the budget constraints of the young and old each period are precisely those of the benchmark policy.
Element 5 guarantees that the elderly are indifferent between consuming their own capital or selling it to
the young, and element 6 guarantees that the young are indifferent between investing their own wages,

26

Distortionary Policy
To see that distortionary policy has no purchase when it comes to connecting
deficits with fiscal fundamentals, consider again the general model that includes variable
first period and second period leisure and net payments from the young and old in period
t to the government of hyt and hot. To introduce distortionary fiscal policy, we simply let
hyt and hot depend on how much generation t decides to consume and work when young
and old, respectively.

In maximizing its lifetime utility function subject to (6) or (7),

agents take into account the marginal dependence of hyt and hot+1 on their consumption
and leisure demands and this marginal dependence helps determine the marginal prices
they face in demanding these commodities.
Our model with distortionary policy thus consists of a) government-chosen timepaths of the hyt and hot functions and gt (government consumption demands) that satisfy
the government’s intertemporal budget constraint, household demands for consumption
and supplies of labor, and firms supplies of output and demands for capital and labor
inputs.

Market clearing requires that, in each period along the economy’s dynamic

transition path, a) firms’ aggregate output supply cover the consumption demands of
households and the government plus the investment demand of firms and b) labor supply
equals labor demand.
The fact that we can formulate and discuss our model of distortionary fiscal
policy making no use whatsoever of the words “taxes,” “transfer payments,” or “deficits”
in itself tells us that the deficit has no connection to policy, even if that policy is
distortionary.

But to drive home the point, consider labeling hyt as “government

purchasing new capital for investment from other young people, or purchasing the capital owned by the

27

borrowing” of mt hyt from the young at time t less a “net transfer payment” to the young at
time t of (mt -1)hyt. The corresponding labeling of the payment by the old of hot+1 would
be labeled as “repayment of principal and interest” of -mt hyt (1+rt+1 ) (which is negative,
because the government is doing the repaying) plus a “net tax payment” of hot+1 + mt hyt
(1+rt+1 ). Notice, that regardless of the size of mt , the net payments of generation t when
young and old are hyt and hot+1 , respectively and its generational account is hyt + Rt+1 hot+1 .
Thus, the choice of the time path of the mt s makes no difference to economic outcomes,
although it leads to a sequence of “official” deficits, dt, of
(22)

d t = mt h yt − mt −1 hyt −1 .
To make this math more concrete, suppose that the government finances its

possibly time-varying consumption each period based on a net payment from the young
of hyt, which distorts each generation’s first-period labor supply. 8

How can observer A

report that the government is taxing only the labor earnings of the young from time 0
onward and always running a balanced budget? How can observer B report that the
government runs a deficit of hy1 at time 0? And how can observer C report that the same
government runs a surplus of hy1 at time 0?
The answer is that observer A sets ms equal to zero for all s; observer B sets m0
equal to zero and m1 equal to 1; and observer C sets m0 equal to zero and m1 equal to -1.
Observer A describes the government as taxing generation 1 when it is young on the
amount it earns when young. Observer B describes the government as taxing generation
1 when it is old on the accumulated (at interest) amount it earns when young. Observer C
describes the government as taxing generation 1 when it is young on its labor supply by
elderly.
8
In this example, the net payment of the old each period is assumed to equal zero.

28

more than the amount needed to cover government spending. Observer C also describes
the government as subsidizing generation 1 when it is old based on the accumulated (at
interest) amount it earned when young.

The key point here is that, although all three

observers report different time-0 deficits, all three report that the government is imposing
the same tax, at the margin, on labor supply when young.
The labels of observers B and C may, at first, seem a bit strained because they
entail stating that the government is collecting revenue or making subsidies in one period
based on economic choices made in another. There are, however, multiple and important
examples of such elocution. Take 401k, IRA, and other tax-deferred retirement accounts.
The tax treatment of these accounts is expressly described as taxing in old age the amount
earned when young plus accumulated interest on those earnings. Another example comes
from the Social Security System, which provides social security benefits in old age based
on the past earnings of workers in a manner that connects marginal benefits to marginal
past contributions.

A third example is the U.S. federal income tax which taxes social

security benefits and thus, indirectly, taxes in old age the labor supplied by retirees when
they were young.
Moreover, such cross-period references aren’t essential.

Take B’s observation

that generation 1 pays zero taxes when young and (1+r2 )hy1 taxes when old.

B can

describe the zero taxes that generation 1 pays when young as “revenues from a tax on
labor supply when young less a lump-sum transfer payment made to the young at time 1
of equal value.” And B can describe the taxes generation 1 pays when old as a “lump
sum tax.”9

9

Recall that, according to observer B, this second-period lump -sum tax is offset by the second-period
repayment of principal plus interest on the government’s borrowing, so that the agent makes no net

29

Although the model discussed above has only a single type of agent per
generation, the argument about the arbitrary nature of fiscal labels is equally valid if
agents are heterogeneous. In this case, the net payments to the government, hyt and hot,
will differ across agents.

If the government cannot observe individual characteristics,

like innate talent, these functions will be anonymous.

On the other hand, the labeling

convention – the choice of mt can be individual specific; i.e., we are each free to describe
our own and our fellow citizens’ net payments to the government with any words we like.
Ghiglino and Shell (2000) point out that if the government were restricted in its
choice of words to, for example, announcing only anonymous tax schedules, those
restrictions might, in light of limits on reported deficits constrained the government’s
policy choices.

This point and their analysis, while very important, is orthogonal to the

one being made here, namely that whatever is the government’s policy and however the
government came to choose that policy, it can reasonably (in the sense of using standard
economic terminology) be described by men and women, who are not encumbered by
government censors, as generating any time path of deficits or surpluses.

Liquidity Constraints
Another objection to the above demonstrations that “deficit” policies are not well
defined is that they ignore the possibility that some agents are liquidity constrained.

If

some young agents can’t borrow against future income how can they be indifferent
between a policy that involuntarily “taxes” them and one that voluntarily “borrows” from
them? There are two answers.
payment in the second period. Thus, if the agent dies prior to reaching the second period, observer B can
claim that the agent’s estate used the proceeds of the debt repayment to pay the second-period lump -sum

30

First, the government can compel payments with words other than “taxes.” For
example, government’s all around the world are currently “reforming” their social
security pension systems by forcing workers to “save” by making contributions to
pension funds, rather than by making social security “tax” contributions.

The

governments are then “borrowing” these “savings” out of the pension funds to finance
current social security benefit payments.

When the workers reach retirement, they will

receive “principal plus interest” on their compulsory saving, but, presumably, also face
an additional tax in old age to cover the government’s interest costs on that “borrowing.”
While this shell game alters no liquidity constraints, it certainly raises the government’s
reported deficit.
The point to bear in mind here is not that governments may, from time to time,
opt for different words to do the same thing, but, rather that any independent observer
can, even in a setting of liquidity constraints, reasonably use alternative words to describe
the same fundamental policy and, thereby, generate total different time-paths of deficits.
The second reason why liquidity-constrained agents may be indifferent between
“paying taxes” and “lending to the government” is due to Hayashi (1987). His argument
is that private-sector lenders are ultimately interested in the consumption levels achieved
by borrowers since the higher those levels, the greater the likelihood that those who can’t
repay will borrow and then default.

When the government reduces its “taxes” on

liquidity-constrained borrowers, private lenders reduce their own loans to those
borrowers to limit the increase in their consumption. Instead of lending as much as it did
to its borrowers, the private lenders make loans to the government.

Indeed, in

equilibrium, the private lenders voluntarily “lend” to the government exactly the amounts
tax.
31

the liquidity-constrained agents were otherwise sending the government in “taxes.”
Hence, the borrowers find their private loans cut back by precisely their cut in taxes (i.e.,
they find their “tax cuts” being used to buy government bonds) and end up with the same
consumption.
liquidity

Thus, changing language will not alter the degree to which any agent is

constrained

since

these

constraints

will

themselves

be

determined,

fundamentally, by the unchanged level and timing of the agents’ resources net of their net
payments to the government.

Uncertainty
A third objection to the proposition that fiscal labels are economically arbitrary
involves uncertainty. “Surely,” the objection goes, “future transfer payments and taxes
are less certain than repayment of principal plus interest, so one can’t meaningfully
interchange these terms.” In fact the risk properties of government payments and receipts
provide no basis for their labeling; i.e., the deficit is no better defined in models with
uncertainty than it is in models with certainty. The reason is that any uncertain payment
~

(receipt) X , where the ~ refers to a variable that is uncertain, can be relabeled as the
−

~

combination of a certain payment (receipt) X plus an uncertain payment (receipt) X −

~

X . So a net payment when young of hyt and an uncertain receipt when old of hot +1 can be
described as a net payment when young of hyt plus a certain old age receipt of hyt/Rt+1 less
~

an uncertain receipt of hot +1 - hyt/ Rt+1 .

Regardless of what one calls the uncertain

component of this receipt, there are, as we’ve seen, an infinite number of ways to label
the certain payment when young and the certain receipt when old.

32

More generally,

whatever are the risk properties of net payments that are labeled “borrowing” and
“interest and principal repayment,” these same net payments can be labeled as “taxes”
and “transfer payments.”
Take, as an example, Barsky, Mankiw, and Zeldes’ (1986) demonstration that “a
tax cut coupled with a future income tax increase (that pays off the associated borrowing)
can stimulate consumer spending” and that “the marginal propensity to consume out of a
tax cut, coupled with future income tax increases, can be substantial under plausible
assumptions.”

In their two-period life-cycle model, agents’ second period earnings are

uncertain. According to the way they label their equations, the government cuts taxes by
an amount T when workers are young and repays its borrowing by taxing workers when
old in proportion to their earnings.

Since agents have no way to insure their risky

earnings, the policy provides an element of intragenerational risk sharing and, thereby,
lowers precautionary saving and raises consumption when young. Barsky, Mankiw, and
Zeldes view this increase in consumption in response to the “tax cut” as a Keynesian
reaction to a Ricardian policy.
While the points Barsky, Mankiw, and Zeldes make about consumption under
uncertainty are impeccable, their findings have nothing to do with “tax cuts,” “deficit
finance,” or “the timing of taxation.”

One can equally well describe their equations as

showing that there is a sizeable and very non-Keynesian consumption response to a tax
hike of size T. How? By labeling the policy as “raising taxes on the young by T and
making a loan to the young of T.” When the young are old, the government “receives
loan repayments of T plus interest” but makes a “transfer payment” of 2T less an amount
that is proportional to earnings at the same rate described by Barsky, et. al. as the tax rate.

33

Time Consistency
Another question about the alleged arbitrary nature of fiscal labels is whether the
timing of “taxes” is better defined in a setting in which government policy is subject to
time-consistency problems.10 One way to demonstrate that it is not is to show that time
inconsistent policy can be modeled with no reference to “taxes,” “transfers,” or
“deficits.” Take, for example, an economy consisting of a generation that lives for two
periods and is under the control of a time inconsistent government in both periods.
Specifically, suppose the government has a social welfare function Wy(u1 ,u2,… ,un ) that
represents its preferences over the lifetime utilities of agents 1 through n when they are
young. Let Wo (u1 ,u2 , … ,un ) represent the government’s preferences when the agents are
old.

Further, assume that agent i’s utility is a function of her consumption when young

and old, ciy and cio , her leisure when young and old, liy and lio , and her enjoyment of
public goods when young and old, gy and go . Thus, ui = ui(ciy,cio ,liy,lio ,gy,go ). When the
cohort is old, the government will maximize Wo taking as given the consumption and
leisure and public goods that each agent enjoyed when young.
If the Wo ( , , , ) and Wy( , , , ) functions differ, the government’s preferences will
be time inconsistent.

In this case, the young government (the government when the

cohort is young), will realize that the old government will exercise some control over the
consumption and leisure that agents will experience when old and use that control to
generate undesirable outcomes.

Consequently, the young government will use dynamic

programming to determine how the old government will make its decisions and the ways
in which it can indirectly control those decisions.

10

Note that time consistency problems can be potentially resolved by having successive governments
purchase consistent behavior from their predecessors. See Kotlikoff, Persson, and Svensson (1988).

34

The government, both when it is old and young, can use non-linear net payment
schedules to redistribute across agents and extract resources from agents.

If the

government is not able to identify particular agents, these net payment schedules will be
anonymous.

If government favors agents with particular unobservable characteristics,

such as low ability, it will condition its net payments schedules on observables, such as
earnings, that are correlated with those characteristics, and face self-selection constraitns
as in Mirrlees (1971).
The government’s second-period optimization is also constrained by the amount
of second–period output, which depends on the economy’s second-period capital stock as
well as agents’ second-period labor supplies. The solution to this problem includes the
choice of go and as well as agent-specific second-period values of consumption and
leisure.

These choices are functions of second-period capital, and these functions are

used by the young government in setting policy; i.e., the young government considers
how its net payment schedules will affect the economy’s capital in the second period and,
thereby, the consumption, leisure, and the public goods enjoyed by different agents when
old.

In recognizing that the old government will control second-period outcomes, the

young government formulates a time-consistent policy.

An Example
To make this point concrete, consider a simple model with two agents, a and b,
both of whom would earn w when young and old were they to work full time. The young
government supplies 2gy and the old government 2go in public goods.

35

The two

governments differ with respect to their preferences over the utilities of the two agents, ua
and ub . Specifically, assume that α>.5 and that
(23)

Wo = αu a + (1 − α)u b

(24)

Wo = (1 − α)u a + αu b

Suppose that utility is separable in public goods, consumption, and leisure and that the
utility of consumption and leisure is given by
(25)

u i = log ciy + log l iy + θ (log c io + log l io ) for i = a and b

It's easy to show using dynamic programming that the consistent solution entails
(26)

cao
αRθ
=
cay (1 − α)(1 + θ )

(27)

wlay = c ay

(28)

wlao = c ao

(29)

c ay =

w
g
− gy − o )
R
R ,
1 +θ

(1 − α)( w +

where R stands for 1 plus the rate of return. A symmetric set of equations holds for the
consumption and leisure of agent b with α replaced by (1-α) and (1-α) replaced by α.
These government choices for consumption and leisure can be compared with the private
choices that would arise in the absence of government policy. Those private demands are
found by setting α, gy, and go to zero. Compared to the no-policy setting, the interaction
of the two governments distorts the intertemporal allocation of consumption and leisure
of the two agents. Agent a (b) ends up with higher (lower) ratios of consumption when

36

old to consumption when young and leisure when old to leisure when young. The reason,
of course, is that the old government redistributes toward agent a, while the young
government redistributes toward agent b.
Having worked out the best lifetime allocations that it can achieve given the old
government’s ultimate control of second-period outcomes, the young government needs
to implement this time-consistent solution. Because it can announce non-linear as well as
non-differentiable net payment schedules, the above allocation can be decentralized in an
infinite number of ways. One way is to announce agent-specific lump-sum payments, ha
and hb , plus agent-specific payments per unit of expenditure on old-age consumption and
leisure, pa and pb .

In this case, the agents will perceive the following lifetime budget

constraints:
(30)

( cay + wlay ) +

p a (c ao + wlao )
w
= w + − ha
R
R

(31)

( cby + wlby ) +

p b ( cbo + wlbo )
w
= w + − hb ,
R
R

where
(32)

ha = ( 2α − 1)( w +

g
w
) + 2(1 − α)( g y + o )
R
R

(33)

hb = (1 − 2α)( w +

g
w
) + 2α( g y + o )
R
R

(34)

pa =

1− α
α

(35)

pb =

α
1− α

Note that the two lump-sum payments add up to the present value of the
government’s purchase of public goods. Also note that since α>.5, agent a faces a lower
37

marginal payment on second-period expenditures than does agent b. It’s easy to show
that the marginal payments generate no net resources to the government.
The fact that one can, as just shown, model time-inconsistent government
preferences without resort to the terms “deficit,” “taxes,” or “transfer payments” indicates
that whatever are the policies that arise in the model just described or in similar models,
they can be labeled any way one wants. Indeed, models of time consistency that cannot
be relabeled freely may be predicated on fiscal irrationality.

Consider, in this respect,

Fischer’s (1980) classic analysis of time-inconsistent capital-income taxation.
Fischer’s model also features a single generation that consumes and works when
young and old and a government that wants to provide public goods.
above model, all generation members are identical.

But unlike the

Fischer permits his government to

levy only proportional taxes on labor earnings when young and old and a tax on capital
holdings when old. These restrictions may seem benign, but they’re not. Why? Because
Fischer is saying that the old government can levy what from the perspective of the
second period is a non-distortionary tax on capital, but that it can’t levy the same nondistortionary tax as part of a non-linear second-period earnings tax in which
inframarginal earnings are taxed at a different rate than are marginal earnings.11
If one drops Fischer’s restriction and allows non-linear net payment schedules, his
model collapses to the above model with α=.5.

In this case the young and old

governments agree and extract inframarginal net payments to pay for public goods.
Hence, Fischer’s economy ends up in a first-best equilibrium, in which no margins of
11

Suppose, for example, that Fischer’s old government levies a tax of 50 units of the model’s good on
capital and a 15 percent proportional tax on labor earnings. From the perspective of second-period agents,
this is no different from a policy under which the government announces that it will not tax capital at all,

38

choice are distorted. This is a far cry from the third-best equilibrium Fischer proposes –
an equilibrium in which the government can only tax second-period earnings in a
distortionary manner and to avoid doing so, places very high, and possibly confiscatory
taxes on agents’ capital accumulation.

Agents naturally respond by saving little or

nothing.
Do

Fischer’s

restrictions,

which

he

doesn’t

justify,

reflect

economic

considerations, or are they simply a subtle manifestation of fiscal illusion? One economic
argument in their behalf is that the governments he contemplates don’t have the ability to
observe individual earnings or capital holdings and are forced to collect net payments on
an anonymous basis.

For example, the governments might be able to collect net

payments from firms that are functions of the firms’ aggregate capital holdings and
aggregate wage payments, but not be able to collect net payments from individual agents.
This doesn’t immediately imply the absence of inframarginal labor earnings taxes since
the governments could, in addition to taxing the firms’ total wage bill at a fixed rate, levy
a fixed payment per employee on each firm, assuming the government can observe the
number of employees.

But, for argument’s sake, let’s assume the government can’t

observed the number of employees.
In this case, can one still re-label fiscal flows in Fischer’s model without changing
anything fundamental? The answer is yes.
equilibria.

Take the first of Fischer’s two third-best

It entails a first-period proportional labor-earnings tax, a second-period

proportional capital levy, and no second-period labor-earnings tax.

Now starting from

this tax structure, suppose the government wants to “run” a smaller surplus. It can do so

but instead assess a 50 unit tax on the first dollar earned and a 15 percent tax on each dollar earned
thereafter.

39

by labeling first-period labor-income taxes of Ty as “a first-period “loan” to the
government of Ty plus a “second-period tax” of (1+r)Ty , where r is the rate of interest.
Since this second-period tax is calculated as a function of labor earnings when young, the
re-labeling alters no incentives to work when young.

Nor does it change the

government’s cash flows, since the government still receives Ty in the first period as a
“loan” and uses the (1+r)Ty second-period “tax” receipt to repay “principal plus interest”
on its first-period “borrowing.”

The government has no reason to either a) renege on

repaying this debt or b) tax these debt holdings because in the second period it is getting
all the receipts it needs from its non-distortionary capital levy.12
If the government is effecting its transactions through firms, it can borrow from
firms in the first period, repay the firms in the second period, and assess a tax in the
second period on the firms based on their first-period wage payments. In this case, the
firms will withhold and save enough of the worker’s first-period pre-tax wages so as to
be able to pay these extra second-period taxes. The firms will invest in the government
bonds and use the proceeds of those bonds to pay off the additional taxes.
Fischer’s alternative third-best tax structure entails a confiscatory tax on all
physical capital accumulated for old age and positive first- and second-period laborearnings taxes. Can the government, also in this setting, postpone its taxes on first-period
labor earnings and get the young, or the firms on behalf of the young, to lend it what it
12

If the government wants, instead, to announce a larger first-period surplus, it can raise the first-period
labor-income tax, lend the additional proceeds back to the young, and provide a second-period subsidy on
first-period labor earnings paid for with the proceeds of the loan repayment. Again, the old government has
no reason to renege on this second-period subsidy because it is already collecting all the resources it needs
via the non-distortionary capital levy. Alternatively, it can collect the second-period capital-income tax in
the form of a first-period tax on the acquisition of assets and then lend these additional first-period receipts
back to the young. This leaves the net payment of the young unchanged, and the second-period repayment
of principal plus interest on the loan gives the government the same second-period net receipts it has under
its initial wording.

40

would otherwise have collected as first-period taxes? The answer is yes.

If the

government reneges on its debt repayment in the second-period, by either repudiating the
debt or levying a tax on holdings of debt, the old, or the firms on their behalf, won’t be
able to repay the taxes that are due in the second-period on first-period labor earnings
unless the government violates Fischer’s stricture against taxing second-period earnings
at other than a fixed rate that is independent of the level of earnings. To see this, note
that taxes levied on first-period labor earnings are, from the perspective of the second
period, lump-sum since first-period labor supply decisions have already been made. So
paying off the debt has no efficiency implications because the proceeds of this debt
repayment are immediately handed back to the old government in the form of a lumpsum tax.

If the government were to renege on its debt and also tax first-period labor

earnings in the second period, it would force the old (the firms) to pay additional taxes
from the proceeds of their second-period labor earnings (their second-period wage
payments).

This would require a non-linear tax, which, again, is something that Fischer

seems to have ruled out a priori. The non-linear tax in this case would be a fixed
payment, independent of second-period labor earnings, plus a payment based on the level
of second-period labor earnings.

Voluntary vs. Involuntary Payments
A final issue is whether the voluntary nature of private purchases of government
bonds makes debt labels meaningful.
interesting

article

redistribution.

by

Tabellini

This proposition is indirectly advanced in a very

(1991)

on

the

sustainability

of

intergenerational

In his model, the government wants to finance uniform transfer payments

41

to young parents by extracting payments from a subset of them, namely those that are
rich.

Unfortunately, Tabellini’s government can’t observe endowments, and were it to

force all young parents to make the same payment, it would defeat its purpose. Instead,
the government “borrows” from young parents, with the result that only those young
parents with large endowments voluntarily “lend” to the government. Tabellini notes that
these loans will be repaid when these rich parents are old. Why? Because their children
will join with them in voting for debt repayment since much of that repayment will come
from the children of the poor. In the course of showing that intragenerational distribution
considerations can help enforce intergenerational redistribution, Tabellini claims that this
same policy could not be implemented through a social security system, because a social
security tax would be compulsory.
I disagree for the simple reason that social security tax payments need not be
compulsory.

Instead of announcing that is “borrowing,” Tabellini’s government could

equally well announce a payroll tax that is the same function of the young parents’
endowment as is their debt purchases.

The government would also announce social

security benefit payments that are set equal to the tax contributions plus the market rate
of return that would otherwise be paid on government bonds. True, the government can't
force the parents, when they are young, to pay social security taxes because the
government can't observe the parent's initial endowments. But there is no need to enforce
the tax collection; the same parents who would otherwise have purchased debt will want
to pay the tax because it will ensure them an old age social security benefit in a setting in
which they have no other means to save for old age.

42

Note that in many countries, payroll tax payments are in large part voluntary.
Workers can choose to work in the formal sector and pay those taxes or they can choose
to work in the informal sector and not pay. Another way to think about “enforcing” the
“tax” is for the government to announce a penalty, namely, disqualification from receipt
of the old-age transfer payment, so that formal-sector workers could choose not to
contribute without the fear of being sent to jail.

Note also that with this alternative

labeling, the children of the rich will want to enforce the payment of social security
benefits because their parents will otherwise lose out to the benefit of the children of the
poor.
With Tabellini’s fiscal labels (case a), the government reports a deficit when the
parents are young. Under mine (case b), it reports a balanced budget. If it wanted to
report a surplus, it could a) announce a social security tax schedule that was, say, double
what would it announce in case b, but also announce that it would make loans to all tax
payers equal to one half of their tax contributions. When old, in this case c, the parents
would get twice the social security benefits that they'd get in case b, but they would have
to pay back their loans with interest.

If the government in Tabellini’s model wants to

report an even larger deficit (case d), it could borrow twice as much and announce that it
would provide a special transfer payment to its lenders equal to, say, one half of the loans
they provide. When old, these lenders would face an extra tax, equal to the special
transfer plus interest, with the proceeds of this tax subtracted out of the government's
repayment to the lenders.

43

In each of these cases, the net flows between each parent and the government in
each period is the same, so the voting choices of the young won't change. The only
change is the government's reported deficit/surplus.

Implications for Empirical Analyses of Deficits, Personal Saving, and Portfolio Choice
The above demonstration that government debt and deficits are not well defined
has serious implications for the vast time-series literature that purports to connect these
aggregates to consumption, interest rates, and other macroeconomic variables.

This

literature is reviewed in Elmendorf and Mankiw (1998). The problem with these studies
is that they use wholly arbitrary measures of deficits and debts, which could just as well
be replaced by other equally arbitrary measures that have the opposite correlation with
the dependent variable.

Moreover, in the absence of any theoretical ground rules for

measuring the deficit, Eisner and Pieper (1984) and other economists have felt free to
”correct” the U.S. federal deficit in ways that substantiate their priors about the impact of
deficits on the economy.
Empirical analysis of personal saving suffers from the same shortcoming.

The

measurement of personal saving is predicated on the measurement of personal disposable
income, which, in turn, depends on the measurement of taxes and transfer payments.
Since taxes and transfer payments can be freely defined, the nation’s personal saving rate
can be anything anyone wants it to be.

This fact casts a pall on studies like those of

44

Bosworth, Burtless, and Sabelhaus (1991) and Gale and Scholz (1999) that purport to
“explain” or, at least illuminate, changes over time in the nation’s rate of personal saving.
Finally, if government debt is not well defined, then the division of private
portfolios between stocks and bonds, including government bonds, is a matter of opinion,
not fact.

This calls into question studies that purport to identify risk preferences and

other portfolio determinants based on the shares of portfolios invested in bonds versus
stocks.

V. Generational Accounting
Generational accounting was developed by Auerbach, Gokhale, and Kotlikoff
(1991) in response to the aforementioned problems of deficit accounting. The objective
of generational accounting’s is to measure the generational incidence of fiscal policy as
well as its sustainability and to do so in ways that are independent of fiscal taxonomy.
Generational accounting compares the lifetime net tax bills facing future generations with
that facing current newborns.

It also calculates the changes in generational accounts

associated with changes in fiscal policies. Both of these comparisons are label-free in the
sense that generate the same answer regardless of how government receipts and payments
are labeled.
Although academics have spearheaded development of generational accounts,
much of the work has been done at the governmental or multilateral institutional level.
The U.S. Federal Reserve, the U.S. Congressional Budget Office, the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, H.M. Treasury, the Bank of Japan, the Bundesbank, the
Norwegian Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Italy, the New Zealand Treasury, the

45

European Commission13 , the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank have all
done generational accounting.

Much of the interest in generational accounting by these

institutions stems from the projected dramatic aging of OECD countries coupled with the
commitments of OECD governments to pay very high levels of social security and health
care benefits to the elderly.
Generational accounting has also drawn considerable interest from academic and
government economists.

Haveman (1994), Congressional Budget Office (1995), Cutler

(1993), Diamond (1996), Buiter (1997), Shaviro (1997), Auerbach, Gokhale, and
Kotlikoff (1994), Kotlikoff (1997), Raffelhuschen (1998), and others have debated its
merits.
Much of the interest in generational accounting is motivated by the extraordinary
aging of industrial societies that will, over the next few decades, make almost all of the
leading countries around the world look like present-day retirement communities.
Population aging per se is not necessarily a cause for economic concern, but population
aging in the presence of high and growing levels of government support for the elderly
makes early attention to the long-term fiscal implications of aging imperative.
While generational accounting is a natural for old and aging countries, developing
countries, like Mexico and Thailand, which don’t face aging problems, have their own
reasons for examining generational accounting.

In particular, they realize that their

relative youth means they have more current and future young people to help bear
outstanding fiscal burdens and that viewed through the lens of generational accounting,

13

The European Commission has an ongoing project to do generational accounting for EU member nations
under the direction of Bernd Raffelhueschen, Professor of Economics at Freiburg University. See
Raffelhueschen (1998).

46

their fiscal policies might look much more responsible relative to those of the developed
world.
This section lays out generational accounting’s methodology, shows alternative
ways of measuring generational imbalances, stresses the importance of demographics in
generational accounting, discusses practical issues in constructing generational accounts,
shows examples of generational accounts and measures of generational imbalances,
points out the connection between generational accounting and traditional tax incidence
analysis, and mentions, along the way, a variety of concerns that have been raised about
this new form of fiscal appraisal.

The Method of Generational Accounting
Equation

(36)

rewrites

the

government’s

intertemporal

budget

constraint

(equation 8) in terms of the generational accounts of current and future generations.
(36)
∞
d
∞
∑ N
P
(1 + r ) − s + ∑ N
P
= ∑ G
(1 + r ) − s + D
t
,
t
+
s
t
,
t
+
s
t
,
t
−
s
t
,
t
−
s
t
+
s
t
s=1
s =0
s=0
In (36), Nt,k stands for the per capita generational account in year t of the generation born
in year k.

For generations currently alive, Nt,k denotes per capita remaining lifetime net

taxes discounted to the current year t. For generations not yet born, Nt,k refers to per
capita lifetime net taxes, discounted to the year of birth.

The term Pt,k stands for the

population in year t of the cohort that was born in year k. This first summation on the
left-hand side of (36) adds together the generational accounts of future generations,
discounted at rate r to the current year t. The second summation adds the accounts of

47

existing generations.

In actual applications of generational accounting, separate accounts

are calculated for males and females, but this feature is omitted from (36) to limit
notation.
The first term on the right-hand side of (36) expresses the present value of
government purchases. In this summation the values of government purchases in year s,
given by Gs, are also discounted to year t.

The remaining term on the right-hand side,

Dtg , denotes the government's explicit net debt – its financial liabilities minus the sum of
its financial assets and the market value of its public enterprises based on whatever
arbitrary language conventions the government has adopted.

The Precise Formula for Generational Accounts
The generational account Nt,k is defined by:
P
s, k
(1 + r )-(s-t) ,
N t,k = ∑ T s, k
P
s= max (t,k)
t, k
k +D

(37)

where κ=max(t,k). The term Ts,k stands for the projected average net tax payment to the
government made in year s by a member of the generation born in year k.
The term Ps,k/Pt,k indicates the proportion of members of cohort k alive at time t
who will also be alive at time s.14

Thus, it represents the probability that a particular

member of the year-k cohort who is alive in year t will survive to year s to pay the net
taxes levied, on average, in that year on year-k cohort members.

Hence, Nt,k is an

actuarial present value. It represents the average value in the present of the amount of
14

The population weights Ps,k incorporate both mortality and immigration, implicitly treating immigration
as if it were a “rebirth” and assigning the taxes paid by immigrants to the representative members of their
respective cohorts. This approach does not, therefore, separate the burdens of natives and immigrants. See

48

net taxes that members of cohort k will pay in the future, where the averaging is over not
just net tax payments, but also survivorship.

What Do Generational Accounts Exclude?
Note that generational accounts reflect only taxes paid less transfer payments
received. With the exception of government expenditures on health care and education,
which are treated as transfer payments, the accounts do not impute to particular
generations the value of the government's purchases of goods and services.

Why not?

Because it is difficult to attribute the benefits of such purchases. Therefore, the accounts
do not show the full net benefit or burden that any generation receives from government
policy as a whole, although they can show a generation's net benefit or burden from a
particular policy change that affects only taxes and transfers.

Thus generational

accounting tells us which generations will pay for the government spending not included
in the accounts, rather than telling us which generations will benefit from that spending.
This implies nothing about the value of government spending; i.e., there is no
assumption, explicit or implicit, in the standard practice of generational accounting
concerning the value to households of government purchases.15

Assessing the Fiscal Burden Facing Future Generations
Given the right-hand side of equation (36) and the second term on the left-handside of equation (36), generational accountants determine, as a residual, the value of the
Ablett (1999) and Auerbach and Oreopoulos (1999) for applications of generational accounting that make
that separation as well as study a variety of fiscal issues associated with immigration.
15
Raffelhüschen (1998) departs from this conventional approach to generational accounting of not
allocating the benefits of government purchases. Instead, he allocates these purchases on a per-capita basis.

49

first term on the left-hand side of equation (36) -- the collective payment, measured as a
time-t present value, required of future generations.

Given this amount, one can

determine the average present value lifetime net tax payment of each member of each
future cohort under the assumption that these lifetime net tax payments rise for members
of each successive future cohorts at the economy's rate of labor productivity growth, g.
Now, if labor productivity grows at g percent per year, so will real wages. Hence, the
lifetime labor income of each new cohort will be g percent larger than that of its
immediate predecessor.

So, in assuming that each successive cohort pays lifetime net

taxes that are g percent larger than those of its predecessor, one is assuming that each
successive future cohort pays the same share of its lifetime labor income in net taxes; i.e.,
one is assuming that each future cohort faces the same lifetime net tax rate.
_
Let N stand for the growth-adjusted generational account of future generations.
_
N is the amount each member of a future cohort would pay in lifetime net taxes if her
lifetime labor income were the same as that of a current newborn. The actual amount the
_
cohort born in year t+1 will pay is N (1+g). The actual amount the cohort born in year
_
t+2 will pay is N (1+g)2 . The actual amount the cohort born in year t+3 will pay is
_
N (1+g)3 , and so on.
_
Equation (38) can be used to solve for N .
(38)

50

D
∞ −
∞
∑ N
P
+ ∑ N (1 + g ) s P
(1 + r ) t − s = ∑ G (1 + r ) t − s + D
t, t + s
t
s = 0 t, t − s t, t − s s = 1
s =t s
_
N is the lifetime net tax payment of future generations adjusted for growth, so it is
directly comparable to that of current newborns, Nt,t. This comparison is also label-free
because alternative labeling conventions leave unchanged lifetime net payments.

If

_
_
N equals Nt,t, generational policy is balanced. If N exceeds (is smaller than) Nt,t, future
generations face larger (smaller) growth-adjusted lifetime net tax burdens than do current
newborns.
The assumption that the generational accounts of all future generations are equal,
except for a growth adjustment, is just one of many assumptions one could make about
the distribution across future generations of their collective net tax payments to the
government.

One could, for example, assume a phase-in of the additional fiscal burden

(positive or negative) to be imposed on future generations, allocating a greater share of
the burden to later future generations and a smaller share to earlier ones. Clearly, such a
phase-in would mean that generations born after the phase-in period has elapsed would
face larger values of lifetime burdens (the Nt,ks) than we are calculating here.

Alternative Ways to Achieve Generational Balance
Another way of measuring the imbalance in fiscal policy is to ask what immediate
and permanent change in either a) government purchases or b) a specific tax (such as the
income tax) or transfer payment (such as old-age social security benefits) would be
necessary to equalize the lifetime growth-adjusted fiscal burden facing current newborns
and future generations.

Because such policies satisfy the government’s intertemporal
51

budget constraint, they also sustainable.
To be more precise about this type of calculation, suppose one wants to find the
immediate and permanent percentage reduction in government purchases needed to
achieve generational balance. Denote this percentage reduction by z.

Next, use equation

_
(39) to solve for z under the assumption that N equals Nt,t.

(39)
D
∞ −
∞
∑ N
P
+ ∑ N (1 + g ) s P
(1 + r ) t − s = ∑ (1 + z )G (1 + r ) t − s + D
t ,t + s
s
t
s = 0 t, t − s t, t − s s = 1
s=t
As a second example, consider the immediate and permanent percentage increase in
income taxes needed to achieve generational balance. Call this percentage increase v.16
To determine the size of v, try different immediate and permanent income tax hikes until
you find the one with the following property: given the new values of generational
_
accounts (the values inclusive of the tax hike), the calculated value of N equals Nt,t.

In

contrast to the calculation of z, in this calculation of v , Nt,t, the generational account of
current newborns, is not held fixed.

Like the accounts of all other existing generations,

_
Nt,t is higher because of the increase in the income tax. Consequently, so is N .

16

To introduce v in equation (4) we’d have to express the generational accounts of current generations as a)
the present value of their future tax payments minus b) the present value of their future transfer payments
and simply multiply the expression for the present value of future tax payments by (1+v).

52

The Role of Demographics
As can be seen in equations (23)-(26), demographics play a central role in
determining the size of the imbalance in generational policy.

Other things equal, the

_
larger the population sizes of future generations, the smaller will be the size of N , and,
therefore, the smaller will be the imbalance of generational policy. Ceteris paribus, larger
_
population sizes of current generations will raise or lower N depending on the sign of the
generational accounts these population totals are multiplying.

For example, if the

generational accounts of those over age 65 are negative, larger numbers of older people
_
will make the calculated value of N larger.

A negative account means that the

government will, under current policy, pay more to a generation in transfer payments
than it receives in taxes.

Negative generational accounts for older generations is the

norm in industrialized countries because these generations receive more in state pension,
health, and other benefits over the remainder of their lives than they pay in taxes.
What is the impact of the large number of baby boomers on generational
imbalance? Since these generations typically still have positive generational accounts,
_
they are contributing, on balance, to lowering the size of N and, thus, the imbalance in
generational policy.

On the other hand, since these generations are close to receiving

large net transfers from the government, the current values of their generational accounts

are quite small.

_
Hence, the contribution they are making toward lowering N is small.

This is the channel through which the very sizable benefits that are due to be paid in
retirement to the enormous baby boom generation in industrialized countries constitute a

53

fiscal burden on young and future generations.

Inputs to Generational Accounting
Producing generational accounts requires projections of population, taxes,
transfers, and government purchases, an initial value of government net debt, and a
discount rate.

Since generational accounting considers all levels of government -- local,

state, and federal -- the measures of taxes, transfers, and government purchases must be
comprehensive.

Government infrastructure purchases are treated like other forms of

purchases in the calculations.

Although such purchases provide an ongoing stream,

rather than a one-time amount, of services, they still must be paid for.

Generational

accounting clarifies which generation or generations will have to bear the burden of these
and other purchases. Government net debt is calculated net of the current market value of
state enterprises.
businesses.

This value is determined by capitalizing the net profits of those

In contrast to the treatment of the market value of state enterprises,

government net debt does not net out the value of the government’s existing
infrastructure, such as parks, highways, and tanks. Including such assets would have no
impact on the estimated fiscal burden facing future generations because including these
assets would require adding to the projected flow of government purchases an exactly
offsetting flow of imputed rent on the government’s existing infrastructure.
Taxes and transfer payments are each broken down into several categories. The
general rule regarding tax incidence is to assume that taxes are borne by those paying the
taxes, when the taxes are paid: income taxes on income, consumption taxes on
consumers, and property taxes on property owners. There are two exceptions here, both

54

of which involve capital income taxes.

First, as detailed in Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and

Gokhale (1991), one should, data permitting, distinguish between marginal and inframarginal capital income taxes.

Specifically, infra-marginal capital income taxes should

be distributed to existing wealth holders, whereas marginal capital income taxes should
be based on future projected wealth holdings.

Second, in the case of small open

economies, marginal corporate income taxes are assumed to be borne by (and are
therefore allocated to) labor.

The general rule for allocating transfer payments is to

allocate them to those who directly receive them.
The typical method used to project the average values of particular taxes and
transfer payments by age and sex starts with government forecasts of the aggregate
amounts of each type of tax (e.g., payroll) and transfer payment (e.g., welfare benefits) in
future years.

These aggregate amounts are then distributed by age and sex based on

relative age-tax and age-transfer profiles derived from cross-section micro data sets. For
years beyond those for which government forecasts are available, age- and sex-specific
average tax and transfer amounts are generally assumed to equal those for the latest year
for which forecasts are available, with an adjustment for growth.
Equation (40) helps clarify the method of distributing annual tax or transfer
aggregates in a particular year to contemporaneous cohorts.

Again, to simplify the

presentation we abstract from the distinction between sexes that we consider in the actual
calculations.
D

(40)

H t = ∑T R
P
t , t , t − s t, t − s
s =0

In (40), Ht stands for an aggregate tax or transfer amount in year t. Let’s assume it stands
for total income tax payments to make the example concrete. The term Tt, is the average

55

amount of income tax paid in year t. Rt,t-s is the relative distribution profile for income
taxes in year t.

Specifically, it stands for ratio of the average income tax payment of

members of the cohort born in year t-s to the average income tax payment in year t.
Finally, Pt,t-s stands for the number of people in year t who were born in year t-s, i.e., it is
the population size of the age t-s cohort. Given Ht and the values of the Rt,t-s and Pt,t-s
terms, one can use equation (41) to solve for Tt.

To form Tt,t-s, the terms that enter

equation (37) that are used to calculate each current generation’s account, note that
(41)

T

t, t − s

=T R
.
t, t t , t − s

Discount Rates and Uncertainty
For base-case calculations, generational accountants typically use a real rate of
discount around 5 percent, a rate that exceeds the real government short-term borrowing
rate in most developed countries.
flows being discounted.

This rate seems justified given the riskiness of the

However, the “right” discount rate to use is in sufficient

question to merit presenting results based on a range of alternative discount rates – a
practice routinely followed by those constructing generational accounts.
The appropriate discount rate for calculating the present value of future
government revenues and expenditures depends on their uncertainty.

If all such flows

were certain and riskless, it would clearly be appropriate to discount them using the
prevailing term-structure of risk-free interest rates.

However, even in this simple and

unrealistic case, such discounting could be problematic since it would require knowing
the values of this term structure.

To discern these values, one might examine the real

yields paid on short-term, medium-term, and long-term inflation-indexed government

56

bonds. But this presupposes the existence of such bonds. Many countries do not issue
indexed bonds, and those that do don’t necessarily issue indexed bonds of all maturities.
In the realistic case in which countries’ tax revenues and expenditures are uncertain,
discerning the correct discount rate is even more difficult. In this case, discounting based on the
term structure of risk-free rates (even if it is observable) is no longer theoretically justified.
Instead, the appropriate discount rates would be those that adjust for the riskiness of the stream in
question. Since the riskiness of taxes, spending, and transfer payments presumably differ, the
theoretically appropriate risk-adjusted rates at which to discount taxes, spending, and transfer
payments would also differ. This point carries over to particular components of taxes, spending,
and transfer payments, whose risk properties may differ from those of their respective
aggregates.17

Moreover, if insurance arrangements are incomplete, the appropriate risk

adjustments would likely be generation-specific. Unfortunately, the size of these risk adjustments
remains a topic for fortune research. In the meantime, generational accountants have simply
chosen to estimate generational accounts for a range of discount rates.

Illustrating Generational Accounts -- the Case of the U.S.
In their recent calculation of U.S. generational accounts, Gokhale, Page, Potter,
and Sturrock (2000) used the latest long-term projections of The Congressional Budget
Office (CBO) with one modification.

They assumed that U.S. federal discretionary

17

To see this, consider a government policy in the two-period life-cycle model of borrowing from the
young at time t and using the proceeds to purchase stock from the young. When the young are old the
government repays the principal it borrowed by selling its shares and making up the difference between its
interest obligations and the return (including capital gain) on its stock as a net tax payment. This entire set
of transactions entails no net payments from the government to generation t either when it is young or old.
However, net tax payments will, on average, be negative when generation t is old, since stocks average a
higher return than bonds. If one discounts the safe and risky components of the net tax payments at their
appropriate and different risk-adjusted discount rates, the present value of future net tax payments will be
zero. This is what one would want generational accounting to show, since the policy simply involves the
government borrowing stock from the young and returning it (including its return) when they are old; i.e.,
the policy entails no increase in lifetime net payments. But were one to mistakenly discount the total of

57

spending would grow with the economy. Table 1 reports generational accounts on this
basis, constructed using a 4.0 percent real discount rate and assuming a 2.2 percent rate of
growth of labor productivity. This discount rate is roughly the current prevailing rate on
long-term inflation-indexed U.S. government bonds, and the productivity growth rate is
the one currently being projected by the CBO. The accounts are for 1998, but are based
on the CBO projections available as of January 2000.
Table 1 shows, for males and females separately, the level and composition of the
accounts. Recall that the accounts are present values discounted, in this case, to 1998.
As an example, consider the $112,300 account of 25 year-old males in 1998.

This

amount represents the present value of the net tax payments that 25 year-old males will
pay, on average, over the rest of their lives.
The generational accounts for both males and females peak at age 25 and become
negative for females at age 50 and for males after at age 60. The accounts for those
younger than age 25 are smaller because they have a longer time to wait to reach their
peak tax-paying years. The accounts are also smaller for those above age 25 because
they are closer in time to receiving the bulk of their transfer payments. By age 10 for
males and age 30 for females, Medicare and Social Security benefits are the two most
important forms of transfer payments, if one uses the government’s fiscal taxonomy.
The only figures in this table that aren’t a function of labeling conventions are the
lifetime net tax rate of future generations and of newborns.

The denominators in these

lifetime tax rates are the present value of lifetime earnings. And they are constructed by
pooling the net tax payments and labor earnings of males and females. In the case of

expected net taxes in old age at a single discount rate, the value of the change in the generational account
would be non zero.

58

future generations, the present value to 1998 of all future net taxes of all future
generations is divided by the present value to 1998 of the labor earnings of all future
generations.

The Imbalance in U.S. Generational Policy
For newborns the lifetime net tax rate is 22.8 percent. For future generations it is
32.3 percent. So future generations face a lifetime net tax rate that is 41.6 percent higher
than that facing current newborns.18

Stated differently, future generations, according to

current policy, are being asked to pay almost a dime more per dollar earned than are
current newborns.
In thinking about the magnitude of the U.S. generational imbalance, it’s important
to keep in mind that the lifetime net tax rate facing future generations under current
policy assumes that all future generations pay this same rate.

If, instead, one were to

assume that generations born, say, over the next decade are treated the same as current
newborns, the net tax rate for generations born in 2010 and beyond would be higher than
32.3 percent.

Policies to Achieve Generational Balance in the U.S.
Table 2 considers five alternative policies that would achieve generational balance
in the U.S. The first is a 31 percent immediate and permanent rise in federal personal and
corporate income taxes. Had the U.S. adopted this policy in 2000, the federal surplus

18

This is a very sizeable imbalance, but it’s nevertheless smaller than the imbalance estimated in
the early 1990s. The decline in the imbalance reflects policy changes and much more optimistic long-term
fiscal projections.

59

reported by the government for that year would have more than doubled. Hence, based
on the government’s fiscal language, the year-2000 surplus was far too small compared to
that needed to achieve generational balance.
Rather than raising just federal income taxes, one could raise all federal, state, and
local taxes.

In this case, an across-the-board tax hike of 12 percent could deliver

generational balance.

Cutting all Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, food stamps,

unemployment insurance benefits, welfare benefits, housing support, and other transfer
payments by 21.9 percent is another way to eliminate the generational imbalance. Two
final options considered in the table are immediately and permanently cutting all
government purchases by 21 percent or cutting just federal purchases by 66.3 percent.
Cutting government purchases to achieve generational balance would leave future
generations paying in net taxes the same 22.8 percent share of lifetime earnings as current
newborns are expected (under current policy) to pay. In contrast, either raising taxes or
cutting transfer payments would mean higher lifetime net tax rates for those now alive.
As Table 2 indicates, these alternative policies would leave newborns and all future
generations paying roughly 27 cents out of every dollar earned in net taxes. This net tax
rate is over 4 cents more per dollar earned than newborns are now forced to pay. The
payoff from having newborns as well as everyone else who is currently alive pay more in
net taxes, is a reduction in net tax rate facing future generations by 5 to 6 cents per dollar
earned.

Achieving Generational Balance in 22 Countries

60

The United States is certainly not alone in running imbalanced generational
policies. Table 3, abstracted from Kotlikoff and Raffelhüschen (1999), reports alternative
immediate and permanent policy changes that would achieve generational balance in 21
countries. According to the second column in the table, 13 of the 22 countries need to cut
their non-educational government spending by over one fifth if they want to rely solely
on such cuts to achieve generational balance. This group includes the United States and
Japan and the three most important members of the European Monetary Union: Germany,
France, and Italy. Four of the 13 countries – Austria, Finland, Spain, and Sweden -- need
to cut their non-education purchases by more than half, and two countries -- Austria and
Finland – need to cut this spending by more than two thirds!

Bear in mind that

generational accounting includes regional, state, local, and federal levels of government.
So the cuts being considered here are equal proportionate cuts in all levels of government
spending.
Not all countries suffer from generational imbalances.

In Ireland, New Zealand,

and Thailand future generations face a smaller fiscal burden, measured on a growthadjusted basis, than do current ones given the government’s current spending projections.
Hence, governments in those countries can spend more over time without unduly
burdening future generations.

There are also several countries in the list, including

Canada and the United Kingdom, with zero or moderate generational imbalances as
measured by the spending adjustment needed to achieve perfect balance. What explains
these tremendous cross-country differences? Fiscal policies and demographics differ
dramatically across countries.

The U.S., for example, has experienced and is likely to

continue to experience rapid health-care spending.

61

Japan’s health care spending is

growing less rapidly, but it’s aging much more quickly.

The United Kingdom has a

policy of keeping most transfer payments fixed over time in real terms.

Germany is

dealing with the ongoing costs of reunification.
One alternative to cutting spending is cutting transfer payments.

In Japan,

education, health care, social security benefits, unemployment benefits, disability
benefits, and all other transfer payments would need to be immediately and permanently
slashed by 25 percent. In the U.S., the figure is 20 percent. In Brazil, it’s 18 percent. In
Germany, it’s 14 percent. And in Italy it’s 13 percent.

These and similar figures for

other countries represent dramatic cuts and would be very unpopular.
So too would tax increases. If Japan were to rely exclusively on across-the-board
tax hikes, tax rates at all levels of government (regional, state, local, and federal) and of
all types (value added, payroll, corporate income, personal income, excise, sales,
property, estate, and gift) would have to rise overnight by over 15 percent. In Austria and
Finland, they’d have to rise by over 18 percent. If these three countries relied solely on
income tax hikes, they had to raise their income tax rates by over 50 percent! In France
and Argentina, where income tax bases are relatively small, income tax rates would have
to rise by much larger percentages. In contrast, Ireland could cut its income tax rates by
about 5 percent before it needed to worry about over burdening future generations. The
longer countries wait to act, the harder will be their ultimate adjustment to fiscal reality.
As an example, the United Kingdom needs to raise income taxes by 9.5 percent if it acts
immediately. But if it waits 15 years, the requisite income tax hike is 15.2 percent.

How Well Does Generational Accounting Measure True Fiscal Incidence?

62

One concern about generational accounting is the accuracy of its implicit
incidence assumptions.

Fehr and Kotlikoff (1997) use the Auerbach-Kotlikoff (1987)

dynamic general equilibrium life-cycle model, described below, to compare changes in
generation accounts with true fiscal incidence.

Tables 3 and 4, taken from their paper,

use the closed-country version of the Auerbach-Kotlikoff model to illustrate the
relationship between changes in generation’s utilities, measured in units of current
consumption, and changes in their generational accounts. The tables consider the effect
of a shift in the tax structure.

Specifically, the economy switches from having a 20

percent income tax to having a 15 percent income tax plus a consumption tax where the
revenue loss from lowering the income-tax rate is covered by the consumption tax.
Government spending on goods and services is held fixed per capita in the simulation.
In the first year of the economy’s transition the consumption tax rate is 6.4
percent. Over time it drops to 6.1 percent. In the long run, the economy’s capital stock,
wage rate, and interest rate end up 8.2 percent higher, 2.1 percent higher, and 5.6 percent
lower, respectively.

This crowding-in of the capital stock reflects the shift in the tax

burden from initial young and future generations to initial older generations. Table 4
shows how key economic variables evolve other time in the model.
Table 4 compares changes in generational accounts with the true policy incidence.
As is clear from the table, generational accounts, in this case, do a very good job in
capturing the general pattern of the generation-specific utility changes. They do less well
for certain generations in capturing the precise magnitude of their welfare changes. The
changes in generational accounts match up fairly closely to the changes in utility for
those initially over age 25. For younger and future generations, the match is much less

63

good. In this simulation, generational accounting provides a lower bound estimate of the
absolute change in welfare of those born in the long run. The reason is that policy that
raise the economy’s capital stock are generally policies that redistribute from the initial
old to the initial young and future generations. Since a higher long-run degree of capital
intensity means a higher long-run wage, the direct redistribution from those alive in the
long run, captured by generational accounting, will understate the improvement in
welfare of those born in the long run.
equilibrium

action,

Fehr

and

In addition to missing this long-run general

Kotlikoff

show

that

generational

accounting,

as

conventionally applied, omits the efficiency gains and losses arising from fiscal reforms.
For particular reforms these efficiency effects can be important components of the
policy’s overall incidence effects.

Fehr and Kotlikoff conclude that the incidence

assumptions used in generational accounting needs to be augmented to incorporate both
efficiency and general equilibrium feedback effects.

Generational Accounting and Monetary Policy
One of the net taxes that are allocated in forming generational accounts is the
seignorage the government collects from the private sector in printing and spending
money.

When it prints and spends money, the government acquires real goods and

services, but it also precipitates a rise in the price level that would not otherwise have
occurred. This real gain to the government is a loss to the private sector that comes in the
form of a reduction in the real value of their holdings of money.
The government can also garner resources from the private sector by deflating the
real value of its official nominal liabilities as well as implicit nominal transfer payment

64

obligations. On the other hand, it can lose resources by deflating away the real value of
tax receipts that are fixed in nominal terms. Finally, governments can use the printing of
money and its associated inflation to reduce the real value of their spending on goods and
services to the extent this spending is fixed in nominal terms. Each of the ways in which
governments use monetary policy as a fiscal instrument can and have been incorporated
in generational accounting.

For example, the hidden seignorage tax is allocated across

cohorts by using data on average real money balances by age and sex.
Generational accounting can also be used to help determine the likely course of
future monetary policy.

Countries with very large generational imbalances are countries

that are likely to have to print large quantities of money to help “pay” their bills. Indeed,
generational accounting can be used to determine the amount of money creation needed
to achieve a generationally balanced and sustainable policy.

Hence, generational

accounting should be of as much importance and interest to monetary authorities as it is
to fiscal authorities.

VI. Simulating Generational Policy
The advent of high-speed computers has transformed generational policy analysis.
Today researchers around the world are constructing large-scale dynamic simulation
models to assess how policy changes would affect macroeconomic outcomes as well as
the intra- and intergenerational distributions of welfare.19
19

This section illustrate the

Arrau (1990), Hamann (1992), Arrau and Schmidt-Hebbel (1993), Raffelhuschen (1989, 1993), Huang,
He, Selo ¤mrohoro—lu, and Thomas Sargent (1997), Imrohoroglu, Imrohoroglu, and Joines (1995, 1998a,
and 1998b), Altig and Carlstrom (1996), Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1997, 1998), Hirte and Weber
(1998), Schneider (1997), Fougere and Merette (1998, 1999), Merette (1998), Lau (1999), Knudsen,
Pedersen, Petersen, Stephensen, and Trier (1999), Bohringer, Pahlke, and Rutherford (1999), and SchmidtHebbel (1999) are examples in this regard.

65

effects of two generational policies – the wholesale shift from income to consumption
taxation and the wholesale privatization of social security, with the accrued liabilities of
the old system financed via a consumption tax.

Both of these policies effect major

redistributions across generations. Indeed, it is hard to contemplate policies with greater
potential to redistribute across generations.
There are three key questions that these and similar simulations address.

First,

how large are the macroeconomic effects of policies of this magnitude? Second, how
long does it take for these effects to occur? Third, how large are the welfare changes
visited on different generations as well as on particular members of those generations?
The illustration is based on the Auerbach-Kotlikoff-Smetters-Walliser (AKSM)
model. The AKSM model descended from the Auerbach-Kotlikoff (1987) (AK) model.
The AK model featured 55 overlapping generations with a single representative agent in
each cohort. Unlike the steady-state and myopic transition models developed by Upton
and Miller (1974), Kotlikoff (1979), Summers (1981), Seidman (1983), Hubbard and
Judd (1987), and others, the AK model solved for the economy’s perfect foresight
transition path.

The solution is found using an iterative convergence algorithm that

begins by guessing the time-paths of factor demands, endogenous tax rates, and other key
endogenous variables. The algorithm then uses these guesses to generate the time-path of
factor prices and marginal net prices. These variables are fed into the supply side of the
model where households determine how much to save and work. These micro decisions,
when aggregated, deliver a time-path of economy-wide factor supplies that is compared
with the initial guess of the time-path of factor demands. If the supply of factors equals
the demand for factors each period, a dynamic equilibrium has been determined.

66

Otherwise, the algorithm averages the initial guessed time-path of factor demands and the
associate time-path of factor supplies to form a new guess of the time-path of factor
demands, and the iteration continues.
The AKSM model uses the same solution technique of the original AK model, but
it differs in two important respects.20 First, it follows the lead of Fullerton and Rogers
(1993) by incorporating intra- as well as intergenerational inequality.

Specifically, the

model posits 12 different earnings groups within each cohort. The groups are labeled 1
through 12, with earnings higher for groups referenced with a higher number. Groups 1
and 12 represent the lowest and highest 2 percent of earners. Groups 2 and 11 are the
next lowest and next highest sets of earners, but each constitutes 8 percent of earners.
And groups 3 through 10 each constitute 10 percent of earners.

The new model also

approximates U.S. fiscal institutions much more closely. Second, it includes an array of
tax-base reductions, a progressive Social Security system, and a Medicare system.

Switching from Income to Consumption Taxation
Tables 5 and 6, extracted from Altig, et. al. (2001), shows some of the AKSW
model’s results from simulating the complete replacement of the current U.S. personal
and corporate federal income taxes with an equal revenue proportional consumption tax.
Given the above discussion of deficit delusion, it’s important to point out that the term
“revenue” here is based on the U.S. federal government’s fiscal language.

Under

alternative labeling conventions, reported tax revenue would be dramatically larger or
smaller than what the government says it is collecting and a “revenue-neutral” switch in

67

tax bases, which did not try to preserve the same changes in generational accounts and
economic incentives, would have different economic effects.

That said, the tax reform

considered here entails a major redistribution across generations because it confronts
those rich and middle class retirees alive at the time of the reform with a much greater
remaining lifetime net tax burden than would otherwise be the case. Low-income retirees
are, on the other hand, largely insulated from the policy because their social security
benefits are adjusted in the model to retain their original purchasing power.
Table 5 reports macroeconomic effects, while Table 6 shows welfare effects for
five of the twelve lifetime earnings classes. Note that income class 1 refers to the poorest
members of each cohort (those with the smallest endowment of human capital), and
income class 12 refers to the richest members of each cohort (those with the largest
endowment of human capital.) The horizontal axis locates cohorts by their years of birth
measured relative to the reform, which occurs in year zero.

The welfare change are

measured as equivalent variations, specifically the percentage change in full remaining
lifetime economic resources that an agent living under the old policy regime (living in the
initial steady state) would need to achieve the same level of remaining lifetime utility as
she/he experiences under the new policy.
The macroeconomic effects of the tax reform are significant. In the long run, the
economy’s capital stock, labor supply, and output are larger by 25.4 percent, 4.6 percent,
and 9.4 percent, respectively. However, getting reasonably close to this new steady state
takes a while.

For example, achieving half of the ultimate increase in the capital stock

takes about 15 years.
20

There is also a new demographic version of the AKSM model (Kotlikoff, Smetters, and Walliser 2000),
not used here, that provides a much more realistic modeling of fertility and lifespan than in the original AK

68

The policy’s capital deepening raises pre-tax wages by 4.6 percent and lowers the
pre-tax return to capital by 100 basis points. The expansion of the economy permits a
decline in the consumption tax rate from an initial rate of 16.6 percent to a final rate of
14.5 percent.

Measured on a wage-tax equivalent basis, the long-run consumption tax

rate is 12.7 percent. This is substantially below the initial steady-state’s 21.4 percent
average marginal tax rate on wage income. It’s even further below the 34.0 percent peak
marginal wage tax faced by those in the top earnings class.
As Table 6 shows, the tax reform effects a major redistribution across generations,
but one that differs markedly for the lifetime poor and rich. In forcing rich (e.g., earnings
class 12) initial retirees to pay a high consumption tax rate, the policy, in effect, taxes
their accumulated wealth.

This lowers their remaining lifetime utility.21

In contrast,

members of this earnings class that are born in the new long-run steady state experience a
4 percent increase in their lifetime utilities measured relative to their welfare in the
absence of the reform. For the lowest earnings class, the generational incidence pattern is
the opposite. The initial poor retirees experience a small welfare improvement, but future
members of this class are worse off. The reason is that the consumption-tax structure is
much less intragenerationally progressive than the original income-tax structure.

The

generational incidence pattern for the other earnings groups in the top (bottom) half of the
earnings distributions is similar, but less pronounced than that for earnings group 12 (1).

Social Security’s Privatization
model and that can initial simulations from non steady-state positions.
21
The simulated model includes capital adjustment costs, which limit the economic losses to initial elderly
generations. The reason is that they own much of the economy’s existing capital stock and this capital

69

The U.S. Social Security System faces a grave long-term financial crisis, the full
dimension of which is not well known. Paying out benefits on an ongoing basis requires
an immediate and permanent increase of roughly 50 percent in the OASDI payroll tax
rate.22 The United States is now embarked in a national debate about how to save Social
Security. Options here include cutting benefits, raising the payroll tax, and privatizing all
or part of the system by allowing people to contribute to individual accounts. The key
issues in this debate are how any policy, including maintaining the status quo, will affect
the macro economy as well as rich and poor members of current and future generations.
Table 7 extracted from Kotlikoff, Smetters, and Walliser (2001), illustrate the AK OLG Model’s analysis of the effects of social security’s privatization.

The table

considers privatizing the U.S. system and financing the 45-year transition, during which
social security benefits are gradually phased out, with a consumption tax.

The policy

generates sizeable long-run increases of 39 percent and 13 percent in the economy’s
capital stock and output, respectively. But the half-life of the policy is 30 years, roughly
twice the half-life of the tax reform just considered. The transition takes longer because
the policy phases in gradually over time.
Table 8 shows that these long-run gains are not free. They come at the price of
lower utility to initial older and middle-aged generations. All those alive in the long run,
including the richest (group 12) and poorest (group 1) agents, are better off. Since the
system being privatized features a highly progressive benefit schedule, but also a highly
regressive tax schedule (due to the ceiling on taxable earnings), the fact that the long-run
poor are better off is particularly interesting.

It shows that paying off the existing

experiences a rise in its relative price because it is a relatively scarce factor with respect to installing
additional capital.

70

system’s benefit liabilities in a more progressive manner (by making initial rich and
middle income elderly contribute to that cause) outweighs the loss the long-run poor
incur from not receiving benefits based on social security’s progressive benefit schedule.
The long-run poorest earnings group experiences a 6.0 percent rise in lifetime
utility. This is a substantial welfare change; it means that were social security not to be
privatized, providing this group with the same welfare improvement would require a 6
percent increase in their consumption and leisure in each year they are alive. The longrun richest earnings group enjoys a 4.4 percent improvement in its lifetime utility.

The

biggest winners from the reform are those in the upper middle classes (groups 6 though
9) alive in the long run.

Their welfare gains are roughly 8 percent.

Like their poorer

contemporaries, these groups enjoy the higher real wages delivered by the privatization.
But the removal of social security means more because, compared with their
contemporaries, they faced the highest rate of lifetime net social security taxation.

The

costs of delivering these long-run welfare gains are visited on the initial middle-class and
high-income elderly as well as all initial workers. The largest losses amount to about 3
percent of remaining lifetime resources.
The two simulations just presented provide a sense of the maximum potential
macroeconomic and redistributive effects of generational policy.

The reasons are a) the

policies are radical, b) they entail major intergenerational redistribuiton, and c) they
significantly improve marginal economic incentives to work and save.

But as described

in Altig, et. al. (2001) and Kotlikoff, Smetters, and Walliser (2001), the benefits available
to future generations from tax reform or social security’s privatization can easily be
dissipated by providing transition relief to early generations. In the case of consumption22

See Gokhale and Kotlikoff (2001).
71

tax reform, such relief could come in the form of exempting the initial elderly from
paying taxes when they purchase consumption with existing assets.23 In the case of
privatizing social security, transition relief could come in the form of the delaying the
imposition of a new tax to cover the loss of revenues arising from having workers make
their social security contributions to private accounts.

Such a policy permits workers

close to retirement to gain at the expense of subsequent generations.

VII. Ricardian Equivalence
Ricardian equivalence refers to the proposition that private intergenerational
transfers will undo government intergenerational transfers making generational policy
entirely ineffectual and generational accounting a waste of time.

The proposition is

appropriately attributed to David Ricardo who, in discussing whether to borrow or tax to
finance a war, wrote that “in point of economy, there is no real difference in either of the
modes …”24 More precisely, in comparing a one-time war tax of £1,000 and a perpetual
tax of £50 to pay interest on borrowing of £1,000, Ricardo said that “if he (the payee)
leaves his fortune to his son, and leaves it charged with this perpetual tax, where is the
difference whether he leaves him £20,000, with the tax, or £19,000 without it?”25
While Ricardo realized that bequests could be raised or lowered to undo
government intergenerational redistribution, he was skeptical that such behavior would
arise in practice. For in his next sentence he says “The argument of charging posterity

23

If consumption taxation was instituted (i.e., labeled) by the government as a tax on income with 100
percent expensing of new investment/saving (i.e., as taxing output minus saving, which equals
consumption), transition relief could come in the form of grandfathering the investment incentives provided
to existing capital under the prior tax structure.
24
Ricardo (1951), 4:185-6. Also see O’Driscoll’s (1977) discussion of why Ricarado rejected Richardian
equivalence as an empirically relevant phenomenon.
25
Ricardo (1951), 4:187.

72

with the interest on our debt, or of relieving them from a portion of such interest, is often
used by otherwise well informed people, but we confess we see no weight in it.”26

Barro’s Proof of the Irrelevance Proposition
Ricardo would presumably have included Robert Barro (1974) in the category of
“otherwise well informed people,” notwithstanding the latter’s elegant and influential
derivation of the former’s irrelevance proposition.

Barro’s derivation begins by positing

that the utility of one generation depends not only on the goods (including leisure) it
consumes over its lifetime, but also the utility of its children. In the two-period model,
this function is
(42)

u t = u( c yt , c ot +1 , l yt , l ot +1 , u t +1 ) .

Writing the corresponding expression for ut+1 and substituting into (42) and then doing
the same for ut+2 and all other future utility functions leads to the following infinite
horizon utility function whose arguments consist of all future values of consumption and
leisure:
(43)

u t = u( c yt , cot +1 , l yt , l ot +1 , c yt +1 , c ot +1 , l yt+1 , l ot + 2 ,...)
Thus, Barro’s simple and seemingly quite natural formulation of intergenerational

altruism has the striking implication that those alive today will care not only about their
own levels of consumption and leisure, but also the consumption and leisure of their
children, grandchildren, and all subsequent descendents.

The generation alive at time t

takes its inheritance, bt, as given and chooses consumption when young and old as well as
bequests (or intervivos transfers) when old, bt+1 , to maximize (43) subject to

26

Ibid.

73

(44) c yt + wt l yt + Rt +1 (c ot +1 + wt +1l ot +1 + bt +1 ) = bt + wt T + Rt +1 (ht +1 + wt +1T ) ,
where Rs+1 discounts flows at time s+1 to time s.
To make Barro’s point about the irrelevance of generational policy, (44) includes
a policy, announced at time t, of giving an amount hs at time s≥t+1 to the
contemporaneous old and taking that same sum from the contemporaneous young. The
generation alive at time t+1 faces the analogous budget constraint, except it includes the
receipt when young of the government’s net payment.
(45) c yt+1 + wt +1l yt+1 + Rt + 2 ( cot + 2 + wt + 2 l ot + 2 + bt + 2 ) = bt +1 − ht +1 + wt +1T + Rt + 2 ( ht + 2 + wt + 2 T )
If one solves for bt+1 in (45) and substitutes for that variable in (44), the terms involving
ht+1 drop out.

The resulting expression now involves bt+2 , which can be eliminated by

solving for bt+2 from the time t+2 version of (45).

Doing so leads ht+2 to drop out.

Proceeding indefinitely in this manner leads to the extended family’s infinite horizon
constraint:
(46)
c yt + wt l yt +

c ot +1 + wt +1 l ot +1
c + wt +1 l ot +1
w T
+ c yt + wt l yt + ot +1
+ ... = bt + wt Tt + t +1 + ... .
1 + rt +1
1 + rt +1
1 + rt +1

The extended family maximizes (43) subject to (46).

Since all the terms involving the

government’s generational policy have dropped out of (46), generational policy has no
impact whatsoever on the economy.

Operationally, the extended family nullifies

generational policy by raising its bequests at time s≥t+1 by hs.

Note that hs can be

positive or negative. Generations that receive a positive net payment when old bequeath
these receipts to their children. The children, in turn, use this inheritance to make their
net payments to the government; i.e., the children’s payment to the government is given

74

to their parents who hand it back to the children. Since bequests can be negative as well
as positive, we can also describe the change in bequests as the children reducing their
own private transfers to their parents. If the government’s net payment to the elderly is
negative, the elderly will respond by cutting back on their bequests to their children;
alternatively, their children will hand the positive net payment they receive from the
government to their parents.

Theoretical Objections to the Barro Framework
Barro’s model ignores four interrelated issues whose consideration undermine, if
not vitiate, his result. First, the model ignores marriage. Second, it ignores differences in
preferences among extended family members.

Third, it assumes symmetric information

across family members about each others’ incomes. Fourth, it ignores uncertainty.
The fact that it takes two to tango means that marriage entails at least two sets of
parents, both of which may be altruistically linked to the married couple, but may have
no particular interest in each other. One way to model intergenerational transfers in this
context is to assume that each set of in-laws takes the other’s transfers to their children as
given. But as shown in Kotlikoff (1983) and Bernheim and Bagwell (1988), this Nash
assumption implies the effective altruistic linkage of the two sets of in-laws. And if the
in-laws have other children, the original in-laws will become altruistically linked with the
all of the other children’s in-laws as well. Hence, if altruism were as widespread as Barro
posits, essentially everyone would be altruistically interlinked with everyone else around
the world as a consequence of marriage within groups and intermarriage across racial,
ethnic, religious, and national lines.

75

The resource sharing arising from altruistic linkage means that each interlinked
household’s consumption and leisure is determined by the collective resources of all
extended family members. State differently, the distribution of resources across extended
family members makes no difference to the distribution of consumption and leisure of
those members.

Thus, the Barro model implies that the consumption of a randomly

chosen person in Nashville, Tennessee should depend on the income of a randomly
chosen person in Almati, Kazakhstan.
The source of this patently absurd prediction is the assumption that each extended
family takes the transfers of other extended family members as given. The difficulty with
this assumption becomes apparent if one compares two parties who each care so strongly
about each other that each wants to transfer to the other. Taking each other’s transfers as
given may lead to an infinite handing back and forth of funds between the two parties;
i.e., the problem may have no solution. Of course, in the real world, such situations are
handled by would-be recipients simply refusing to receive the funds they are handed. As
Kotlikoff, Razin, and Rosenthal (1990) point out, the power to refuse a transfer if it is too
big or, indeed, if it is too small as well as the power to refuse to make a transfer is
someone else’s transfer is too small or too large changes the bargaining game
fundamentally.

In particular, threat points matter and Ricardian Equivalence no longer

holds because when the government redistributes across generations, it alters their threat
points.
Conflicts over who loves whom and by how much may also lead parties to
withhold information about their economic positions.

Kotlikoff and Razin (1988) point

out that altruistic parents trying to transfer to children whose abilities and labor efforts are

76

unobservable will condition their transfers on their children’s earnings.

In this setting,

government redistribution between parents and children can modify the self-selection
constraints under which parents operate in establishing their earnings-related transfer
functions. In this case, the policy will be non neutral.
Feldstein (1988) raised another important theoretical objection to the Barro
model, namely that, in the context of uncertainty, Ricardian equivalence will only hold if
transfers are operative in all states of nature in which the government’s redistribution
occurs. Take parents who are altruistic, but whose altruism is not strong enough to lead
them to make transfers to their children if their children end up with higher incomes than
their own.

Then government redistribution from children to parents will generate no

private offset in the form of higher bequests or intervivos gifts in those states of nature in
which the children would otherwise be better off than the parents.

In developed

economies in which per capita incomes grow through time, one would expect Feldstein’s
point to be particularly applicable.

Testing Intergenerational Altruism
As mentioned, the Barro Model of intergenerational altruism predicts that the
consumption of altruistically linked individuals is independent of the distribution of
resources across those individuals. This implication has been tested in a variety of ways
with a variety of data. Boskin and Kotlikoff (1985) took the Barro model as the null
hypotheses and used dynamic programming to determine the level of annual consumption
that would be demanded by Barro dynasties given earnings and rate of return uncertainty.
They estimated their model on postwar U.S. time series data and tested whether the cross-

77

cohort distribution of resources matters to aggregate consumption given the level of
consumption predicted by the Barro Model. The authors report a very strong dependence
of aggregate consumption on the intergenerational distribution of resources.
Abel and Kotlikoff (1994) pointed out that altruistically linked households will
automatically share risk and, therefore, experience identical shocks (Euler errors) to their
marginal utilities of consumption.

They also showed that changes in the average Euler

error by cohort would share this property if, as Barro believed, the economy was
dominated by intergenerational altruists.

Abel and Kotlikoff aggregated by cohort U.S.

consumer expenditure data to test for the commonality of Euler errors.

Their test

strongly rejects intergenerational altruism; cohorts that experience positive income
shocks spend, rather than share, their good fortune.
Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff (1992) and Hayashi, Altonji, and Kotlikoff (1996)
use Panel Study of Income Dynamics data on the consumption of extended family
members to test whether a) the distribution of consumption of extended family members
depends on the distribution of resources among those members and b) whether extended
family members share risk – an implication not simply of altruism, but also selfish risk
sharing. The data strongly reject both propositions. Another study by the three authors
(Altonji, Kotlikoff, and Hayashi 1997) considers the subset of extended PSID families
who were actively making transfers among themselves. They showed that taking a dollar
from a child and giving it to a parent who is giving the child money results in an increase
in transfers to the child of only 13 cents – an amount that is not only small, but also
insignificantly different from zero.

78

Additional compelling evidence against the Barro view is provided by Gokhale,
Kotlikoff, and Sabelhaus (1996).

This article documents that the dramatic postwar

decline in U.S. saving has been the result of an equally dramatic increase in
intergenerational transfers to the elderly that have led to an enormous increase in their
absolute and relative consumption. Since 1960 the consumption of the elderly, on a per
person basis, has roughly doubled relative to that of young adults.

A related finding,

developed in Auerbach, Gokhale, Kotlikoff, Sabelhaus, and Weil (2001), is the dramatic
postwar increase in the annuitization of the resources of the elderly.

This increased

annuitization has been engineered primarily by the government, which provides the
elderly substantial resources in old age in the form of cash and medical benefits that
continue until they die, but aren’t bequeathable. If Barro were right, and the elderly were
altruistic, they would have responded to their being forced to acquire more annuities by
purchasing more life insurance.

In fact, the life insurance holdings of the elderly have

not increased in the postwar period as a share of their remaining lifetime resources.
They’ve declined.

VIII. The Government’s Role in Intergenerational Risk Sharing
Samuelson’s (1958) classic consumption-loan model pointed out the inherent
incompleteness in markets arising from the fact that agents alive at one point in time
can’t contract with those who will be born well after those agents are deceased.
market failure is manifest primarily in the area of risk sharing.

This

Were they able to

contract, agents alive today and those born in the future could form risk-sharing
arrangements by buying or selling state-contingent contracts of various kinds.

79

The

question raised by these missing markets is whether the government can redistribute
across generations to emulate, if not replicate, the risk-sharing arrangements that
members of different cohorts would privately conclude.
As shown in Kotlikoff (1993), it’s an easy matter to extend the two-period model
of Section III to include uncertainty both with respect to the economic environment and
government policy.

Kotlikoff (1993) considers uncertain technology, specifically the

coefficient of total factor productivity, as well as uncertain (i.e., state-contingent)
government net payments each period from the young to the old.

The role for

government intergenerational risk sharing in this model is to transfer resources from the
contemporaneous young to the contemporaneous old at time t if the technology at time t
is better than at time t- 1. The degree of redistribution would also be conditioned on the
economy’s time-t capital stock.
The fact that government’s can pool risks across generations doesn’t mean they
necessarily do so. Indeed, governments may exacerbate the degree of uncertainty facing
generations by randomly distributing among them.

As Auerbach and Hassett (1999)

point out, this manufacturing of uncertainty may come in the form of simply delaying the
decision of who will pay the government’s bills. Take, as an example, the current failure
of the U.S. government to determine how it will close the very sizeable imbalance in U.S.
generational policy.

The government can either place a larger fiscal burden on the

current elderly, on middle-aged baby boomers, on the current young, or on future
generations.

The size of the bill is reasonably clear.

But in failing to specify

immediately which generations will pay what, the U.S. government is generating
uncertainty for all generations, where none intrinsically exists.

80

Can one say whether the government is, on balance, pooling risk across
generations? Yes and no.27 Abel and Kotlikoff (1994) stress that their study tests and
strongly rejects intergenerational risk sharing, no matter whether that risk sharing is
arising from a) altruistic extended family behavior, b) selfish extended family
arrangements, c) the purchase of contracts and securities in private insurance and
financial markets, or d) government policy.

But Abel and Kotlikoff’s study doesn’t tell

us the precise role, if any, played by the government in frustrating or improving
intergenerational risk sharing.

IX. Conclusion
Generational policy – the question of which generation will pay the government’s
bills -- lies at the heart of most fiscal policy debates. The importance of this issue has
stimulated a prodigious amount of theoretical, empirical, and simulation research.
research has delivered some important findings.

This

First, which generation pays the

government’s bills is, apart from efficiency considerations, a zero-sum game.

Second,

generational policy works not just by redistributing resources directly across generations,
but also by redistributing resources indirectly via policy-induced general equilibrium
changes in factor prices. Third, the same generational policy can be conducted under a
variety of headings and operate through surprising channels, including asset markets.
Fourth, notwithstanding its ubiquitous use, the budget deficit is not a well-defined
measure of generational or any other aspect of economic policy.

The same is true of

taxes and transfer payments as well as their associated constructs, such as disposable
27

Note that the government may pool risks within generations at the same time it generates risks across
generations. Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes’ (1995) and Eaton and Rosen (1980) are two important studies

81

income and personal saving.

Fifth, generational accounting represents an important, but

far from perfect method of assessing generational policy.

Sixth, generational policies in

non-altruistic economies can effect major redistribution across generations and major
changes in the long-run values of key macroeconomic variables.
policies take a fairly long time to effect the economy.

Seventh, generational

Eighth, intergenerational altruism

can nullify the impact of generational policy, but the theoretical conditions under which it
would arise are highly unlikely to prevail. Ninth, there is a plethora of evidence, at least
for the U.S., that intergenerational redistribution, be it across cohorts or between older
and younger members of the same extended families, materially raises the well being to
those receiving the transfers and materially harms those making the payments. Tenth, at
least in the U.S., government policy does not achieve intergenerational risk sharing.
Indeed, U.S. government policy may, on balance, be an important, if not the primary
source of generational risk. Finally, and most important, a variety of countries around the
world are running generational policies that will dramatically reduce the economic well
being of their future generations.

Achieving generational balance in those countries

requires immediate, major, and highly painful policy responses.

of government intragenerational risk sharing.

82

References

Abel, Andrew and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1994, "Intergenerational Altruism and the
Effectiveness of Fiscal Policy: New Tests Based on Cohort Data," in: Toshi
Tachibinachi, ed., Savings and Bequests, (Michigan University Press, Ann Arbor, MI).
Ablett, John, “Generational Accounting in Australia,” 1999, in: Alan Auerbach,
Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, eds., Generational Accounting Around
the World (Chicago University Press, Chicago), 141-160.
Altig, David and Charles T. Carlstrom, 1996, “Marginal Tax Rates and Income Inequality
in a Life-Cycle Model,” working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Altig, David, Alan Auerbach, Larry Kotlikoff, Kent Smetters, Jan Walliser, 2001,
"Simulating Fundamental Tax Reform." forthcoming, The American Economic
Review.
Arrau, Patricio and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, 1993, "Macroeconomic and Intergenerational
Welfare Effects of a Transition from Pay-as-You-Go to Fully Funded Pensions," Policy
Research Dept., Macroeconomics and Growth Division, (World Bank, Washington,
D.C.).
Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1992, “Is the Extended
Family Altruistically Linked?” The American Economic Review, 82 (5), 1177–98.
Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1997, “Parental
Altruism and Inter-Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political
Economy, 105 (6), 1121–66.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Kevin A. Hassett, 1999, “Uncertainty and the Design of LongRun Fiscal Policy,” NBER working paper 7036, March.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1987, Dynamic Fiscal Policy,
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England).
Auerbach, Alan J., Robert Hagemann, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Giuseppe Nicoletti.
1989, “The Economics of Aging Populations: The Case of Four OECD Economies,”
OECD Staff Papers.
Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, eds., 1999, Generational
Accounting Around the World, (Chicago University Press, Chicago).
Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1999, “The Methodology of Generational
Accounting,” in: Alan Auerbach, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, eds.,

83

Generational Accounting Around the World, (Chicago University Press, Chicago),
31-42.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1991, “Generational
Accounts: A Meaningful Alternative to Deficit Accounting,” in Tax Policy and the
Economy, D. Bradford, ed., 5, (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), 55-110.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1994, "Generational
Accounting: A Meaningful Way to Assess Generational Policy," The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Winter.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Philip Oreopoulos, 2000, “The Fiscal Impact of U.S. Immigration
– A Generational Accounting Perspective,” Tax Policy and the Economy.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, John Sabelhaus, and David
Weil, 2001, "The Annuitization of Americans' Resources: A Cohort Analysis,"
forthcoming in Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Essays on Saving, Bequests, Altruism, and
Financial Planning, (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Barro, Robert, 1974, “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political
Economy, 48 (6), 1095-1118.
Barsky, Robert B., N. Gregory Mankiw, and Steven P. Zeldes, 1986, “Ricardian
Consumers with Keynesian Propensities,” The American Economic Review, 76 (4),
676-91.
Becker, Gary S., 1974, “A Theory of Social Interactions.” Journal of Political Economy,
82, 1063-93.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Kyle Bagwell, “Is Everything Neutral,” 1988, Journal of
Political Economy, 96 (2), 308-38.
Bohringer, Christoph, Andreas Pahlke, and Thomas F. Rutherford, 1999, “Carbon
Abatement, Revenue Recycling, and Intergenerational Burden Sharing,” forthcoming
in Using Dynamic Computable General Equilibrium Models for Policy Analysis,
(North Holland, Amsterdam).
Boskin, Michael and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1985, "Public Debt and U.S. Saving: A New
Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, Autumn.
Bosworth, Barry, Gary Burtless,and John Sablehaus, 1991, “The Decline in Saving:
Evidence from Household Surveys,” The Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,
183-242.

84

Buiter, Willhelm H., 1997, “Generational Accounts,
Intergenerational Distribution,” Economica, 64, 605-26.

Aggregate

Saving

and

Chamley, Christophe, 1981, “The Welfare Costs of Capital Income Taxation in a
Growing Economy,” Journal of Political Economy, 89 (3).
Congressional Budget Office, 1995, Who Pays and When: An Assessment of
Generational Accounting, (U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.).
Cutler, David, 1993, “Review of Generational Accounting: Knowing Who Pays, and
When, for What We Spend,” National Tax Journal, 46 (1), 61-76.
Diamond, Peter A., 1965, “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” The
American Economic Review, 55, 1126-50.
Diamond, Peter A., 1996, “Generational Accounts and Generational Balance: An
Assessment,” National Tax Journal, 49 (4), 597-607.
Eaton, Jonathan and Harvey Rosen, 1980, “Labor Supply, Uncertainty, and Efficient
Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics, 14, 365-74.
Eisner, R., and Pieper, P. J., 1984, “A New View of the Federal Debt and Budget
Deficits,” The American Economic Review.
Elmendorf, Douglas W. and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1998, “Government Debt,” NBER
working paper no. 6470.
Fehr, Hans and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1996-1997, “Generational Accounting in General
Equilibrium,” FinanzArchiv, 53 (4), 1-27.
Feldstein, M. S., 1974, “Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital
Accumulation,” Journal of Political Economy, 82.
Feldstein, Martin, 1974, “The Surprising Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New
Answer to an Old Question,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (2).
Feldstein, Martin, 1988, “The Effects of Fiscal Policy When Incomes are Uncertain: A
Contradiction to Ricardian Equivalence,” The American Economic Review, 14-23.
Ferguson, Niall and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 2000, “The Degeneration of the EMU,”
Foreign Affairs, 79(2), 110-21.
Fischer, Stanley, 1980, “Dynamic Inconsistency, Cooperation, and the Benevolent
Dissembling Government,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2, 93-107.

85

Fullerton, Donald and Diane Lim Rogers, 1993, Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden?
(The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.).
Fougere, Maxime and Marcel Merette, 1998, “Economic Dynamics of Population Aging
in Canada: An Analysis with a Computable Overlapping-Generations Model,” paper
presented at the Canadian Public Economics Study Group, Ottawa, Canada, May
1998.
Fougere, Maxime and Marcel Merette, 1999, “Population Aging, Intergenerational
Equity and Growth: Analysis with an Endogenous Growth, Overlapping Generations
Model, forthcoming in Using Dynamic Computable General Equilibrium Models for
Policy Analysis, forthcoming, North Holland, Netherlands).
Gale, William and John Sablehaus, 1999, “Perspectives on the Household Saving Rate,”
The Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 181-214.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and John Sabelhaus, 1996, “Understanding
the Postwar Decline in U.S. Saving: A Cohort Analysis,” The Brookings Papers on
Economic Analysis.
Ghiglino, Christian and Karl Shell, 2000, “The Economic Effects of Restrictions on
Government Budget Deficits,” Journal of Economic Theory, 94 (1), 106-137.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Benjamin R. Page, and John R. Sturrock, 1999, “Generational
Accounts for the U.S.: An Update,” in: Alan J. Auerbach, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and
Willi Leibfritz, eds., Generational Accounting Around the World, (Chicago
University Press, Chicago).
Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Ben Page, Joan Potter, and John Sturrock, 2000, “Generational
Accounts for the U.S. – An Update,” The American Economic Review, 90(2), 293-6.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 2001, “The Calm Before the Generational
Storm,” forthcoming, The Milken Review.
Hamann, Alfonso Javier, 1992, A Quantitative Assessment of the Effects of Inflationary
Finance in an Overlapping Generations Model, Boston University, Ph.D.
Dissertation.
Hirte, Georg and Reinhard Weber, 1998, “Pareto_improving Transition from a
Pay_as_you_go to a Fully_funded System - Is It Politically Feasible?,”
FinanzArchiv.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1987, “Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey and Some
New Observations,” in: F. Truman Bewley, ed., Advances in Econometrics. Fifth
World Congress, 2, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England).

86

Hayashi, Fumio, Joseph Altonji, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1996, "Risk-Sharing Between
and Within Families," Econometrica, 64 (2), 261-94.
Haveman, Robert, 1994, “Should Generational Accounts Replace Public Budgets and
Deficits?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8 (1), Winter, 95-111.
Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber, 1997, “Explaining Rising
Wage Inequality: Explorations with A Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of
Labor Earnings with Heterogeneous Agents,” mimeo, University of Chicago,
November 1997.
_______________________________________________________,1998,
“Evaluation
of Education and Training Programs in A General Equilibrium Setting,” mimeo,
University of Chicago, March 1998.
Hubbard, Glenn R. and Kenneth L. Judd, 1987, “Social Security and Individual Welfare:
Precautionary Saving, Borrowing Constraints, and the Payroll Tax,” The American
Economic Review, 77 (4), 630-46.
Hubbard, Glenn R., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1994a, “Why do People
Save?” The American Economic Review, 84 (2), 174-9.
Hubbard, Glenn R., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1994b, “The Importance of
Precautionary Motives in Explaining Individual and Aggregate Saving,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 40, 59-125.
Hubbard, Glenn R., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1995, “Precautionary
Saving and Social Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 103 (2), 360-99.
Huang, He, Selo ¤mrohoro—lu and Thomas Sargent, 1997, "Two Computational
Experiments to Fund Social Security," forthcoming in Macroeconomic Dynamics,
mimeo University of Southern California.
Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, and Douglas H. Joines, 1998a, “Social
Security in an Overlapping Generations Economy with Land,” mimeo, University of
Southern California.
Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, and Douglas H. Joines, 1995, “A Life Cycle
Analysis of Social Security,” Economic Theory, 6, 83-114.
Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, and Douglas H. Joines, 2001, “The Effect of
Tax-Favored Retirement Accounts on Capital Accumulation,” forthcoming in The
American Economic Review.

87

Joint Committee on Taxation, 1997, Tax Modeling Project and 1997 Tax Symposium
Papers, JCS_21_97, November 1997, (US Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C.).
Kehoe, Timonthy J. and David Levine, 1985, “Comparative Statics and Perfect Foresight
in Infinite Horizon Economies,” Econometrica, 53 (2), 433-53.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., 1983, “Altruistic Extended Family Linkages – a Note,” Boston
University mimeo, (also published in Laurence J. Kotlikoff, What Determines
Savings? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989:86-7.)
Kotlikoff, Laurence J, 1979, “Social Security and Equilibrium Capital Intensity,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93(2), 233-53.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., 1996, "Privatizing Social Security: How It Works and Why It
Matters," in: James M. Poterba (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, 10, (MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA), 1-32.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1987, “Tax Incidence,” in: Alan J.
Auerbach and Martin S. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, 2, (North
Holland, Amsterdam), 1043-88.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Kent Smetters, and Jan Walliser, 2001, “Distributional Effects in a
General Equilibrium Analysis of Social Security,” forthcoming in The Distributional
Effects of Social Security Reform, (Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey Liebman, eds.),
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Kent Smetters, and Jan Walliser, 1998, “The Economic Impact of
Transiting to a Privatized Social Secuirty System,” in Redesigning Social Security,
Horst Siebert, ed., (Kiel University Press, Kiel, Germany), 327-48.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., 1992, Generational Accounting: Knowing Who Pays, and When,
for What We Spend, (The Free Press, New York, NY).
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., 1993, “From Deficit Delusion to the Fiscal Balance
for an Economically Meaningful Way to Assess Fiscal Policy,”
Economics, suppl. 7, 17-41, reprinted in: Alan Auerbach, Laurence J.
Willi Leibfritz, eds., Generational Accounting Around the World,
Chicago Press, Chicago), 1999, 9-30.

Rule: Looking
in Journal of
Kotlikoff, and
(University of

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., 1995, “Applying Generational Accounting to Developing
Countries, Boston University IED Discussion paper no. 67.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Willi Leibfritz, 1999, “An International Comparison of
Generational Accounts,” in Generational Accounting Around the World, Alan J.

88

Auerbach, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, eds., Chicago, Illinois: Chicago
University Press.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., 1997, “Reply to Diamond’s and Cutler’s Reviews of Generational
Accounting,” in The National Tax Journal, L (2).
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Bernd Raffelhüschen, 1999, “Generational Accounting
Around the Globe,” The American Economic Review, 161-6.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Assaf Razin, 1988, "Making Bequests Without Spoiling
Children: Bequests as an Implicit Optimal Tax Structure and the Possibility that
Altruistic Bequest are not Equalizing," NBER Working Paper No. 2735, October
1988, forthcoming in Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Essays on Saving, Altruism, Bequests,
and Financial Planning, (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), 2001.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Torsten Persson, and Lars E. O. Svensson, 1988, “Social
Contracts as Assets: A Possible Solution to the Time-Consistency Problem,” The
American Economic Review, 78 (4), 662-77.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Assaf Razin, and Robert Rosenthal, 1990, "A Strategic Altruism
Model in Which Ricardian Equivalence Does Not Hold," The Economic Journal,
100, (403), 1261-8.
Laitner, John, 1984, “Transition Time Paths for Overlapping-Generation Models,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.
Lau, Morten I, 2000, “Assessing Tax Reforms When Human Capital is Endogenous,”
forthcoming in: Glenn W. Harrison, Svend E. Hougaard Jensen, Lars Haagen
Pedersen, and Thomas F. Rutherford, eds., Using Dynamic Computable General
Equilibrium Models for Policy Analysis, (North Holland, Amsterdam), 203-22.
Merette, Marcel, 1998, “The Effects of Debt Reduction on Intergenerational Equity and
Growth,” Miles Corak, ed., Statistics Canada, Ottawa, mimeo.
Miller, Merton and Charles Upton, Macroeocnomics: A Neoclassical Introduction, (R.D.
Irwin, Homewood, Ill.).
Mirrless, J.A., 1971, “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,” in
Symposium on Public Finance, The Review of Economic Studies, 38 (2), 175-208.
O’Driscoll, Gerald P. Jr., 1977, “The Ricardian Nonequivalence Theorem,” Journal of
Political Economy, 85(1), 207-10.
OECD, 1996, ”Ageing in OECD Countries -- A Critical Policy Challenge”, Social Policy
Studies, No.20.

89

Raffelhüschen, Bernd, 1998, “Aging, Fiscal Policy and Social Insurances: A European
Perspective,” mimeo, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Germany and
University of Bergen, Norway.
Raffelhuschen, Bernd, 1993, “Funding Social Security Through Pareto-Optimal
Conversion Policies,” in: Bernhard Felderer, ed., Public Pension Economics, Journal
of Economics/Zeitschrift fur Nationalokonomie, Suppl. 7, 105-31.
Raffelhüschen, Bernd, 1989, “Anreizwirkungen des Systems der
Alterssicherung. Eine Dynamische Simulationsanalyse,” mimeo, Frankfurt.

Sozialen

Ricardo, David, 1951, The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, edited by Piero
Sraffa, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England).
Samuelson, Paul A., 1958, “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or
without the Social Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, 66 (6),
467-82.
Seidman, Laurence S., 1983, “Taxes in a Life Cycle Model with Bequests and
Inheritances,” American Economic Review, 73, (3), 437-441.
Shavior, Daniel N, 1997, Do Deficits Matter?, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Schneider, Ondrej, 1997, “Dynamic Simulation of Pension Reform,” mimeo, Charles
University, CERGE-EI, Prague.
Schmidt-Hebbel, Klaus, 2001, “Pension Reform, Informal Markets, and Long-term
Income and Welfare,” forthcoming in Pension Systems: From Crisis to Reform, (The
World Bank, Washington, D.C.).
Summers, Lawrence H, 1981, “Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle
Growth Model,” American Economic Review, 71(4), 533-44.
Tabellini, Guido, 1991, “The Politics of Intergenerational Redistribution,” Journal of
Political Economy, 99(2), 335-57.

90

91

Table 1 The Composition of Male U.S. Generational Accounts
(present values in thousands of 1998 dollars)
Tax Payments
______________________________________________

Transfer Receipts
______________________________

Age in
1998

OASDI MEDICARE MEDICAID Welfare

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90

Net Tax
Payment
249.7
256.4
272.3
291.4
318.7
327.3
313.7
279.2
241.4
194.2
129.7
66.2
-5.8
-77.5
-91.0
-75.1
-56.3
-42.4
-25.6

Income
Taxes

Income
Taxes

Payroll
Taxes

128.3
136.3
147.1
158.4
171.2
174.5
167.8
153.9
137.1
116.1
93.0
65.5
38.0
16.6
6.8
3.3
1.4
.5
.4

61.8
66.0
71.8
77.9
85.4
91.6
98.2
104.5
110.0
113.0
112.4
108.4
100.5
89.5
76.3
61.3
46.1
33.0
28.5

107.3
114.1
123.1
132.8
143.8
145.7
138.1
124.3
108.9
91.2
71.8
50.4
29.1
12.7
5.1
2.4
1.2
.5
.4

Excise
Taxes
93.4
97.4
102.1
105.9
107.5
102.4
95.9
89.4
83.2
75.5
65.6
56.0
46.4
37.2
28.4
20.8
14.6
10.1
7.9

45.2
48.0
51.7
55.4
59.0
61.2
64.6
69.4
76.4
85.5
95.6
108.1
123.1
138.5
129.7
106.5
85.7
67.0
51.7

24.0
35.9
44.2
50.5
51.9
52.5
55.2
63.7
67.4
67.9
75.4
69.7
66.1
69.3
56.2
38.2
20.2
9.0
3.1

58.1
58.9
60.2
60.6
59.9
55.2
49.9
45.0
40.4
35.9
31.0
26.3
21.8
17.7
14.8
12.5
9.7
8.0
6.0

13.7
14.6
15.8
17.1
18.3
17.8
16.5
14.9
13.5
12.3
11.1
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
5.7
4.0
2.6
2.0

Growth-Adjusted Net Tax Payment of Future Generations 361.8
Lifetime Net Tax Rate on Future Generations 32.3 percent
Lifetime Net Tax Rate on Newborns
22.8 percent
Generational Imbalance
41.7 percent
_________________________________________________________________________________
Note: Table assumes a 4 percent real discount rate and 2.2 percent growth rate.

87

Table 1 (continued)
The Composition of Female U.S. Generational Accounts
(present values in thousands of 1998 dollars)

Age in
1998

Net Tax
Payment

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90

109.6
104.6
104.6
105.4
113.7
112.3
95.6
65.6
37.9
7.9
-37.7
-73.9
-115.0
-157.6
-155.9
-131.8
-99.2
-70.5
-44.4

Tax Payments
_______________________________
Labor
Capital
Income Income Payroll Excise
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes
67.8
72.1
77.9
84.1
91.0
91.5
85.1
75.6
66.0
55.4
42.2
28.3
15.6
6.6
2.5
.9
.3
.2
.1

21.6
23.0
25.1
27.2
29.8
31.8
33.9
35.9
37.9
39.2
39.6
39.1
37.4
34.6
30.8
26.3
21.5
16.9
14.1

64.1
68.2
73.7
79.6
86.2
86.4
79.9
70.8
62.0
52.1
39.6
26.6
14.7
6.1
2.2
.9
.3
.1
.1

89.0
92.7
97.0
99.9
100.9
96.6
91.2
85.7
79.7
72.7
64.4
55.2
46.0
36.9
28.7
21.3
15.3
11.1
8.3

Transfer Receipts
_____________________________
OASDI MEDICARE MEDICAID Welfare

42.3
45.0
48.7
52.4
56.4
58.9
61.9
65.7
71.4
78.8
87.7
99.0
112.7
124.6
116.8
100.0
82.1
63.4
47.3

24.6
38.3
48.8
57.9
61.1
63.7
68.0
78.6
83.7
84.7
94.1
87.5
84.0
89.3
78.7
59.6
36.9
20.6
9.0

44.0
44.7
46.1
46.9
46.9
45.2
43.2
41.1
39.3
37.6
33.5
29.8
26.2
22.6
20.0
17.9
14.5
12.5
8.9

22.0
23.4
25.6
28.2
29.9
26.2
21.3
17.0
13.3
10.4
8.2
6.8
5.8
5.2
4.6
3.8
3.1
2.4
1.8

Future
Generations
158.8
_________________________________________________________________________________
Note: Table assumes a 4 percent real discount rate and 2.2 percent growth rate.

88

Table 2

Alternative Policies to Achieve Generational Balance* in the U.S.

Policy

Immediate and Permanent
Percentage Change
in Policy Instrument

Equalized
Lifetime
Net Tax Rate

Raise All Taxes

12.0

27.5

Raise Fed. Inc. Taxes

31.3

27.3

Cut All Transfers

21.9

26.5

Cut All Govt. Purchases

21.0

22.8

Cut Federal Purchases

66.3

22.8

________________________________________________________________________
* Generational imbalance is the percentage difference in lifetime net tax rates of newborns and future generations.

89

Table 3

Alternative Ways to Achieve Generational Balance in 22 Countries

Country

Argentina
Australia

29.1
10.2

11.0
9.1

8.4
4.8

Increase
in
income
tax
75.7
8.1

Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Denmark
Finland

76.4
12.4
26.2
0.1
29.0
67.6

20.5
4.6
17.9
0.1
4.5
21.2

18.4
3.1
11.7
0.1
4.0
19.4

55.6
10.0
74.0
0.2
6.7
50.8

Germany
Ireland
Italy

25.9
-4.3
49.1

14.1
-4.4
13.3

9.5
-2.1
10.5

29.5
-4.8
28.2

Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand

29.5
28.7
-1.6

25.3
22.3
-0.6

15.5
8.9
-0.4

53.6
15.6
-0.8

Norway
Portugal
Spain

9.9
9.8
62.2

8.1
7.5
17.0

6.3
4.2
14.5

9.7
13.3
44.9

Sweden
Thailand
France

50.5
-47.7
22.2

18.9
-114.2
9.8

15.6
-25.0
6.9

41.9
-81.8
64.0

9.7
21.0

9.5
21.9

2.7
12.0

9.5
31.3

United Kingdom
United States

Cut in
government
purchases

Cut in
government
transfers

Increase
in
all taxes

na – not available

Source: Kotlikoff and Leibfritz (1999), Raffelheuschen (1998), and Gokhale and Kotlikoff (2000).

90

Table 3
Structural Tax Reform in the Auerbach-Kotlikoff Model

Year

Capital

Labor

1
89.9
19.2
2
89.9
19.5
3
90.4
19.5
4
90.8
19.5
5
91.3
19.4
10
91.7
19.4
20
95.5
19.3
60
97.2
19.2
97.3
19.2
∞
Source: Fehr and Kotlikoff (1997)

Output

Wage

25.7
25.9
25.9
25.9
26.0
26.0
26.1
26.1
26.1

1.000
.997
.998
1.000
1.001
1.003
1.015
1.021
1.021

Interest
Rate
.071
.072
.072
.071
.071
.071
.068
.067
.067

91

Consumption
Tax Rate
.000
.064
.064
.064
.064
.063
.061
.061
.061

Saving
Rate
.035
.054
.053
.052
.051
.050
.042
.037
.037

Table 4
Comparing Changes in Generation’s Utility and their Generational Accounts
(changes, expressed as percent of remaining lifetime economic resources)
Generation’s Year of
Change in Generational
Birth
Account
-54
-2.39
-50
-2.13
-45
-1.64
-40
-1.16
-35
-0.72
-30
-0.36
-25
-0.06
-20
0.17
-15
0.32
-10
0.40
-5
0.41
0
0.37
5
0.36
10
0.35
20
0.34
50
0.33
0.33
∞
Source: Fehr and Kotlikoff (1997)

Change in Utility
-2.41
-2.03
-1.60
-1.22
-0.87
-0.55
-0.26
-0.01
0.21
0.37
0.49
0.55
0.68
0.80
0.94
1.04
1.05

92

Table 5
Proportional Consumption-Tax Reform
Impact on Macro Variables
1996
Aggregates

2010

2145

National Income Index
1.000
1.044
1.063
Capital Stock Index
1.000
1.010
1.108
Labor Supply Index
1.000
1.063
1.054
Net Saving Rate
0.051
0.073
0.067
Wage Rates, Interest Rates, and Asset Values

1.094
1.254
1.046
0.059

Before-Tax Wage Index
1.000
0.987
1.013
After-Tax Wage
0.775
0.817
0.843
Interest Rate
0.083
0.079
0.076
Federal Consumption and Payroll Tax Rates

1.046
0.881
0.073

Consumption Tax Rate [3]
Payroll Tax Rate

0.145
0.141

0
0.146

1997

0.166
0.140

0.160
0.140

Source: Altig, Auerbach, Kotlikoff, Smetters, and Walliser (2001)

93

Table 6
Welfare Effects of
Proportional Consumption-Tax Reform
Lifetime Earnings Cohort Born in Cohort Born in
Class
Year -54
Year -30

Cohort Cohort Cohort
Born in Born in Born in
Year 0 Year 30 Long Run
1
1.01
.97
.94
.95
.96
3
1.00
.99
.98
.99
.99
6
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.01
1.01
9
.99
1.0
1.01
1.02
102
12
.99
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.04
Note: Welfare is measured relative to the no-reform equilibrium. A value, for example,
of .97 means that the group in question experiences a welfare change from the reform
that is equivalent to their experiencing a 3 percent decline in consumption and leisure at
each age under the initial fiscal structure.
Source: Altig, Auerbach, Kotlikoff, Smetters, and Walliser (2001)

94

Table 7
Privatizing Social Security with ConsumptionTax Transitional Finance
Percentage Change in Macro Variables Relative to
Initial Steady State
Year of Transition:
Macro Variable

5

10

National Income
.6
1.3
Capital Stock
1.8
4.1
Labor Supply
.3
.4
Before-Tax Wage
.4
0.9
Interest Rate
-1.1
-2.7
Source: Kotlikoff, Smetters, and Walliser (2001)

25

150

4.9
12.8
2.4
2.4
-6.9

13.0
39.0
5.5
7.1
-18.9

95

Table 8
Privatizing Social Security – Percentage Change in Remaining Lifetime
Utility for Selected Income Classes by Cohort
Cohort Year of Birth Relative to Initial Steady State
Class
1

-54
.7

-25
-2.1

3

-.4

6

-10

1

10

25

150

-.6

.5

1.3

3.2

6.0

-2.0

.0

1.2

2.1

4.2

7.4

-.9

-1.7

.3

1.6

2.6

4.8

8.0

9

-1.2

-1.6

.5

1.7

2.7

4.9

8.1

12

-1.5

-2.5

-1.8

-1.0

-.1

1.7

4.4

Source: Kotlikoff, Smetters, and Walliser (2001)

96

