                                 "   $$ 




                                      


                                            
                                               !


                                          "#$%&'()
                                  **%+,,---..,%%,-&'()



                                /   
                                    ')0)!**1!
                                      23 )4'5&
                                          




            
    !       " #   $ 
%$  &$     '  &   '  &
 ()! "*      &   ( 
   )!


+&(    !%    !$    *   * "
 &,  "  *         +   
   !
*!* 1 3 313!*#*!
3 !
"#$%.&'()
4))'
6. '4


                                                 

      "*!378!!292:1*#*!*-2+-1*
11*9!*!*9**#%*93*-*71
1*9!*!*9313!*#***7-.*%%3*2%
%2 !*-93*3%%*2!9!+**27 **7%
313!*#*!23;1**7 3*1!%2!2
*:*- *2;** %*!37227!32!*9*23.




                                              !
  1*79                                          3!*9!
  3!*9!                                  *93 1*7
'')'*0&WK**                                         *93 (<5)0
  =)=5>                                             2!?3.*93.3!
3
#.?.!.3!
    Over the past two decades, researchers analyzing the structure of individual stock
returns have uncovered a wide range of phenomena, both in the time series and the
cross-section. In the time series, the returns of a typical individual stock have a high
mean, are excessively volatile, and are slightly predictable using lagged variables. In
the cross-section, there is a substantial \value" premium, in that stocks with low
ratios of price to fundamentals have higher average returns, and this premium can to
some extent be captured by certain empirically motivated multifactor models. These    1


  ndings have attracted a good deal of attention from nance theorists. It has proved
something of a challenge, though, to explain both the time series and cross-sectional
e ects in the context of an equilibrium model where investors maximize a clearly
speci ed utility function.
    In this paper, we argue that it may be possible to improve our understanding of
  rm-level stock returns by re ning the way we model investor preferences. For guid-
ance as to what kind of re nements might be important, we turn to the experimental
evidence that has been accumulated on how people choose among risky gambles.
Many of the studies in this literature suggest that loss aversion and narrow framing
play an important role in determining attitudes towards risk. Financial economists do
not typically incorporate these ideas into their models of asset prices. We investigate
whether doing so can shed light on the behavior of individual stock returns.
    Loss aversion is a feature of Kahneman and Tversky's (1979) descriptive model
of decision making under risk, prospect theory, which uses experimental evidence to
argue that people get utility from gains and losses in wealth, rather than from absolute
levels. The speci c nding known as loss aversion is that people are more sensitive to
losses than to gains. Since our framework is intertemporal, we also make use of more
recent evidence on dynamic aspects of loss aversion. This evidence suggests that the
degree of loss aversion depends on prior gains and losses: a loss that comes after prior
gains is less painful than usual, because it is cushioned by those earlier gains. On
the other hand, a loss that comes after other losses is more painful than usual: after
being burned by the rst loss, people become more sensitive to additional setbacks.
    A crucial question which arises in applying this evidence on loss aversion to the
context of investing is: over which gains and losses is the investor loss averse? Is
he loss averse over changes in total wealth? Or is he loss averse over changes in the
value of his portfolio of stocks or even over changes in the value of individual stocks
  1 The value premium was originally noted by Basu (1983) and Rosenberg, Reid and Lanstein
(1985); Fama and French (1992) provide more recent evidence. Fama and French (1993) show that a
speci c three-factor model can capture much of the value premium. Vuolteenaho (1999) documents
the excess volatility and time series predictability of rm level stock returns.


                                              1
that he owns? When gains and losses are taken to be changes in total wealth, we
say that they are de ned \broadly." When they refer to changes in the value of
isolated components of wealth { the investor's stock portfolio or individual stocks
that he owns { we say that they are de ned \narrowly." Which gains and losses the
investor pays attention to is a question about mental accounting, a term coined by
Thaler (1980) to refer to the process by which people think about and evaluate their
  nancial transactions.
    Numerous experimental studies suggest that when doing their mental accounting,
people engage in narrow framing, that is, they often appear to pay attention to
narrowly de ned gains and losses. This may re ect a concern for non-consumption
sources of utility, such as regret, which are often more naturally experienced over
narrowly framed gains and losses. If one of an investor's many stocks performs poorly,
the investor may experience a sense of regret over the speci c decision to buy that
stock. In other words, individual stock gains and losses can be carriers of utility in
their own right, and the investor may take this into account when making decisions.
    In our analysis, we study the equilibrium behavior of rm-level stock returns when
investors are loss averse and exhibit narrow framing in their mental accounting. We
consider two kinds of narrow framing, one narrower than the other, and investigate
whether either of them is helpful for understanding the data.
    In the rst economy we consider, investors get direct utility not only from con-
sumption, but also from gains and losses in the value of individual stocks that they
own. The evidence on loss aversion described above is applied to these narrowly
de ned gains and losses: the investor is loss averse over individual stock uctua-
tions, and how painful a loss on a particular stock is, depends on that stock's prior
performance. We refer to this as \individual stock accounting."
    In the second economy, investors get direct utility not only from consumption,
but also from gains and losses in the value of their overall portfolio of stocks. The
evidence on loss aversion is now applied to these gains and losses: the investor is
loss averse over portfolio uctuations, and how painful a drop in portfolio value is,
depends on the portfolio's prior performance. We call this \portfolio accounting," a
form of narrow framing, although not as extreme as individual stock accounting.
    In our rst set of results, we show that for all its severity, individual stock ac-
counting can be a helpful ingredient for understanding a wide range of empirical
phenomena. In equilibrium, under this form of mental accounting, individual stock
returns have a high mean, are more volatile than their underlying cash ows and are
slightly predictable in the time series. In the cross-section, there is a large value pre-
mium: stocks with low price-dividend ratios have higher average returns than stocks
                                            2
with high price-dividend ratios. Moreover, the same kinds of multifactor models that
have been shown to capture the value premium in actual data can also do so in our
simulated economy. At the same time, the model matches empirical features of aggre-
gate asset returns. In equilibrium, aggregate stock returns have a high mean, excess
volatility and are moderately predictable in the time series, while the risk-free rate is
constant and low.
    Second, we nd that the investor's system of mental accounting a ects asset prices
in a signi cant way. As we broaden the investor's decision frame from individual
stock accounting to portfolio accounting, the equilibrium behavior of individual stock
returns changes considerably: their mean value falls, they become less volatile, and
also more correlated with each other. Moreover, the value premium in the cross-
section disappears. Overall, portfolio accounting can explain some features of the
data, but is less successful than individual stock accounting.
    To understand where our results come from, consider rst the case of individual
stock accounting. Many of the e ects here derive from a single source, namely a
discount rate for individual stocks that changes as a function of the stock's past
performance. If a stock has had good recent performance, the investor gets utility
from this gain, and becomes less concerned about future losses on the stock because
any losses will be cushioned by the prior gains. In e ect, the investor perceives the
stock to be less risky than before and discounts its future cash ows at a lower rate.
Conversely, if one of his stocks performs dismally, he nds this painful and becomes
more sensitive to the possibility of further losses on the stock. In e ect, he views the
stock as riskier than before and raises its discount rate.
    This changing discount rate makes rm-level stock returns more volatile than
underlying cash ows: a high cash ow pushes the stock price up, but this prior gain
also lowers the discount rate on the stock, pushing the stock price still higher. It
also generates a value premium in the cross-section: in this economy, a stock with a
high price-dividend ratio (a growth stock) is often one that has done well in the past,
accumulating prior gains for the investor who then views it as less risky and requires
a lower average return. A stock with a low price-dividend ratio (a value stock) has
often had dismal prior performance, burning the investor, who now views it as riskier,
and requires a higher average return. Finally, since the investor is loss averse over
individual stock uctuations, he dislikes the frequent losses that individual stocks
often produce, and charges a high average return as compensation.
    The reason the results are di erent under portfolio accounting is that in this case,
changes in discount rates on stocks are driven by uctuations in the value of the
overall portfolio: when the portfolio does well, the investor is less concerned about
                                           3
losses on any of the stocks that he holds, since the prior portfolio gain will cushion
any such losses. E ectively, he views all stocks as less risky. Discount rates on all
stocks therefore go down simultaneously. Conversely, discount rates on all stocks go
up after a prior portfolio loss.
    This discount rate behavior is the key to many of the portfolio accounting results.
Stock returns are less volatile here than under individual stock accounting. In the
latter case, stocks are highly volatile because good cash ow news is always accom-
panied by a lower discount rate, pushing the price up even more. Under portfolio
accounting, good cash ow news on a particular stock will only coincide with a lower
discount rate on the stock if the portfolio as a whole does well. There is no guarantee
of this, and so volatility is not ampli ed by as much. Since shocks to discount rates
are perfectly correlated across stocks, individual stock returns are highly correlated
with one another. Moreover, the value premium largely disappears since a stock's
past performance no longer a ects its discount rate, which is now determined at the
portfolio level. Finally, while there is a substantial equity premium, it is not as large
as under individual stock accounting. The investor is loss averse over portfolio level
  uctuations, which are sizeable but not as severe as the swings on individual stocks.
The compensation for risk is therefore more moderate.
    While individual stock accounting can potentially be a helpful way of thinking
about the data, we emphasize that it is only a potential ingredient in an equilibrium
model, and by no means a complete description of the facts. For one, we show that it
underpredicts the correlation of stocks with each other, and argue that a model which
combines individual stock accounting with broader forms of accounting is likely to be
superior to a model which uses individual stock accounting alone.
    The fact that we study equilibrium returns under both individual stock account-
ing and portfolio accounting is also useful for making additional predictions for future
testing. If individual stock accounting is relatively more prevalent among individual
investors as opposed to institutional investors, we would expect to see stocks held
primarily by individuals { small stocks, for example { exhibit more of the features
associated with individual stock accounting. Other predictions arise, if, over time,
investors change the way they do their mental accounting. For example, the increased
availability of mutual funds since the early 1980s may have caused a shift away from
individual stock accounting towards portfolio accounting, since funds automatically
prevent investors from worrying about individual stock uctuations. Our analysis
predicts that stocks that were once held directly but are now held indirectly through
mutual funds should exhibit speci c changes in pricing behavior. Among other pre-
dictions, such stocks should have higher price-to-fundamentals ratios and exhibit a

                                           4
lower cross-sectional value premium.
    Loss aversion and narrow framing have already been applied with some success
to understanding the aggregate stock market. Benartzi and Thaler (1995) analyze
the static portfolio problem of an investor who is loss averse over changes in his
  nancial wealth and who is trying to allocate his wealth between T-Bills and the
stock market. They nd that the investor is reluctant to allocate much to stocks,
even if the expected return on the stock market is set equal to its high historical
value. Motivated by this nding, Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001) introduce loss
aversion over nancial wealth uctuations into a dynamic equilibrium model and nd
that it captures a number of aggregate market phenomena. They do not address
the time series or cross-sectional behavior of individual stocks. Moreover, since they
consider only one risky asset, they cannot investigate the impact of di erent forms of
mental accounting, which is our main focus in this paper.
    Ours is not the only paper to address empirical phenomena like time series pre-
dictability and the cross-sectional value premium. Other promising approaches in-
clude models based on irrationality or bounded rationality, such as Barberis, Shleifer
and Vishny (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (2001), and Hong and
Stein (1999); models based on learning, such as Brennan and Xia (2001); and models
based on corporate growth options such as Berk, Green and Naik (1999) and Gomes,
Kogan, and Zhang (2001).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section I, we propose two di erent
speci cations for investor preferences: in one case, the investor is loss averse over
  uctuations in the value of individual stocks in his portfolio; in the other case, he
is loss averse only over uctuations in overall portfolio value. Section II derives the
conditions that govern equilibrium prices in economies with investors of each type.
In Section III, we use simulated data to analyze equilibrium stock returns under
each of the two kinds of mental accounting. Section IV discusses the results further
and in particular, argues that they may be robust to generalizations which allow for
heterogeneity across investors. Section V concludes.

            I. Two Forms of Mental Accounting


   Extensive experimental work suggests that loss aversion and narrow framing are
important features of the way people evaluate risky gambles. In this section, we
construct preferences that incorporate these two ideas.

                                           5
    Loss aversion is a central feature of Kahneman and Tversky's (1979) prospect
theory, a descriptive model of decision making under risk, which argues that people
derive utility from changes in wealth, rather than from absolute levels. The speci c
 nding known as loss aversion is that people are more sensitive to reductions in wealth
than to increases, in the sense that there is a kink in the utility function. A simple
functional form that captures loss aversion is
                                     (
                                        X         X0
                             w(X ) =          for         ;                          (1)
                                        2X        X <0
where X is the individual's gain or loss, and w(X ) is the utility of that gain or loss.
    Kahneman and Tversky (1979) introduce loss aversion as a way of explaining why
people tend to reject small-scale gambles of the form          2


                                           1
                                G = (110; ; 100; ):
                                                    1
                                           2        2
Most utility functions used by nancial economists are not able to explain these risk
attitudes because they are di erentiable everywhere, making the investor risk-neutral
over small gambles.    3


    In order to incorporate loss aversion into an intertemporal framework, we need
to take account of its dynamic aspects. Tversky and Kahneman (1981) note that
their prospect theory was originally developed only for one-shot gambles and that
any application to a dynamic context must await further evidence on how people
think about sequences of gains and losses.
    A number of papers have taken up this challenge, conducting experiments on how
people evaluate sequences of gambles. In particular, Thaler and Johnson (1990) nd
that after a gain on a prior gamble, people are more risk-seeking than usual, while
after a prior loss, they become more risk averse. The result that risk aversion goes
down after a prior gain, con rmed in other studies, has been labeled the \house
money" e ect, re ecting gamblers' increased willingness to bet when ahead. Thaler          4


and Johnson interpret these ndings as evidence that the degree of loss aversion
   2 This should be read as: \receive $110 with probability 1 , and lose $100 with probability 1 ."
                                                             2
   3 One exception is rst-order risk aversion preferences, studied                             2
                                                                   by Epstein and Zin (1990), Segal
and Spivak (1990), Gul (1991) and others. However, this speci cation does not allow for narrow
framing, which is central in our analysis. Of course, even if a utility function is di erentiable,
one can explain aversion to small-scale risks by increasing the function's curvature. However, this
immediately runs into other diÆculties. Rabin (2000) shows that if an increasing, concave, and
di erentiable utility function is calibrated so as to reject G at all wealth levels, then that utility
function will also reject extremely attractive large-scale gambles, a troubling prediction.
   4 It is important to distinguish Thaler and Johnson's (1990) evidence from other evidence pre-

                                                  6
depends on prior gains and losses: a loss that comes after prior gains is less painful
than usual, because it is cushioned by those earlier gains. A loss that comes after
other losses, however, is more painful than usual: after being burned by the rst loss,
people become more sensitive to additional setbacks.
    A crucial question which arises in applying this evidence on loss aversion to the
context of investing is: over which gains and losses is the investor loss averse? Is
he loss averse over changes in total wealth? Or is he loss averse over changes in the
value of his portfolio of stocks or even over changes in the value of individual stocks
that he owns? When gains and losses are taken to be changes in total wealth, we
say that they are de ned \broadly." When they refer to changes in the value of
isolated components of wealth { the investor's stock portfolio or individual stocks
that he owns { we say that they are de ned \narrowly." Which gains and losses the
investor pays attention to is a question about mental accounting, a term coined by
Thaler (1980) to refer to the process by which people think about and evaluate their
  nancial transactions.
    To see why mental accounting matters, consider the following simple example. An
investor is thinking about buying a portfolio of two stocks { one share of each, say.
The shares of both stocks are currently trading at $100, and after careful thought,
the investor decides that for both stocks, the share value a year from now will be
distributed as
                                     (150; 21 ; 70; 21 );
independently across the two stocks.
    Suppose that the investor's loss aversion is captured by the functional form in
equation (1). If he is loss averse over portfolio uctuations, the expected utility of
the investment is    5
                           1 w(100) + 1 w(20) + 1 w( 60) = 5;
                           4          2            4
sented by Kahneman and Tversky (1979) showing that people are risk-averse over gains and risk-
seeking over losses; indeed this evidence motivates a feature of prospect theory that we do not
consider here, namely the concavity (convexity) of the value function in the domain of gains (losses).
One set of evidence pertains to one-shot gambles, the other to sequences of gambles. Kahneman
and Tversky's evidence suggests that people are willing to take risks in order to avoid a loss; Thaler
and Johnson's evidence suggests that if these e orts are unsuccessful and the investor su ers an
unpleasant loss, he will subsequently act in a more risk-averse manner.
   5 This calculation says: with probability 1 , both stocks will gain $50, for a total gain of $100;
                                                 4
with probability 21 , one stock will gain $50, the other will lose $30, for a total gain of $20; and with
probability 14 , both stocks will lose $30, for a total loss of $60.




                                                   7
while if he is loss averse over individual stock uctuations, it is           6




                             2 21 w(50) + 21 w( 30) = 10;
                                                   


which is not as attractive.
    Which form of mental accounting is a better description of individual behavior?
Traditional asset pricing models usually assume as broad a form of accounting as
possible: utility is typically speci ed only over total wealth or over consumption,
and not over individual stock uctuations. A substantial body of experimental work,
however, suggests that when doing their mental accounting, people engage in narrow
framing, that is, they often do appear to focus on narrowly de ned gains and losses.                  7


    The absence of narrow framing from standard asset pricing models is probably
due to doubts about its normative acceptability. These doubts may be unwarranted:
narrow framing can be defended on normative grounds because it may simply re ect a
concern for non-consumption sources of utility, which are often naturally experienced
over narrowly de ned gains and losses. Regret is one example of such utility: a loss
is more painful to us if it is linked to an action we took than if it simply befalls us
through no fault of our own. If one of an investor's many stocks performs poorly, the
investor may experience a sense of regret over the speci c decision to buy that stock.
Since each stock is associated with a distinct decision, namely the decision to buy
that particular stock, each stock's gains and losses can give rise to a distinct source
of utility, based on regret or euphoria about the initial buying decision. This is our
preferred way of thinking about the narrow framing that we model below.
    In other situations, narrow framing is less acceptable from a normative perspective.
These are situations where it arises because of cognitive limitations: even though we
know that gains and losses in total wealth are more relevant for our consumption
decisions, we may focus too much on gains and losses in one part of our wealth { in
our stock portfolio { simply because information about those gains and losses is more
readily available.
    In what follows, we study asset prices in economies where investors are loss averse
and exhibit narrow framing in their mental accounting. In the rst economy we
consider, investors get direct utility not only from consumption, but also from gains
and losses in the value of individual stocks that they own. The evidence on loss
   6 This calculation says: for each stock, there is an equal chance of a gain of $50 and a loss of $30.
   7 Redelmeier and Tversky (1992), Kahneman and Lovallo (1993), Gneezy and Potters (1997),
Thaler et al. (1997), Benartzi and Thaler (1999), and Rabin and Thaler (2000) present evidence of
various kinds of narrow framing. Read, Loewenstein, and Rabin (1999) review some of the evidence
and discuss possible explanations of why people frame decisions the way they do.

                                                   8
aversion is applied to these narrowly de ned gains and losses: the investor is loss
averse over individual stock uctuations, and how painful a loss on a particular stock
is, depends on that stock's prior performance. We refer to this as \individual stock
accounting."  8


    In our second piece of analysis, we consider an economy where investors get direct
utility not only from consumption, but also from gains and losses in the value of
their overall portfolio of stocks. The evidence on loss aversion is now applied to
these gains and losses: the investor is loss averse over portfolio uctuations, and how
painful a drop in portfolio value is, depends on the portfolio's prior performance. We
call this \portfolio accounting." While this is a broader form of mental accounting
than individual stock accounting, it still represents narrow framing: the investor is
segregating his stock portfolio from his other forms of wealth such as human capital,
and is focusing on its uctuations separately.
    We now show how these two forms of mental accounting can be incorporated into
a traditional asset pricing framework, starting with individual stock accounting in
Section I.A and then moving to portfolio accounting in Section I.B. In both cases,
there are two kinds of assets: a risk-free asset in zero net supply, paying a gross
interest rate of Rf;t between time t and t + 1; and n risky assets { \stocks" { each
with a total supply of one unit. The gross return on stock i between time t and t + 1
is Ri;t :
      +1



A. Individual Stock Accounting

   When the investor is loss averse over individual stock uctuations, he chooses
consumption Ct and an allocation Si;t to stock i to maximize
                       1     "                                                        #
                       X           Ct1                   X
                                                         n
                   E          t
                                   1     + b Ct
                                           0      t+1         v (Xi;t+1 ; Si;t ; zi;t ) :      (2)
                       t=0                               i=1

    The rst term in this preference speci cation, utility over consumption Ct, is a
standard feature of asset pricing models. Although the framework does not require
it, we specialize to power utility, the benchmark case studied in the literature. The
   8 A skeptic could argue that an investor who does individual stock accounting will be reluctant
to take on blatantly attractive opportunities, such as exploiting a relative mispricing between two
stocks by going long one and short the other. Even if he is sure to make $5 on the long position and
to lose only $3 on the short, he may code this as 5 2(3), which does not look attractive. However,
since the long and short positions are really components of a single trading idea, it is more likely
that the investor will evaluate the strategy as a single entity: he will code a gain of 5 3 = 2, and
will be keen to take on the opportunity.

                                                  9
parameter  is the time discount factor, and > 0 controls the curvature of utility
over consumption.  9


     The second term models the idea that the investor is loss averse over changes in
the value of individual stocks that he owns. The variable Xi;t measures the gain or
                                                                 +1

loss on stock i between time t and time t +1, a positive value indicating a gain and a
negative value, a loss. The utility the investor receives from this gain or loss is given
by the function v, and it is added up across all stocks owned by the investor. It is a
function not only of the gain or loss itself, but also of Si;t, the value of the investor's
holdings of stock i at time t, and of a state variable zi;t which measures the investor's
gains or losses on the stock prior to time t as a fraction of Si;t . By including Si;t and
zi;t as arguments of v , we allow the investor's prior investment performance to a ect
the way subsequent losses are experienced.
     As discussed earlier, we think of v as capturing utility unrelated to consumption,
such as regret. This is naturally de ned over individual stock gains and losses because
each stock in the investor's portfolio corresponds to a separate buying decision and
is therefore a separate potential source of regret. There may also be other kinds of
non-consumption utility at work here. An investor may interpret a big loss on a stock
as a sign that he is a second-rate investor, thus dealing his ego a painful blow, and
he may feel humiliation in front of friends and family when word about the failed
investment leaks out.
     The b C t coeÆcient on the loss aversion terms is a scaling factor which ensures
         0

that risk premia in the economy remain stationary even as aggregate wealth increases
over time. It involves per capita consumption C t which is exogeneous to the investor,
and so does not a ect the intuition of the model. The constant b controls the
                                                                           0

importance of the loss aversion terms in the investor's preferences; setting b = 0  0

reduces our framework to the much studied consumption-based model with power
utility.
     Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001), BHS henceforth, have already formalized the
notion of loss aversion in a model of the aggregate stock market. We borrow their
speci cation, which we summarize in the remainder of this section. We limit ourselves
to describing the essential structure; BHS provide more supporting detail.
     The gain or loss on stock i between time t and t + 1 is measured as
                               Xi;t = Si;t Ri;t
                                  +1              +1Si;t Rf;t :                         (3)
In words, the gain is the value of stock i at time t + 1 minus its value at time t
multiplied by the risk-free rate. Multiplying by the risk-free rate models the idea
  9 For = 1, we replace Ct1 =(1    ) with log Ct .

                                             10
that investors may only view the return on a stock as a gain if it exceeds the risk-free
rate. The unit of time is a year, so that gains and losses are measured annually. While
the investor may check his holdings much more often than that, even several times a
day, we assume that it is only once a year, perhaps at tax time, that he confronts his
past performance in a serious way.
     The variable zi;t tracks prior gains and losses on stock i. It is the ratio of another
variable, Zi;t, to Si;t, so that zi;t = ZS . BHS call Zi;t the \historical benchmark level"
                                            i;t



for stock i, to be thought of as the investor's memory of an earlier price level at
                                            i;t




which the stock used to trade. When Si;t > Zi;t, or zi;t < 1, the stock price today is
higher than what the investor remembers it to be, making him feel as though he has
accumulated prior gains on the stock, to the tune of Si;t Zi;t. When Si;t < Zi;t, or
zi;t > 1, the current stock price is lower than it used to be, so that the investor feels
that he has had past losses, again of Si;t Zi;t .
     The point of introducing zi;t is to allow v to capture experimental evidence sug-
gesting that the pain of a loss depends on prior outcomes. This is done by de ning v
in the following way. When zi;t = 1,
                                                   (
                                                     Xi;t              Xi;t  0
                          v (Xi;t ; Si;t; 1) =        +1
                                                                 for    +1
                                                                                       ;              (4)
                                +1
                                                     Xi;t
                                                         +1            Xi;t < 0
                                                                        +1


with  > 1. For zi;t < 1,
                           (
                              Si;t Ri;t       Si;t Rf;t                                      Ri;t  zi;t Rf;t
v (Xi;t ; Si;t ; zi;t ) =            +1
                                                                                         for  +1
                                                                                                              ;
       +1
                              Si;t (zi;t Rf;t Rf;t ) + Si;t (Ri;t +1      zi;t Rf;t )       Ri;t < zi;t Rf;t
                                                                                              +1
                                                                                                      (5)
and for zi;t > 1,
                                                 (
                                                    Xi;t                  Xi;t  0
                      v (Xi;t ; Si;t ; zi;t ) =     +1
                                                                     for     +1
                                                                                          ;           (6)
                           +1
                                                    (zi;t )Xi;t
                                                              +1          Xi;t < 0
                                                                             +1


with
                                          (zi;t ) =  + k(zi;t 1);                                   (7)
and k > 0.
     It is easiest to understand these equations graphically. Figure 1 shows the form
of v: the solid line for zi;t = 1, the dash-dot line for zi;t < 1, and the dashed line for
zi;t > 1. When zi;t = 1, the case where the investor has neither prior gains nor prior
losses on stock i, v is a piecewise linear function with a slope of one in the positive
domain and a slope of  > 1 in the negative domain. This gives it a kink at the origin
where the gain equals zero and provides a simple representation of loss aversion.
                                                   11
    When zi;t < 1, the investor has accumulated prior gains on stock i. The form of
v (Xi;t ; Si;t ; zi;t ) is the same as for v (Xi;t ; Si;t ; 1) except that the kink is no longer
      +1                                       +1

at the origin but a little to the left; how far to the left depends on the size of the prior
gain. This formulation captures the idea that prior gains may cushion subsequent
losses. In particular, the graph shows that a small loss on stock i is penalized at the
gentle rate of one, rather than : since this loss is cushioned by the prior gain, it is
less painful. If the loss is so large that it depletes the investor's entire reserve of prior
gains, it is once again penalized at the more severe rate of  > 1.
    The remaining case is zi;t > 1, where stock i has been losing value. The form of
v (Xi;t ; Si;t ; zi;t ) in this case has a kink at the origin just like v (Xi;t ; Si;t ; 1), but
      +1                                                                        +1

di ers from v(Xi;t ; Si;t; 1) in that losses are penalized at a rate more severe than
                    +1

, capturing the idea that losses that come after other losses are more painful than
usual. How much higher than  the penalty is, is determined by equation (7), and in
particular by the constant k. Note that the larger the prior loss, as measured by zi;t ,
the more painful any subsequent losses will be.
    To complete the model description, we need an equation for the dynamics of zi;t .
Based on BHS, we use
                                                    !
                                           R
                           zi;t+1 =  zi;t i            + (1    ) (1);                     (8)
                                          Ri;t+1
where Ri is a xed parameter and   1: Note that if the return on stock i is
particularly good, so that Ri;t > Ri, the state variable zi;t = ZS falls in value. This
                                 +1
                                                                          i;t



means that the benchmark level Zi;t rises less than the stock price Si;t , increasing the
                                                                          i;t




investor's reserve of prior gains. In other words, equation (8) captures the idea that a
particularly good return should increase the amount of prior gains the investor feels
he has accumulated on the stock. It also says that a particularly poor return depletes
the investor's prior gains: if Ri;t < Ri, then zi;t goes up, showing that Zi;t falls less
                                      +1

than Si;t, decreasing Si;t Zi;t. The parameter  controls the persistence of the state
variable and hence how long prior gains and losses a ect the investor. If   1; a prior
loss, say, will increase the investor's sensitivity to further losses for many subsequent
periods.
    Implicit in equation (8) is an assumption that the evolution of zi;t is una ected
by any actions the investor might take, such as buying or selling shares of the stock.
In many cases, this is reasonable: if the investor sells some shares for consumption
purposes, it is plausible that any prior gains on the stock are reduced in proportion
to the amount sold { in other words, that zi;t remains constant. More extreme trans-
actions, such as selling one's entire holdings of the stock, might plausibly a ect the
                                              12
way zi;t evolves. In assuming that they do not, we are making a strong assumption,
but one that is very useful in keeping our analysis tractable.                10


   The parameter Ri is not a free parameter, but is determined endogeneously by
imposing the requirement that in equilibrium, the median value of zi;t be equal to
one. The idea behind this is that half the time, the investor should feel as though he
has prior gains, and the rest of the time as though he has prior losses. It turns out
that Ri is typically of similar magnitude to the average stock return.
B. Portfolio Accounting

   The second form of narrow framing we consider is portfolio accounting, where
investors are loss averse only over portfolio uctuations. In particular, they choose
consumption Ct and an allocation Si;t to stock i to maximize
                           1     "                                                 #
                           X              Ct1
                       E          
                                   1 + b C t  v(Xt ; St ; zt) :                         (9)
                                      t                        t+1
                                                     0                  +1
                           t=0

Here, Xt is the gain or loss onP the investor's overall portfolio of risky assets between
           +1

time t and time t + 1, St = ni Si;t is the value of those holdings at time t, and
                                                =1
zt is a variable that measures prior gains and losses on the portfolio as a fraction of
St . Once again, we interpret v as a non-consumption source of utility, which in this
case is experienced over changes in overall portfolio value and not over changes in
individual stock value.
     Portfolio gains and losses are measured as
                                    Xt = St Rt  +1   St Rf;t ;
                                                          +1                            (10)
where Rt is the gross return on the portfolio. When zt = 1, v is de ned as
           +1

                                            (
                                              Xt           Xt  0
                         v (Xt ; St ; 1) =           for  +1
                                                                       ; +1
                                                                                        (11)
                                 +1
                                              Xt          Xt < 0
                                                              +1         +1


with  > 1. For zt < 1,
                      (
                        St Rt       St Rf;t                              Rt  zt Rf;t
  v (Xt ; St ; zt ) =            +1
                                                                   for                ; (12)
                                                                                       +1
      +1
                        St (zt Rf;t Rf;t ) + St (Rt     zt Rf;t ) +1    Rt < zt Rf;t  +1

  10 An alternative way of interpreting this implicit assumption in equation (8) is that it represents
a form of bounded rationality: when making his investment decisions, the investor is simply unable
to gure out the e ect of his actions on the future evolution of the state variable.



                                                         13
and for zt > 1,
                                            (
                                                Xt+1                 Xt+1  0
                    v (Xt+1 ; St ; zt ) =                    for              ;     (13)
                                                (zt )Xt+1           Xt+1 < 0
with
                                 (zt ) =  + k(zt 1);                              (14)
and k > 0.   Finally, the dynamics of zt are given by
                                              !
                                          R
                           zt+1 =  zt          + (1 ) (1):                        (15)
                                         Rt+1
    In summary, the functional forms are identical to what they were in the case of
individual stock accounting. The only di erence is that in equation (2), the investor
experiences loss aversion over changes in the value of each stock that he owns, while
in equation (9), he is loss averse only over overall portfolio uctuations.

                          II. Equilibrium Prices


    We now derive the conditions that govern equilibrium prices in two di erent
economies. The rst economy is populated by investors who do individual stock
accounting and have the preferences laid out in equations (2) through (8). Investors
in the second economy do portfolio accounting, and have the preferences in equations
(9) through (15). In both cases, there are a continuum of investors, with a total
\mass" of one.
    In each economy, we want to compute the price Pi;t of stock i, say, which we model
as a claim to a stream of perishable output given by the dividend sequence fDi;tg,
where                                            !
                                         Di;t
                                    log D = gi + i "i;t
                                                +1
                                                                   +1                (16)
                                             i;t
with "t = (" ;t; : : : ; "n;t)  i.i.d. N (0; ), and where ij = (!ij ) with !ii = 1.
             1

    Aggregate consumption evolves according to
                                                 !
                                       C t+1
                                 log    Ct
                                                     = gc + ct+1   ;              (17)
where t  N (0; 1); i.i.d. over time, and
                                                     (
                           corr(t; "i;t ) = !0 ci for tt ==6 tt0 :
                                            0                                       (18)
                                                     14
    We do not impose the Lucas (1978) restriction that aggregate consumption equal
the aggregate dividend. The advantage of this is that it allows the volatility of con-
sumption growth and of dividend growth to be very di erent in our model, as they are
in the data. Given that aggregate consumption di ers from the aggregate dividend,
we ll the gap by assuming that each agent also receives a stream of non nancial
income fYtg { labor income, say. We assume thatPn
                                                   fYtg and fDi;tgi ;:::;n form a joint
                                                                                    =1

Markov process whose distribution gives C t  i Di;t + Yt the distribution in equa-
                                                          =1

tion (17). For simplicity, we assume that agents are not loss averse over labor income
  uctuations, although this can be relaxed without a ecting the main features of our
results.
A. Equilibrium Prices under Individual Stock Accounting

    Consider rst an economy where investors have the preferences given in equations
(2) through (8). Our assumptions so far allow us to construct a Markov equilibrium
in which the risk-free rate is constant and the state variable zi;t determines the dis-
tribution of returns on stock i. Speci cally, we assume that the price-dividend ratio
of stock i is a function of the state variable zi;t,
                                fi;t  Pi;t =Di;t = fi (zi;t );                   (19)
and then look for an equilibrium satisfying this assumption. Under this one-factor
assumption, the distribution of the stock return Ri;t is determined by zi;t and the
                                                                +1

function fi() as follows:
                R
                i;t+1  = Pi;t + Di;t = 1 + Pi;t =Di;t Di;t
                               +1

                                   Pi;t
                                         +1                +1

                                                      Pi;t =Di;t
                                                                     +1

                                                                          Di;t
                                                                               +1




                        =   1 + fi(zi;t+1 ) Di;t+1   = 1 +ff(iz(zi;t)+1 ) eg + "     +1 :        (20)
                               fi (zi;t )
                                                                           i    i   i;t

                                             Di;t           i i;t

    Intuitively, the value of stock i can change because of news about dividends "i;t ,            +1

or because its price-dividend ratio fi;t changes. Changes in this ratio are driven by
changes in zi;t, which tracks the past performance of the stock. Recent gains (losses)
on the stock make the investor perceive the stock as less (more) risky, changing its
price-dividend ratio.
    In equilibrium, and under rational expectations about stock returns and aggregate
consumption levels, the agents in our economy must nd it optimal to hold the market
supply of zero units of the risk-free asset and one unit of each stock at all times, and
to consume their labor income and the dividend on each stock every period. The               11


 11 We need to impose rational expectations about aggregate consumption because the agent's

                                              15
proposition below characterizes the equilibrium.                                       12


PROPOSITION 1: For the preferences in equations (2) through (8), necessary and
suÆcient conditions for a one-factor Markov equilibrium are
                                                                                      2 c2 =2
                                                     Rf      =     1
                                                                        e   gc
                                                                                                 ;                                            (21)
and
                                                                        "                                                                #
                1 =          egi     gc + 12     2 c2 (1    2)
                                                             !ci
                                                                   Et
                                                                            1 + fi(zi;t ) e  !      +1     (               c )"i;t+1
                                                                                fi (zi;t )
                                                                                                                 i     ci



                                         "
                             +b Et          vb
                                                    1 + fi (zi;t    +1      ) eg  " +1 ; z !# ;
                                                                                     i+
                                                                                                                                              (22)
                                                       fi (zi;t )
                                                                                          i   i;t
                                  0                                                                        i;t


where for zi;t  1,
                        (
                            Ri;t+1 Rf;t                                                                                Ri;t+1  zi;t Rf;t
 vb(Ri;t+1 ; zi;t ) =                                                                                           for                       ;   (23)
                            (zi;t Rf;t Rf;t ) + (Ri;t+1                              zi;t Rf;t )                      Ri;t+1 < zi;t Rf;t
and for zi;t > 1,
                                          (
                                                  Ri;t+1 Rf;t                                                   Ri;t+1  Rf;t
                vb(Ri;t+1 ; zi;t ) =                                                                 for                      :               (24)
                                                  (zi;t )(Ri;t+1                Rf;t )                         Ri;t+1 < Rf;t

    We prove this formally in the Appendix. At a less formal level, equation (22)
follows directly from the agent's Euler equation for optimality at equilibrium, derived
using standard perturbation arguments,
                                2                       ! 3
                                                   C t+1 5
                  1=        Et 4Ri;t+1
                                                      Ct
                                                                        + b Et [vb(Ri;t
                                                                                 0                         +1    ; zi;t )] ;      8i.         (25)

   The rst term is the standard one that obtains in an economy where investors
have power utility over consumption. However, there is now an additional term.
Consuming less today and investing the proceeds in stock i exposes the investor to
the risk of greater losses on that stock. Just how painful this might be, is determined
by the state variable zi;t .
B. Equilibrium Prices under Portfolio Accounting
utility includes aggregate consumption as a scaling term.
  12 Throughout the paper, we assume log  gc + gi + 1 ( 2 c2                                               2 !ci c i + i2 ) < 0 so that the
                                                          2
agent's consumption-portfolio decision is well behaved at t = 1.


                                                                    16
    We now compute the price Pi;t of stock i in a second economy where investors
have the preferences described in equations (9) through (15).
    In the case of portfolio accounting, we need to price the portfolio of all stocks
in the economy before we can price any one stock. This portfolio is a claim to the
aggregate dividend, which follows the process
                                        
                                            Dt+1 
                                  log        Dt
                                                   = gp + p"t+1                              (26)
with "t  N (0; 1); i.i.d. over time, and
       +1

                                                    (
                             corr(t ; "t ) =
                                        0              for tt =6= tt0
                                                         !cp
                                                         0                        (27)
                                              (
                         corr("i;t; "t ) = !0 ip for tt =6= tt0 :
                                        0                                         (28)
    The dividend processes for stocks 1 through n in equation (16) will not in general
\add up" to the aggregate dividend process in equation (26). Without additional
structure, we cannot think of the n stocks as a complete list of all stocks in the
portfolio. We therefore imagine that there are some other securities in the economy
whose dividends are distributed in such a way that the total dividend does add up to
the aggregate dividend in equation (26). For the purpose of choosing parameters, it
is helpful to have a setup where the dividends of the n original stocks alone do add
up, and we present this special case in Section III.
    Our assumptions allow us to construct a Markov equilibrium in which the risk-free
rate is constant and the portfolio-level state variable zt determines the distribution
of returns on all stocks. Speci cally, we assume that stock i's price-dividend ratio is
a function of zt ,
                                 fi;t  Pi;t =Di;t = fi (zt );                    (29)
and then look for an equilibrium satisfying this assumption. Given this one-factor
assumption, the distribution of the stock return Ri;t is determined by zt and the
                                                                   +1

function fi() as follows:
                Ri;t+1  = Pi;t + Di;t = 1 + Pi;t =Di;t Di;t
                                  +1

                                     Pi;t
                                               +1               +1

                                                           Pi;t =Di;t
                                                                         +1       +1

                                                                               Di;t
                         =    1 + fi(zt+1 ) Di;t+1       = 1 +ff(iz(z)t+1 ) eg + "    +1 :   (30)
                                 fi (zt )
                                                                              i   i i;t

                                             Di;t                i t

    As in the rst economy, the price of stock i can change because of dividend news
"i;t or because its price-dividend ratio fi;t changes. The key di erence is that changes
  +1



                                                    17
in this ratio are not driven by a stock-level state variable zi;t but by the portfolio-
level state variable zt , which tracks prior gains and losses on the overall portfolio.
Recent gains (losses) on the portfolio make the investor perceive the entire portfolio
as less (more) risky, changing the price-dividend ratio of every stock in the portfolio
simultaneously.
    In equilibrium, and under rational expectations about stock returns and aggregate
consumption levels, the agents in our economy must nd it optimal to hold the market
supply of zero units of the risk-free asset and one unit of each stock at all times, and
to consume their labor income and the aggregate dividend stream every period. The
proposition below characterizes the equilibrium.
PROPOSITION 2: For the preferences in equations (9) through (15), necessary and
suÆcient conditions for a one-factor Markov equilibrium are
                                                                                    2 c2 =2
                                                    Rf        =     1
                                                                         e   gc
                                                                                               ;                                                   (31)
and
                                                                                                     "                                                     #
1 =    eg      gc + 21 2 c2 (1    2 )+ 1 i2 (1
                                   !cp   2
                                                        2)
                                                       !ip       c i (!ci !cp !ip )
                                                                                               Et
                                                                                                          1 + fi(zt ) e  !
                                                                                                                        +1     (            c !cp )"t+1
                                                                                                             fi (zt )
           i                                                                                                                       i   ip



                   "                                                                                          !#
       +b Et          ve
                            1 + fi(zt ) eg
                                         +1          i+ i !ip "t+1 + 21 i2 (1 !ip
                                                                                 2)
                                                                                               ; Rt+1 ; zt          ;                               (32)
           0
                               fi (zt )
where for zt     1,
                                   (
                                        Ri;t+1 Rf;t                                                                          Rt+1  zt Rf;t
   ve(Ri;t+1 ; Rt+1 ; zt ) =                                                                                       for                      ;
                                        (zt Rf;t Rf;t ) + (Ri;t+1                                 zt Rf;t )                 Rt+1 < zt Rf;t
                                                                                                                                                   (33)
and for zt > 1,
                                                   (
                                                        Ri;t+1 Rf;t              R  Rf;t
               ve(Ri;t+1 ; Rt+1 ; zt ) =                                     for t+1         :                                                     (34)
                                                        (zt )(Ri;t+1 Rf;t )     Rt+1 < Rf;t
The gross return Rt+1 on the overall portfolio is given by

                                          Rt+1 =
                                                              1 + f (zt ) eg +1        p+ p "t+1
                                                                                                          ;                                        (35)
                                                                 f (zt )
where f () satis es
                                                                             "                                                     #
                 1 =         e    gp   gc + 21    2 c2 (1     2)
                                                               !cp
                                                                     Et
                                                                                 1 + f (zt ) e 
                                                                                               +1         (       !cp c )"t+1
                                                                                    f (zt )
                                                                                                              p



                                          "                                                  !#
                             +b Et           vb
                                                     1 + f (zt ) eg  +1           p+p "t+1
                                                                                                   ; zt       ;                                    (36)
                                   0
                                                        f (zt )
                                                                     18
and where vb is de ned in Proposition 1. Moreover, f () and fi () must be self-
consistent:
                                             X Di;t
                                 f (zt ) =                 fi (zt ):                                 (37)
                                              i    Dt
    We prove this formally in the Appendix. At a less formal level, equation (32)
follows from the agent's Euler equation for optimality,
                     2                 ! 3
                               C t+1
            1=   Et 4Ri;t+1
                                Ct
                                         5   + b Et [ve(Ri;t
                                                  0                    +1   ; Rt+1 ; zt )] ;   8i.   (38)
    The rst term is standard. The second term re ects the fact that consuming less
today and investing the proceeds in stock i exposes the investor to the risk of greater
losses on that stock. How painful this is, is now determined by the portfolio-level
state variable zt .
    Note that there is now an extra step in computing the price-dividend ratio of an
individual stock. Under portfolio accounting, the price behavior of individual stocks
depends on the behavior of the overall portfolio. This means that we rst need to
calculate the equilibrium portfolio return Rt in equations (35) and (36), and then
                                                      +1

use this in equation (32) governing the individual stock return.

            III. Numerical Results and Intuition


    In this section, we solve equations (22) and (32) for the price-dividend ratio of
an individual stock fi () under individual stock accounting and portfolio accounting
respectively, and then use simulated data to study the properties of equilibrium stock
returns in each case.
A. Parameter Values

    Table I summarizes our choice of parameters. We divide the table into two panels,
to separate the two types of parameters: those that determine the distributions of
consumption and dividend growth, and those that determine investor preferences.
    For the mean gc and standard deviation c of log consumption growth, we follow
Ceccheti, Lam, and Mark (1990) who obtain gc = 1:84% and c = 3:79% from a time
series of annual data from 1889 to 1985.
    In principle, specifying parameters for individual stock and aggregate dividend
growth is a daunting task. Equations (16) and (26) show that we need gi, i , !ci, and
                                              19
!ip   for each stock, !ij 2for each pair of stocks, and gp, p, and !cp for the aggregate
portfolio, a total of n + n + 3 parameters. Fortunately, it turns out that with
                                   7


two simplifying assumptions, we can specify the dividend processes with just four
                         2          2



parameters, and yet still convey most of the important economics. Essentially, we
take dividend growth to be identically distributed across all stocks, a restriction that
we relax in Section III.E.
      Our rst assumption is that the mean and standard deviation of log dividend
growth is the same for all stocks:
                                        gi = g; i = ; 8i.                           (39)
Second, we assume a simple factor structure for individual stock dividend growth
innovations:                                            q
                                    "i;t = !p "t + "bi;t 1 !p :            2
                                                                                      (40)
In words, the cash ow shock to stock i has one component due to the aggregate
dividend innovation "t introduced in equation (26), and one idiosyncratic component,
"bi;t  i.i.d. N (0; 1). The relative importance of the two components is controlled
by a new parameter !p. The idiosyncratic component is orthogonal to consumption
growth shocks, aggregate dividend growth shocks, and the idiosyncratic shocks on
other stocks:
                   corr("bi;t; t) = corr("bi;t; "t) = corr("bi;t; "bj;t) = 0; 8i; j: (41)
This immediately implies
                                         !ci = !p!cp; 8i,                             (42)
                                         !ij = !p ; 8i; j;
                                                        2
                                                                                      (43)
                                        !ip = !p; 8i:                                 (44)
   Another attractive feature of this simple factor structure is that in the limit, as we
add more and more stocks, the growth of their total dividend is also i.i.d lognormal:           13


                             Pn
                                   Di;t+1                       1 2      !p2 )+!p "t+1
                         n!1
                             lim
                              Pi=1
                                n
                                              Di;t
                                                     ! eg   +   2  (1                    :   (45)
                                        i=1
  13 For an economy with a nite horizon from t = T to t = T; this limiting behavior is based
on an argument similar to the law of large numbers. Anderson (1991) and Green (1989) provide
technical details. Our stationary economy can then be thought of as the limit as the time horizon
goes to in nity.



                                                      20
    This means that we can think of the n stocks as being an exhaustive list of all
securities,
Pn
            with their total dividend equaling the aggregate dividend in (26), Dt =
  i=1Di;t . Comparing equation (45) with equation (26), we obtain                 14



                                          1
                               gp = g +  (1 !p );      2       2
                                                                                (46)
                                          2
                               p = !p:                                        (47)
    Equations (39), (42) through (44), and (46) through (47) show that the entire
structure of dividend growth can be determined from gp, p, , and !cp alone. We
choose these four quantities as the basis variables rather than any other four because
they can be estimated in a relatively straightforward manner. First, we estimate
the mean and standard deviation of aggregate dividend growth using NYSE data
from 1925 to 1995 from CRSP, which gives gp = 0:015 and p = 0:12. The correla-
tion between shocks to consumption growth and dividend growth, !cp, we take from
Campbell (2000), who estimates it in the neighbourhood of 0.15.
    We set the volatility  of individual stock dividend growth to 0:25. A direct
calculation of the value-weighted average volatility of real dividend growth for rms
in the COMPUSTAT database suggests that this is a reasonable benchmark level.                         15


Further con rmation comes from Vuolteenaho (1999), who estimates the cash ow
news volatility of an individual stock, equal-weighted across stocks, to be 32 percent.
Since smaller rms have more volatile cash ows, 25 percent may be a better estimate
of value-weighted cash ow volatility.
    Panel A in Table I shows what these values imply for the remaining parameters
governing the dividend processes. The preference parameters are summarized in
                                          16


Panel B of the table. We choose the curvature of utility over consumption and the
time discount factor  so as to produce a sensibly low value for the risk-free rate.
Given the values of gc and c , equation (21) shows that = 1:0 and  = 0:98 set the
risk-free interest rate to Rf 1 = 3:86%.
    The value of  determines how keenly losses are felt relative to gains in the case
where the investor has no prior gains or losses. We take  = 2:25, the value Tversky
  14 The assumptions in this section also allow us to satisfy the self-consistency condition in Propo-
sition 2. Under our assumptions, if f () solves equation (36), then it also solves equation (32) for all
i: Therefore fi () = f (); 8i; and so the self-consistency condition is satis ed.
   15 More precisely, we take all stocks in the annual COMPUSTAT database for which at least 11
consecutive years of dividend data are recorded, compute real dividend growth volatility for each,
and then calculate the average volatility, weighted by rm size.
   16 Note that while the mean log dividend growth gi is negative, mean simple dividend growth
equals exp( 0:0091 + 0:25
                              2
                            2 ) 1 = 2:24%, a positive number.

                                                   21
and Kahneman (1992) estimate by o ering subjects isolated gambles in experimental
settings.
    The parameter k determines how much more painful losses are when they come
on the heels of other losses. We choose k = 3. To interpret this, suppose that the
state variable zi;t is initially equal to one, and that stock i then experiences a sharp
fall of 10 percent. From equation (8) with   1, this means that zi;t goes up by
about 0.1, to 1.1. From equation (7), any additional losses will now be penalized at
2:25 + 3(0:1) = 2:55, a slightly more severe penalty.
    The parameter b determines the relative importance of the loss aversion term
                     0

in the investor's preferences. We set b = 0:45. One way to think about b is to
                                                           0                                                              0

compare the disutility of losing a dollar on a stock investment with the disutility of
having to consume a dollar less. When computed at equilibrium, the ratio of these
two quantities equals b . Our parameter choices therefore make the psychological
                             0

disutility of losing the $1 roughly equal in magnitude to the consumption disutility.
    Finally,  arises in the de nition of the state variable dynamics. It controls the
persistence of the state variable zi;t , which in turn controls the autocorrelation of
price-dividend ratios. We nd that  = 0:9 brings this autocorrelation close to its
empirical value.
B. Methodology

   For the case of individual stock accounting, we use an iterative technique to solve
equation (22) for the price dividend ratio fi() of an individual stock. The only dif-
 culty is that the state variable zi;t is endogenous: it tracks prior gains and losses
which depend on past returns, themselves endogenous. To deal with this, we use
the following procedure. We guess a solution to equation (22), fi say, and then                                 (0)


construct a function zi;t = hi (zi;t ; "i;t ) that solves
                             +1
                                           (0)
                                                           +1



                            Ri;t =
                                     1 + fi(zi;t ) eg  " +1           +1
                                                                                  (48)
                                                                                  i+

                                         fi (zi;t )
                                                                                       i i;t
                                          +1



and                                                 !
                                             R
                         zi;t =  zi;t                + (1 ) (1)                 (49)
                                     +1
                                          R                    i;t+1

simultaneously for this particular fi =                        fi(0) .      Given hi , we get a new candidate
                                                                                            (0)


solution fi through the recursion
          (1)


                                                             2                                                        3
            1 =    eg   i       gc + 12 2 c2 (1    2)
                                                    !ci
                                                          Et 4
                                                                 1 + fi j (zi;t ) e 
                                                                            ( )
                                                                                       +1      (   i   !ci c )"i;t+1 5
                                                                   fi j (zi;t )
                                                                         ( +1)




                                                               22
                                  2 0                                                          13
                          +b0 Et 4vb @
                                          1 + fi j (zi;t ) eg
                                                  ( )
                                                              +1        i+   i "i;t +1 ; zi;t A5 :             (50)
                                            fi j (zi;t )
                                              ( +1)




     With fi in hand, we calculate a new hi = hi that solves equations (48) and
            (1)                                                                (1)


(49) for fi = fi . This hi gives us a new candidate fi = fi from equation (50).
                    (1)          (1)                                                               (2)


We continue this process until we obtain convergence, fi j ! fi, hij ! hi . Figure 2         ( )         ( )


shows the price-dividend ratio fi() that corresponds to the parameter values in Table
I. Its precise shape will be explained in more detail later.
     With the price-dividend ratio fi() in hand, we use simulated data to see how
returns behave in equilibrium. We simulate dividend shocks f"i;tg for n = 500 stocks
and for 10,000 time periods subject to the speci cation in equation (16) and the
parameters in Table I. We then apply the price-dividend function fi() to this dividend
data to see what realized returns look like. More precisely, we use the zi;t =                                 +1

hi (zi;t ; "i;t ) function described above to generate the series of zi;t implied by the
           +1

dividend shocks and then set the return of stock i between time t and t + 1 equal to
                              Ri;t =
                                       1 + fi(zi;t ) eg  " +1 .   +1        i+
                                                                                    (51)
                                          fi (zi;t )
                                                                                     i i;t
                                        +1



This gives n time series of individual stock returns. We can then compute moments
{ standard deviation, say { for each stock, and then average these moments across
di erent stocks. This provides a sense of how the \typical" stock behaves, and we
report the results of such calculations later in Section III.
     We can also use our n time series of individual stock returns to compute an equal-
weighted average
                                          =1 R ;
                                                 X n
                                    R         p;t+1
                                                          n i=1          i;t+1      (52)
which can be interpreted as the aggregate stock return.                                  17


   For the case of portfolio accounting, we start out by using iteration in equation
(36) to compute the aggregate price-dividend ratio. As before, we iterate between
guesses f = f j and functions zt = h j (zt ; "t ) that solve
                  ( )
                                             +1
                                                        ( )
                                                                        +1



                            Rt =
                                   1 + f (zt ) eg  " +1       +1            p+
                                                                                (53)
                                       f (zt )
                                                                                  p t
                                        +1



and                                           !
                                        R
                          zt =  zt             + (1 ) (1)                     (54)
                                   +1
                                      R                  t+1
  17 The aggregate return Rp;t+1 di ers from the aggregate return Rt+1 described earlier only in
that it is equal-weighted rather than value-weighted.

                                                          23
simultaneously for f = f j . Once this process converges with f j ! f and h j ! h,
                            ( )                                             ( )          ( )


we take the resulting functions f () and zt = h(zt ; "t ) and iterate in equation (32)
                                                +1                    +1

over guesses fi j () for stock i's price-dividend ratio, converging eventually to the
                 ( )


solution fi(). Figure 2 shows the price-dividend ratio fi() that we obtain for the
               18


parameter values in Table I. We display it on the same graph as the price-dividend
ratio obtained earlier in the individual stock accounting case, but it is important to
note that the two curves are plotted against di erent state variables: against zi;t for
individual stock accounting, and against zt for portfolio accounting.
    Simulation then illustrates the behavior of individual stock returns. We again
generate dividend shocks f"i;tg for n = 500 stocks and for the portfolio, f"tg; over
10,000 time periods. The function zt = h(zt ; "t ) generates the time series for the
                                           +1             +1

aggregate state variable zt implied by these f"tg. The time series of returns for stock
i is then given by
                             Ri;t =
                                      1 + fi(zt ) eg  " +1 ,
                                                     +1    i+
                                                                                   (55)
                                         fi (zt )
                                                                  i   i;t
                                   +1


while the aggregate return is measured by
                                         =1 R .
                                               X n
                                  R     p;t+1
                                                n i=1     i;t+1                    (56)

C. Equilibrium Returns under Individual Stock Accounting

    Table II summarizes the properties of individual and aggregate stock returns in
simulated data from three economies: one in which investors use individual stock
accounting, another in which they use portfolio accounting, and for comparison, a
third economy in which investors experience no loss aversion at all. Speci cally, in
this third economy, investors have the preferences in equation (2) but with b = 0; in   0

other words, they have power utility over consumption with = 1 and  = 0:98.
    Panel A in Table II reports time series properties of individual stock returns;
Panel B describes the time series properties of aggregate returns; nally, Panel C
summarizes the cross-sectional patterns in average returns. As described in Section
III.B, the time series results for individual stocks come from computing the relevant
moment for each stock in the simulated sample and then averaging across stocks. All
values are expressed in annual terms. In this section, as well as in Sections III.D
and III.E, we lay out the results and explain the intuition behind them. Section IV
discusses the broader implications of our ndings.
  18 The way f () enters equation (32) is through the portfolio return Rt+1 in equations (33) and
(34). Note that Rt+1 depends on f () as shown in equation (35).

                                                24
    As we present the results, it may be helpful to keep in mind the main empirical
  ndings that have been documented. In the time series, the returns of a typical
individual stock have a high mean, are excessively volatile, and are slightly predictable
using lagged variables. The time series of aggregate stock returns displays the same
properties. In the cross-section, there is a substantial value premium, in that stocks
with low ratios of price to fundamentals have higher average returns. The well-      19


known diÆculties that the \No Loss Aversion" model faces in explaining these facts
are clearly illustrated in Table II: the equity premium is tiny, there is no excess
volatility to speak of, no time series predictability, and no value premium in the
cross-section.
    In our rst set of results, we study an economy in which investors do individual
stock accounting. We look rst at the time series implications. The typical individual
stock has a high average excess return, E (R) Rf = 6:7%. It is volatile, and in
particular, excessively volatile: its standard deviation, R = 40:6%; is higher than
the standard deviation of underlying dividend growth,  = 25%. Its returns are also
slightly predictable: a regression of four-year cumulative log returns on the lagged
dividend yield,
                                                                  Di;t
                     log(Ri;t +1   Ri;t+2 Ri;t+3 Ri;t+4 ) =   +   Pi;t
                                                                       + vi;t+4 ;
produces an R of 4.1%.
                 2


    The last variable in Panel A, !R ; measures the average contemporaneous correla-
tion of individual stocks; we calculate it to be 0.23 in a way that we explain shortly.
    The next panel shows that the aggregate stock market also has a high excess
average return, E (RM ) Rf = 6:7%, and is excessively volatile, with a standard
deviation of M = 19% that exceeds the 12 percent standard deviation of aggregate
dividend growth. Aggregate stock returns are also slightly predictable: a regression
of four-year cumulative log aggregate returns on the lagged aggregate dividend yield
gives an R of 5.9 percent.
            2                   20


    The market standard deviation M helps us measure the average correlation !R
  19 Le Roy and Porter (1981) and Shiller (1981) nd excess volatility in aggregate stock returns,
while Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Fama and French (1988) show that the dividend yield has
predictive power for future aggregate returns. Vuolteenaho (1999) documents the excess volatility
and time series predictability of rm level stock returns. The value premium was originally noted
by Basu (1983) and Rosenberg, Reid and Lanstein (1985); Fama and French (1992) provide more
recent evidence.
  20 Note that Table II uses the notation R2 (M ) to distinguish this from the R2 obtained earlier in
the individual stock return regression.

                                                   25
                                                                   2
between stocks that we reported earlier: we compute it as  . This calculation is
                                                                M



exact in the limit as the number of stocks n ! 1, if all stocks have the same standard
                                                                R




deviation and correlation with one another, as they do in our simple economy. This
follows because
                                                                        !
                      R ;t + : : : + Rn;t           R 2
                                                                1
      = lim Var(
     2
          n!1
                      1 +1             +1
                                          ) = limn!1
                                                        + (1 ) ! =  ! .2
                                                                         R R
                                                                               2
                                                                               R R
     M
                              n                        n        n
    Panel C in Table II describes the cross-sectional features of individual stock re-
turns. Our simulated data produces a value premium: a scaled-price variable { in our
case, the price-dividend ratio { has predictive power for the cross-section of average
returns. Each year, we sort stocks into deciles based on this ratio, and measure the
returns of the top and bottom decile portfolios over the next year. The time series
mean of the di erence in returns between the two deciles is a very substantial 17.9
percent.
    Our data also replicates a well-known study of De Bondt and Thaler (1985) which
  nds that long-term prior losing stocks on average outperform long-term prior winning
stocks. Every three years, we sort stocks into deciles based on their three-year prior
return, and measure the average annual returns of the top and bottom deciles over the
next three years. The time series mean of the di erence in average returns between
the two deciles over all non-overlapping periods in our simulated data is 11.1 percent.
    Many of the e ects we obtain under individual stock accounting derive from a
single source, namely a discount rate for individual stocks that changes as a function
of the stock's past performance. If a stock has had good recent performance, the
investor gets utility from this gain, and becomes less concerned about future losses
on the stock because any losses will be cushioned by the prior gains. In e ect, the
investor perceives the stock to be less risky than before and discounts its future
cash ows at a lower rate. Conversely, if one of his stocks performs dismally, he nds
this painful and becomes more sensitive to the possibility of further losses on the
stock. In e ect, he views the stock as riskier than before and raises its discount rate.
    This changing discount rate has many implications. It gives individual stocks some
time series predictability: a lower discount rate pushes up the price-dividend ratio and
leads to lower subsequent returns, which means that the lagged price-dividend ratio
can predict returns. It makes stock returns more volatile than underlying cash ows:
a high cash ow pushes the stock price up, but this prior gain also lowers the discount
rate on the stock, pushing the stock price still higher. It also generates a value
premium in the cross-section: in our economy, a stock with a high price-dividend
ratio (a growth stock) is often one that has done well in the past, accumulating prior
                                            26
gains for the investor who then views it as less risky and requires a lower average
return. A stock with a low price-dividend ratio (a value stock) has often had dismal
prior performance, burning the investor, who now views it as riskier, and requires a
higher average return.
    The high equity premia we obtain under individual stock accounting derive from a
di erent source: since the investor is loss averse over individual stock uctuations, he
dislikes the frequent losses that individual stocks often produce, and charges a high
average return as compensation. Other papers, such as Benartzi and Thaler (1995)
and Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001) have also suggested loss aversion as a way
of understanding a high equity premium. The e ect we obtain here, though, is one
level stronger than in those earlier papers, since the investor is now loss averse over
individual stock uctuations rather than over the less dramatic uctuations in the
diversi ed aggregate market.
    This intuition also explains why the price-dividend function in Figure 2 is down-
ward sloping. A lower value of zi;t means that the investor has accumulated prior
gains on stock i. Since he is now less concerned about future losses on this stock, he
perceives it to be less risky and is therefore willing to pay a higher price for it per
unit of cash ow.
D. Equilibrium Returns under Portfolio Accounting

    Our next set of results shows that the investor's system of mental accounting mat-
ters a great deal for the behavior of asset prices. As we broaden the investor's frame
from individual stock accounting to portfolio accounting, individual stock returns
exhibit quite di erent features in equilibrium.
    Table II shows that under portfolio accounting, the average excess return on a
typical individual stock is 2.2 percent { not insubstantial, but rather lower than under
individual stock accounting. At 29.4 percent, individual stock volatility is also lower
than under individual stock accounting. In particular, excess volatility of returns over
dividend growth is much smaller. Individual stock returns are predictable in the time
series, but only slightly.
    The average excess return on the aggregate market is 2.2 percent. Interestingly,
aggregate returns are roughly as volatile here as they are under individual stock
accounting. Since individual stocks are much less volatile here than under individual
stock accounting, this must mean that stocks are more highly correlated than before,
and indeed, !R = 0:34. Finally, aggregate stock returns are slightly predictable.
    We now turn to the cross-section. One disadvantage of our assumption that stock-
                                          27
speci c parameters { dividend growth mean gi; standard deviation i and correlations
with the overall portfolio !ip and with consumption !ci { are the same for all stocks
is that there is no cross-sectional dispersion in price-dividend ratios in the case of
portfolio accounting. This assumption will be relaxed in Section III.E. For now, the
lack of dispersion means that we cannot check for a value premium in the simulated
data.
    We can, however, still look to see if there is a De Bondt-Thaler premium to prior
losers. As Table II shows, this e ect is no longer present under portfolio accounting.
    The reason the results are di erent under portfolio accounting is that in this case,
changes in discount rates on stocks are driven by uctuations in the value of the
overall portfolio. When the portfolio does well, the investor is less concerned about
losses on any of the stocks that he holds, since the prior portfolio gain will cushion
any such losses. E ectively, he views all stocks as less risky. Discount rates on all
stocks therefore go down simultaneously. Conversely, discount rates on all stocks go
up after a prior portfolio loss.
    This discount rate behavior is the key to many of the portfolio accounting results.
Stock returns are less volatile here than under individual stock accounting. In the
latter case, stocks are highly volatile because good cash ow news is always accom-
panied by a lower discount rate, pushing the price up even more. Under portfolio
accounting, good cash ow news on a particular stock will only coincide with a lower
discount rate on the stock if the portfolio as a whole does well. There is no guarantee
of this, and so volatility is not ampli ed by as much. Since shocks to discount rates
are perfectly correlated across stocks, individual stock returns are highly correlated
with one another. Moreover, the De Bondt-Thaler premium disappears because a
stock's past performance no longer a ects its discount rate, which is now determined
at the portfolio level.
    Finally, while there is a substantial equity premium, it is not as large as under
individual stock accounting. The investor is loss averse over portfolio level uctua-
tions, which are sizeable but not as severe as the swings on individual stocks. The
compensation for risk is therefore more moderate.
    This intuition also clari es why the price-dividend function in Figure 2 is down-
ward sloping. A lower value of zt means that the investor has accumulated prior gains
on his portfolio. Since he is now less concerned about future losses on stock i { or
indeed, on any stock { he perceives stock i to be less risky and is therefore willing to
pay a higher price for it per unit of cash ow. Since he is loss averse only over portfolio
  uctuations and not over individual stock ucuations, he on average perceives stocks
to be less risky, which is why the overall level of the price-dividend function is higher
                                           28
here than under individual stock accounting.
E. Further Cross-sectional Results

   Our analysis so far has assumed that mean log dividend growth rates gi and log
dividend growth volatilities i are equal across stocks. In particular, Table I shows
that we have assumed gi = 0:0091 and i = 0:25, 8i. Note that for the mean simple
dividend growth rate Gi, this implies
                                              !
                                      D
                        Gi       E i;t+1
                                       Di;t
                                                   1 = eg  i+i2 =2
                                                                          1 = 0:0224; 8i
               ln(1 + Gi) =       0:0222; 8i:
We now relax these restrictive parameter choices. This should allow for a more
realistic comparison of the cross-sectional features of the actual data with those of
the simulated data.
    As before, we simulate dividend data for 500 di erent stocks over 10; 000 time
periods. This time, however, we draw Gi and i for each stock from the following
distributions, independently across di erent stocks:
                              ln(1 + Gi)  N (0:0222; g )            2


                                        i  N (0:25; S );     2




where g = 0:01 and S = 0:05. In other words, we allow for dispersion in the mean
                                     21


and volatility of dividend growth across di erent stocks. We use the dispersion in
dividend growth volatilities estimated from COMPUSTAT data as a guide to choosing
S ; g is harder to estimate directly, but we nd that given our other parameter values,
an g of 0:01 leads to a realistic cross-sectional dispersion in price-dividend ratios.
     Table III repeats the cross-sectional calculations shown in the bottom panel of
Table II for our new simulated data. We look rst at the results for individual
                                             22


stock accounting.
     Under individual stock accounting, the value premium and the De Bondt-Thaler
premium to prior losers remain as strong as in Table II. The bulk of the value premium
here is due to changing discount rates on individual stocks, exactly as described
  21 We implement any particular draw (Gbi ; bi ) by setting i = bi and gi = 0:0091 + ln(1 + Gbi )
0:0222 + 21 (0:252 bi2 ), which immediately implies Gi = G  bi .
  22 In order to avoid computing the price-dividend function fi () and transition function hi () for
all 500 draws of Gi and i ; we compute them for a few (Gi ; i ) pairs and then use interpolation to
approximate fi and hi for other values of Gi and i .

                                                  29
earlier. Now that we have allowed for cross-sectional dispersion in the volatility of
dividend growth, there is an additional mechanism contributing to the value premium.
A rm with more volatile cash ow growth has more volatile returns, which scares
the loss averse investor into charging a higher risk premium. Since the investor is
applying a high discount rate to future cash ows, the rm will have a low DP ratio,
thus generating a cross-sectional link between DP ratios and average returns.           23


    The value premium in Table III is lower than the premium in Table II. The reason
for this is the following. In the Table II simulations, a stock only has a low DP ratio if
investors decide to assign it a high discount rate. Portfolios of low DP stocks therefore
earn high returns on average. In the more realistic simulations we do in Table III,
a low DP ratio can be a sign of a high discount rate, but it can also mean that the
stock has a low gi, in other words, that investors expect low cash ow growth on the
stock. Portfolios of low DP stocks still have high returns, but the e ect is diluted since
the portfolio now includes stocks with low expected growth rates and only average
discount rates.
    Table III also presents results for the portfolio accounting case. There is now
                                                                              24


dispersion in price-dividend ratios, which means that we can examine whether price-
dividend ratios have any predictive power in the cross-section. They do not; in other
words, there is no value premium. The attempt to replicate De Bondt and Thaler's
(1985) ndings is also a failure, as it was in Table II.
    Given the ability of individual stock accounting to generate a value premium, it is
natural to ask whether we are also able to replicate the nding of Fama and French
(1993), namely that the value premium can be captured by a multifactor model that
includes as a factor a portfolio formed by ranking stocks on their scaled-price ratios
{ the so-called \HML" portfolio.
    To study this, we simplify the cash ow structure by once again equating the mean
and volatility of dividend growth across all stocks, but also enrich it by allowing rm
level cash ows to be driven not just by one factor, but by many factors. These
additional factors can be thought of as industry shocks. Suppose that each of the
n stocks falls into one of a small number of industry sectors, labelled s = 1; : : : ; S .
  23 Our claim that the bulk of the value premium is due to changing discount rates is based on
a comparison of the results in Table III to those for an economy in which there is dispersion only
in the mean dividend growth rate across rms and not in the volatility of dividend growth. These
results are not shown here but are available from the authors on request.
  24 Now that we have allowed for dispersion in gi and i ; we cannot be certain that the self-
consistency condition in Proposition 2 is satis ed. The portfolio accounting results in Table III
should therefore be viewed as approximate.



                                               30
Suppose that the cash ow shock to stock i now has the structure
                                                       q
                    "i;t = !p"t + !s"s;t + "bi;t 1 !p !s :
                       +1       +1         +1           +1
                                                              2     2
                                                                                      (57)
In addition to the market-wide shock "t and the idiosyncratic shock "bi;t , there
                                           +1                                   +1

is sector-level cash ow shock "s;t , where s is the sector to which stock i belongs.
                                    +1

All shocks are distributed N (0; 1), i.i.d. over time, and their relative importance is
determined by !p and !s. If we assume for simplicity that these shocks are orthogonal
to one another, the correlation !ij between the cash ow shocks on stock i and j will
satisfy:
                 !ij = !p , for i 6= j and i; j in di erent sectors,
                            2


                 !ij = !p + !s , for i 6= j and i; j in the same sector,
                            2   2


                 !ij = 1, for i = j .
We simulate dividend data on 500 stocks over 10,000 time periods using this corre-
lation structure, and then compute the resulting stock prices in an economy where
investors do individual stock accounting. We take !p = 0:48 as before, and !s = 0:5.
    To investigate Fama and French's (1993) nding, we split our simulated data into
two equal subsamples. In the rst subsample, we create the portfolios whose average
returns we want to explain. Each year, we sort stocks intoP=D   quintiles based on their
price-dividend ratio and record the equal-weighted return Rj;t ; j = 1; : : : ; 5; of each
quintile over the next year; in particular, RP=D ;t 1is the return on the rst quintile,
containing stocks with the lowest price-dividend ratios. Repeating this each period
produces long time series of returns onP=Dthe ve portfolios. Table IV reports each
portfolio's average return over time, Rj . Of course, the dispersion in the average
returns across the ve portfolios is what we refer to as the value premium.
    Table IV shows the results of time series regressions of the excess returns on these
  ve portfolios on the excess market return,
                         P=D
                        Rj;t    Rf = j + j; (Rp;t Rf ) + uj;t :
                                                1                                     (58)
The intercepts are large, replicating Fama and French's (1993) nding that the CAPM
is not able to explain the average returns on portfolios sorted by scaled-price ratios.
    In our second subsample, we construct a counterpart to Fama and French's (1993)
HML factor: each year, we compute the return on the portfolio of stocks with price-
dividend ratios in the lowest quartile that period, minus the return on the portfolio
of stocks with price-dividend ratios in the highest quartile that period. We denote

                                           31
this di erence Ft . 25


    Table IV shows that when we include Ft in the time series regressions,
                     P=D
                    Rj;t     Rf = j + j; (Rp;t Rf ) + j; Ft + uj;t;
                                              1                   2                 (59)
the intercepts fall in magnitude, replicating Fama and French's (1993) result that
loadings on this additional factor can help capture average returns on the ve portfo-
lios. Portfolio 1 (portfolio 5) loads positively (negatively) on Ft because the stocks it
contains share a common industry factor with stocks whose returns enter positively
(negatively) into the construction of Ft: Moreover, portfolio 1 has a higher average
return than portfolio 5. Loadings on Ft therefore line up with average returns.

                                   IV. Discussion


    We draw a number of conclusions from the results in Tables II, III, and IV. First,
both kinds of narrow framing may shed light on certain aspects of the data. Under
both individual stock accounting and portfolio accounting, rm level returns have
a high mean, are excessively volatile, and are predictable in the time series using
lagged variables. In both cases, aggregate stock returns inherit a high mean, excess
volatility and some time series predictability, again in line with the available evidence.
Moreover, the risk-free rate is constant and low.
    Another attractive feature of both narrow framing models is that they are able to
generate excess volatility in the time series while still keeping the correlation of aggre-
gate stock returns and consumption growth { a number that we also report in Table
II { at realistically low levels. Some consumption-based models, such as Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), are also able to generate excess volatility in aggregate returns.
However, the extra volatility is driven by shocks to consumption growth, a mechanism
which inevitably gives consumption growth and stock returns a counterfactually high
correlation.
    Of the two models, individual stock accounting may be the more successful one.
Not only can it reproduce time series facts, but also a number of puzzling cross-
sectional features of the data: the premium to value stocks and to stocks with poor
prior returns, as well as the ability of certain multifactor models to capture the value
premium. Portfolio accounting fails on the cross-sectional facts, and this is not simply
  25 The reason we split the data into two subsamples is so that RP=D and Ft can be computed in
                                                                  j;t
di erent samples, thus ensuring that our regressions do not pick up any spurious correlation.

                                                  32
a consequence of the particular parameter values we have used. The way the cross-
sectional facts emerge under individual stock accounting is through a discount rate
that is a function of a stock's own past performance. This is simply not a feature of
portfolio accounting, whatever the parameters.
    While individual stock accounting can be a useful device for understanding certain
features of asset prices, we emphasize that it is at most a potential ingredient in an
equilibrium model, and not a complete description of the facts. There are a number of
dimensions on which it too, fails. For example, it predicts that the correlation between
returns on di erent stocks is the same as the correlation between their cash ows.
This can be seen in Table II, which reports the typical correlation between stocks
to be !R = 0:23, identical to the correlation between cash ow shocks, !ij = 0:23;
listed in Table I. However, Vuolteenaho (1999) nds that shocks to expected returns
on di erent stocks are actually much more correlated than cash ow shocks, which
immediately implies that stocks are more correlated with each other than are their
underlying cash ows.     26


    Moreover, while individual stock accounting does generate time series predictabil-
ity, it does not generate enough: the R in a time series regression of four-year
                                                  2


cumulative aggregate stock returns on the lagged dividend yield is much smaller than
the empirical value, reported by Fama and French (1988) to be over 20 percent.
    One nal reason why individual stock accounting may only be a partial explanation
of the facts is that it also predicts that more volatile stocks will earn higher average
returns, even though there is as yet little evidence of such an e ect. It is worth 27


noting however, that individual stock accounting may be able to generate excess
volatility in the time series as well as a value premium in the cross-section without
generating a large premium for idiosyncratic risk. The reason is that in our model,
the rst set of e ects are generated by changes in the degree of loss aversion, while the
price of volatility risk is determined by the average level of loss aversion. If investors'
loss aversion changes over time without being too high on average, our model may be
able to replicate the salient features of the data without producing a counterfactually
high premium for volatility risk.
    In summary, while individual stock accounting may o er a simple way of under-
standing a wide range of facts, it cannot be the complete story. A model which
  26 Equivalently, the individual stock accounting model predicts that individual stock returns and
aggregate stock returns will exhibit the same amount of excess volatility, while Vuolteenaho (1999)
 nds there to be much less excess volatility in individual stocks than in the aggregate stock market.
  27 This is not to say that there is no evidence of such an e ect: using a di erent methodology from
earlier studies, Lehmann (1990) does nd some evidence of a residual risk premium.


                                                 33
combines individual stock accounting with broader forms of accounting { portfolio
accounting or even loss aversion over total wealth uctuations { is likely to be bet-
ter. Portfolio accounting introduces a common component in discount rate variation
across stocks and therefore makes stocks move together more than their cash ows
do. For reasons of tractability, we do not attempt an analysis of such a model in this
paper.
A. Other Predictions

    The fact that we study equilibrium returns under both individual stock accounting
and portfolio accounting can also be useful for making additional predictions for
future testing. If individual stock accounting is relatively more prevalent among
individual investors as opposed to institutional investors, we would expect to see
stocks held primarily by individuals { small stocks, for example { exhibit more of the
features associated with individual stock accounting. In particular, by comparing the
\Individual Accounting" and \Portfolio Accounting" columns in Table II, the speci c
prediction is that small stocks should have higher mean returns and more excess
volatility than large stocks, should be more predictable in the time series and less
correlated with each other, and that the value and De Bondt-Thaler premia should
be stronger among small stocks.
    Other predictions arise, if, over time, investors change the way they do their mental
accounting. For example, the increased availability of mutual funds since the early
1980s may have caused a shift away from individual stock accounting and towards
portfolio accounting, since funds automatically prevent investors from worrying about
individual stock uctuations. Our analysis predicts that stocks that were once held
directly but are now increasingly held indirectly through mutual funds should exhibit
speci c changes in pricing behavior. Among other predictions, such stocks should
have higher price-to-fundamentals ratios and exhibit a lower cross-sectional value
premium.
B. Exploiting Investors who Frame Narrowly

    In Section III.A, we introduced a one-factor cash ow structure for stocks so as to
simplify the calibration process as much as possible. If in reality, cash ows did indeed
have a one-factor structure, it would be relatively straightforward for investors who
do not frame narrowly to take advantage of investors who do, thus attentuating their
e ects. For example, they could buy a portfolio of stocks with price-dividend ratios
in the lowest decile and short a portfolio of stocks with price-dividend ratios in the
                                           34
highest decile. This strategy earns the sizeable value premium documented in Tables
II and III, and if implemented with a very large number of stocks, becomes almost
riskless: idiosyncratic risk gets washed away within the portfolio while the long-short
position nets out the market factor. Table V provides some numbers: the column
marked \One-factor" reports the standard deviation of the strategy just described
for various values of n, the total number of stocks. As n increases, the standard
deviation falls, dropping to as low as 9.7 percent for an n of 1000. Coupling this
standard deviation with the kind of value premia reported in Table II produces very
attractive Sharpe ratios.
    The problem with such a strategy in reality is that stock returns are driven not
by one, but by many di erent factors, making it much harder to reduce the strategy's
risk, even with many stocks. To illustrate, the column titled \Multifactor" in Table
V reports the standard deviation of the same long-short strategy, only this time
computed for the more realistic cash ow structure in equation (57). In particular,
this cash ow structure allows industry factors to a ect groups of stocks. Note that
once we recognize these additional factors, the strategy becomes much more risky:
going from 100 to 1000 stocks only reduces risk by about a fth, in contrast to the
almost 50 percent reduction in risk in the \one-factor" case. Intuitively, many value
stocks now belong to the same sector and hence co-move: there may have been bad
news at the sector level, pushing all stocks in the sector down and leading investors to
view them all as more risky, thus giving them low price-dividend ratios and making
them all value stocks. Similarly, many growth stocks now belong to the same sector,
and therefore also co-move. A long value, short growth strategy does not net out these
industry factors, leaving it far from riskless. Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam
(2001) provide a similar discussion of this point in a related model.
    There may be other reasons why exploiting investors who engage in narrow framing
may be harder in reality than it appears in theory. It is likely to take many years
of data before arbitrageurs can be statistically con dent of the existence of a value
premium, and even more time before they can convince themselves that it is not
simply compensation for a lurking risk factor. Put simply, the e ects of narrow
framing may persist for a very long time before they can be detected and exploited.            28




C. Heterogeneity, Aggregation and Trading

   Even investors who do frame narrowly are likely to be heterogeneous in a number
  28 After all, the value premium in our simulated data, while certainly strong, has been computed
using 10,000 years of data. Arbitrageurs looking for exploitable anomalies have much less data at
their disposal.

                                               35
of ways: in the stocks that they hold or in the time at which they bought a particular
stock. One limitation of our framework is the assumption that investors are com-
pletely homogeneous. This raises the question of whether the intuition of our models
still holds once heterogeneity is recognized.
    A full quantitative analysis of this issue is beyond the scope of this paper, but
there is nonetheless reason to be hopeful that a more general model might deliver
similar results. Consider the case of individual stock accounting. First, it is not at
all clear that loss aversion will \wash out" in the aggregate. All investors holding
a particular stock will nd its uctuations painful and will therefore require a high
average return on the stock.
    Moreover, if a stock goes down in value, all investors holding the stock will have
their prior gains on the stock reduced, increasing their sensitivity to further losses
regardless of when they bought into the stock or at what price. These investors now
want to get rid of the stock: their selling pressure depresses the price, making the
stock a value stock and giving it a higher expected return. Other investors who were
not originally holding the stock can of course attenuate this e ect: since they did not
experience the loss, they do not require such a high rate of return. However, these
other investors will trade cautiously for the same reason that arbitrageurs in general
will trade cautiously: common factors in value stocks makes buying these stocks risky.
The price pressure will therefore be only partially absorbed, and the value premium
will persist.
     Similarly, if a stock rises in value, all investors holding the stock will accumulate
larger prior gains on the stock, lowering their sensitivity to future losses. They will
want to buy more of the stock, exerting a buying pressure which pushes up the price,
making the stock a growth stock and giving it a lower expected return. This time,
investors not already holding the stock can attenuate the e ect by shorting, but a
common factor in growth stocks together with restrictions on shorting by mutual
funds suggest that the e ect may survive.
     Recent evidence on trading behavior may be consistent with the predictions of
this more general way of thinking about pricing e ects. Hvidkjaer (2000) nds strong
selling pressure among stocks with poor prior performance and strong buying pres-
sure among stocks with good prior performance. Moreover, if we think of \narrow
framers" as being individual investors and the arbitrageurs as being mainly institu-
tions, we would expect to see individuals selling to institutions in market troughs and
institutions selling to individuals at market peaks. There is in fact evidence of such
an e ect: Cohen (1999) examines the long-term buying and selling patterns of indi-
viduals and institutions, and nds exactly the pattern we predict, namely individuals
                                           36
selling to institutions in market troughs and vice-versa at market peaks.
    It is interesting to compare our prediction (and Cohen's (1999) and Hvidkjaer's
(2000) results) with the ndings of Odean (1998), who shows that individual investors
are reluctant to sell stocks with short-term prior losses, preferring to sell prior short-
term winner stocks. The di erence between this nding and our prediction may lie
                     29


in the horizon over which investors come to terms with an investment loss. If a stock
has experienced a short-term loss, the investor may not count this as a loss, prefering
to hold on the stock in the hope of breaking even down the line. However, if the stock
experiences a sustained, long-term drop, the investor may eventually decide that the
investment has been a failure; he will accept the loss, view the stock as riskier, and
then be ready to sell it.

                                  V. Conclusion


    A substantial body of experimental evidence suggests that loss aversion { the
tendency to be more sensitive to losses than to gains { and narrow framing { the
tendency to focus on narrowly de ned gains and losses { play an important role in
determining how people evaluate risky gambles. In this paper, we incorporate these
ideas into an asset pricing framework to see if they can shed light on the behavior
of rm-level stock returns. In particular, we consider two economies: one, labelled
\individual stock accounting," in which investors are loss averse over individual stock
  uctuations, and another, labelled \portfolio accounting," in which investors are loss
averse only over portfolio uctuations.
    We nd that both forms of narrow framing can explain certain aspects of the data.
In both cases, the typical individual stock has a high mean, is excessively volatile and
is predictable in the time series. The aggregate stock return inherits these properties
and is also only weakly correlated with consumption growth, while the risk-free rate is
constant and low. Moreover, under individual stock accounting, there is a substantial
value premium in the cross-section, and this premium can to some extent be captured
by the same kinds of multifactor models that have been successful in actual data.
    Our paper suggests that using experimental evidence to re ne the way we model
investor preferences may be a promising avenue for further research. Nonetheless,
there are alternative explanations under development for some of the phenomena dis-
cussed here, ranging from models rmly rooted in the consumption-based paradigm
  29 This is often known as the disposition e ect, and is also discussed by Shefrin and Statman
(1985).

                                              37
to models of learning and models of irrational beliefs. An important topic for fur-
ther study is to clarify the distinct predictions of these various explanations so that
additional testing might tell them apart.




                                          38
                                                          Appendix


   Proof of Proposition 1:                Each agent's optimization problem is
                              1      "                                                                                   #
                              X                   Ct1                                  X
                                                                                       n
              max
            Ct ;fSi;t g
                          E
                            1 + b Ct     t                       0           t+1           v (Xi;t+1 ; Si;t ; zi;t ) ;          (60)
                      t         =0                                                     i=1

subject to the standard budget constraint
                                                                              X
                                                                              n
                          Wt+1 = (Wt                         Ct )Rf +               Si;t (Ri;t+1        Rf );                     (61)
                                                                              i=1

where Wt denotes the agent's pre-consumption wealth at t.
   The Euler equations for the optimization problem are
                                                                2                  ! 3
                                                                              C t+1 5
                                                  1=     Rf Et 4
                                                                              Ct
                                                                                       ;                                          (62)
                          2                                 ! 3
                                                       C t+1 5
              1=      Et 4Ri;t+1
                                                        Ct
                                                                         + b Et [vb(Ri;t
                                                                               0                 +1   ; zi;t )] ;    8i.          (63)
These Euler equations are necessary conditions of optimality for the individual's in-
tertemporal problem. We now show that they are suÆcient conditions, using a tech-
nique developed by DuÆe and Skiadas (1994).
    To simplify notation, let ut(Ct) = t Ct =(1 ) and bt = t b C t . Assume
                                                                         1                                          +1
                                                                                                                         0

that the strategy (C ; fSig) satis es the Euler equations
                                                 h          i
                               u0t (Ct ) = Rf Et u0t (Ct ) ;                  (64)
                                                                                +1       +1

                               h                   i
                u0t (Ct ) = Et Ri;t u0t (Ct ) + bt Et [vb(Ri;t ; zi;t )] :
                                                        +1       +1      +1     (65)                    +1


Consider any alternative strategy (C  + ÆC; fSi + ÆSig) that satis es the budget
constraint                                         X n
                    ÆWt = (ÆWt ÆCt )Rf + ÆSi;t (Ri;t
                              +1                                  Rf ):         (66)               +1
                                                   i                           =1

The increase in expected utility from using the alternative strategy is
                      "1 "                                                                                                   ##
                                                                      ut (Ct ) + bt ÆSi;t vb(Ri;t+1 ; zi;t )
                       X                                                             X
                                                                                     n
                  E              u (C  + ÆC )
                                     t        t              t                                                                    (67)
                          t=0                                                            i=1
                         "1 "                                                                                  ##
                                                                      + bt
                          X 0                                                 X
                                                                              n
                    E     u                     t   (C  )ÆC
                                                         t        t                 ÆSi;t vb(Ri;t+1 ; zi;t ) ;
                                     t=0                                      i=1


                                                                       39
where we have made use of the concavity of ut() and the linearity of the prospect
utility term with respect to Si;t : It is therefore enough to show that  = 0 under
budget constraint (66).
    Multiplying equation (66) by u0t (Ct ) and applying Euler equations (64) and
                                                +1          +1
(65), we have
    "                                                   #                                          h                   i
 Et u0t (Ct )ÆCt + bt ÆSi;t vb(Ri;t+1 ; zi;t )
                       X n
                                                            = u0t(Ct )ÆWt                       Et u0t+1 (Ct+1 )ÆWt+1 :                    (68)
                         i=1

Summing up equation (68) for all t and taking expectations, we have
                           = u (C  )ÆW Tlim
                                   0       0
                                                    !1
                                                    0   E [u0T (CT )ÆWT ] :                        (69)
The budget constraint implies that ÆW = 0. By requiring feasible strategies to use
                                                        0

bounded units of nancial securities, and with a unit of the risk-free security priced
at one, we can show that the limiting term also goes to zero if our model parameters
satisfy log  gc + gi + ( c 2 !cici + i ) < 0; a condition which we already
                               1   2   2                                   2


noted in footnote 12. So  = 0 for any feasible alternative to (C ; fSig).
                               2
                          30


    We have therefore shown that any other budget feasible strategy cannot increase
utility. The Euler equations are therefore necessary and suÆcient conditions of opti-
mality.
    To close the proof, we show that if the risk-free gross interest rate is constant at
Rf given by equation (21) and if the returns on any stock have a one-factor Markov
structure given by equations (8), (19), and (20), with fi() satisfying equation (22)
for all zi;t , then the agent's strategy of consuming his labor income and the dividend
of each stock and holding the total supply of assets at each time t indeed satis es the
Euler equations.
    The choice of risk-free rate in equation (21) allows us to satisfy Euler equation
(62), given equation (17). Given the assumed Markov structure of stock i's returns,
zi;t is determined by zi;t and "i;t . So we have
   +1                                          +1

       2               ! 3            "                                                 #
    Et 4Ri;t
                  C t
                    +1
                           5 = Et       1 + f i ( zi;t  ) e g   "
                                                                 +1  +1 e     gi+  +1             (   c+                )

                                           fi (zi;t )
                                                                                    i i;t                     c   t
            +1
                   Ct
                                              "                                                  #
                                                                           " +1 1 + fi (zi;t )
                               = e Et E [e
                                    g   g  i    c         +1
                                                                j"i;t ]e
                                                                       c       t

                                                                                      fi (zi;t )
                                                                                            +1
                                                                                                   i    i;t
                                                                                                                                   +1


                                                               "                                   #
                               = e  g   g 21 2 2
                                                c+     !2
                                                            Et
                                                            c (1
                                                                 1  +  fi (zi;t )  !  " +1
                                                                           )
                                                                                   e                 :   +1       (                c ) i;t

                                                                      fi (zi;t )
                                           i                          ci                                              i       ci




  30 The proof of this is available upon request.

                                                            40
Applying this, we nd that the strategy of consuming C t and holding the supply of
all securities satis es Euler equation (63) for all i.
    Proof of Proposition 2: Each agent's optimization problem is
                                    1     "                                                               #
                                    X              Ct1
                   max
                  Ct ;fSi;t g   1 + b Ct
                                E             t
                                                                0              t+1
                                                                                      v (Xt+1 ; St ; zt ) ;          (70)
                                    t=0

subject to the standard budget constraint
                                                                        X
                                                                        n
                         Wt+1 = (Wt                  Ct )Rf +                 Si;t (Ri;t+1       Rf );               (71)
                                                                        i=1

where Wt denotes the agent's pre-consumption wealth at t.
   The Euler equations for the optimization problem are
                                                           2                   ! 3
                                                                    C t+1
                                          1=        Rf Et 4
                                                                     Ct
                                                                                 5;                                  (72)
                      2                        ! 3
                                          C t+1 5
             1=   Et 4Ri;t+1
                                              Ct
                                                              + b Et [ve(Ri;t
                                                                    0                  +1   ; Rt+1 ; zt )] ;   8i.   (73)
These Euler equations are necessary conditions of optimality for the individual's in-
tertemporal problem. One can also show that they are suÆcient conditions, using an
identical argument to the one in the proof of Proposition 1. Summing up equation
(73) for all the stocks in the economy, we obtain the Euler equation for the market
portfolio,                  2           ! 3
                                    C
                    1 = Et 4Rt C     t    5 + b Et [vb(Rt ; zt )] :
                                              +1
                                                         +1
                                                                               0(74)           +1
                                                         t

    To close the proof, we show that if the risk-free gross interest rate is constant at
Rf given by equation (31), and if the returns on any stock have a one-factor Markov
structure given by equations (15), (29), and (30), with fi () satisfying equation (32)
for all zi;t, and if aggregate stock returns are given by equation (35) with f () satisfying
equation (36) for all zt ; then the agent's strategy of consuming his labor income and
the dividend of each stock and holding the total supply of assets at each time t indeed
satis es the Euler equations.
    The choice of risk-free rate in equation (31) allows us to satisfy Euler equation
(72), given equation (17). A similar procedure to that used in the proof of Proposition
1 can be used to prove that the strategy of consuming C t and holding the supply of
all securities satis es Euler equation (74) under the conjectured Markov structure of
market returns.
                                                               41
    Turning now to Euler equation (73), note that
                       h              i        1 2   2
                     Et eg  " +1 j"t = eg 2  !  ! " +1 ;
                              i+      i i;t
                                                    +1
                                                                       i+       i
                                                                                    (1    ip
                                                                                               )+    i     ip t




and
                  h                          i
               E e g   +1 eg  " +1 j"t
                     (   c+   c   t    )      i+   i i;t
                                                                   +1


           = eg g 12 2 2 !2 21 2 !2   ! ! ! e  !  ! " +1 :
                i   c+        c (1         cp )+     i
                                                         (1   ip
                                                                   )        c   i(   ci    cp       ip )    (   i   ip   c   cp ) t




By iterated expectations, and using the above two equations and observing that zt                                                     +1

is determined by zt and "t given the conjectured Markov structure of stock returns,
                              +1

we see that Euler equation (73) reduces to equation (32) and is therefore satis ed by
the strategy of consuming C t and holding the supply of all stocks.




                                                              42
                                 REFERENCES
Anderson, Robert, 1991, Nonstandard methods with applications in economics, in
    Werner Hildenbrand and Hugo Sonnenschein, eds.: Handbook of Mathematical
    Economics (North Holland, Amsterdam).
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos, 2001, Prospect theory and asset
    prices, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1-53.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor
    sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.
Basu, Sanjoy, 1983, The relationship between earnings yield, market value and return
    for NYSE common stocks: Further evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12,
    129-156.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 1995, Myopic loss aversion and the equity
    premium puzzle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 73-92.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard Thaler, 1999, Risk aversion or myopia? Choices in
    repeated gambles and retirement investments, Management Science 45, 364-381.
Berk, Jonathan, Richard Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth
    options, and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1553-1607.
Brennan, Michael, and Yihong Xia, 2001, Stock price volatility and the equity pre-
    mium, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Campbell, John Y., 2000, Asset prices, consumption and the business cycle, in John
    Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.: Handbook of Macroeconomics (North Hol-
    land, Amsterdam).
Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-
    based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 107, 205-251.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert Shiller, 1988, Stock prices, earnings, and expected
    dividends, Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.
Ceccheti, Stephen, Pok-sang Lam, and Nelson Mark, 1990, Mean reversion in equi-
    librium asset prices, American Economic Review 80, 398-418.
Cohen, Randolph, 1999, Asset allocation decisions of individuals and institutions,
    Working paper, Harvard Business School.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2001, Covariance
    risk, mispricing, and the cross-section of security returns, Journal of Finance,
                                        43
    forthcoming.
De Bondt, Werner, and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?,
    Journal of Finance 40, 793-805.
DuÆe, Darrell, and Costis Skiadas, 1994, Continuous-time security pricing: A utility
    gradient approach, Journal of Mathematical Economics 23, 107-131.
Epstein, Larry, and Stanley Zin, 1990, First-order risk aversion and the equity pre-
    mium puzzle, Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 387-407.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock re-
    turns, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-27.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock re-
    turns, Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
    stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Gneezy, Uri, and Jan Potters, 1997, An experiment on risk taking and evaluation
    periods, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 631-645.
Gomes, Joao, Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang, 2001, Equilibrium cross-section of re-
    turns, Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Green, Edward, 1989, Individual-level randomness in a nonatomic population, Work-
    ing paper, University of Pittsburgh.
Gul, Faruk, 1991, A theory of disappointment aversion, Econometrica 59, 667-686.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy Stein, 1999, A uni ed theory of underreaction, momen-
    tum trading, and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-
    2184.
Hvidkjaer, Soeren, 2000, A trade-based analysis of momentum, Working paper, Cor-
    nell University.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Dan Lovallo, 1993, Timid choices and bold forecasts: A
    cognitive perspective on risk taking, Management Science 39, 17-31.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
    under risk, Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Lehmann, Bruce, 1990, Residual risk revisited, Journal of Econometrics 45, 71-97.
LeRoy, Stephen, and Richard Porter, 1981, The present value relation: Tests based
    on variance bounds, Econometrica 49, 555-577.
Lucas, Robert, 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1419-
                                        44
     1446.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of
     Finance 53, 1775-1798.
Rabin, Matthew, 2000, Risk aversion and expected utility theory: A calibration the-
     orem, Econometrica 68, 1281-1292.
Rabin, Matthew, and Richard Thaler, 2000, Anomalies: Risk aversion, Working pa-
     per, University of Chicago.
Read, Daniel, George Loewenstein, and Matthew Rabin, 1999, Choice bracketing,
     Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19, 171-197.
Redelmeier, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1992, On the framing of multiple prospects,
     Psychological Science 3, 191-193.
Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of
     market ineÆciency, Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9-17.
Segal, Uzi, and Avia Spivak, 1990, First-order versus second-order risk aversion, Jour-
     nal of Economic Theory 51, 111-125.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early and
     ride losers too long: Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 40, 777-790.
Shiller, Robert, 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justi ed by subsequent
     changes in dividends?, American Economic Review 71, 421-436.
Thaler, Richard, 1980, Toward a positive theory of consumer choice, Journal of Eco-
     nomic Behavior and Organization 1, 39-60.
Thaler, Richard, and Eric Johnson, 1990, Gambling with the house money and trying
     to break even: The e ects of prior outcomes on risky choice, Management Science
     36, 643-660.
Thaler, Richard, Amos Tversky, Daniel Kahneman, and Alan Schwarz, 1997, The
     e ect of myopia and loss aversion on risk taking: An experimental test, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 112, 647-661.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1981, The framing of decisions and the psy-
     chology of choice, Science 211, 453-458.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1992, Advances in prospect theory: Cumula-
     tive representation of uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297-323.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 1999, What drives rm level stock returns?, Working paper,
     University of Chicago.

                                          45
                                            Table I
                                        Parameter Values

Panel A lists the parameters that determine the distributions of consumption and
dividend growth. Speci cally, g and  are the mean and standard deviation of log
                                    c           c

consumption growth; g ;  ; ! ; and ! are the mean, standard deviation, correlation
                       i   i   ci          ij

with log consumption growth and correlation with stock j 's log dividend growth of
stock i's log dividend growth, respectively; and g ;  ; ! ; and ! are the mean,
                                                       p   p   cp    ip

standard deviation, correlation with log consumption growth and correlation with
stock i's log dividend growth of log aggregate dividend growth. Panel B lists the
parameters that determine investor preferences: governs the curvature of utility
over consumption,  is the time discount rate,  determines how keenly losses are felt
relative to gains when there are no prior gains and losses, k determines how much
more painful losses are when they come on the heels of other losses, b0 determines
the relative imporance of loss aversion in the investor's preferences and  determines
how long prior gains and losses a ect the investor.




                                           46
  Panel A: Consumption and
     Dividend Parameters
       gc            1.84%
       c            3.79%
       gi           -0.91%, 8i
       i           25.0%, 8i
       !ci           0.072, 8i
       !ij           0.23, 8i; j
       gp            1.5%
       p           12.0%
      ! cp           0.15
      ! ip           0.48, 8i
Panel B: Preference Parameters
                     1.0
                    0.98
                    2.25
        k            3.0
       b0            0.45
                    0.9




              47
                                      Table II
                  Properties of Asset Returns in Simulated Data

We report the properties of asset returns in simulated data from three economies. In
the rst economy, labelled \individual stock accounting," investors are loss averse
over individual stock uctuations; in the second, labelled \portfolio accounting,"
they are loss averse over portfolio uctuations; and in the third, labelled \no loss
aversion," they have power utility over consumption levels. Panel A reports the
properties of the typical individual stock return: its mean in excess of the risk-
free rate, its standard deviation, the R2 in a regression of four-year cumulative
log returns on the lagged dividend yield, and the average contemporaneous return
correlation with other stocks. Panel B reports the risk-free rate and the properties
of the aggregate stock return: its mean in excess of the risk-free rate, its standard
deviation, the R2 in a regression of four-year cumulative log returns on the lagged
dividend yield, and its correlation with consumption growth. Panel C reports the
cross-sectional features of the data. Each year, we sort stocks into deciles based on
their price-dividend ratio, and measure the returns of the top and bottom decile
portfolios over the next year. The value premium is the time series mean of the
di erence in returns between the two deciles. Every three years, we sort stocks
into deciles based on their three year prior return, and measure the average annual
returns of the top and bottom deciles over the next three years. The De Bondt-
Thaler premium is the time series mean of the di erence in average returns between
the two deciles over all non-overlapping periods.




                                     48
                              Individual Stock Portfolio No Loss
                                 Accounting       Accounting Aversion
            Panel A: Properties of Individual Stock Returns
Excess mean E (R) R     f           6.7%            2.2%      0.1%
Standard deviation R              40.6%           29.4%     26.5%
Predictability R 2
                                    4.1%            0.4%      0.0%
Correlation !
            R                       0.23            0.34      0.23
            Panel B: Properties of Aggregate Asset Returns
Aggregate stock return
  Excess mean E (R ) R
                    M       f       6.7%            2.2%      0.1%
  Standard deviation   M          19.0%           17.2%     12.7%
  Predictability R (M )
                   2
                                    5.9%            2.1%      0.0%
  Correlation with                  0.15            0.15      0.15
  consumption growth
Risk-free rate Rf                   3.86%           3.86%     3.86%
                Panel C: Properties of the Cross-section
Value premium                      17.9%               -         -
De Bondt-Thaler premium            11.1%            0.0%      0.0%




                                 49
                                    Table III
             The Cross-section of Average Returns in Simulated Data

We report the cross-sectional properties of average returns in simulated data which
allows for dispersion in both the mean and the standard deviation of rm level div-
idend growth rates. We consider three economies. In the rst economy, labelled
\individual stock accounting," investors are loss averse over individual stock uc-
tuations; in the second, labelled \portfolio accounting," they are loss averse over
portfolio uctuations; in the third, labelled \no loss aversion," they have power util-
ity over consumption levels. Each year, we sort stocks into deciles based on their
price-dividend ratio, and measure the returns of the top and bottom decile portfolios
over the next year. The value premium is the time series mean of the di erence in
returns between the two deciles. Every three years, we sort stocks into deciles based
on their three-year prior return, and measure the average annual returns of the top
and bottom deciles over the next three years. The De Bondt-Thaler premium is the
time series mean of the di erence in average returns between the two deciles over
all non-overlapping periods.


                          Individual Stock Portfolio No Loss
                            Accounting     Accounting Aversion
  Value premium              12.6%          0.0%       0.0%
  De Bondt-Thaler premium      8.2%         0.0%       0.0%




                                      50
                                   Table IV
Time Series Regressions of Returns of Portfolios formed on Price-dividend Ratios
      on the Excess Market Return and on HML-type Portfolio Returns

We split our simulated data into two equal subsamples. Using the rst subsample,
each year, we sort stocks into quintiles based on their price-dividend ratio and record
the equal-weighted return R ; j = 1; : : : ; 5; of each quintile over the next year;
                                        P =D
                                        j;t


j = 1 is the quintile containing stocks with the lowest price-dividend ratios. R is                                    P =D
                                                                                                                        j

the average return of portfolio j over time. Panel A reports the result of time series
regressions of excess portfolio returns on excess market returns,

                         R   P =D
                             j;t
                                         R =  f           j    +     j;  1   (Rp;t       R )+u :
                                                                                          f                 j;t




Using the second subsample, we create a portfolio similar to Fama and French's
(1993) HML factor. Each year, we compute the return on the portfolio of stocks
with price-dividend ratios in the lowest quartile that period, minus the return on
the portfolio of stocks with price-dividend ratios in the highest quartile that period.
We denote this di erence F : Panel B reports the result of time series regressions of
                                    t

excess portfolio returns on excess market returns and F ;                                     t




                  Rj;t
                      P =D
                                   R =
                                    f             j   +       j;1   (Rp;t         R )+
                                                                                     f        j;   2   F +u :
                                                                                                        t         j;t




                                                          51
      Panel A: One-factor Model
j   R
     P =D
     j
            1         j     1
                            j;


1   19.1%        7.3%     1.18
2   12.9%        1.7%     1.09
3    9.4%       -1.2%     1.01
4    6.7%       -3.3%     0.92
5    4.7%       -4.5%     0.81
      Panel B: Multifactor Model
j   R
     P =D
     j
            1         j      1
                            j;        2
                                     j;


1   19.1%        2.2%     1.03      0.47
2   12.9%        0.1%     1.03      0.15
3    9.4%       -0.1%     1.02     -0.05
4    6.7%       -0.1%     0.99     -0.22
5    4.7%       -0.3%     0.94     -0.39




                 52
                                   Table V
                          The Risk of Value Strategies

The table reports the standard deviation, in simulated data, of a strategy which
each year, sorts stocks by price-dividend ratio and buys the bottom decile (value
stocks) and shorts the top decile (growth stocks). The calculation is done for the
case when rm-level cash ows have a one-factor structure and for the case where
they have a multifactor structure which allows for industry shocks. There are n
stocks in total, and in the multifactor case, ve industries.


            Number of stocks n     One-factor      Multifactor
            100                     18.2%           23.2%
            500                     11.4%           19.2%
            1000                     9.7%           17.9%




                                    53
           0.5

           0.4

           0.3

           0.2

           0.1
Utility




            0
                 prior gains (z<1)

          −0.1
                                                                     no prior gains
                                                                     or losses (z=1)
          −0.2

          −0.3
                                                                    prior losses (z>1)
          −0.4

          −0.5


                  −0.25   −0.2   −0.15   −0.1   −0.05       0       0.05   0.1   0.15    0.2   0.25
                                                        Gain/loss




Figure 1. Utility of gains and losses. The utility function is shown for each of three
cases: when the investor has prior gains (dash-dot line), prior losses (dashed line),
or neither prior gains nor prior losses (solid line).




                                                54
                       45




                       40




                       35                                        Portfolio accounting
Price−dividend Ratio




                       30




                       25




                       20




                       15       Individual stock accounting


                       10
                            0      0.5          1             1.5            2          2.5       3
                                                          z (ISA), z (PA)
                                                           i,t         t




Figure 2. Price-dividend ratio of stock i under individual stock accounting and
portfolio accounting. The two price-dividend curves are presented on the same graph
for ease of comparison, but they are functions of di erent variables. Under individual
stock accounting, the price-dividend ratio is a function of z ; which measures prior
                                                                                 i;t

gains and losses on stock i: Under portfolio accounting, it is a function of z ; which        t

measures prior gains and losses on the investor's overall portfolio of stocks.


                                                     55
