!  "





  

   


  #$%#
&'' ())***+)  )*#$%#

 , !     
-%.% /&0'' 10
2+3
%$-4#




                           
    !" #  $   # %     & "" '( & )'%
*  '$  ++',!)  '-  ' .',  ',/#"  ',!0 '
,0   #    !!   1     #
     # #!  
2% " 33   "    $   1'1 "  '!
%4##1  !   #  ' #"2' "  # 

0 26*/20&

!   #$%#
$%%8
  
,& 25 0 6'&  ':-;/'&<0'6/''&'&1+66
6&00+'*/2&0&'&2 /'6'&<0'6/'6'&
10'6&0 23:$;/+'&2'2 ''6'06'&'
' &0 2 6 */2 &0&  '& ' ''3 :4; 0227 '&
2 /1/'&2<66/'6'& 23:=;57'&2< '6
626'&5'26&00+,&'' 2> 0+/03
/'$4?3/'#*'0/')0+'' &+3/'#@'3 >/'
.-.3'& >*/20,@',&66/'6'& 2'&'*+
/ /0 66/'  '& &0 //0  +5 / ' 6 '& 0+5  '&
/02 ' 6 '& 3 66/'  + 0

5 6 ' &0&3 '& '+0' 6

+6'2/ '3 '/ ''266''5 6&0&366/''&
'5 6&+&*&/&0+7&0&1'&66/'60+7&0
&0&  '& &+3 '& 66/'  / 6 00+7 &03  '& /'
66/'16''12'&61&0'/


 '2'6/2/
1'56A
&''13A $$B%#%=B$=4==4
C10

I.

Introduction

Federal, state, and local governments in the United States spend substantially
more on housing subsidies to the poor than on other better-known parts of the welfare
system such as Food Stamps and TANF. The most widely cited figures for government
expenditures on housing subsidies refer to the direct expenditures of the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development. They ignore the USDA programs that account for
more than 20 percent of all subsidized units, the tax expenditures on the Low Income
Housing Tax Credit (about $3 billion per year), the expenditures of state and local
governments often funded by block grants from the federal government, and the many
indirect subsidies such as local property tax exemptions and abatements received by all
public housing projects and many privately owned projects, the federal income tax
exemption of interest on the bonds issued by state and local governments to finance
housing projects, and the underpriced mortgage insurance received by many privately
owned projects.
Given the enormous amount of money that has been spent on means-tested
housing assistance over the years, the amount of research on the most important effects of
these programs is shockingly small. There is no evidence on the effects of some major
programs and little evidence on the effects of other large programs. For example, there
are only two studies of the most important effects of Section 236, a program that still
serves almost a million people. There are no studies of the important effects of the LowIncome Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC), a program that has been the fastest growing
housing program over the last decade accounting for the majority of additional recipients
of housing subsidies. The evidence on the most heavily studied programs is old. For
example, the studies of the effects of the public housing program on housing
consumption are based on data from 1965 through 1977. At the midpoint of this period,
the median age of public housing units was 10 years. Today, the median age is about
thirty years. It stands to reason that the effect of public housing on the housing
consumption of tenants is very different today than it was at the time of these studies.
Since direct HUD expenditure on public housing in the form of operating and
modernization subsidies is about $6 billion annually and the real resource cost of
continuing to use these units to house low-income households is much larger due to their
opportunity cost and the substantial local property tax abatement that they receive, this is
a sad state of affairs.
If a housing program consists of a set of eligible households and suppliers
operating under one set of rules, the United States has had an enormous number of
programs intended to improve the housing of low-income households since the federal
government became seriously involved in this activity in 1937. There have been many
programs as this term is commonly used, each of these programs has typically had a
number of variants, and each change in the regulations produces a new program. For
example, the public housing program has at least 29 variants. Each has its own rules and
these rules have changed from time to time, though they have many rules in common.
To keep the length of this paper within reasonable limits, it will focus on four
broad programs that account for the bulk of all subsidized rental units. These programs
are Public Housing, project-based assistance under the Section 236 and Section 8 New
Construction/ Substantial Rehabilitation Programs, and tenant-based assistance under the

1

Section 8 Existing Housing Program. They illustrate the three basic approaches that have
been used to provide housing assistance: government ownership and operation of housing
newly built for occupancy by low-income households, government contracts with private
parties to build (or substantially rehabilitate) and operate housing for these households,
and subsidies to eligible households who select housing in the private market meeting
certain minimum quality standards and, under some variants, other restrictions.
Even though there have been almost no studies of their major effects, a more
comprehensive paper would have devoted considerable attention to the Low Income
Housing Tax Credit Program (that currently serves more than 700,000 households and
has been growing rapidly since 1988), Section 515 (a rental housing program operated by
the Department of Agriculture in rural areas and small towns that no longer produces new
units but still serves more than half a million households), and the HOME housing block
grant program from the federal government to state and local housing agencies on which
we currently spend about $1.6 billion annually, primarily for project-based assistance. In
light of the continuing interest in increasing the homeownership rate of the near poor, it
would also be desirable to devote considerable attention to several fairly large
homeownership programs – HUD’s Section 235 Program that provided subsidies to about
a half a million households since 1969 and USDA’s Section 502 Program that has
subsidized almost two million households since 1949 and currently provides subsidies to
about half a million households.
The primary purposes of this paper are to (1) consider the justifications that have
been offered for housing subsidies to low-income households and the implications of
these justifications for the evaluation and design of housing programs, (2) describe the
most important features of the largest rental housing programs for low-income
households in the United States, (3) summarize the empirical evidence on the major
effects of these programs, and (4) analyze the most important options for reform of the
system of housing subsidies to low-income households. The effects of these programs
that will be considered include effects on the housing occupied by recipients of the
subsidy and their consumption of other goods, effects on labor supply of recipients, the
participation rates of different types of households, the distribution of benefits among
recipients and all eligible households, effects on the types of neighborhoods in which
subsidized households live and the effect of subsidized housing and households on their
neighbors, effects on the rents of unsubsidized units, and the cost-effectiveness of
alternative methods for delivering housing assistance. Since we continue to seriously
consider or embark upon new programs that have the same basic features of older
programs and the major effects of the newer programs have not been estimated, an
understanding of the older programs is highly relevant for current discussions of housing
policy.
Section II discusses the justifications for housing subsidies for low-income
households and goals consistent with these justifications, gives a brief overview of the
development of the current system of housing subsidies, and describes in more detail the
development and most important rules of the major rental housing programs. Section III
provides information about the number of households served by major programs, direct
federal expenditures on these programs, and the characteristics of the households
assisted. Section IV discusses what can be said on theoretical grounds about the effects
of the programs and reviews the evidence on these effects. Section V analyzes options

2

for reform of the system of housing subsidies to low-income households. Section VI
summarizes the major results.
II.

Program Justifications, Goals, History, and Rules

A.

Justifications and Goals

Without a clear understanding of the justifications for government activity in a
particular area, it is difficult (though not impossible) to conduct an incisive evaluation of
current programs or design better programs. For example, a person who has not thought
seriously about the justifications for housing subsidies to low-income households might
imagine that a housing program for these households is successful if it induces them to
occupy better housing. However, a program of cash grants with no strings attached
would have this effect for all recipients whose income elasticity of demand for housing is
positive, that is, almost everyone. Indeed, it would be possible to devise a subsidy that
led to a smaller improvement in housing for all recipients than would result from an
equally costly lump-sum grant. A subsidy equal to a fraction of expenditure on all goods
except housing would have this effect for recipients whose price elasticity of demand for
these other goods is less than one. Should this be considered a successful housing
program?
In general, a justification for a government program is an explanation of why we
should have a program of that type. Obviously, this involves value judgments. The value
judgment underlying this paper is that we should have a program of a particular type if
and only if an appropriately designed program of that type will lead to an efficient
allocation of resources that is preferred by everyone to the allocation in the absence of
government action. Although this simple view leaves much to be desired because it
ignores the impact of the multiplicity of external effects, market imperfections, and
informational problems that justify other programs and hence the design of a set of
programs to deal simultaneously with all of these problems, it is at least a step in the
direction of clear thinking about policy evaluation and design.
The major justification for housing subsidies to low-income households is that
some taxpayers care about these households but feel that at least some low-income
households undervalue housing. If some taxpayers feel this way while others are either
completely selfish or non-paternalistic altruists, it is possible for the government to
achieve an efficient allocation and to make everyone better off as they judge their own
well-being by providing these low-income households with housing subsidies (Olsen,
1981).
It is clear that paternalistic altruists do not think that all low-income households
undervalue housing. In recent years, proponents of housing subsidies have frequently
argued that the primary housing problem of low-income households is an excessive rentincome ratio rather that inadequate housing. That is, the majority of low-income
households occupy adequate housing by spending too much of their income on it and
hence too little on other goods. People who make this argument must be saying that
these low-income households undervalue other goods. If we want to attain an efficient
allocation of resources that is preferred by everyone to the allocation in the absence of
government action, we must provide non-housing, rather that housing, subsidies to this

3

group. The implications of these feelings for housing policy are not clear. If housing
programs are designed to deal with both poor housing and excessive rent burden, what is
the role of food stamps, Medicaid, and other programs designed to subsidize various nonhousing goods?
It is often claimed that housing subsidies to low-income households are justified
by more tangible externalities. For example, it has been argued that better housing for
low-income families leads to better health for its occupants, and since some diseases are
contagious, to better health for the middle- and upper-income families with whom they
come in contact. Available evidence suggests that some such externalities exist but that
their magnitudes are small (Weicher, 1979, pp. 489-492). If the goal of housing subsidies
is to make both recipients and the taxpayers better off, it is doubtful that substantial
expenditure can be justified on the basis of these externalities.
No attempt has been made to derive implications for the evaluation and design of
government housing programs of a coherent set of justifications for programs of this type.
However, the following properties seem broadly consistent with the preceding
justifications. First, the program must induce the worst-housed families at each income
level to occupy better housing than they would choose if they were given equally costly
cash grants with no strings attached. This goal is consistent with the stated purposes of
the two major housing acts, namely “to remedy the acute shortage of decent, safe, and
sanitary dwellings” (Housing Act of 1937) and “the elimination of substandard and other
inadequate housing” (Housing Act of 1949).1 Second, families that are the same with
respect to characteristics of interest to taxpayers should be offered the same assistance.
Third, the greatest assistance should go to the neediest families. Finally, the housing
provided to participants should have the lowest possible total cost to tenants and
governments given its overall desirability.
Other goals for housing programs have been suggested, for example, reducing
racial segregation in housing or stabilizing new construction. The rationales for
achieving these goals are different from those underlying housing subsidies to lowincome families, and they are arguably best achieved by other means.
B.

History

Table 1 contains some milestones in the development of the system of housing
subsidies for low-income households in the United States.2 This subsection provides a
brief overview of the development of each part of the system, namely public housing,
privately owned projects, tenant-based certificates and vouchers, homeownership
programs, housing block grants. The next subsection provides details about the rules
governing the four largest rental programs.
Public Housing. Substantial government involvement in subsidizing the housing
of low-income households began with the Public Housing Program enacted in the U.S.
1

In discussions of housing policy, the word “shortage” is not used as economists use it. Instead it means
that the market outcome does not provide all households with the type of housing that the speaker thinks
they should occupy. All major housing programs were enacted in these laws or as amendments to them.
2
The dates listed in the table are the dates that programs were enacted. Programs do not become
operational until regulations have been written, and this sometimes requires considerable time.

4

TABLE 1
DEVELOPMENT OF SYSTEM OF HOUSING PROGRAMS
1937

Public housing, HUD, rental, publicly owned

1949

S502, USDA, homeownership

1954

S221(d)(3) MIR, HUD, rental, privately owned,

1959

S202, HUD, rental, privately owned, elderly & handicapped

1961

S221(d)(3) BMIR, HUD, rental, privately owned

1962

S515, USDA, rental, privately owned

1965

Rent supplements, HUD, rental, extra subsidy to private projects

1965

S23, HUD, rental, leasing existing units for public housing tenants

1968

S235, HUD, homeownership

1968

S236, HUD, rental, privately owned

1969

Modernization subsidies for public housing

1969

Rents in public housing limited to 25% of income

1970

Substantial operating subsidies for public housing

1974

S8 Existing, HUD, rental, tenant-based

1974

S8 New Construction/Substantial Rehab, HUD, rental, privately owned

1975

Operating subsidies for public housing (Performance Funding System)

1976

Operating subsidies for privately-owned projects (LMSA & PD)

1979

Modernization subsidies for privately owned projects (Flexible Subsidy)

1983

Housing Voucher Demonstration, HUD, rental, tenant-based

1986

Low Income Housing Tax Credit, IRS, rental

1990

HOME, HUD, rental and homeownership, block grants to states and localities

1998

New Voucher Program, HUD, rental, tenant-based

Housing Act of 1937. Public housing projects are owned and operated by local public
housing authorities established by local governments. Almost all are newly built for the
program. Until 1969, with minor exceptions, federal taxpayers paid the initial
development cost of public housing while tenants and local taxpayers paid the operating
cost. Between 1968 and 1972, the federal government greatly increased its previously
modest subsidies for operating public housing projects in conjunction with restrictions on
the rents that local housing authorities could charge their tenants. In 1969, the federal
government began to provide subsidies to local housing authorities for the modernization
of their projects. These additional subsidies and restrictions on rent were intended to
insure that public housing would provide satisfactory housing to its tenants without
charging rents that were regarded as excessive.
Privately Owned Projects. In 1954, the federal government began to contract
with private parties to provide housing for low-income households. Under most
programs, these parties agreed to provide housing meeting certain standards to
households with particular characteristics for a specified number of years. The
overwhelming majority of the projects were newly built. Almost all of the rest were
substantially rehabilitated as a condition for participation in the program. The federal
government insures the mortgages on the vast majority of these projects, and default loss
in excess of mortgage insurance payments is a major indirect cost of many of the
programs. It is important to realize that none of these programs provide subsidies to all
suppliers who would like to participate. Since subsidies are provided to selected private
suppliers, the market mechanism does not insure that subsidies are passed along to
occupants of the subsidized units. If this is to be achieved, it must be achieved by other
means.
The earlier programs such as HUD’s Section 221(d)(3) MIR and Section 202
limited the private parties who operate the projects to nonprofits and cooperatives.3 They
were succeeded by programs that allowed the participation of for-profit firms, while
attempting to limit their profits by restricting their net revenues during the period of the
use agreement. For-profit firms have accounted for the majority of the units in the most
recent programs such as Section 8 New Construction / Substantial Rehabilitation and the
Low Income Housing Tax Credit. Despite this trend, nonprofits still account for a
substantial minority of units under some recent programs such as the LIHTC.4
The earlier programs (Section 221(d)(3) MIR and Section 202) did not have
income limits. Instead they attempted to insure occupancy by households of low and
moderate income by limiting the per-unit cost of the project, thereby providing relatively
modest housing. The subsidy under the earlier programs was a below-market interest rate
on the loan used to finance the project, and the subsidy received by an occupant of the
project did not depend on the household’s income. The modest magnitude of the subsidy
and the high cost of newly built housing meeting the program’s standards resulted in few
units occupied by the poorest households.
3

The original Section 221(d)(3) program is usually called the Market Interest Rate Program (MIR). This is
misleading because the program does provide financing at below-market interest rates, albeit not as far
below market as the later Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market Interest Rate (BMIR) Program.
4
The extent of the involvement of the two types of sponsor is not well documented because they often
work in partnership and only one is listed as the sponsor in official records.

5

The initial response to this situation (HUD’s Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market
Interest Rate Program) was to provide a larger interest subsidy, thereby reducing the rent
to tenants at all income levels by the same amount. Another response (for example, the
Rent Supplement Program) was to provide an additional subsidy to many of the poorest
households in projects that received an interest subsidy in order to reduce their rents to 25
percent of their adjusted incomes. (The poorest of the poor paid a flat rent equal to 30
percent of the rent that would otherwise be charged for the apartment.) Rent supplements
were used almost exclusively with the Section 221(d)(3) MIR and the Section 236
Programs.
HUD’s basic Section 236 Program and the USDA’s 515 Program are similar to
the Section 221(d)(3) BMIR Program in providing a substantial interest subsidy that
reduces the rent of all of the poorest households occupying identical apartments in a
project by the same amount. The more affluent among the eligibles initially paid 25
percent of their adjusted incomes. Over time, an increasing fraction of the poorest
occupants of these projects have received additional subsidies under a succession of
programs that initially reduced their rents to 25 percent of adjusted income and later to 30
percent.5 Some of these programs were intended to insure that projects built under
construction programs continued to house low-income households and to avoid defaults
on loans insured by the federal government. However, about a fourth of the occupants of
apartments in privately owned HUD subsidized projects have rents that do not vary with
their income (U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1997, p. 3).
In 1978, Congress enacted the Flexible Subsidy Program to provide
modernization subsidies to older privately owned subsidized projects, especially under
Section 236, 221(d)(3), and 202, just as it had done earlier for public housing. The
money is awarded on a competitive basis rather than by formula.
The largest program of subsidized privately owned projects for low-income
households is HUD’s Section 8 New Construction/Substantial Rehabilitation Program
enacted in 1974. Section 8 NC/SR not only provides subsidies for the construction or
rehabilitation of projects but also rental assistance payments that initially reduced the
rents paid by all tenants to 25 percentage of their adjusted incomes.6
With minor exceptions, Congress had terminated all of HUD’s construction
programs by 1983. Section 236 replaced Section 221(d)(3) BMIR, Section 8 NC/SR
replaced Section 236, and Section 8 NC/SR was terminated in 1983 in the sense that no
additional applications for projects under this program were accepted after this time.7
This was in response to the large per-unit cost under all new construction programs
compared with tenant-based Section 8 Certificates and studies indicating that these costs
were also large relative to the market rents of the units provided. Only public housing
and the small Section 202 program for the elderly and handicapped that had been revised
to operate like the Section 8 NC/SR Program were allowed to approve a modest number
of additional applications.
5

The programs involved were the Rent Supplement Program, the Rental Assistance Payments Program,
Section 8 Conversion Assistance, and the Section 8 Loan Management Set-Aside (LMSA) and Property
Disposition (PD) Programs.
6
Beginning in 1982, it rose one percentage point each year until it reached 30.
7
It is a testimony to the long lags between the appropriation of money under construction programs and
their completion that the number of occupied units under this program continued to grow for 13 years after
its termination. For systematic evidence on these lags, see Schnare and others (1982, Table 4-8).

6

The Low Income Housing Tax Credit was enacted hastily as a part of the Tax
Reform Act of 1986 to replace other tax subsidies for low-income housing that were
eliminated.8 Within the next decade, it will become the second largest program of
housing subsidies to low-income households, surpassing public housing. For projects not
financed by tax-exempt bonds, the tax credit pays 70 percent of the cost of developing the
project. The tax credit is not available to all developers who want to build housing under
the terms specified in the law. Instead each state housing finance agency is allocated an
amount of money that is proportional to the state’s population to distribute to selected
private suppliers. In recent years, developers have proposed projects that would use three
times the amount of money appropriated for the program, and many do not apply because
the probability of success is too small to justify the effort.
The overwhelming majority of tax credit projects receive subsidies from other
sources, primarily development grants or loans at below-market interest rates from state
and local governments and rental assistance payments that depend upon the income of the
tenants. These additional development subsidies account for about a third of the total
capital subsidy (Cummings and DiPasquale, 1999, Table 7), and owners of tax credit
properties receive rental assistance payments on behalf of about 39 percent of their
tenants (GAO, 1997, p.40). The typical project receives subsidized financing from many
sources, thereby complicating the task of insuring that the subsidy is passed along to the
tenant. The median was five in Stegman’s non-random sample of 24 projects (Stegman,
1991, p. 362).
Under the LIHTC, the tenant’s maximum rent is 30 percent of the upper income
limit for eligibility.9 Tenant rent within a project does not vary with income except for
households who receive assistance from other programs that require it. As a result, the
poorest households occupy relatively few LIHTC units. According to Wallace (1995,
p.790), only 28% of households in LIHTC projects are very low income as HUD defines
this term (50% of local median for a family of four). The percentages are 90 for Section
8 New Construction, 81 for public housing, and 77 for Section 236 and 221(d)(3) BMIR.
Tenant-Based Assistance. Until 1965, all housing assistance to the poor was
project-based and the overwhelming majority of units were newly constructed under a
8

Virtually nothing is known about the effects of the LIHTC. There is no repository of information on the
characteristics of the households served by this program or the characteristics of the housing provided.
Some rudimentary statistical information can be found at http://www.huduser.org/datasets/lihtc.html and
http://ncsha.org/NCSHA/public/whatHFAsdo/whatHFAsdoindex.htm. In assessing opinions expressed on
the homepage of the National Council of State Housing Agencies, it is important to realize that distributing
the tax credits is a major activity of state housing agencies and hence lobbying for the expansion of this
program is a major activity of the NCSHA. What is known about the program is the result of a few studies.
Wallace (1995, pp. 794-801) provides an accurate description of the program’s rules and a summary of
basic descriptive statistics that had been produced by earlier studies. Cummings and DiPasquale (1999)
add an unusually thorough analysis of all of the subsidies provided for the development of LIHTC projects.
This analysis does not, however, include the substantial tenant-based and project-based Section 8 subsidies
received by about 39 percent of the units (GAO, 1997, p. 40). GAO (1997) provides additional descriptive
material. Despite the absence of evidence on the effects of the LIHTC, the Congress just increased
appropriations for this program by more than 40 percent to about $5 billion per year.
9
The upper income limit for a family of four is effectively 60 percent of the local median. Increasing or
decreasing these income limits by nationally uniform percentages used for the largest HUD programs
yields the income limits for households of other sizes.

7

government program. In 1965 Congress created Section 23, a program under which
public housing authorities could lease apartments in existing private unsubsidized
housing for the use of households eligible for public housing.10 One variant of this
program allowed tenants to locate their own apartments meeting the program’s minimum
standards. This was the first program of tenant-based assistance in the United States. In
1974, the Section 8 Existing Housing Program replaced Section 23. Since then, tenantbased Section 8 has become the country’s largest program of housing assistance. This
program was called the Certificate Program. Another program of tenant-based housing
assistance, called the Section 8 Voucher Program, that had somewhat different
constraints than the Certificate Program was introduced in 1983. This program operated
simultaneously with the Certificate Program until 1998 when the two programs were
consolidated into another tenant-based program that combined features of the two earlier
programs.
Despite the rapid growth of the tenant-based Section 8 Certificate and Voucher
Programs, the majority of additional recipients of rental housing assistance since 1975
have received project-based assistance. Between 1975 and 1990, the major sources of
this assistance were Section 8 New Construction/Substantial Rehabilitation and Section
515. Since 1990, the overwhelming majority of HUD’s incremental assistance has been
tenant based, but project-based assistance has continued to account for the majority of
additions to number of subsidized households in the U.S. due to the rapid growth of the
IRS’s LIHTC. Furthermore, HUD spends a substantial fraction of its budget providing
additional assistance to units in subsidized housing projects beyond the subsidies initially
promised.
Homeownership Programs. The United States has had two major homeownership
programs that provide housing assistance to low-income households. The Housing Act
of 1949 established the USDA’s Section 502 Single Family Direct Loan Program.11
Until 1968, the magnitude of the subsidy was modest and did not depend on the
household’s income. The subsidy consisted of lending to farmers, and later others living
in rural areas, at the federal borrowing rate. (Farmers now account for a small share of
all borrowers.) The Housing Act of 1968 authorized the USDA to pay a portion of the
loan repayments for low-income households. For the poorest households, the USDA paid
the difference between principal and interest payments at the government’s borrowing
rate and at an interest rate of 1 percent. For eligible households with higher incomes, the
USDA paid the difference between property taxes, homeowners insurance, operating
expenses and principal and interest payments at the government’s borrowing rate and 20
percent of the household’s adjusted income. During its 50-year history, Section 502
Single Family Direct Loan Program has provided over $51 billion in homeownership
loans to about 1.9 million households. The program currently provides subsidies to over
500,000 low-income households.

10

For a comprehensive analysis of this program and a detailed survey of the literature on it, see Reid
(1989).
11
See Carliner (1998, pp. 314-315) for a brief history of the development of the program and Mikesell and
others (1999) for descriptive statistics and the first analysis of this program based on a nationally
representative survey.

8

The Housing Act of 1968 also established Section 235, a HUD program similar in
many respects to USDA’s Section 502. Unlike Section 502, this program suffered from
scandals and high default rates (Carliner, 1998, p.313-314). Section 235 was suspended
in 1973, reactivated in 1975, severely limited in geographical scope in 1983, and
terminated in 1987. Over this period, it provided subsidies to more 500,000 low-income
households. Little is known about the reasons for the difference in outcomes of the two
programs. The poor performance of Section 235 is usually attributed to consumer naivete
and FHA mismanagement. More plausible explanations would rely on differences in the
structures of the programs such as the magnitude of the downpayment required and
whether the subsidy is allocated to the seller or the buyer of the house.
Housing Block Grants. The HOME Investment Partnerships Program enacted in
1990 is a block grant for housing assistance. It allocates federal funds by formula to state
and local governments to spend on any type of housing assistance subject to certain limits
on the incomes of the households served, the cost to acquire and develop units, and the
rents that may be charged for rental units. This program is based on the untested
assumptions that the best mix of housing programs differs from locality to locality and
local officials are better able to determine and implement the best mix.12
C.

Rules

This section presents information concerning many of the important rules
governing HUD’s four largest programs of rental housing assistance for low-income
households and the evolution of these rules over the history of the programs. The rules
considered determine who is eligible to receive assistance, how the limited assistance is
allocated among households that would like to participate, upper and lower limits on the
desirability of the housing that can be occupied, and upper limits on spending on goods
other than housing. These rules affect which households are served and a program’s
effects on consumption patterns.
Other rules that determine the incentives facing potential and actual suppliers will
not be discussed. For construction and rehabilitation programs, these rules affect the
types of housing that will be proposed and selected. For all programs, they affect how
well the units will be maintained and the total cost of the housing provided. Although
these rules determine the cost-effectiveness of a program and the level of housing
services provided, they have not been seriously analyzed by housing policy analysts.
This represents a major gap in our knowledge of housing programs.
It is not possible within reasonable time and space constraints to describe
accurately the rules of the four programs that are the focus of this paper over their
histories. The rule describing what is and is not included in a household’s annual income
in determining its eligibility for assistance illustrates the problem. The current rule is
more than three pages single spaced. This rule is now the same for all major low-income

12

These assumptions could be tested by comparing the outcomes of different federal programs across
localities to see whether one program performs better than all others on all measures and then comparing
the overall effect of the mix of programs chosen by local officials with the federal mix in a random sample
of localities.

9

housing programs. In earlier years, it was different for different programs and has been
changed on a number of occasions over the history of each program.
Researchers who want to conduct empirical studies of the effects of housing
programs, or indeed any program, should consult the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
for the time period to which their data refer to determine the rules that were in effect at
that time.13 HUD’s regulations are in Title 24 of the CFR. That is, references to them all
begin with 24CFR. For example, since 1996 the reference for HUD’s physical condition
standards for virtually all subsidized housing has been 24CFR5.703. In earlier years, the
standards for each program were located in the CFR under the regulations for that
program.
The CFR is an annual publication that contains the updated regulations of the
federal government as of April 1. A searchable electronic version containing the CFR
and the Federal Register since 1981 is available at http://web.lexis-nexis.com/congcomp/.
Virtually all rules of interest must be published in the Federal Register along with the
date on which they became effective, and each regulation in the CFR cites the relevant
passage in the Federal Register. For example, the citation for the proposed regulation
that ultimately led to a unified set of physical condition standards applying to all lowincome housing programs is 63FR35650. As usual, this source contained a history of
previous regulations. The citation for the final rule is 63FR46566, which contains the
date on which the regulation became effective.
These sources are useful not only for researchers who have a data set that
identifies which households participate in housing programs and are attempting to
determine the parameters of the budget spaces of these households but also to others who
are trying to learn when major changes in program parameters occurred with an eye to
selecting which data to use to maximize exogenous variation in budget constraint
parameters. Using these sources, it is easy to determine when important changes in the
regulations have occurred.
Prior to the regulations implementing the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974 (hereafter HA74), there was considerable diversity in the rules of different
housing programs. This legislation introduced many similarities in the rules across
programs, and this trend has continued over the past twenty-five years, culminating in the
1990s with the placement of many common rules in Part 5 of Title 24 of the CFR. These
include rules for preferences for admission into subsidized housing (24CFR5.4XY since
1996), income limits, the definitions of annual income and adjusted income, tenant rents,
and certifying eligibility (24CFR5.6XY since 1997), and minimum physical housing
standards (24CFR7XY since 1999).

13

In the case of housing programs, secondary sources, even government publications or agency websites,
are always incomplete and sometimes erroneous. For example, it is often said in official HUD documents
that the upper income limit for admission to public housing is 80 percent of the local median. This might
lead the unsuspecting to conclude that the income limit is the same for families of all sizes, or perhaps that
for families of each size it is 80 percent of the local median for families of that size. Neither is correct.
Reading the legislation is not a substitute for reading the regulations. Legislation typically specifies some,
but not all, of a program’s rules. It provides general guidelines concerning other matters, but leaves the
design of specific regulations to the administering agency. Furthermore, the operation of a program does
not change with the passage of legislation. This does not occur until after new regulations have been
announced in the Federal Register.

10

To help aspiring housing policy analysts navigate through the regulations and to
provide others with an overview of the rules that have governed low-income housing
programs, this section describes the key rules that prevailed of April 1, 1999 and some of
the major changes that have occurred in these rules over the years.
Before proceeding, it is useful to mention several general features of the rules. In
recent years, the majority of privately owned projects under HUD’s programs receive
project-based Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments and are therefore subject to the key
rules of the Section 8 Program. Since the enactment of the Section 8 Program in 1974,
Section 8 and Public Housing have had very similar rules in many respects. This means
that the overwhelming majority of HUD’s subsidized households are subject to many of
the same rules.
Eligibility. With a few minor exceptions such as Section 221(d)(3) MIR and
Section 202 in its early years, all housing programs have had upper income limits for
eligibility. Indeed, the earlier programs such as public housing had two limits for
households of each size -- one for initial receipt of a subsidy and a larger limit for
retaining the subsidy.14 The income limits that are discussed here and elsewhere are
limits for initial receipt of a subsidy unless otherwise stated.
Prior to the HA74, local public housing authorities chose their own upper income
limits based on a vaguely worded provision of the law. The upper income limits for other
programs were related to the limits for public housing and always greater than these
limits. For example, the income limits for Section 236 in its early years were 35 percent
above the limits for public housing in the same locality.
Since the HA74, public housing, Section 236, and all variants of Section 8 have
had a common set of income limits. These programs account for the overwhelming
majority of HUD-subsidized households. Each year, the Economic and Market Analysis
Division (EMAD) in HUD’s Office of Policy Development and Research estimates these
limits in accordance with the regulations.
The basic income limit for a family of four is 80 percent of the median income of
all families in a locality.15 Income limits for families of other sizes are obtained from the
4-person income limit by applying the following percentages.16

14

The earliest housing programs involved construction and so households had to move in order to receive
the subsidy. Even after these programs stopped producing additional units, households entering the
program had to move into a project in order to receive a subsidy. The higher limit for continued occupancy
was introduced to avoid forcing a household to move if its income rose too much. This problem only arises
if the market rent of the unit occupied exceeds the tenant’s rent at the upper income limit for admission,
that is, if there is a notch at this upper income limit. This is almost surely the case for every construction
program in its early years when the housing is new. Based on a vague provision in the law, many local
housing authorities set their upper income limits for continued occupancy 25 percent above their limits for
admission. Under Section 8 certificates and vouchers the effective upper income limit for continued receipt
of a subsidy is the income at which the subsidy is zero.
15
Income limits were related to local median incomes in an attempt to account for geographical price
differences, but differences in median incomes obviously also reflect other factors such as differences in
skill levels.
16
There is no good rationale for these percentages. For example, they are not based on differences in
poverty lines for households of different sizes.

11

Family Size and Percentage Adjustments
1
70%

2
80%

3
90%

4
100%

5
108%

6
116%

7
124%

8
132%

In the terminology of housing regulations and policy discussions, these families are
described as low-income families.17 In the absence of exceptions, only low-income
families are eligible for the housing programs that account for almost all means-tested
housing subsidies.
However, there are important exceptions to these simple rules. In 2000, these
affected the limits for 37 percent of the metropolitan areas and 86 percent of the nonmetropolitan areas. The most important exception in terms of the number of areas
affected is the requirement that the income limits in a non-metropolitan area may not be
less than limits based on the State non-metropolitan median family income.
In a series of amendments to housing laws since 1975, Congress has specified that
an increasing percentage of recipients of housing subsidies have incomes below 50
percent of the local median for 4-person families and the aforementioned adjustments for
family size.18 These households are called very low income households, and these laws
are codified in 24CFR1275 (1975), 24CFR882 (1976), 24CFR813 (1985), and
24CFR982 (1999).
Finally, the Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998 created a new
category called extremely low income families whose incomes were 30 percent of the
local median for families of four and required a high percentage of new recipients of
housing subsidies to be in this category [24CFR982.201 (2000)]. Consistent with a trend
over several decades to avoid concentrations of the poorest households in public housing,
the required percentage was much lower for public housing than tenant-based vouchers
and certificates.
The details concerning the rules and methods for calculating income limits are
contained in FY 2000 Income Limits Briefing Material available at
http://www.huduser.org/datasets/il.html. Fortunately, understanding these complexities
is not important for most purposes because the income limits themselves are available in
electronic form for all areas from 1990 to the present at the aforementioned website.
They can be obtained for earlier years through HUD’s EMAD.
Unlike many other means-tested welfare programs, there are no asset tests for
eligibility for housing assistance. Actual or imputed income from specified assets is
included in income in determining eligibility and rent.
Preferences. Since housing programs are not entitlements, some system is
required to allocate the available money to the many families that would like to
17

To put these limits in perspective, the poverty line is about 30 percent of median income.
The income limits calculated based on 80 percent of the local median and income limits for virtually all
other housing programs, including non-HUD programs, that use different percentages are calculated by first
calculating the limits based on 50 percent, then applying the exceptions, and finally multiplying by the
relevant percentage. For example, almost all LIHTC projects involve a program option that restricts the
rents of tenants to income limits based on 60 percent of the local median. To calculate these limits, the
limits based on 50 percent are multiplied by 1.2.

18

12

participate.19 The most salient feature of the system is that there has never been a
uniform national system to rank families on a waiting list. Instead Congress has specified
that some preference must be given to certain types of families but left it to local housing
authorities and owners of subsidized private projects to devise preference schemes. For
example, in 1971 Section 10(g)(2) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 read as
follows.
The public housing agency shall adopt and promulgate regulations
establishing admissions policies which shall give full consideration to its
responsibility for the rehousing of displaced families, to the applicant’s
status as a serviceman or veteran or relationship to a serviceman or veteran
… , and to the applicant’s age or disability, housing conditions, urgency of
housing need, and source of income: Provided, That in establishing such
admission policies the public housing agency shall accord to families of
low income such priority over single persons as it determines to be
necessary to avoid undue hardship
HUD has never been authorized to establish a nationally uniform preference system. Its
role has been to review preference systems for consistency with Congressional intent.
Obviously, there are infinitely many schemes for ranking families on a waiting
list that give some preference to the types of households mentioned in this passage.
There are now about 3400 local public housing authorities and more than 22,000
privately-owned HUD-subsidized projects. Although some undoubtedly copy the
schemes of others, it seems likely that there have always been an enormous number of
different schemes in existence. A common scheme has been to assign points to different
family attributes mentioned in the law. However, there are infinitely many different
weights that could be assigned to the favored household types consistent with the
wording of the law.20
Although the language of the law with respect to priorities for receipt of housing
subsidies has changed from time to time and other types of families have been singled out
for preferential treatment, some of the family types mentioned in the preceding passage
have been accorded preferential treatment for receipt of housing assistance under many
programs over much of their histories. The elderly and handicapped have been given a
preference for subsidized housing for at least forty years. There are two programs
(Section 202 and 811) limited to such households, many projects built under other
programs are built exclusively for them, and they have typically been given priority for
admission into projects not built exclusively for them. Families living in substandard
housing or displaced by government action have always been given a preference for

19

The next section discusses the extent of the excess demand for assistance to the extent possible with
existing data.
20
This creates a problem for research where information on the preference scheme is important. These
preference systems could be collected because each public housing agency and manager of a privatelyowned project is required by law to have a written preference scheme that is available to the public.
However, it would be quite expensive to do it for all subsidized housing unless they are available in HUD’s
central office.

13

housing subsidies.21 Single persons who are not elderly, disabled, or displaced by
government action have always been given a low priority for assistance.
Congress suspended federal preferences on January 26, 1996 and repealed them in
the Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998 (64FR23460, 65FR16692).
The final regulations implementing these changes became effective April 30, 2000.
Since these legislative changes did not require housing authorities to alter their current
preference system, it is likely that they had little immediate effect. Prior to the
suspension of federal preferences, federal law required that for the overwhelming
majority of new recipients of housing assistance, local housing authorities must give
preference to families who were occupying substandard housing, involuntarily displaced,
or paying more than fifty percent of income for rent. They were allowed to use local
preferences for a small minority of new recipients (53FR1122).
Restrictions on Housing Consumption. Under all forms of project-based housing
assistance, households that reach the top of the waiting list are offered a particular unit.
To a first approximation, they have no choice concerning the quantity of housing services
that they consume if they want to receive housing assistance. It is only to the extent that
they can reject particular units without dropping to the bottom of the waiting list and the
possibility of being simultaneously on the waiting lists for public housing and individual
private projects that eligible families have a range of housing choices.22 Even if we
ignore the complexities resulting from these possibilities, it is not the case that all
households offered assistance under a project-based program are offered the same
housing. Under mature construction and substantial rehabilitation programs, the variance
in the desirability of the program’s units of a particular size is enormous. Therefore, the
housing offered by these programs at a point in time cannot be characterized by a single
number such as its market rent divided by a housing price index or a single vector of
characteristics. As explained later and depicted in Figure 4, families eligible for tenantbased housing vouchers or certificates have a wide range of housing choices, but the
program adds the same consumption bundles to the budget spaces of all eligible families
with the same characteristics living in one locality provided that they are offered
assistance.
Since a primary goal of housing programs is to improve the housing occupied by
participants, it should not be surprising that almost all housing programs have minimum
housing standards. For some programs such as the older programs involving privately
owned projects, these standards have been so vague as to be unenforceable. They require
that the housing be decent, safe, and sanitary. For others such as tenant-based vouchers
and certificates, much more specific standards have existed.23 It was not until 1999 that
the same detailed standards applied to virtually all subsidized housing (63FR46566).
With the exception of the housing voucher program that began as a demonstration
in 1983 and is currently being phased out, all housing programs place upper limits on the
21

Many involved in discussions of housing policy view living in substandard housing as something that
happens to a person rather than something that is chosen.
22
Some housing authorities allow tenants to reject a few units before being dropped from the waiting list.
Nothing prevents eligible households from being on the public housing waiting list and simultaneously
applying for an apartment in any privately-owned subsidized project.
23
See 63FR35650 for a history of the occupancy standards.

14

quantity of housing available to participants. In the case of production programs, these
result from upper limits on construction costs and limits on the amount of money that the
housing authority or owner of a private project can receive from the tenant and the
government each month. Although this limits how good any program unit can be, it is
not a parameter of the budget space of most households offered units under the program
for the reasons mentioned above. With the exception of the aforementioned voucher
program, the other programs of tenant-based assistance impose upper limits on the rents
that landlords can receive. This is a parameter of the budget space of each household
offered assistance under a particular program in a specific locality.
Under all housing programs, the size of the apartment offered to a household
depends on the size and composition of the household. For example, two children of the
same sex will be expected to share a bedroom. Beyond a certain age, two children of
different sexes will have their own bedrooms.
Tenant Rent. For more than thirty years, the tenant’s contribution to rent under all
construction programs has been specified in the program’s regulations. For all units in
the largest programs (Public Housing and Section 8 New Construction/Substantial
Rehabilitation) and many units in other programs, it has depended on household
characteristics, but not on the desirability of the housing occupied. Similar remarks apply
to the Section 8 Certificate Program since 1980. For the other programs of tenant-based
assistance, the tenant’s contribution to rent depends on the market rent of the apartment
selected.
In public housing prior to 1969, each local housing authority had its own system
for determining the rent paid by public housing tenants subject to very general guidelines.
Some housing authorities charged a fixed fraction of adjusted income (usually 20
percent), others charged the same rents for all apartments of the same size, and still others
charged a certain minimum rent to the poorest households and a fraction of adjusted
income to households for which this was larger. In 1969, legislation imposed a uniform
upper limit on rents at 25 percent of adjusted income, and almost all local authorities
charged the maximum rents permitted. Between 1982 and 1985, a transition to a higher
percentage 30% occurred and the authorities were required to charge this rent. The
Section 8 New Construction/Substantial Rehabilitation Program and the Section 8
Certificate Program after 1980 used the 25 percent rule initially and made the
aforementioned transition to 30 percent in the early 1980s.
The history of the rules for tenant rent in the Section 236 Program is similar to the
history in several other construction programs. The thick lines in Figure 1 depict how the
tenant’s rent TR under Section 236 without rent supplements or other additional subsidies
varies with the tenant’s income Y. In the diagrams, FMR is the sum of the allowed
monthly costs of providing an apartment, including repayment of the mortgage loan at the
interest rate charged by the lender.24 HUD directly pays enough of the mortgage
payment to reduce the effective interest rate to one percent. This determines the basic
rent BR paid by the poorest participants. Richer participants paid 25 percent of their
adjusted incomes, and owners rebated to HUD the excess of this amount over BR. If the

24

This interest rate is below the market rate due to indirect interest subsidies. For this and other reasons,
FMR should not be interpreted as the market rent of the unit.

15

TR

TR = .25(Y-A)

FMR

BR

A

YLIM

FIG. 1. – Tenant Rent Under Section 236 Without Rent Supplements

Y

upper income limit for eligibility YLIM is sufficiently high that 25 percent of the
adjusted incomes of some tenants exceeds FMR (as in Figure 1), their rent is FMR.
The thick lines in Figure 2 depict how the tenant’s rent varies with income for
Section 236 with rent supplements. The Rent Supplement Program was an attempt to
make it more attractive for the poorest households to occupy units in these projects and
for the owners of the projects to accept these tenants by guaranteeing a part of the rent
payment.25 To achieve this goal, the program paid a portion of the rent that the poorest
households would otherwise have to pay to live in these projects. Specifically, these
extra payments reduced tenant rents to 25 percent of adjusted income except when this
was less than .3·BR. In that event, the tenant paid .3·BR. The minimum rent supplement
payment was .1·BR. A succession of later programs replaced the Rent Supplement
Program in providing additional subsidies to the poorest households in privately-owned
subsidized projects.
III.

Program Statistics

Table 2 contains the standard information on the number of households assisted
by each broad type of housing program. In some respects, these numbers are misleading.
First, the numbers concerning assisted homeowners are not comparable to the numbers
for rental assistance. When the loan on a unit subsidized under a means-tested
homeownership program is repaid that household is no longer counted as being assisted
even though it continues to live in the house. That is one reason why the number of
homeowners assisted has declined. This contrasts sharply with rental assistance where
households living in housing built under new construction programs are counted
independent of whether the mortgage has been repaid. In fact, the purchase of more than
2.5 million houses has been subsidized under Section 235, Section 502, and other smaller
programs. Second, the numbers in Table 2 take no account of the large number of
households assisted by the Low Income Housing Tax Credit. About 700,000 households
lived in such units in 1999 (U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2000,
p. 7). Third, the numbers do not account for households that receive subsidies from only
state and local programs. The numbers in Table 2 reflect only households assisted by
HUD and USDA.
With these caveats in mind, we see that in percentage terms the fastest growing
part of the system of rental housing subsidies over this period has been household-based
assistance to live in existing units. This, however, is a bit misleading because there were
no programs in this category prior to 1965 when the small precursor to Section 8 Existing
was established. In total, more additional households have been served over the past
twenty years by new construction programs than by household-based certificates and
vouchers even when the LIHTC is ignored.

25

The Rent Supplement Program enacted in 1965 was always used in conjunction with subsidized
construction programs involving private ownership of housing projects, especially Section 236 and Section
221(d)(3) Market Interest Rate. Piggybacks with other construction programs were rare. Except for
providing supplements for projects in the pipeline at the time, no new commitments under this program
have been made since January 5, 1973. At its peak, the program provided subsidies to about 180,000
households.

16

TR

TR = .25(Y-A)

FMR

BR
.9 BR

.3 BR

A

YLIM

FIG. 2. – Tenant Rent Under Section 236 With Rent Supplements

Y

TABLE 2
TOTAL HOUSEHOLDS RECEIVING ASSISTANCE BY TYPE OF SUBSIDY, 1977-97
(in thousands)
Assisted Renters
Existing Housing

Fiscal year

Household
Based

Project
Based

Subtotal

New
Construction

Total
Assisted
Renters

1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

162
297
427
521
599
651
691
728
749
797
893
956
1,025
1,090
1,137
1,166
1,326
1,392
1,487
1,413
1,465

105
126
175
185
221
194
265
357
431
456
473
490
509
527
540
554
574
593
595
608
586

268
423
602
707
820
844
955
1,086
1,180
1,253
1,366
1,446
1,534
1,616
1,678
1,721
1,900
1,985
2,081
2,021
2,051

1,825
1,977
2,052
2,189
2,379
2,559
2,702
2,836
2,931
2,986
3,047
3,085
3,117
3,141
3,180
3,204
3,196
3,213
3,242
3,293
3,305

2,092
2,400
2,654
2,895
3,012
3,210
3,443
3,700
3,887
3,998
4,175
4,296
4,402
4,515
4,613
4,680
4,851
4,962
5,087
5,079
5,120

Total
Total
Assisted
Assisted
Homeowners
Homeowners* and Renters*
1,071
1,082
1,095
1,112
1,127
1,201
1,226
1,219
1,193
1,176
1,126
918
892
875
853
826
774
751
705
670
631

3,164
3,482
3,749
4,007
4,139
4,411
4,668
4,920
5,080
5,174
5,301
5,213
5,295
5,390
5,465
5,506
5,625
5,714
5,792
5,748
5,751

* Starting in 1988, figures reflect a one-time decrease of 141,000 in the number of assisted homeowners because
of asset sales by the FmHA to private investors.
NOTES. – Figures for total assisted renters have been adjusted since 1980 to avoid double-counting households
receiving more than one subsidy. Data are for beginning of fiscal year.
SOURCE. – U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means (1998 Green Book, Table 15-26).

Table 3 contains the standard numbers on HUD outlays. It shows that, contrary to
newspaper accounts, real expenditures on housing assistance has more than tripled over
the past twenty years, and Table 4 shows that real expenditure per household has
increased more than 80 percent over this period. With minor exceptions, both have
increased continuously for the last twenty years.
Although there is no good reason to believe that these numbers give an erroneous
view of the trends over time, it is important to realize that the outlay for a particular year
is not the total cost of providing HUD-subsidized housing in that year for several reasons.
First, it does not include the many indirect subsidies involved such as local property tax
exemptions and abatements received by all public housing projects and some privately
owned projects, the federal income tax exemption of interest on the bonds issued by state
and local governments to finance housing projects, and the underpriced mortgage
insurance received by many privately owned projects.26 Second, it includes outlays that
are mainly used to provide housing in future years and excludes costs that are the result
of past outlays. For example, if HUD pays the cost of building a public housing project
this year, that outlay will appear this year. This enormously exceeds the real cost of
providing the public housing units for whatever part of the current year they are
available. It also greatly understates the cost of providing these units in all future years.
That the development costs have been paid does not mean that the cost of using the land
and structure to house low-income households is zero. These units have an opportunity
cost. To the extent that few units have been built recently or the units built have been
financed with capital grants rather than annual payments, the real resource cost of HUD’s
programs is understated. HUD has built few units recently and has moved towards
development grants and away from partially or fully subsidizing mortgage payments.
However, without a knowledge of the trend in the importance of indirect subsidies in the
total cost of providing housing assistance, it is impossible to say whether the trends
reported in Tables 3 and 4 are understated or overstated.
Table 5 shows the number of units under the larger individual rental programs.
The decline in the number of public housing units in recent years is due in part to the
demolition of some projects, though most of the large decline between October 1997 and
October 1998 is due to the exclusion of about 73,000 Indian public housing units from
the total. It is a testimony to the difficulty in producing information on the number of
units receiving various combinations of subsidies that this table indicates that only 38
percent of Section 236 units received rent supplements or Section 8 project-based
assistance in 1997 while HUD’s Picture of Subsidized Households indicates that 67
percent receive Section 8 project-based assistance. The decline in the number of units
under the Section 236 and Section 8 programs reflects in part the decisions of owners of
some projects not to continue to participate at the termination of their contract with the
government.
Table 6 presents information about the characteristics of the households served by
HUD’s four largest programs. Although household income is about the same across the
four programs, the substantial differences in household sizes leads to substantial
differences in per-capita income. Mean household sizes are 2.8 for tenant-based
vouchers and certificates, 2.4 for public housing, 2.1 for Section 236, and 1.6 for Section
26

Mortgage insurance is underpriced when the present value of the losses exceeds the present value of
insurance premiums. Some programs are designed to provide a subsidy in this form.

17

TABLE 3
OUTLAYS FOR HOUSING AID ADMINISTERED BY HUD, 1977-97
(in millions of current and 1997 dollars)
Outlays
Fiscal year
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997 (estimate)

Current Dollars
2,928
3,592
4,189
5,364
6,733
7,846
9,419
11,000
25,064
12,179
12,509
13,684
14,466
15,690
16,898
18,243
20,490
22,191
* 24,059
* 25,349
* 26,110

1997 Dollars
7,515
8,660
9,275
10,687
12,189
13,273
15,257
17,096
37,569
17,813
17,784
18,684
18,860
19,484
19,973
20,936
22,817
24,079
25,394
26,032
26,110

* Figures have been adjusted to account for $1.2 billion of advance spending that
occurred in 1995 but that should have occurred in 1996.
NOTES. – The bulge in outlays in 1985 is caused by a change in the method of financing
housing, which generated close to $14 billion in one-time expenditures. This amount
paid off, all at once, the capital cost of public housing construction and modernization
activities undertaken between 1974 and 1985, which otherwise would have been paid off
over periods of up to 40 years. Because of this one-time expenditure, however, outlays
for public housing since that time have been lower than they would have been otherwise.
SOURCE. – U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means (1998
Green Book, Table 15-28).

TABLE 4
PER UNIT OUTLAYS FOR HOUSING AID ADMINISTERED BY HUD, 1977-79
(in current and 1997 dollars)
Per Unit Outlays
Fiscal year
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997 (estimate)

Current Dollars
1,160
1,310
1,430
1,750
2,100
2,310
2,600
2,900
6,420
3,040
3,040
3,270
3,390
3,610
3,830
4,060
4,450
4,720
5,080
5,350
5,490

1997 Dollars
2,980
3,160
3,160
3,480
3,810
3,900
4,220
4,500
9,620
4,440
4,320
4,460
4,420
4,480
4,530
4,670
4,960
5,120
5,360
5,490
5,490

NOTES. – The peak in outlays per unit in 1985 of $6,420 is attributable to the bulge in
1985 expenditures associated with the change in the method for financing public housing.
Without this change, outlays per unit would have amounted to around $2,860.
SOURCE. – U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means (1998
Green Book, Table 15-29).

TABLE 5
NUMBER OF UNITS ELIGIBLE FOR ASSISTED HOUSING PAYMENTS BY PROGRAM TYPE, END OF FISCAL YEAR
Section 515

Year
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1973
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986

Public
Housing
365,896
374,172
401,467
425,481
465,481
482,714
511,047
539,841
577,347
608,554
639,631
687,336
767,723
830,454
892,651
989,419
1,047,000
1,109,000
1,151,000
1,172,000
1,174,000
1,173,000
1,178,000
1,192,000
1,204,000
1,224,000
1,313,816
1,340,575
1,355,152
1,379,679

Total
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25,702
50,261
80,842
114,429
150,714
185,253
216,974
247,164
273,928
300,602
326,212

Section 236

With
Section 8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
647
7,064
15,800
24,422
32,274
40,412
44,129
45,465
45,510
45,510

Rent
Supplement
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
930
2,731
12,299
30,804
57,786
92,070
118,184
147,847
165,326
174,339
179,908
171,598
178,891
164,992
157,779
153,355
76,919
55,606
45,611
34,376

Total
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,437
32,322
98,699
191,261
293,831
400,360
447,126
543,360
544,515
541,460
538,285
537,206
536,531
533,469
530,735
527,978
529,121

Section 8

With Rent
Supplements
or Section 8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
163,000
161,000
174,600
176,736
178,115
196,280
192,000

TenantBased
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
162,085
297,256
427,331
521,329
599,122
650,817
690,643
728,406
748,543
797,383
892,863

New
Subrehab †
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,701
30,281
88,738
191,815
333,153
474,465
571,298
664,395
730,148
757,091
777,656

Other
ProjectBased ‡
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
105,480
125,598
174,845
185,297
221,036
193,645
264,742
357,103
431,121
455,832
472,820

LIHTC #
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Section 515

Year
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997*
1998*

Public
Housing
1,390,098
1,397,907
1,403,816
1,404,870
1,410,137
1,409,191
1,407,923
1,409,455
1,397,205
1,388,746
1,372,260
1,295,437

Total
349,178
368,456
385,677
401,941
417,998
433,616
448,767
463,742
476,213
482,980
482,980
482,980

Section 236

With
Section 8
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510
45,510

Rent
Supplement
23,487
23,476
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
19,270
18,808
20,860
20,860
20,860
20,860

Total
528,174
528,174
528,000
530,625
528,115
510,442
510,105
504,966
508,353
505,305
494,121
476,451

Section 8

With Rent
Supplements
or Section 8
189,389
202,575
197,329
199,617
199,000
199,000
190,140
190,140
190,140
190,140
190,140
190,140

TenantBased
956,181
1,024,689
1,089,598
1,137,244
1,166,257
1,326,250
1,391,794
1,486,533
1,413,311
1,464,588
1,499,329
1,605,898

New
Subrehab †
793,812
798,551
803,618
822,962
827,474
822,383
826,791
844,663
890,241
907,215
880,369
853,523

Other
ProjectBased ‡
489,510
509,222
526,650
540,256
554,264
573,844
593,423
594,763
608,140
586,359
563,937
541,514

SOURCE. – Wayne Baker, Housing Budget Office, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Washington, D.C., December 1979, for
1941-1975; Carla Pedone, Congressional Budget Office, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C., April 2000, for 1976-1998. CBO tabulations based on
Congressional Justifications for the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and unpublished data from HUD and the Rural Housing
Administration.
NOTES. – N/A = Not Available. Because reliable data is not available at this point, this table excludes rental assistance for units funded through the various
block grant programs to state and local governments, including the McKinney Homeless programs, Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
(HOPWA), HOME, and, starting in FY 1998, all units assisted through the Indian Housing Block Grants program. CBO has made some adjustments to
published data in certain years to smooth out extremely weird patterns in those years. In particular, figures were reduced for the end of FY 1992 because
renewals of expiring contracts in the LMSA program were being double-counted as additional units. Some other strange patterns remain in the data,
however.
* Numbers for these years are estimates
† Excludes units funded with capital grants and project rental assistance through the Section 202/811 program.
‡ Includes units receiving assistance through the Section 8 Loan Management Set Aside (LMSA), Property Disposition (PD), Conversion (from Rent
Supplement and Section 236 RAP), and Moderate Rehabilitation programs.
# Unlike other numbers in the table, the number of units for the LIHTC are the number of units authorized rather than the number of units available for
occupancy. Due to the lag between authorization and completion, these numbers exceed the number of units available for occupancy each year.

LIHTC #
34,491
115,899
242,099
316,128
428,098
519,398
623,154
740,253
826,596
902,188
972,408
1,041,499

TABLE 6
CHARACTERISTICS OF HUD SUBSIDIZED HOUSEHOLDS 1997

Number of Projects
Subsidized People (thousands)
Subsidized Units (thousands)
Average Rent/Month, Inc. Utilities
Average Household Income/Year
Average People/Household
Per Capita Income
Neighborhood Poverty Rate
% Age 62+, Head or Spouse
% Age 62+ or Disability
% With Children Under 18
% Single Parent
% Minority total
% Black
% Hispanic
Minority as % of Neighborhood

Section 8
Vouchers and
Certificates
3973
1433
204
9100
2.8
3250
20
16
34
66
57
58
39
15
39

Public Housing

Section 8
New and
SubRehab

Section 236

13755
2859
1322
192
8900
2.4
3708
37
32
48
45
39
68
48
17
59

15177
1403
895
190
8900
1.6
5563
20
60
74
23
20
37
23
11
34

4224
902
448
255
10000
2.1
4762
21
34
43
45
37
53
35
13
40

NOTES. – Most Section 236 units (67%) use Section 8 Loan Management as well as Section 236 subsidy.
SOURCE. – 1997 Picture of Subsidized Households Quick Facts (http://www.huduser.org/datasets/assthsg/picqwik.html).

8 NC/SR. The latter program serves the elderly and disabled to a much greater extent
than the other programs. Three fourths of the households served by this program are in
this category as opposed to about 45 percent in public housing and Section 236 and only
34 percent with vouchers and certificates. Section 8 NC /SR serves minorities to a much
lesser extent than the other programs. More than half of the households served by the
three other programs are members of a minority group, but only 37 percent of households
served by this program are minorities. Finally, public housing projects are much more
often located in neighborhoods with a high poverty rate and a high fraction of households
that are minorities.
One of the most salient features of the system of housing subsidies is the extent to
which it fails to offer assistance to all eligible households.27 Consider the largest group
that has been given priority for assistance by the biggest housing programs. For many
years, Congress has required that Public Housing and Section 8 reserve a substantial
majority of newly allocated units for households whose incomes are less than limits
based on 50 percent of the local median income for four-person households, with
nationally uniform percentage adjustments for households of other sizes as previously
described. These households account for 27% of all households in the country. Only
28% of the renters in this income group receive housing assistance. Local housing
agencies have been allowed to admit households into these programs with incomes up to
60% higher than the limits based on 50 percent of the local median for almost twenty
years. Forty two percent of all households meet these higher income limits, and 23% of
the renters in this larger group receive housing assistance.
Because the upper income limit for continued receipt of housing assistance under
these programs greatly exceeds the upper income limit for admission into the programs
and exceptions to the limits are allowed in some cases and some programs have higher
upper income limits, many households with higher incomes receive housing subsidies
under means-tested housing programs. Specifically, 10% of all renters with incomes
between limits based on 50 and 80 percent of the local median for four-person
households and the standard HUD adjustments for households of other sizes receive
means-tested housing assistance. Seven percent with incomes between limits based on
80 and 120 percent of the local median and 7% with incomes in excess of limits based on
120 percent of the local median also receive means-tested housing assistance.
Obviously, the overwhelming majority of eligible households do not receive
housing assistance. This is not because they do not want it on the terms offered. There
are long waiting lists to get into subsidized housing in all localities, and the length of the
waiting list understates excess demand in many localities because housing authorities
often close their waiting lists when they get sufficiently long. 28
Two numbers clearly reveal the extent to which HUD’s housing assistance is
focused on the poorest households. Forty three percent of the household’s served by
HUD’s programs are above the poverty line (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, 1992, Table 1-1.) while seventy percent of renters below the poverty line
27

See U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2000) for the numbers reported in this and the
next paragraph.
28
HUD does not regularly collect data on the size of the waiting lists under any of its programs. However,
a telephone survey in 1999 by HUD staff revealed that the Los Angeles Housing Authority alone had
342,000 households on its waiting list for Section 8 vouchers.

18

are not served (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1991, Table 4-12, and U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development, 1992, Table 1-1).
IV.

Program Effects

This section discusses what program effects should be expected based on each
program’s rules and the general assumptions of economic theory, and it describes the
evidence on important effects of Public Housing, Section 236, Section 8 NC/SR, and
tenant-based Section 8 Certificates and Vouchers. To the best of my knowledge, no
research on Section 515 or the LIHTC deals with the effects considered in this paper.
One theme of this section is that little can be said about many effects of
government housing programs based on the usual assumptions of economic theory even
combined with plausible additional assumptions such as the normality of housing and
leisure. For example, housing programs change budget spaces in ways that do not imply
that recipients will occupy better housing or work less.
A.

Cost-Effectiveness

Since large sums of money are spent on housing subsidies and many different
methods are used to deliver them, it is important to consider the cost-effectiveness of
alternative approaches. When needlessly expensive methods of delivering housing
assistance are used, many low-income households who could have been provided with
adequate housing at an affordable rent within the current budget continue to live in
deplorable housing.
All cost-effectiveness analyses of housing programs involve a comparison of the
total cost of providing the housing with its market rent. For tenant-based vouchers and
certificates, the approach is straightforward because all of the costs associated with
providing the housing during a period occur in that period and they are all in the records
of the administering agency. Estimating a statistical relationship between the rent and
characteristics of unsubsidized apartments and then substituting the characteristics of the
subsidized units into it yields estimates of the market rents of the units occupied by
subsidized households.
Dealing with construction or rehabilitation programs is more difficult because the
time path of cost bears no particular relationship to the time path of the market rent of a
unit and all of these programs involve indirect costs that are not in the records of the
administering agency. The most widely accepted measure of cost-effectiveness for
programs of this type is the ratio of (1) the present value of the rents paid by tenants and
all direct and indirect costs incurred by federal, state, and local governments to (2) the
present value of the market rents of the units over the period that the units are used to
house subsidized families. If a government owns the project at the time that it stops
being used to house subsidized families, the present value of the project’s market value at
that time should be subtracted from the present value of the costs. A severe practical
problem in implementing this approach is that data on the condition of the apartments in
subsidized housing projects over their lives is not available, and some of the costs are
difficult to obtain for each year. As a result, only one study (U. S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, 1974, pp.123-128) has fully implemented this

19

approach. Other studies take various shortcuts or rely on strong assumptions about
missing data.
This measure of cost-effectiveness focuses on effectiveness in providing housing
to the recipient. It does not capture benefits or costs of a housing program to others. For
example, it is possible that some housing projects make the neighborhoods in which they
are located more attractive places to live. Other projects may have the opposite effect.
The standard measure of cost-effectiveness captures neither positive nor negative effects
of this sort.
Broadly speaking, there are three potential sources of cost-ineffectiveness of
housing programs – distortions in input choices for producing housing services,
insufficient incentives for efficiency on the part of civil servants, and excessive profits to
developers of private projects. This section discusses each source.
Almost all of the subsidies for housing projects are subsidies for the initial
development of the project or subsidies that are independent of input usage. For
example, some programs provide direct loans for development at below-market interest
rates, others pay a fixed proportion of the mortgage payment on private loans, still others
provide tax credits that are proportional to development cost, and some pay directly the
entire development cost. Among subsidies that do not depend on input usage are rental
assistance payments under the Section 8 NC/SR Program and Public Housing operating
subsidies since 1975. (Recall that the latter do not depend on the housing authority’s
actions.)
This has led some to conclude that housing services in these projects will be
produced with too much initial capital and too little of other inputs from the viewpoint of
efficient production. However, since all of these programs contain limits on per-unit
development cost, the net effect on input usage is ambiguous on theoretical grounds.
Nevertheless, the combination of capital subsidies and development cost limits surely
results in productive inefficiency to some extent.
The preceding argument applies most directly to for-profit firms who own and
operate housing for low-income households. However, to the extent that the decision
makers in local housing authorities and the nonprofits who sponsor subsidized projects
are interested in the well being of their tenants rather than other taxpayers, they apply
with some force to them as well.
Another incentive for inefficient production of housing services in privatelyowned projects is that the supplier’s revenue is independent of the condition of the
apartment, provided that it meets the program’s minimum occupancy standards. Given
the below-market rents that subsidized households are charged, there is a tremendous
excess demand for these units for many years after they are built. Therefore, owners will
have no trouble renting them even if they are allowed to deteriorate substantially. Just as
in the case of simple rent control, this should lead to too little maintenance from the
viewpoint of efficient production of housing services.
An additional source of inefficiency is involved in the case of public housing.
Under the public housing program, government employees make all of the decisions that
are made by managers of profit maximizing firms in the private market. These include
the exact specifications of the project to be built and exactly what maintenance and
renovations to undertake. These decisionmakers also must monitor the performance of
the employees of the housing authorities. The government managers involved do not

20

have the same financial incentives to operate efficiently as owners of private rental
housing. If they make good decisions, they are not rewarded. If they make bad
decisions, they suffer no consequences over a wide range of bad decisions. Indeed, they
cannot easily learn whether they have made good or bad decisions. Due to the subsidy,
they will not lose their tenants unless they make extraordinarily bad decisions.
The other construction and rehabilitation programs such as Section 8 NC/SR and
the Low Income Housing Tax Credit provide subsidies to selected private suppliers,
albeit with restrictions concerning who may live in the units, how much rent may be
charged, etc. The subsidies and restrictions are designed (or redesigned based on initial
experience) to insure that the money budgeted is spent. In all cases, the result has been
that many more suppliers want to participate than can be accommodated with available
funds. For example, developers have requested three times as much money as state
housing agencies have to allocate under the LIHTC in recent years. The reason that there
is an excess demand for program funds by suppliers of housing is that those who are
allowed to participate make excessive profits, provided that they do not have to pay
anything for the privilege. This explains the bribery and influence peddling under these
programs that comes to light from time to time.
Four major studies attempt to compare the costs incurred to provide units under
various housing programs with the market rents of these units.29 Table 7 reports the
results of these studies. In assessing the results in this table, it is important to realize that
the Olsen-Barton and HUD studies of public housing did not include the federal or local
cost of administering the program as opposed to the cost of managing the housing. The
other studies did include administrative cost. This would add about 14% to the cost of
these programs. Furthermore, the cost of the Section 8 New Construction Program did
not include any indirect costs. These include the tax exemption of the interest on state
bonds issued to finance state housing agency projects and the interest subsidy involved in
the Tandem Plan financing of FHA-insured projects. Previous research on the
magnitudes of these subsidies led Wallace and his coauthors to conclude that these
indirect subsidies add 20 to 30 percent to the total cost of the projects.
With the aforementioned adjustments to insure comparability, these studies are
unanimous in finding that it costs significantly more than a dollar to provide a dollar’s
worth of housing under construction programs such as Public Housing, Section 236, and
Section 8 New Construction. The studies of housing certificates and vouchers show that
the total costs of these programs exceed the market rents of the units by approximately
the cost of administering the program. Excluding administrative cost, the two earliest
studies find excess costs of public housing in the range of 10 to 17 percent. The more
recent studies find excess costs for this program in the range of 65 to 106 percent. The
range of the estimated excess cost of Section 236 is 33 to 87 percent, and the estimated
excess cost of Section 8 NC/SR is 30 to 40 percent.
These estimates almost surely understate the extent of the inefficiency of
construction programs compared with tenant-based certificates and vouchers for two
29

See Olsen (2000) for a description and appraisal of the data and methods used in these studies. This
paper also discusses a study by Schnare and others (1982) that focuses on differences in development costs
across programs and contains problematic results on overall cost-effectiveness. Weinberg (1982)
summarizes the research in Wallace and others (1981) and Mayo (1986) summarizes his studies of the costeffectiveness of U.S. and German housing programs.

21

TABLE 7
RATIO OF PRESENT VALUE OF COST TO PRESENT VALUE OF MARKET RENT
Housing Vouchers
Mayo and others (1980B)

Phoenix

1975

1.15

Mayo and others (1980B)

Pittsburgh

1975

1.09

Wallace and others (1981)

National

1979

0.91

Olsen and Barton (1983)

New York City

1965

1.14a

Olsen and Barton (1983)

New York City

1968

1.10a

U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (1974)

Baltimore, Boston, Los Angeles,
St. Louis, San Francisco, Washington

1971

1.17a

Mayo and others (1980B)

Phoenix

1975

1.79

Mayo and others (1980B)

Pittsburgh

1975

2.20

Mayo and others (1980B)

Phoenix

1975

1.47

Mayo and others (1980B)

Pittsburgh

1975

2.01

National

1979

1.24b

Public Housing

Section 236

Section 8 New Construction
Wallace and others (1981)

NOTES. -- (a) Excludes cost of program administration of about 14%.
(b) Excludes all indirect costs estimated to add 20% to 30%.

reasons. First, the studies using data before 1975 based their estimates of market rent on
an estimated hedonic equation containing a short list of easily observed housing
characteristics. Older public housing projects did not have many of the unobserved
amenities that were common in the private sector. So there is good reason to expect the
estimated hedonic equation to overstate the market rents of public housing units. The
more recent studies are based on much more detailed data on housing characteristics and
hence are likely to provide more accurate estimates of the market rents of public housing
units. Second, unlike tenant-based assistance, the construction programs involve indirect
subsidies that do not appear in the program’s records. All studies attempt to estimate the
magnitude of the major indirect subsidies. However, no study attempts to estimate the
magnitude of all of the indirect subsidies. For example, some public housing units were
built on land donated by federal, state and local governments. No study has attempted to
add the market value of this land to the cost of public housing. Nonprofit developers of
Section 8 New Construction projects sometimes receive property tax exemptions or
abatements. No study has attempted to account for this indirect subsidy.
An influential view in discussions of housing policy is that subsidized new
construction is needed in localities with the lowest vacancy rates. This suggests that
construction programs will be more cost-effective than vouchers in these areas.
Obviously, the small number of studies of cost-effectiveness and the different
methodologies used in these studies preclude making any judgment about this matter.
Whether there are any market conditions under which construction programs are more
cost-effective than vouchers is surely one of the most important unanswered questions in
housing policy analysis.
B.

Consumption Patterns

Ideally, a theoretical analysis of the possible effects of housing programs on
consumption patterns would consider all of the other welfare programs for which a
household is eligible in describing its budget space in the absence of the housing program
and define preferences over at least three composites – housing, other produced goods,
and leisure. This has never been done in a theoretical analysis.30 In this section, we will
follow the more traditional approach in the literature, namely to assume that income is
not subject to choice and that households would face a linear budget frontier defined by
this income and market prices for all goods in the absence of housing subsidies. These
same assumptions underlie almost all empirical studies of the effects of housing programs
on consumption patterns. Even with these simplifying assumptions, little can be said on
theoretical grounds about the effect of any housing program on consumption of housing
and other goods. For example, the public housing program could induce households to
consume more housing services and consume less of other goods, more of all goods, or
less housing service and more of other goods.
To see why the usual assumptions of economic theory have no important
implications for consumption of housing services and other produced goods under any
form of project-based assistance, consider Figure 3. In this figure, consumption of
30

Schone (1994) accounts for several major welfare programs and taxes in her empirical study of the
effects of housing and other programs on consumption patterns that will be discussed when we consider
work disincentive effects.

22

QX

Y/PX
A
G

QXG
B

C

QHG

Y/PH

FIG. 3. – Budget Space for Project-Based Program

QH

housing services is measured on the horizontal axis and consumption of other produced
goods on the vertical axis.31 The line segment is the budget line in the absence of the
housing subsidy. Since housing assistance is not an entitlement, each subsidized
privately owned project and each local housing authority has a waiting list. When a unit
becomes available, it is offered to a household on the waiting list of an appropriate size
for that apartment. This apartment provides a certain quantity of housing service QHG
and the rent that the eligible household must pay enables it to consume a certain quantity
of other goods QXG. Normally, if the household declines the offer, they are removed
from the waiting list. In some cases, the household is allowed to decline several offers
before removal. This does not change the argument in any fundamental way. In essence,
the household is offered an all-or-nothing choice of a particular bundle. The household
accepting this offer might choose bundle A, B, or C in the absence of the program.
Therefore, the program can have any effect on the consumption bundle of a participant
other than reducing its consumption of both goods.
The same conclusion is reached for any type of tenant-based assistance that has
been used except for the form of housing voucher that was used between 1983 and 1999.
Figure 4 depicts the budget spaces of eligible households who were offered assistance
under the major certificate and voucher programs. In this diagram, Y is the household’s
income and PH and PX are unsubsidized prices of housing services and other goods.
Since participation in these programs is voluntary, a household that is offered assistance
can consume any bundle on or below the usual budget line defined by these parameters.
All of these programs of tenant-based assistance require recipients to live in apartments
meeting minimum housing standards in order to receive assistance. To describe the
budget space accurately, it would be necessary to decompose the housing bundle into its
components because the standards apply to some, but not all, characteristics of housing.
When a scalar index of the quantity of housing services is used, this constraint places a
lower limit on housing consumption QHMIN as a condition for receipt of a subsidy.32
Under the original certificate program, participants had to occupy units renting for
less than the local Fair Market Rent (FMR) for units of the size occupied. The FMR in
an area for units with a certain number of bedrooms has always been the rent at a
specified percentile of the distribution of rents of a subset of units of this size. Currently,
it is the fortieth percentile of the rents of standard quality units occupied within the past
fifteen months and not built within the last two years.33 Since there is an upper limit on
the number of bedrooms that may be occupied by each household depending upon its size
and composition and a ceiling rent for apartments of each size, the FMR places an upper
31

The quantity of housing service is an index of all of the attributes of housing valued by consumers,
including its neighborhood characteristics. In much of the empirical literature, it is measured by the market
rent of the dwelling divided by a housing price index. A housing price index across areas or over time is
the market rent of dwellings with the same characteristics. The more comprehensive the list of housing
characteristics, the better the housing price index. A few studies based on the housing occupied
immediately before and after receipt of housing assistance provide information on the program’s effect on a
few particular housing characteristics.
32
In research on these programs, this has been measured as the market rent of units that just meet the
program’s standards but are minimal in other respects divided by a housing price index (Olsen and Reeder,
1983; Olsen and Crews, 1997).
33
Fair Market Rents apply to entire metropolitan areas and their surrounding counties and nonmetropolitan
counties and are published in the Federal Register each year. See, for example, 64FR53450.

23

QX

1. Certificate Program (1974 - 1980):
2. Certificate Program (1980 - phaseout):
3. Voucher Program (1983 - phaseout):
4. Voucher Program (Oct. 1, 1999 -):

A, B
A
A, B, C, D, E
A, C

Y/PX

D
B
[Y-α(Y-A)]/PX

[Y-.4(Y-A)]/PX

C
A
E

α(Y-A)/PH QH

MIN

QH
FMR/PH

Y/PH

[(1-α)Y+αA+FMR]/PH

FIG. 4. – Budget Spaces Under Section 8 Certificate and Voucher Programs

limit FMR/PH on each participant’s consumption of housing services.34 A participant that
occupied a unit renting for the applicable FMR paid a fraction α of its adjusted income
Y-A in rent. (The fraction is currently .3.) In this case, the subsidy was FMR-α·(Y-A)
and the participant’s consumption of other goods would be [Y-α·(Y-A)]/PX. If the
participant occupied a unit renting for less than the applicable FMR, she paid a fraction
α·(Y-A)/FMR of the rent. Therefore, the budget space under the original certificate
program was the areas A and B in Figure 4.
The feature of the original certificate program that reduced the rent of a tenant
occupying a unit renting for less than the FMR was intended to create an incentive for
participants to be economical. However, surveys revealed that few participants
understood the rent reduction credit, and it was eliminated in 1980. The budget space
under the revised certificate program was the area A.
The voucher program that was introduced as a demonstration in 1983 and
operated simultaneously with the Certificate Program had a simpler structure. It paid a
fixed amount towards the participant’s rent provided that the participant occupied a unit
meeting the program’s standards. The fixed amount was PS-α·(Y-A), where PS refers to
the payment standard. The payment standard for households of each size and
composition could not exceed the applicable FMR, but housing authorities could set
payment standards at lower levels.35 For simplicity, Figure 4 assumes that PS is equal to
FMR. In this case, the budget space under the original voucher program is areas A, B, C,
D, and E.
The preceding certificate and voucher programs are being phased out in favor of a
voucher program that has some features of each of its predecessors. Starting from the
budget space under the most recent certificate program (the area A), the new voucher
program enables participants to occupy apartments renting for more than FMR, but
neither increases nor decreases their subsidy if they do it. The program places an upper
limit on housing consumption by limiting the tenant’s contribution to rent to 40 percent
of adjusted income. The tenant’s contribution is simply the excess of the rent received by
the landlord over the government’s subsidy, FMR-α·(Y-A). Since α is currently .3, the
upper limit on housing consumption is currently FMR+.1·(Y-A).
If housing is a normal good, the type of voucher program in operation between
1983 and 1999 will induce households to occupy better housing than in the absence of the
program, though not necessarily better than they would choose if given a cash grant equal
to the amount of the housing subsidy. This type of voucher could have the same effect as
the cash grant for some, all, or none of its recipients. It is easy to show that each of the
other certificate or voucher programs can have any effect on consumption patterns of
recipients except less of both goods.

34

Given the methodology used to calculate them, differences in FMRs between areas do not reflect only
geographical differences in housing prices, that is, the difference in the mean rent of identical units in
different areas. Therefore, the ceiling on housing consumption has been different for identical households
in different localities.
35
Since each authority was allocated a fixed amount of money, setting the payment standard below the
FMR enabled it to serve more households. Under the Certificate Program, the authority was allocated a
certain number of certificates. This created an incentive for each authority to lobby for higher FMRs in its
area to increase the subsidies received by local residents.

24

In short, the design of housing programs does not insure that they change
consumption patterns in a way that is consistent with their justifications. It is an
empirical matter whether they have the desired effects.
The available evidence reported in Table 8 strongly suggests that all housing
programs result in substantially better housing for participants. The percentage increase
tends to be greatest for new construction programs in their early years when most of the
units are new. As the average age of the units under a construction program increases,
the percentage increase in housing consumption of participants declines. The results
reported in Table 9 illustrate this feature of construction programs. In 1970, the median
age of public housing units was 22 years and the mean market rent of these units differed
little from the mean rent of all unsubsidized rental units. At the same time, all Section
236 units were only a few years old. The mean market rent of these units was almost
twice as great as the mean rent of all unsubsidized rental units.
Almost all housing programs at almost all times have also increased the
consumption of other goods by participants. That is, participants spend less on housing
than they would have spent in the absence of the program. Because the overwhelming
majority of participants in each housing program pay the same percentage of their
adjusted income for rent, there is little difference in expenditure on other goods among
households with the same income. Expenditure on other goods under the program differs
on account of different adjustments to income and possibly because the household must
pay more than 30% of adjusted income in order to live in a privately owned subsidized
project (about 25% of the households in privately-owned HUD projects are in this
category).
The numbers reported in Table 8 indicate that the percentage increase in
consumption of other goods is less than the percentage increase in housing consumption
in public housing, that the opposite is true for tenant-based certificates, and that Section
236 had little effect on consumption of other goods in its early years when the rent
schedule required the poorest participants to pay a flat rent exceeding 25 percent of their
income. Currently, about two thirds of the occupants of Section 236 units pay 30 percent
of their adjusted income in rent because they receive project-based Section 8 subsidies,
and so this program’s effect on consumption of other goods is almost surely positive
now.
Unfortunately, the contract reports done for HUD have consistently failed to
calculate the percentage increase in consumption of other goods resulting from the
programs studied or to provide the relevant mean incomes that would allow others to do
it. However, these studies do indicate the dollar magnitude of the decrease in expenditure
on housing. With income fixed, this is the dollar magnitude of the increase in
expenditure on other goods. These studies consistently report that housing programs lead
to decreases in housing expenditure.
A careful consideration of the justifications for housing subsidies to the poor
suggests that a housing program is not successful unless it induces the worst housed
households with each income to occupy better housing and consume less of other goods
than they would choose if they were given cash grants involving the same subsidy.36
These are the households who undervalue housing in the eyes of paternalistic altruists.
36

The subsidy is the excess of the market value of goods consumed under the program over the market
value of goods consumed in the absence of the program.

25

TABLE 8
PERCENTAGE INCREASE IN CONSUMPTION OF HOUSING AND OTHER GOODS
Housing

Other

Public Housing
Olsen and Barton (1983)

New York City

1965

58%

17%

Olsen and Barton (1983)

New York City

1968

66%

17%

U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (1974)

Austin, Boston, Honolulu, Indianapolis
Minneapolis, Pittsburgh, Washington

1971

82%

19%

U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (1974)

Baltimore, Boston, Los Angeles,
St. Louis, San Francisco, Washington

1971

71%

16%

U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (1974)

Boston, Pittsburgh, St. Louis,
San Francisco, Washington

1971

59%

5%

Kraft and Olsen (1977)

National

1971

33%

14%

Mayo and others (1980A)

Phoenix

1975

35%

NA

Mayo and others (1980A)

Pittsburgh

1975

22%

NA

Hammond (1987)

National

1977

41%

*

U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (1974)

NA

1972

51%

0%

Mayo and others (1980A)

Phoenix

1975

31%

NA

Mayo and others (1980A)

Pittsburgh

1975

26%

NA

National

1979

58%

NA

Reeder (1985)

National

1976

16%

50%

Wallace and others (1981)

National

1979

31%

NA

Leger and Kennedy (1990B)
Certificates
Vouchers

Large Urban PHA

1986
59%
63%

NA
NA

40%

*

Section 236

Section 8 New Construction
Wallace and others (1981)
Section 8 Existing (Tenant-based)

All Programs
Hammond (1987)

National

1977

NOTES. – The percentage increase in consumption is the percentage increase in the real market value
(that is, market value divided by an index of the prices of the goods in a category).
NA = Not available.
* = Not comparable with other results due to intertemporal approach used.

TABLE 9
MEAN GROSS MARKET RENTS OF SUBSIDIZED AND UNSUBSIDIZED UNITS, 1970
Section 236
Metropolitan Area

Unsubsidized
All Renters

Public Housing

New

Rehab

Baltimore
Boston
Los Angeles
Pittsburgh
St. Louis
San Francisco
Washington, D.C.

116
135
128
110
97
144
134

113
125
117
92
103
133
136

–
245
–
226
224
224
215

–
206
–
214
–
–
197

SOURCE. – U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (1974, Tables 18 and 31).
NOTES. – The mean rents for all renters include the rents paid by subsidized households. Since the
mean rent paid by subsidized households was below the mean rent of unsubsidized households, these
mean rents understate the mean rent of unsubsidized households. However, since less than five
percent of renters received housing assistance, the bias is surely small. Section 236 market rents are
from 1972-73 data,adjusted to 1970 dollars using a national consumer price index.

Since other programs such as Food Stamps and Medicaid are intended to deal with
households who overvalue housing in the eyes of paternalistic altruists (that is,
households with excessive rent burdens), it is not clear how housing programs should
change the consumption patterns of these households.
Since substantial empirical evidence supports the view that the mean income
elasticity of demand for housing is no greater than one, the results in Table 9 strongly
suggest that in aggregate occupants of public housing projects consume more housing
services than they would consume if given cash grants equal to their housing subsidies.
If the relevant numbers had been included in the reports of HUD’s contractors, it might
have been possible to make similar statements about other programs.
While many studies compare housing consumption with and without the program,
only four make the more relevant comparison between housing consumption under the
program and housing consumption with cash grants equal to the housing subsidies. Table
10 reports the results of these studies. They show that public housing, tenant-based
Section 8 certificates, and the entire system of housing subsidies have this effect in
aggregate, though the effect is more pronounced for public housing than for certificates.
What the existing studies do not tell us is whether the households whose
consumption is “distorted” towards housing by these programs would have been among
the worst housed households with the same budget constraint in the absence of housing
assistance. Recall that the rationale for housing subsidies implies that these are the
households whose consumption should be distorted towards housing.
In deciding how many households should be subsidized to consume housing
beyond the levels resulting from cash grants, it is important to realize that the
overwhelming majority of households eligible for housing assistance would not live in
housing with severe or moderate physical problems or more than one person per room in
the absence of the assistance. [See U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(2000, pp. A28-A29) for HUD’s definition of these terms.] In 1997, only 23 percent of
unassisted eligible households lived in such housing (U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, 2000, Table A5). Since the preprogram housing of recipients of
housing assistance differs little from the housing of all eligible households (Wallace and
others, 1981, p.171), about three fourths of all eligible households would not have these
housing problems in the absence of housing programs.
C.

Neighborhood Choices

In discussing the neighborhood effects of subsidized housing, it is important to
distinguish between its effect on the types of neighborhoods in which assisted families
live and the effect of housing programs on the characteristics of the people and housing
in a particular neighborhood. This section deals with the former. In the absence of
housing subsidies, each currently assisted household would live in a particular
neighborhood. With housing assistance, many of these households live in different
neighborhoods. The difference in the characteristics of these neighborhoods for program
participants is the effect of the program in this regard.
Before considering program effects, it is useful to provide some information on
the neighborhoods occupied by households under the three broad types of rental housing
assistance. Until quite recently, good national information on the neighborhoods in

26

TABLE 10
PERCENTAGE INCREASE IN HOUSING CONSUMPTION BEYOND CASH GRANTS
Public Housing
Olsen and Barton (1983)

New York City

1965

48%

Olsen and Barton (1983)

New York City

1968

53%

Hammond (1987)

National

1977

40%

Schone (1994)

National

1984

49%

National

1976

10%

National

1977

39%

Section 8 Existing (Tenant-based)
Reeder (1985)
All Programs
Hammond (1987)

NOTES. – Cash grant involved in these calculations is equal to the subsidy (that is, market rent minus
tenant rent) rather than the cost to taxpayers.

which subsidized households live did not exist. Sandra Newman and her collaborators
have remedied this deficiency. (See Newman and Schnare (1997) for a description of the
data base that they have assembled and some initial results based on it.) Table 11 reports
one of the results of their efforts. It shows that the neighborhoods occupied by public
housing tenants have many more households with incomes below the poverty line than
the neighborhoods occupied by recipients of other types of project-based assistance,
certificates and vouchers, and welfare recipients. Recipients of certificates and vouchers
live in noticeably better neighborhoods in this regard than households in the other
categories.
Under the assumption that, in the absence of housing subsidies, households under
each broad type of housing assistance would live in neighborhoods with the same
characteristics as the neighborhoods currently occupied by welfare recipients, this table
would indicate the effect of housing subsidies on the neighborhoods of assisted
households. However, since there are some marked differences in the characteristics of
the households served by the three types of program (see Table 6), it is not reasonable to
expect that average characteristics of the neighborhoods of the households in these three
groups would be the same in the absence of a housing subsidy.
A number of studies attempt to estimate this program effect directly by comparing
the characteristics of the neighborhoods of households immediately before and after
receipt of a housing subsidy. Tables 12 through 15 report some results of studies of the
project-based Section 8 NC/SR Program and the tenant-based Section 8 Existing
Program. The data underlying these studies are for a random sample of units in a random
sample of projects (in the case of project-based assistance) within a random sample of
urban areas.
Table 12 reveals that 57% of the minority households who moved into Section 8
NC/SR projects lived in the central city before and after their move and that 32% lived in
the suburbs before and after their move. Only 11% of these households moved from the
central city to the suburbs. So this program does not induce mass migration of minorities
from central cities to suburbs. Table 13 indicates that participation in this program
typically induced black households to move to a neighborhood with a substantially lower
minority percentage.
Tables 14 and 15 refer to the effects on recipients of the tenant-based Section 8
Existing Program. Many participants in this program receive subsidies without moving
because their initial units already meet the program’s standards or (less often) are
repaired to meet the standards and they choose not to move at least initially. The
program has no immediate effect on their neighborhoods. Table 14 indicates that those
households who move on receipt of the subsidy have fewer poor neighbors and live in
neighborhoods where the housing is better. However, these effects are modest. Table 15
indicates that tenant-based certificates and vouchers also have a modest effect in reducing
racial segregation in housing.
Finally, studies done as a part of the Experimental Housing Allowance Program
indicated that public housing induces its participants to live in neighborhoods with a
much higher fraction of low-income households and its black participants to live in
neighborhoods with a significantly higher fraction of minority households (Kennedy,
1980, Table 3-9 and 3-14).

27

TABLE 11
DISTRIBUTION OF UNITS BY POVERTY RATE
(Percent)
Assisted Housing

Less than 10 percent
10-29 percent
20-39 percent
40 percent or more

Public
Housing

Private
Developments

Certificates
and Vouchers

Welfare
Households

All Rental
Units

7.5
38.9
17.1
36.5

27.4
50.7
11.5
10.4

27.5
57.8
9.5
5.3

25.3
51.0
12.1
11.6

42.1
45.4
6.8
5.7

SOURCE. – Newman and Schnare (1997, Table 3).

TABLE 12
MINORITY PERCENTAGE OF ALL HOUSEHOLDS BY LOCATION
BEFORE AND AFTER ENROLLMENT:
SECTION 8 NEW CONSTRUCTION AND SUBSTANTIAL REHAB PROGRAM
Destination
Central City

Suburb

All Locations

Central City

57%

11%

68%

Suburb

2%

30%

32%

All Locations

59%

41%

100%

Origin

NOTES. – The sample size is 1385 observations.
SOURCE. – Wallace and others (1981, Table 3-8).

TABLE 13
MEAN CHANGE IN MINORITY CONCENTRATION FROM ORIGIN TRACT
TO DESTINATION TRACT FOR MAJOR DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS:
SECTION 8 NEW CONSTRUCTIONAND SUBSTANTIAL REHAB

Number of
Observations

Mean Percentage
Minority in
Tract of Origin

Mean Percentage
Minority in
Destination Tract

Mean Change in
Percentage
Minority

Black

1001

54%

35%

-19%

Hispanic

184

34%

32%

-2.3%

Minority

1314

47%

32%

-15%

Non-minority White

5918

7.2%

7.0%

0.2%

Household Type

SOURCE. – Wallace and others (1981, Table 3-9).

TABLE 14
INCOME AND HOUSING MARKET CHARACTERISTICS OF CENSUS TRACTS
OCCUPIED BY RECIPIENTS BEFORE AND AFTER PARTICIPATION:
SECTION 8 EXISTING
Housing Voucher Program

Certificate Program

13.3
12.6
13.7

13.3
12.5
13.5

16.2
19.3
17.2

16.9
19.9
16.1

233
217
235

240
215
234

2.6
2.6
1.7

2.6
2.2
1.9

Median Family Income (000s)
Stayers
Movers' Origin Tract
Movers' Destination Tract
Percent of Families Receiving Welfare
Stayers
Movers' Origin Tract
Movers' Destination Tract
Median Monthly Rent
Stayers
Movers' Origin Tract
Movers' Destination Tract
Percent of Units Without Adequate Plumbing
Stayers
Movers' Origin Tract
Movers' Destination Tract

SOURCE. – Leger and Kennedy (1990B, Tables 4.20 and 4.22).

TABLE 15
CHANGE IN RACIAL/ETHNIC CONCENTRATION OF TRACTS OCCUPIED BY BLACK
(NON-HISPANIC) RECIPIENTS WHO MOVED FROM THEIR PRE-ENROLLMENT UNIT:
SECTION 8 EXISTING
Housing Voucher Program

Certificate Program

75.8
73.8

77.1
73.7

7.9
8.4

8.8
9.4

63.9
61.9

64.0
61.2

Percent Minority
Origin Census Tract
Destination Census Tract
Percent Hispanic
Origin Census Tract
Destination Census Tract
Percent Black
Origin Census Tract
Destination Census Tract
SOURCE. – Leger and Kennedy (1990B, Table 4.25B).

D.

Work Disincentives

With minor exceptions, all programs mentioned in this paper have always been
means tested in the sense that there have been upper income limits for eligibility for
households of each size.37 Even the programs that have not been means-tested in this
sense for all participants over their entire histories have had income limits for many
participants for at least twenty years because the program’s rules applying to new
projects have changed or some participants receive extra subsidies under other programs
that have income limits.
The largest programs (Section 8 Certificates/Vouchers and Public Housing) and
three fourths of the units in privately owned HUD projects are also means tested in the
sense that the magnitude of the subsidy received by a household occupying a particular
dwelling depends upon its earned income (U. S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, 1997, p. 3). All units in the Section 8 New Construction Program, the
largest HUD program involving privately owned projects, are means tested in the second
sense. For more than fifteen years, the tenant has paid 30 percent of adjusted income in
rent under these programs.38
Under some project-based programs such as the LIHTC, Section 221(d)(3), and
Section 202 (older projects), the subsidy does not depend on income unless the unit or
household receives a subsidy from some other source. In each of these cases, the basic
program reduces the rent for each unit below the market rent, and the occupant pays this
rent independent of its income. However, as far back as 1965, some households in the
projects funded under these programs have received additional subsidies that reduced
their rents to a fixed fraction of their incomes, and a significant minority of the current
participants in these programs receives these extra subsidies. For example, about forty
percent of LIHTC units receive Section 8 assistance (GAO, 1997, p.40.).
The basic Section 236 program is between the two extremes of proportional
adjustment of rent to changes in adjusted income for all participants and no adjustment of
rent for all participants. Under the original program, all households who occupied
identical units in a Section 236 project and had incomes below a certain level paid the
same rent. (Within a project, the income cutoff was different for households occupying
apartments of different sizes.) If income exceeded the cutoff, the rent was twenty five
percent of adjusted income. Therefore, the benefit reduction rate was zero at low levels
of income and .25 at higher levels. Substantial numbers of households were in each
category. Between 1965 and 1974, some, but not all, of the poorest households living in
Section 236 projects received rent supplements that reduced their rents to 25 percent of
their adjusted incomes over a larger range of adjusted income. Only if the household’s
income fell below a very low level would its rent and hence subsidy be independent of its
earnings. After 1974, many more of the poorest households in Section 236 projects
received subsidies under the Section 8 Loan Management Set-Aside Program that
initially reduced their rents to twenty five percent of their adjusted incomes and later to
thirty percent.
In studying the work disincentive effects of housing programs, it is important to
realize that the subsidy is not the same function of earnings for all households with the
37
38

The primary exceptions have been the Section 202 and Section 221(d)(3) MIR.
This ignores several alternative rent schemes that applied to a small minority of recipients.

28

same characteristics, even within a given program and the same locality. The subsidy is
the excess of the market rent of the unit occupied over the rent paid by the tenant. The
preceding paragraphs pointed out the differences in the rents paid by households with the
same characteristics under some programs. Even more important are the enormous
differences in the market rents of the units occupied by similar households under all
mature construction programs. The newest units under these programs are very good and
hence have a high market rent. The worst are deplorable in part because the program’s
minimum occupancy standards are not always enforced. The maximum subsidy within a
locality under the each certificate or voucher program is the same for households with the
same characteristics. However, the maximum real subsidy under this program to a
household with the same real income will vary across localities because the program’s
guarantee (the FMR) is not the same everywhere in real terms.
Because the magnitude of the housing subsidy received by a household occupying
a particular dwelling is a decreasing function of its earned income in the vicinity of its
chosen bundle for the overwhelming majority of recipients of housing assistance and is
independent of earned income for all other recipients, it seems plausible that the standard
assumptions of economic theory together with the assumption that leisure is a normal
good would imply that each recipient would work less as a result of the program. Schone
(1992) has shown that this intuition is incorrect for a program such as public housing that
offers a household a specified apartment for a rent that is proportional to its earned
income. She does it by producing a counterexample that involves no peculiar
assumptions about preferences or the budget space of the household offered a public
housing unit. As usual, this is a result of the nonlinearities of the budget frontier.
Therefore, empirical research is required to determine even the qualitative effect of the
program in this regard.
In the seminal study of the labor supply effects of means-tested housing
programs, Murray (1980) estimated that public housing induces tenants to reduce their
labor earnings by about 4 percent. Since the study predated data on the hours worked by
participants in housing programs and information about multiple program participation,
many highly restrictive assumptions were required to make this estimate. First, Murray
assumed that leisure is separable from produced goods in household preferences. Many
utility functions used in empirical research have this property. Second, he relied on a
utility function defined over leisure and a composite of produced goods that was
estimated ignoring all nonlinearities in budget frontiers and all differences in market
prices facing households living in different localities. It also ignored differences in tastes
for leisure versus produced goods across different households, thereby ignoring selection
bias. Participants in housing programs may have a different taste for leisure than others.
Third, in estimating the subutility function defined over housing and other produced
goods, he ignored the other in-kind subsidies for which public housing participants were
eligible. However, he did allow for differences in taste based on certain observed
characteristics of households, and he did avoid selection bias at this stage by using data
on public housing tenants immediately prior to entering the program to estimate the
subutility function.
Since the SIPP, it has been possible (though extremely difficult) to estimate
household preferences accounting for many of the nonlinearities in budget frontiers that
result from government programs and to predict the effects of changes in the parameters

29

of these programs in a way that avoids selection bias. In the most important published
contribution to this literature, Keane and Moffitt (1998) estimate a model of labor supply
and program participation for female heads of household who are eligible for AFDC,
food stamps, and housing assistance. They model Medicaid as a benefit automatically
received by all participants in AFDC and account for federal income and social security
taxes. The estimated model is then used to predict the effects of a wide variety of
changes in the welfare system.
The treatment of housing assistance is the most problematic part of their analysis.
Since estimation is extremely challenging without disaggregation of produced goods into
housing and other produced goods, they did not do it. However, they recognized that
housing subsidies, unlike food stamps, are worth much less to many recipients than cash
grants in the amount of the subsidy. They also recognized that housing subsidies are not
entitlements and that many households that want to participate are not offered assistance.
Keane and Moffitt attempted to capture these aspects of reality by assuming that each
household could choose to participate in a program that would provide them with a cash
grant equal to an unknown fraction of the difference between the local fair market rent
under the Section 8 Certificate/Voucher Program for a household with its characteristics
and 30 percent of its adjusted income. That is, housing assistance was treated as an
entitlement NIT whose known parameters are parameters of the Section 8
Certificate/Voucher Program. However, they judged the results based on this
specification to be so implausible that they abandoned this approach and reestimated the
model treating the housing subsidy as an exogenous component of nonlabor income for
participants and not attempting to explain housing program participation.
Ignoring the possibility that the household alters its behavior to affect the
probability that it will be selected to participate in a housing program, the information
missing from the SIPP that precludes estimation of preferences in a straightforward
manner is whether a household that is not receiving housing assistance was offered
housing assistance during the period under consideration and what housing assistance
was offered. For example, was the household offered a Section 8 voucher? Was it
offered a particular public housing unit, and what were the characteristics of that unit?
(Even without this detailed information on what the household was offered, it would be
possible to proceed based on a knowledge of which households rejected offers and
approximations of the offer.) Accounting for the possibility that the household alters its
behavior to affect the probability that it will be selected to participate in a housing
program would require a model of decision making under uncertainty and a model of
administrative selection.39
The best study of the work disincentive effect of a housing program is also one of
the most sophisticated econometric studies of the labor supply effects of any government
program. In this study, Schone (1994) uses data from the SIPP to estimate the
distribution of preferences defined over leisure, housing and other produced goods for a
population of female-headed households. These estimates account for many of the
nonlinearities in the budget frontier resulting from eligibility for AFDC, food stamps,
public housing, federal and state income taxes, and social security taxes. (She deleted
households who are assisted by other housing programs from the sample because the
39

Crews (1995) has developed such a model to study the effects of housing programs on the consumption
of produced goods, treating labor earnings as exogenous.

30

specific program was not identified and hence she could not describe the household’s
budget frontier.) She then uses these estimates to predict the effects of several changes in
policy. She estimates that the combined effect of AFDC, food stamps, and public
housing is to reduce the labor supply of female-headed households by 42 percent and to
increase their consumption of housing by 18 percent (Schone, 1994, Table 7). Table 16
reproduces her Table 8. It shows that cashing out housing programs, that is, eliminating
housing programs and adding the housing subsidy to the AFDC guarantee of the
participants in these programs, will increase the labor supply of these households only 2
percent but will reduce their consumption of housing 33 percent.
One assumption underlying these estimates is that households who did not receive
housing assistance during the last quarter of 1984 were not offered housing assistance
during that period. Since it is certainly not the case that all households who are offered
housing assistance accept it, this assumption is violated to some extent. For example,
Kennedy and Finkel (1994) found that 13 percent of the households offered Section 8
vouchers and certificates in the early 1990s did not use them. The figure was 27 percent
in the mid-1980s (Leger and Kennedy, 1990A). (Similar figures for public housing and
subsidized privately owned projects are not available.) However, since turnover in
housing programs is low and the number of assisted households was not increasing
rapidly at this time, it is safe to say that only a minute fraction of Schone’s sample
declined an offer of housing assistance during the last quarter of 1984. In this sense, her
assumption is quite close to the truth.
Of course, some households surely declined to apply for housing assistance based
on the cost of participation broadly conceived and their perceptions of the likelihood of
being chosen to participate in each program and, in the case of project-based assistance,
the likelihood of being offered particular units. Modeling the decision to apply may
enable us to estimate the distribution of taste parameters in the population with less bias
and more precision. Two problems in implementing this approach are that few databases
contain information on whether a household is on a waiting list for housing assistance
and waiting lists are frequently closed to additional applicants. Therefore, it is incorrect
to conclude that households that are not on the waiting list do not want to participate.
E.

Mean Benefit and Subsidy

Since housing programs change budget spaces in ways very different from lumpsum grants, we certainly expect any satisfactory measure of benefit to be less than the
subsidy for almost all households. Therefore, the mean benefit should be less than the
mean subsidy.
Table 17 contains the results of seven studies that estimate both the mean benefit
and mean subsidy for one of the four programs or for the entire system of housing
subsidies. Clearly, there are few estimates for programs other than public housing, and
there are no recent estimates for any program or for the system as a whole. The median
of the estimated ratios of mean benefit to mean subsidy for public housing is .76, and
seventy percent of the estimated ratios are between .71 and .81. Based on one study
apiece, the ratio is between .63 and .77 for Section 8 NC/SR, .83 for tenant-based Section
8 Existing, and .61 for the system as a whole.

31

TABLE 16
SIMULATION OF CASHING OUT PUBLIC HOUSING
(for current public housing recipients)
Predicted Labor Supply / Week
Original Program
Participation Combination

Predicted H / Month

N

Baseline

Public Housing
Cashed Out

Baseline

Public Housing
Cashed Out

Public Housing Only

23

26.28

27.95

399.88

283.51

Public Housing, AFDC

2

0.98

0

492.46

230.53

Public Housing, Food Stamps

10

8.57

6.42

356.95

242.15

All Programs

39

0

0

394.44

259.14

All Public Housing Recipients

74

9.35

9.56

393.71

263.65

SOURCE. – Schone (1994), Table 8.

TABLE 17
RATIO OF MEAN BENEFIT TO MEAN SUBSIDY
Measure Sample

Ratio

Public Housing
Olsen and Barton (1983)

New York City

1965

EV

1366

0.77

Olsen and Barton (1983)

New York City

1968

EV

1515

0.73

Murray (1975)
Cobb-Douglas
CES

7 Cities

1968

EV

1388

Kraft and Olsen (1977)

Boston, Pittsburgh, St. Louis,
San Francisco, Washington

1972

EV

333

Clemmer (1984)
Cobb-Douglas
Stone-Geary
Linear Demand
Nonlinear Demand

33 SMSAs

1977

EV

>20,000

Hammond (1987)

National

1977

EV

804

13 Metro areas

1979

CV

167

0.81
0.84
0.73

0.92
0.80
0.71
0.76
0.64

Section 8 New Construction
Schwab (1985)
Loglinear H Expenditure Function
Linear H Expenditure Function

0.63
0.77

Section 8 Existing (Tenant-based)
Reeder (1985)

National

1976

EV

1099

0.83

National

1977

EV

1088

0.61

All Programs
Hammond (1987)

F.

Distribution of Benefits

Little can be said on the basis of the program’s rules and the general assumptions
of economic theory about how mean benefit will vary with household characteristics
under any of the programs even within a single locality. Since larger households are
entitled to larger apartments under the programs considered, the subsidy will be greater
for larger households on this account. However, since larger units under new
construction programs may typically be in worse condition or in worse neighborhoods
than smaller units, they are not necessarily better overall. Therefore, the mean subsidy is
not necessarily greater for larger households. The certificate and voucher programs
provide a larger maximum subsidy to larger households within a locality. However, if
larger households experience a larger consumption distortion than smaller households,
they could receive a smaller benefit even though they receive a larger subsidy.
Similar remarks apply to the variation in mean benefit with household income
within a locality. For all units under many project-based housing programs and many
units under the rest, the rent that the tenant pays varies directly with income among
households of the same size. Therefore, if all households of a particular size served by a
program lived in apartments with the same market rent, the subsidy would be larger for
the poorest households of that size. Under all variants of tenant-based Section 8, the
maximum subsidy varies inversely with income among households of the same size.
However, it is far from the truth that all households served by a mature construction
program (that is, a construction program that has been in existence for many years)
occupy housing with the same real market rent. Furthermore, a larger subsidy does not
imply a larger benefit. If poorer households experience a larger consumption distortion
than richer households, they could receive a smaller benefit even though they receive a
larger subsidy.
Table 18 summarizes the results of regressions of estimated benefit on household
characteristics in which a linear relationship between mean benefit and income, family
size, age, race and other characteristics are assumed. All of the studies except Kraft and
Olsen used real benefit and income in their analyses. That is, they divided money benefit
and income by a cross-sectional price index.40
Some results are consistent across the studies. In public housing, tenant-based
Section 8, and the system as a whole, the mean benefit is larger for poorer households
that are the same with respect to other characteristics. Similarly, mean benefit is larger
for larger households. These results continue to hold when the authors allow for the
possibility of a non-monotonic relationship by including income and family size squared.
The results are less consistent for race and age of the head of the household. The
coefficients have different signs in different studies, they are often statistically
insignificant, and the magnitudes of the coefficients indicate small differences in mean
benefit among otherwise similar households who differ in these respects.
Two other noteworthy results emerged from these analyses. First, when Murray
included dummy variables for the different cities represented in his data in the regression
equation, he found substantial differences in the real mean benefit of public housing for
households with the same characteristics living in different urban areas. In her study of
40

Since Kraft and Olsen’s study is based on data for five of the country’s largest metropolitan areas, it is
not clear that taking account of overall differences in prices would have had much effect on their results.

32

TABLE 18
DISTRIBUTION OF BENEFITS AMONG PROGRAM RECIPIENTS
Income

Family Size

Black

Age

SE/Benefit

Sample

Olsen and Barton (1983) - 1965

–*

+*

–

–

0.38

1366

Olsen and Barton (1983) - 1968

–*

+*

–

–

0.43

1515

Murray (1975)

–

+

+*

+*

Kraft and Olsen (1977)

–*

+*

–*

–*

0.93

333

Hammond (1987)

–*

+*

–

+*

0.89

804

–*

+*

–

+

0.42

1099

–*

+*

+

+*

1.23

1088

Public Housing

1388

Section 8 Existing (Tenant-based)
Reeder (1985)
All Programs
Hammond (1987)

NOTES. – This table summarizes the results from multiple regression analyses in several articles. In each case,
the benefit is regressed on the variables presented in the first four columns and other variables. Olsen-Barton
and Kraft-Olsen included sex of the head of the household; Hammond included sex and education of the head
and dummy variables for region of the country and size of the locality; and Reeder included dummy variables
for sex of the head, other minority, and nonmetropolitan residence as well as an overall price index and the
squaresof income and family size. In Murray, Age is a dummy variable which indicates whether the head is 62
years or older. Murray also includes dummy variables for different household compositions rather than a single
variable for family size. The signs presented in the table indicate whether mean benefit varies directly (+) or
inversely (-) with the household characteristic. The fifth column presents the standard deviation of the error
term divided by the mean benefit, as a measure of the amount of variation present. Finally, the last column
gives the number of observations used in the regression.
* = the coefficient was statistically significant at the 5% level.

public housing and the entire system of housing subsidies, Hammond also found
substantial differences in real mean benefit for otherwise similar households living in
different regions and in places with different degrees of urbanicity. Reeder found large
differences in the real mean benefit of the Section 8 Existing Program between otherwise
similar households living in expensive and inexpensive locations. Second, when Reeder
included a measure of the household’s taste for housing in the regression equation, he
found that households with the strongest taste received the largest benefit from the
Section 8 Existing Program.
G.

Participation Rates

There are few studies of participation rates under housing programs. The
majority of studies are purely descriptive. They are intended to be useful for judging
whether the programs are serving the intended groups rather than testing hypotheses
about behavior.41 Reeder (1985, Table 6) presents the percentage of households in each
income and family size class who participate in any HUD program in 1977. The highest
participation rate in any of the 77 classes was less than 25 percent. The regularities are
that, for any family size, the participation rate first rises and then falls as income
increases. The poorest households of each size have very low participation rates. Within
each income class, participation rates are highest for one-person households, reflecting
the strong preference received by the elderly in housing programs, and for medium sized
families.
Wallace and others (1981, Figure S-3 and Table 2-8) compare the fraction of
eligible households and participants in the Section 8 Existing and New Construction
Programs with particular characteristics. For Section 8 Existing they find that in 1979 the
percentage of participants who were elderly was about the same as the percentage of
eligible in this category, that minorities were a slightly larger fraction of participants than
eligibles, and very-low income households were a noticeably larger fraction of
participants than eligibles. For Section 8 New Construction, elderly, white, females, and
small families were greatly overrepresented in the sense that they were a higher fraction
of participants than eligibles.
Olsen and Barton (1985, p. 325) use a linear probability model to estimate how
the participation rate in public housing in New York City in 1965 and 1968 varied with
the household’s income and size and with the age, race, and sex of the head of the
household. (At that time, public housing accounted for almost all subsidized housing for
the poor in the City.) The most striking finding is that blacks had a much higher
participation rate (about 20 percentage points) than whites with the same other
characteristics. Participation also increased noticeably with family size (about 4
percentage points per person).
In her attempt to account for both self and administrative selection in estimating
the preferences of recipients of housing subsidies and the benefits that they receive from
housing programs, Crews (1995) used data from the 11 metropolitan areas in the 1987
American Housing Survey to estimate a probit model explaining whether a household
41

Of course, different people may desire different patterns. For example, some may prefer no difference in
participation rates among otherwise identical blacks and whites, and others may have different preferences
in this regard. Whatever a person’s preferences, the pattern of participation is useful information.

33

receives housing assistance. Her explanatory variables reflect participation costs broadly
conceived and the factors involved in the preference systems of housing authorities. She
found that the poorest households, nonwhites, food stamp and welfare participants, and
the unemployed had higher participation rates that were statistically significant at the 1%
level. The elderly have a much higher participation rate that is statistically significant at
the 5% level. The variables representing federal preferences were jointly significant at
the 1% level.
H.

Market Prices

It is often argued that housing programs will have effects on the rents of
unsubsidized units with specified characteristics throughout the housing market. For
example, it has been argued that housing vouchers will lead to a higher demand and
hence higher rents for units that just meet the standards of the housing program and lower
demand and hence lower rents for the worst units because these units will be abandoned
by households who receive vouchers. This argument is certainly well founded on
economic theory at least in the short run. Others argue that new construction programs
will lead to lower prices for existing apartments. If the new construction comes as a
complete surprise to private suppliers, this is also a clear implication of standard
economic theory. However, if the new construction under the program is completely
anticipated by private suppliers, the opposite effect is to be expected. To the extent that
subsidized construction programs lead to greater production of housing, they drive up the
prices of inputs that are most important in the production of housing and thereby increase
the cost of producing housing with any specified characteristics.
Other than studies of the effects of housing programs on the rents of units in the
immediate neighborhoods of subsidized housing that will be discussed later, there are no
studies of the effects of any of the programs under consideration on market rents. The
aforementioned studies are usually interpreted as measuring the magnitude of
nonpecuniary external effects rather than market effects due to changes in the pattern of
demand and supply. NBER and Urban Institute simulation models have been used to
study the effects of hypothetical programs bearing some resemblance to the programs
under consideration (Kain, 1981). The Housing Allowance Supply Experiment did study
the effect on market prices of an entitlement housing voucher program similar to the
Section 8 voucher program in operation between 1983 and 1999. This study found little
effect on the market rents of units of any type (Barnett and Lowry, 1979; Mills and
Sullivan, 1981; Rydell, Neels, and Barnett, 1982). If an entitlement housing allowance
program for which 20% of households were eligible had no discernible effect on housing
prices, it is perhaps reasonable to conclude that existing tenant-based programs have little
effect. Nothing is known about the effects of the construction programs on housing
prices.
I.

Tangible External Benefits

Many of the alleged tangible external benefits and costs of particular types of
housing program would accrue to neighbors of subsidized households. To the extent that
they existed, these external benefits and costs would be reflected in neighboring property

34

values. Although the oldest study of this matter was conducted more than forty years
ago, there have been relatively few studies over the years.42 Until recently, these studies
have usually been limited to a small number of projects in one city or based on crude
methods and data. Recent advances in software for analyzing geographical data have led
to several detailed analyses based on data on sales of all unsubsidized single family units
and the location of all subsidized households or projects in several large metropolitan
areas. Lee, Culhane, and Wachter (1999) studied the effects of all major urban rental
housing programs.43 They find small positive effects on average for some programs and
small negative effects for others. Galster, Tatian, and Smith (1999B) find statistically
significant effects of the occupancy of units by recipients of Section 8 certificates and
vouchers on neighborhood property values. The direction of the effect depends on the
nature of the neighborhood and the concentration of program participants in the
neighborhood, and the magnitudes are relatively small.
J.

Other Issues

Other important issues dealt with in the literature on housing policy are the extent
to which subsidized new construction reduces unsubsidized construction (Murray, 1983;
1999), the effect of public housing waiting lists on intra-urban mobility (Painter, 1997),
the effect of subsidized housing on homelessness (Early, 1998), the effect of living in
public housing on the educational attainment of children (Currie and Yelowitz, 2000), the
effect of living in different types of housing project as a child on educational attainment
and earnings as an adult (Newman and Harkness, 2000), and the effect of requiring
subsidized households to live in low-poverty neighborhoods on self-sufficiency,
educational outcomes, and juvenile crime (Ludwig, Ladd, and Duncan, 2000A, 2000B,
2001).44
K.

Experimental Housing Allowance Program

No discussion of housing policy research would be complete without some
mention of the Experimental Housing Allowance Program (EHAP). The major goals of
EHAP were to determine the market effects of an entitlement program of tenant-based
housing assistance and the effects of various types of such assistance on household
choices. Congress authorized this program in 1970, planning for the experiment occurred
in the early 1970s, data were collected during the mid-1970s, and the final reports were
completed in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The experiment cost almost $200 million
(that is, more than $500 million in 2000 prices); research and data collection accounted
for almost half of this amount.45 The research firms that ran the experiments issued more
42

See Galster, Tatian, and Smith (1999A) for a review of the literature.
They incorrectly assume that the FHA-assisted units in their data are owner-occupied units. In fact, these
are units in privately owned subsidized rental projects under programs such as Section 221(d)(3) and 236
whose mortgages are insured by the FHA. Therefore, their conclusions about the effect of homeownership
programs on neighboring property values is not supported by their results.
44
Ludwig, Ladd, and Duncan’s research is based on data from HUD’s Moving to Opportunity
Demonstration Program in Baltimore. Their papers contain references to similar research based on data
from the other cities in the demonstration.
45
Sadly, HUD lost all of the data that had been so carefully collected and documented.
43

35

than 300 reports, technical notes, and professional papers. As a result of these
expenditures, we know more about the effects of the experimental programs studied than
any established housing program.
The experiment had four components: the Supply Experiment, the Demand
Experiment, the Administrative Agency Experiment, and the Integrated Analysis. The
first two were the largest and most important.
The Rand Corporation conducted the Supply Experiment. The experiment
involved operating entitlement housing allowance programs in the Green Bay and the
South Bend metropolitan areas. At the time of the experiment, Green Bay had few
minorities and a very low vacancy rate. South Bend had a large minority population and
a high vacancy rate. About 20 percent of the households in each area were eligible for
housing assistance. Unlike established housing programs, both renters and homeowners
could participate. These households were offered a cash grant on the condition that they
occupy housing meeting certain standards. These payments could continue for up to ten
years provided that the household remained eligible. The primary purposes of the
experiment were to determine the market effects of an entitlement program of householdbased assistance such as its effects on the rents of units with specified characteristics and
how suppliers alter their units in response to the program. The Supply Experiment
research still accounts for the bulk of what is known about these matters.
Abt Associates conducted the Demand Experiment in the Pittsburgh and Phoenix
metropolitan areas. This experiment was primarily intended to see how recipients would
respond to different types of household-based housing assistance and, for a given type, to
different program parameters. To this end, eligible households were assigned at random
to the different programs or to a control group that was paid a small amount of money to
provide needed information. One type of housing assistance offered eligible households
a cash grant under the condition that they occupy housing meeting certain standards,
another offered a cash grant under the condition that they spend at least a certain amount
on housing (two different amounts were tested), and another offered the same cash grant
with no strings attached. Two other plans offered to pay different fractions of the
household’s housing expenditure with no other strings attached. Since the Demand
Experiment provided subsidies for only three years and large changes in housing
consumption have a large fixed cost component, the Demand Experiment results
undoubtedly understate the responsiveness to a permanent program (Bradbury and
Downs, 1981, pp. 367-368).
The most important Demand Experiment research from the viewpoint of influence
on housing policy went beyond a comparison of different types of household-based
assistance. It compared the effects of the minimum standards housing allowance
program with the major established housing programs in existence at the time, namely
Public Housing, Section 236, and Section 23. The results of some of this research are
reported earlier in this paper.
In the Integrated Analysis, the Urban Institute helped to design all of the
experiments and used data from all of the experiments to analyze many of the same
questions considered by the contractors operating the experiments. The Administrative
Agency Experiment conducted by Abt Associates focused on the behavior of local
administrative agencies in operating an allowance program. Unlike the Demand
Experiment, it was not a controlled experiment.

36

The best introductions to this vast literature are the final reports of the Supply
Experiment, the Demand Experiment, and the Integrated Analysis (Lowry, 1983;
Kennedy, 1980; Struyk and Bendick, 1981), an edited volume containing (with one
exception) summaries of the findings by the major contributors to EHAP research
(Friedman and Weinberg, 1983), an edited volume containing evaluations of this research
by outside scholars (Bradbury and Downs, 1981), a monograph containing some of the
more technical results on consumer behavior from the Demand Experiment (Friedman
and Weinberg, 1982), and HUD’s 1980 summary report.
Although it is impossible to present a detailed review of the findings here, it is
possible to state a few of the most important results for housing policy. Since the only
type of tenant-based housing assistance studied in EHAP that has been used in an
established program is the cash grant conditional on occupying a dwelling meeting
certain housing standards and both the Supply and the Demand Experiments studied this
type of program, the summary will focus on it. 46
About half of the eligible families in the Supply Experiment occupied housing
meeting its standards and about a fourth of the eligible families in the Demand
Experiment sites occupied housing meeting its more stringent standards prior to receiving
assistance. Even at the lowest income levels, many households occupied units meeting
the standards of the Demand Experiment. This suggests the importance of preferences in
determining whether poor households meet housing standards. Not surprisingly,
households whose units met the standards prior to the program were much more likely to
participate in the minimum standards housing allowance program. They could receive a
subsidy without moving or getting their landlords to improve their apartments.
Although the entitlement housing allowance programs in Green Bay and South
Bend were heavily publicized, the participation rate leveled off at about a third after three
years. It was about 41 percent for eligible renters and 27 percent for eligible
homeowners. The primary reasons for the low participation rates are easy to understand.
Since the subsidy declines linearly with income until the upper income limit is reached
and the density of eligible households increases with income, many eligible households
were entitled to small subsidies. Many others who were eligible for somewhat larger
subsidies had to move to get them because their apartments were substantially below the
program’s minimum standards. Many households eligible at a point in time were only
briefly eligible. Finally, despite the heavy publicity, seventeen percent of eligible
households had not learned about the program by the end of its third year. Obviously, we
should not conclude that the participation rate in any entitlement minimum standards
housing allowance program would be a third. This is heavily dependent on the
generosity of the subsidy and the minimum standards. It is possible to have an expensive
entitlement housing allowance program serving a large number of households or an
inexpensive program serving a small number.
46

The Section 8 Voucher Program implemented in 1983 and currently being phased out is a program of this
type. (See Figure 4.) Since this program does not have the same specific parameters (housing standards,
real guarantee, and benefit reduction rate) as the programs studied in the experiments and participation in
the Section 8 Voucher Program depends importantly on administrative selection, it should not be expected
to have the same quantitative effects as the experimental programs. The best sources of information about
the effects of the Voucher Program are the detailed studies commissioned by HUD (Leger and Kennedy,
1990A, 1990B; Kennedy and Finkel, 1994).

37

The minimum standards housing allowance program tested in the Supply and
Demand Experiments resulted in modest increases in overall housing consumption as
measured by the mean market rent of the units occupied and a substantial effect in terms
of the fraction of eligible households meeting the program’s minimum standards.
Recipients in the Supply Experiment devoted 80 percent of their increased spending to
goods other than housing. For a slight majority of recipients, the minimum housing
standards were non-binding constraints. So the effect of the program on the consumption
patterns of these households was an income effect alone. For many others, only modest
improvements in their current housing were necessary to meet the standards. Indeed, the
required improvements were so modest that many renters made them without involving
their landlords.
Evidence from the Supply Experiment shows beyond a reasonable doubt that an
entitlement housing allowance program similar to the one tested will have no significant
effects on rents of units with specified characteristics even in the short run. Reasons for
the program’s small effect on rental housing prices are easy to find. Eligible families
account for only a small fraction of the demand for housing services in a given housing
market, and many of these families choose not to participate. So even a large increase in
demand by participants will have a small effect on aggregate demand for housing
services, and this small increase occurs gradually over time because not all families
respond instantly to an offer of assistance.47 Furthermore, the Supply Experiment
revealed that even over short periods suppliers are willing to make many changes in
existing units in response to small changes in the profitability of housing with different
characteristics. The effect of the housing allowance program on the rents of unsubsidized
units in submarkets defined in terms of housing characteristics was not studied.
V.

Reform Options

The major options for reform of the system of housing subsidies to low-income
households are answers to the following questions. Should housing assistance be an
entitlement? Should the poorest households of each size be given priority for housing
assistance? Should housing subsidies be delivered to additional households by building
new projects under some type of construction or substantial rehabilitation program or by
giving them housing vouchers? Should we require households currently living in
subsidized projects for which future federal expenditure is discretionary to live in these
projects to receive a subsidy and their owners given a sufficient subsidy to induce them to
continue to serve these households, or should these households be given housing
vouchers? This section will consider each of these questions.
Unlike other major means-tested transfer programs, housing assistance is not an
entitlement despite its stated goal of “a decent home and suitable living environment for
every American family” (Housing Act of 1949). No coherent justification for this feature
47

The response to an offer of housing assistance with minimum housing standards is surely slower than the
response to an offer of assistance for most other goods because many households must substantially
renovate their current housing or move in order to receive assistance. Despite this drawback of tenantbased housing assistance of this form, it still gets households into satisfactory housing much faster than any
form of new construction. The lag between authorization of funds and occupancy under all construction
programs is much greater than the lag under this form of tenant-based assistance.

38

of the system of housing subsidies has been offered. That is, no one has attempted to
explain why we should offer assistance to some, but not other, households with the same
characteristics.
The usual argument against making housing assistance an entitlement is that it
would be too expensive. Those who make this argument seem to have in mind delivering
housing assistance to all currently eligible households using the current mix of housing
programs and the current rules for the tenant’s contribution to rent. This would indeed
increase the amount spent on housing assistance greatly, though this magnitude has not
been estimated. However, we do not have to make more than forty percent of the
population eligible for housing assistance, we can reduce the fraction of housing
assistance delivered through programs that are cost-ineffective, and we can reduce
subsidies at every income level. Indeed, U.S. housing policy has been moving in this
direction as a result of (1) a series of amendments of 1937 Housing Act that required an
increasing percentage of households served by tenant-based assistance to be the poorest
of the currently eligible households, (2) the introduction and rapid expansion of the costeffective tenant-based Section 8 Program authorized by the 1974 Housing Act, and (3)
the increase in the tenant contribution to rent mandated by the Housing and Community
Development Amendments of 1981. Each of these reforms moved us in the direction of
an entitlement program.
Furthermore, it is easy to develop an entitlement housing assistance program with
any cost desired. For example, we could have an entitlement housing assistance program
without spending any additional money by a simple change in the Section 8 Voucher
Program, namely reducing the subsidy available to each eligible household by the same
amount. This will effectively eliminate from the program all households currently
eligible for subsidies smaller than this amount. These are the currently eligible
households with the largest incomes. This will free up money to provide vouchers to
poorer households who want to participate. The reduction in subsidies to those who
continue to participate will free up money to provide vouchers to households with
identical characteristics who had not previously been served. At current subsidy levels,
many more people want to participate than can be served with the existing budget. As we
reduce the subsidy at each income level, the number of households that are eligible for a
subsidy and willing to participate will decline until we reach a point where all households
who want to participate in the program are participating. So without any change in the
program’s budget, we can create an entitlement housing assistance program serving the
poorest of the currently eligible households. If reductions in the subsidies received by
current participants seem too draconian, we could phase in the new system by freezing
subsidies at current levels and allowing inflation to erode real subsidy levels.
In discussions of housing policy, a common objection to this proposal is that no
one would be able to find housing meeting the program’s standards with the lower
subsidies. Obviously, this objection is logically flawed. If we start from a position where
many more people want to participate than can be served with the existing budget and we
reduce subsidy levels slightly, it will still be the case that more people want to participate
than can be served. If we decrease the subsidy levels so much that no one wants to
participate, we have decreased them more than the proposed amounts.
A more sophisticated argument against the proposal is that the poorest households
will be unable to participate in the proposed program. The simple proposal above calls

39

for reducing the guarantee under the Voucher Program (called the Payment Standard).
This is the subsidy received by a household with no income. If the Payment Standard is
less than the rent required to occupy a unit meeting the Program’s minimum housing
standards, then a household whose income and assistance from other sources is just
sufficient to buy subsistence quantities of other goods would be unable to participate in
the proposed Voucher Program. Previous studies (Olsen and Reeder, 1983; Olsen and
Crews, 1997) have shown that the Payment Standard exceeds the market rent of units just
meeting the Program’s minimum housing standards in all of the many metropolitan areas
and bedroom sizes studied. The median excess was about 60 percent in the mid-1970s
and the mid-1980s. So a considerable reduction in the payment standard could occur
almost everywhere without precluding participation by the poorest of the poor. However,
the preceding proposal might lead to a particularly low participation rate by these
households. This could be counteracted by a smaller reduction in the guarantee
combined with a greater benefit reduction rate. For a given program budget, this would
yield a higher participation rate by the poorest of the poor and a lower participation rate
by other eligible households.
Another objection to the proposed program is that participants in the revised
Section 8 Voucher Program would receive much smaller subsidies than the majority of
identical households receiving project-based assistance, thereby introducing additional
inequities into the system of housing subsidies. This objection could be overcome by
increasing the tenant contribution under the programs of project-based assistance and
using the savings from the reduced subsidies under these programs to increase the budget
of the Voucher Program. If this were done, subsidies under the Voucher Program would
not have to be reduced as much to make it an entitlement program and hence the
program’s participation rate would be higher.
The other three questions in the introduction to this section are important whether
or not housing assistance is an entitlement. For example, whether the poorest households
should be given priority for housing assistance is an issue for an entitlement program in
the sense that the parameters of the program determine the participation rates of
households at each income level.
The trend in housing policy has been towards targeting assistance to the poorest
of the currently eligible households in tenant-based programs and in the opposite
direction for project-based assistance. The latter trend reflects a widespread agreement
among those involved in discussions of housing policy that concentrating the poorest
households at high densities in projects is a bad idea.48 To the extent that this belief is
justified and focusing aid on the poorest of the currently eligible households is desired,
the obvious policy options are to voucher out project-based assistance as soon as possible
given contractual commitments and to avoid building large new projects at high densities.
Both options will be discussed in detail below. However, it is worth mentioning at this
point that public housing authorities with HUD assistance have been tearing down some
of their worst large projects and replacing them with lower-density projects on the same
sites. (This initiative is called HOPE VI.) Since the optimal density of housing
production on a site from the viewpoint of efficient production depends on the price of

48

This view is not based on a substantial body of empirical evidence (though some evidence exists), and it
is not the case that the majority of housing projects are large high-rise buildings.

40

land, this policy might well have a substantial effect on the cost-effectiveness of the
public housing program.
The unanimity of the evidence on the cost-effectiveness of tenant-based vouchers
versus any form of project-based assistance studied is a strong argument for providing
vouchers to all additional households receiving housing assistance, especially because the
parameters of a voucher plan can be altered to change many of its other effects without
affecting its cost-effectiveness or its total cost to taxpayers. For example, if we want to
increase the effect of the latest voucher program on housing consumption at the expense
of consumption of other goods, we can reduce the subsidy at each income level and allow
recipients to spend more than 40 percent of their adjusted income on housing. (See
Figure 4.) The latter effectively increases allowed housing consumption. If we want to
increase the participation rate of the poorest households at the expense of other eligible
households, we can increase the program’s guarantee (that is, the Payment Standard) and
benefit reduction rate (that is, the tenant contribution as a fraction of adjusted income).
Two main objections have been raised to exclusive reliance on tenant-based
assistance.49 Specifically, it has been argued that tenant-based assistance will not work in
markets with the lowest vacancy rates and new construction programs have an advantage
compared with tenant-based assistance that offsets their cost-ineffectiveness, namely they
promote neighborhood revitalization to a much greater extent.
Taken literally, the first argument is clearly incorrect in that Section 8 Certificates
and Vouchers have been used continuously in all housing markets for more than two
decades. Obviously, it is impossible to keep all vouchers in use at all times due to the
inevitable lags between the time that the LHA receives new vouchers, or old vouchers
from households leaving the program, and the time that new recipients find housing that
suits them and meets the program’s standards. It is also true that some households who
are offered vouchers do not find such housing within their housing authority’s time
limits.50 However, other eligible households use these vouchers. The overwhelming
majority of certificates and vouchers are in use at each point in time. Local housing
authorities rarely, if ever, return certificates and vouchers to HUD.51
The real issue is not whether tenant-based vouchers can be used in all market
conditions but whether it would be better to use new construction or substantial
rehabilitation programs in tight markets. In this regard, two questions seem especially
important. Will construction programs get eligible households into satisfactory housing
faster than tenant-based vouchers in some market conditions? Are construction programs
more cost-effective than tenant-based vouchers under some circumstances? Although

49

See Weicher (1990) for a more extended discussion of the voucher/production debate.
In recent years, many housing authorities have tried to maintain the highest possible usage rate by
allocating more certificates and vouchers to potential new recipients than the number available to be used,
relying on the failure of a certain fraction of potential recipients to use the voucher allocated. Once
authorized to search for a unit, a household has a certain amount of time to find a unit that meets the
program’s rules and that it is willing to occupy. Different authorities have different rules; limits between
two and four months are common.
51
Although there are significant differences across areas during each year in the fraction of households
offered certificates and vouchers who return them unused, these do not seem to be strongly related to
differences in market conditions (Kennedy and Wallace, 1983; Leger and Kennedy, 1990; Kennedy and
Finkel, 1994).
50

41

careful studies of these two questions have not been done, we can be very confident about
the answer to the first question.
Based on existing evidence, there can be little doubt that tenant-based vouchers
get households into satisfactory housing much faster than any construction program even
in the areas where the highest fraction of vouchers are returned unused. Two major
studies of success rates under the tenant-based Section 8 Program have been completed
over the past fifteen years (Leger and Kennedy, 1990; Kennedy and Finkel, 1994). These
studies collected data on more than 50 local housing authorities selected at random. The
lowest success rate observed was 33 percent for New York City in the mid-1980s.52 If a
housing authority with this success rate issued only the vouchers available at each point
in time and allowed recipients up to three months to find a unit meeting the program’s
standards, about 80 percent of the vouchers would be in use within a year. If they
followed the current practice of authorizing more households to search for units than the
number of vouchers available, almost all of the vouchers would be in use in much less
than a year.
Based on data on a large stratified random sample of 800 projects built between
1975 and 1979, Schnare, Pedone, Moss, and Heintz (1982) found the mean time from
application for project approval to completion of the project ranged from 23 months for
Section 236 to 53 months for conventional public housing. Mean times ranged from 26
to 31 months for the variants of the Section 8 New Construction and Substantial
Rehabilitation Program. Occupancy of the completed units required additional time.
Although the authors did not report results separately for different markets, it seems
reasonable to believe that these times were greater in the tightest housing markets
because the demand for unsubsidized construction would be greatest in these locations.
So if Congress were to simultaneously authorize an equal number of tenant-based
vouchers and units under any construction program, it is clear that all of the vouchers
would be in use long before the first newly built unit was occupied no matter what the
condition of the local housing market at the time that the money is appropriated.
Although the cost-effectiveness studies discussed in Section IV are based on data
for projects built in 25 cities at many different times and these studies are unanimous in
finding that it costs significantly more than a dollar to provide a dollar’s worth of housing
under construction programs such as Public Housing, Section 236, and Section 8 New
Construction, they do not report results that enable us to determine how the costeffectiveness of these programs vary with market conditions. Therefore, we cannot be
certain that vouchers are more cost-effective than construction programs in all
circumstances. Whether there are any market conditions under which construction
programs are more cost-effective than vouchers is one of the most important unanswered
questions in housing policy analysis.
The second major objection to the exclusive reliance on tenant-based assistance is
that new construction promotes neighborhood revitalization to a much greater extent than
52

The success rate is the percentage of the households authorized to search for a unit who occupy a unit
meeting the program’s standards within the housing authority’s time limit. The success rate in New York
City in the mid-1980s was much lower than the second lowest (47 percent in Boston in the mid-1980s) and
much lower than in New York City in 1993 (65 percent). An earlier study based on data from the late
1970s found lower success rates. However, at that time housing authorities were still figuring out how to
administer this new program. So these success rates are of no relevance for predicting the effects of
expanding the program today.

42

tenant-based assistance. The evidence from EHAP is that even an entitlement housing
voucher program will have modest effects on neighborhoods and the small literature on
the Section 8 Voucher Program confirms these findings for a similar non-entitlement
program (Lowry, 1993, pp. 205-217; Galster, Tatian, Smith, 1999B). These programs
result in the upgrading of many existing dwellings, but this is concentrated on their
interiors. It is plausible to believe that a new subsidized project built at low-density in a
neighborhood with the worst housing and poorest households would make that
neighborhood a more attractive place to live for some years after its construction. The
issue is not, however, whether some construction projects lead to neighborhood
upgrading. The issues are who benefits from this upgrading, the extent to which
upgrading of one neighborhood leads to the deterioration of other neighborhoods, and the
magnitude of neighborhood upgrading across all projects under a program over the life of
these projects.
Economic theory suggests that the primary beneficiaries of neighborhood
upgrading will be the owners of nearby properties. Since the overwhelming majority of
the poorest households are renters, it is plausible to believe that most of the housing
surrounding housing projects located in the poorest neighborhoods is rental. Therefore, if
a newly built subsidized project makes the neighborhood a more attractive place to live,
the owners of this rental housing will charge higher rents and the value of their property
will be greater. Since the occupants of this rental housing could have lived in a nicer
neighborhood prior to the project by paying a higher rent, they are hurt by its
construction. The poor will benefit from the neighborhood upgrading only to the extent
that they own the property surrounding the project.
With the passage of time, the initial residents will leave the neighborhood in
response to the projects and others who value a better neighborhood more highly will
replace them. The desirability of the neighborhoods into which the original residents
move will decline in response to their weaker demand for neighborhood amenities. In
short, housing programs involving new construction may primarily shift the location of
the worst neighborhoods. The aforementioned possibilities have not even been
recognized in discussions of housing policy, let alone studied.
What has been studied is the extent to which projects under various housing
programs affect neighborhood property values. The existing studies find small positive
effects on average for some programs and small negative effects for others (Lee,
Culhane, and Wachter, 1999; Galster, Tatian, and Smith, 1999B). No study finds
substantial positive effects on average for any program.
HUD devotes a substantial fraction of its budget for housing assistance to
discretionary expenditures that provide additional subsidies to public housing authorities
and the owners of privately owned subsidized projects in an attempt to insure that their
projects provide satisfactory housing without charging rents that are regarded as
excessive. For example, more than $6 billion annually is spent on operating and
modernization subsidies for public housing. Many units under all major construction
programs that have been in existence for more than twenty years receive similar
subsidies. Given the evidence on the cost-effectiveness of different methods of
delivering housing assistance, an obvious policy reform is to replace these discretionary
expenditures with tenant-based vouchers.

43

In the case of public housing, this would involve using the money currently
devoted to operating and modernization subsidies to offer public housing tenants
vouchers that can be used in private or public housing.53 Under the proposed reform,
housing authorities would be forced to compete with the private sector for tenants, albeit
with the considerable advantage of having been given their projects. At present, if a
tenant leaves public housing, she loses her subsidy. So housing authorities have a captive
audience.
To offset this large reduction in revenue and enable housing authorities to raise
the money to continue to provide housing meeting program standards, they could be
allowed to charge market rents for the units vacated after the implementation of the
reform. Households with tenant-based vouchers would occupy many of these units.
Other households eligible for housing assistance would occupy the rest. Public housing
tenants who rejected vouchers would be able to remain in their apartments on the
previous terms.
Housing authorities could raise additional money by taking advantage of the
current regulation that allows them to sell projects. At present, they have little incentive
to do it. Without guaranteed federal operating and modernization subsidies, many of the
larger authorities may well decide to sell their worst projects. These are the projects that
will be abandoned to the greatest extent by their tenants with vouchers, and they are the
most expensive to operate. If they are sold to the highest bidders, some of these buildings
will undoubtedly be torn down and the land put to some better use.
The main issues involved here are the same as the issues involved in the decision
concerning whether to serve additional households by building or substantially
rehabilitating housing for them or by providing them with tenant-based vouchers, and
these issues have already been discussed. However, two other objections to vouchering
out public housing warrant consideration.
One objection to this proposal is that it will force some tenants who prefer to stay
in their current units to move. This objection applies equally to the current initiatives
within the public housing program involving the demolition or major rehabilitation of
projects. When these activities occur, displaced tenants are provided with tenant-based
vouchers. It also applies equally to similar activities in the unsubsidized housing market.
Legal prohibitions against this displacement are rare.
Another objection to the proposal is that it will reduce the number of affordable
housing units. The meaning of this objection is not entirely clear. Since any dwelling is
affordable with sufficient subsidy, vouchering out public housing does not change the
number of affordable units unless it leads to a smaller housing stock. Even if vouchering
out public housing led to the demolition of more public housing units than pursuing
current policies, it does not follow that the total housing stock will be smaller on that
account. When vacancy rates fall, private unsubsidized construction increases. Finally,
this objection might refer to a reduction in the number of apartments reserved for
occupancy by subsidized households. However, the advantages to assisted households or
taxpayers of requiring subsidized households to live in particular units in order to receive
a subsidy have not been explained. Among the disadvantages are the cost-ineffectiveness

53

During its first term, the Clinton Administration proposed this reform (HUD, 1995). Robert Dole made a
similar proposal during his presidential campaign.

44

of project-based assistance and the severe limitation on the tenant’s ability to adjust his or
her housing in response to changes in circumstances such as job location.
Under all programs that provide substantial project-based assistance to private
parties who build or rehabilitate housing for low-income households, these parties agreed
to provide housing meeting certain standards to households with particular characteristics
for a specified number of years. At the end of the use agreement, the government must
decide whether to change the terms of the agreement and the private parties must decide
whether to participate on these terms. Since the government provides mortgage
insurance for the overwhelming majority of these projects, it must also decide whether to
provide additional subsidies to these projects when the private parties default on their
loans or to sell these projects without subsidies. When use agreements are not renewed,
current occupants are always provided with other housing assistance, usually tenantbased vouchers.54 Up to this point, housing policy has leaned heavily in the direction of
providing owners with a sufficient subsidy to induce them to continue to serve the lowincome households in their projects.
Given the evidence on the cost-effectiveness of different methods of delivering
housing assistance, an obvious policy reform is not to renew any use agreement and
provide the subsidized occupants of these projects with tenant-based vouchers. The
issues involved in this decision are the same as those involved in the decision to voucher
out public housing. However, it should be pointed out that for-profit sponsors will not
agree to extend the use agreement unless this provides a higher present value of net
revenues over the remaining life of the project than operating in the unsubsidized market.
Since these subsidies are provided to selected private suppliers, the market mechanism
does not insure that net revenues under the new use agreement will be driven down to
market levels. If this does not happen, it will be more cost-effective to provide the
occupants of these units with tenant-based vouchers.
VI.

Summary and Conclusions

The primary justification for housing subsidies to low-income households seems
to be a desire on the part of many citizens to help these households combined with the
view that many low-income households undervalue housing. To provide assistance
consistent with this justification, an incredibly complicated system of housing programs
has been developed, involving much larger indirect subsidies than is common for meanstested transfer programs. The total cost of this system exceeds the cost of other betterknown parts of the welfare system. Only Medicaid is larger. The evidence on the major
effects of housing programs is sparse or old or both. Based on this evidence, the effects
of low-income housing programs can be summarized as follows.
In aggregate, all major housing programs increase housing consumption
substantially and almost all significantly increase consumption of other goods. The
increase in housing consumption is especially marked for new construction programs in
their early years. However, well before they reach the midpoint of their useful lives these
projects have provided less desirable housing than the housing occupied by voucher
54

Indeed, they have normally been given the option of staying in their current apartment with the
government paying the difference between the market rent of the unit and the standard tenant contribution
or receiving the regular voucher that would be offered to any household with the same characteristics.

45

recipients. All programs increase aggregate housing consumption more than would occur
if each participant were given a cash grant equal to his or her housing subsidy.
The net effect of these changes in consumption patterns is that housing programs
typically provide large benefits to their recipients. Although mean benefit is large
compared with their mean income, it is small compared with the cost to taxpayers. The
mean benefit is about 75 percent of the mean subsidy for construction programs and
about 80 percent for vouchers. For vouchers the cost to taxpayers exceeds the subsidy by
the modest administrative cost. For construction programs, the cost to taxpayers is much
larger than the sum of the subsidy and administrative cost. Mean benefit of each program
varies directly with income and inversely with family size, but the variance in real benefit
among similar households is large under most programs.
For the entire system of housing subsidies, the participation rate among eligible
households is far below 50 percent for all combinations of income and family size. For
each family size, the participation rate first rises and then falls as income increases. The
poorest households of each size have very low participation rates. Within each income
class, participation rates are highest for one-person households, reflecting the strong
preference received by the elderly in housing programs.
Evidence on the effect of housing programs on the characteristics of the
neighborhoods in which recipients live is particularly meager. It suggests that that public
housing tenants live in noticeably worse neighborhoods than in the absence of the
program and that the program contributes to racial segregation in housing. Section 8
New Construction / Substantial Rehabilitation and Section 8 Certificates and Vouchers
appear to have modest effects in the opposite direction. With respect to the effect of
subsidized housing and households on their neighbors, the existing studies find small
positive effects on neighboring property values on average for some programs and small
negative effects for others. No study finds substantial positive effects on average for any
program.
Housing programs appear to have small work disincentive effects. They also
have miniscule effects on the prices of unsubsidized units that are not located near
subsidized units.
The most important finding of the empirical literature from the viewpoint of
housing policy is that tenant-based vouchers and certificates provide equally good
housing at a much lower cost than any type of project-based assistance that has been
studied. This finding implies that a shift of all discretionary resources from programs of
project-based assistance to tenant-based vouchers would enable us to provide several
million additional households with adequate housing at an affordable rent without any
increase in government expenditure.
The major issues in housing policy for low-income households are whether (1)
housing assistance should be an entitlement, (2) the poorest households of each size
should be given priority for housing assistance, (3) housing subsidies should be delivered
to additional households by building new projects under some type of construction or
substantial rehabilitation program or by giving them housing vouchers, and (4) whether
we should require households currently living in subsidized projects for which future
federal expenditure is discretionary to live in these projects to receive a subsidy and their
owners given a sufficient subsidy to induce them to continue to serve these households,
or give these households housing vouchers. Although the available evidence suggests

particular answers to some of these questions, the magnitude of the public expenditures
involved argues for producing better information on which to base these decisions.
References
Barnett, C.L. and Lowry, I.S. How Housing Allowances Affect Housing Prices. Santa
Monica, CA: The Rand Corporation, October 1979.
Bradbury, Katherine and Downs, Anthony. Do Housing Allowances Work? Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1981.
Carliner, Michael S. “Development of Federal Homeownership ‘Policy’.” Housing Policy
Debate 9 (1998): 299-321.
Clemmer, Richard B. “Measuring Welfare Effects of In-Kind Transfers.” Journal of
Urban Economics 15 (1984): 46-65.
Crews, Amy D. “Self Selection, Administrative Selection, and Aggregation Bias in the
Estimation of the Effects of In-Kind Transfers.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Virginia, 1995.
Cummings, Jean L. and DiPasquale, Denise. “The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit: An
Analysis of the First Ten Years.” Housing Policy Debate 10 (1999): 251-307.
Currie, Janet and Yelowitz, Aaron. “Are Public Housing Projects Good for Kids?”
Journal of Public Economics 75 (2000): 99-124.
Early, Dirk W. “The Role of Subsidized Housing in Reducing Homelessness: An
Empirical Investigation Using Micro-Data.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 17 (1998): 687-696.
Friedman, Joseph and Weinberg, Daniel H. The Economics of Housing Vouchers. New
York: Academic Press, 1982.
———. The Great Housing Experiment. Sage Press, 1983.
Galster, George; Smith, Robin E.; Tatian, Peter A.; and Santiago, Anna M. with Mary
Cunningham and Charlene Y. Wilson. Assessing Property Value Impacts of
Dispersed Housing Subsidy Programs: Final Report. Washington, D.C.: The
Urban Institute, May 1999A.
Galster, George C.; Tatian, Peter; and Smith, Robin. “The Impact of Neighbors Who Use
Section 8 Certificates on Property Value.” Housing Policy Debate 10 (1999B):
879-917.
Hammond, Claire H. The Benefits of Subsidized Housing Programs: An Intertemporal
Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Kain, John F. “A Universal Housing Allowance Program” in Katherine Bradbury and
Anthony Downs (ed.) Do Housing Allowances Work? Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution, 1981.
Keane, Michael and Moffitt, Robert. “A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program
Participation and Labor Supply.” International Economic Review 39 (August
1998): 553-589.
Kennedy, Stephen D. Housing Allowance Demand Experiment: Final Report.
Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates Inc.: June 1980.
Kennedy, Stephen D. and Finkel, Meryl. Section 8 Rental Voucher and Rental Certificate
Utilization Study. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates Inc., 1994.
Kennedy, Stephen D. and MacMillan, J. Participation Under Alternative Housing
Allowance Programs: Evidence From the Housing Allowance Demand
Experiment. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates Inc., 1980.
Kennedy, Stephen D. and Wallace, James E. An Evaluation of Success Rates in Housing
Assistance Programs Using the Existing Housing Stock: Implications for the
Housing Payment Certificate Program from the Section 8 Existing Housing
Program. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates Inc., March 1983.
Kraft, John and Olsen, Edgar O. "The Distribution of Benefits from Public Housing," in
F. T. Juster (ed.) The Distribution of Economic Well-Being. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research, 1977.
Lee, Chang-Moo; Culhane, Dennis P.; and Wachter, Susan M. “The Differential Impacts
of Federally Assisted Housing Programs on Nearby Property Values: A
Philadelphia Case Study.” Housing Policy Debate 10 (1999): 75-93.
Leger, Mireille L. and Kennedy, Stephen D. Final Comprehensive Report of the
Freestanding Housing Voucher Demonstration. Volume 1 & 2. Cambridge, MA:
Abt Associates Inc., May 1990A.
———. Recipient Housing in the Housing Voucher and Certificate Programs.
Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates Inc., May 1990B.
Lowry, Ira S. (ed.) Experimenting With Housing Allowances: The Final Report of the
Housing Assistance Supply Experiment. Cambridge, MA: Oelgeschlager, Gunn &
Hain, 1983.
Ludwig, Jens; Duncan, Greg J.; and Pinkston, Joshua C. “Urban Poverty and Juvenile
Crime: Evidence from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, forthcoming 2001.

48

———. “Neighborhood Effects on Economic Self-Sufficiency: Evidence from a
Randomized Housing Mobility Experiment. Unpublished manuscript, January
2000A.
———. “The Effects of Urban Poverty on Educational Outcomes: Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment. Unpublished manuscript, October, 2000B.
Mayo, Stephen K. "Sources of Inefficiency in Subsidized Housing Programs: A
Comparison of U.S. and German Experience." Journal of Urban Economics. 20
(September 1986): 229-249.
Mayo, Stephen K.; Mansfield, Shirley; Warner, David; and Zwetchkenbaum, Richard.
Housing Allowances and Other Rental Assistance Programs-A Comparison Based
on the Housing Allowance Demand Experiment, Part 1: Participation, Housing
Consumption, Location, and Satisfaction. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates Inc.,
June 1980A.
———. Housing Allowances and Other Rental Assistance Programs-A Comparison
Based on the Housing Allowance Demand Experiment, Part 2: Costs and
Efficiency. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates Inc, June 1980B.
Mikesell, James J.; Ghelfi, Linda M.; Salant, Priscilla; Wallace, George; and Whitener,
Leslie A. Meeting the Housing Needs of Rural Residents: Results of the 1998
Survey of USDA’s Single Family Direct Loan Program. Washington, D.C.:
United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Rural
Development Research Report 91, December 1999.
Mills, Edwin S. and Sullivan, Arthur. “Market Effects” in Katherine Bradbury and
Anthony Downs (ed.) Do Housing Allowances Work? Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution, 1981.
Murray, Michael. “The Distribution of Tenant Benefits in Public Housing.”
Econometrica 43 (July 1975): 771-788.
———. “A Reinterpretation of the Traditional Income-Leisure Model, With Application
to In-Kind Subsidy Programs.” Journal of Public Economics 14 (1980): 69-81.
———. “Subsidized and Unsubsidized Housing Starts: 1961-1977.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 65 (November 1983): 590-597.
———. “Subsidized and Unsubsidized Housing Stocks 1935 to 1987: Crowding Out and
Cointegration.” Journal of Real Estate Economics and Finance 18 (1999): 107124.
Newman, Sandra J. and Schnare, Ann B. “ ‘… And a Suitable Living Environment’: The
Failure of Housing Programs to Deliver on Neighborhood Quality.” Housing
Policy Debate 8 (1997): 703-741.

49

Newman, Sandra J. and Harkness, Joseph M. “The Long-Term Effects of Housing
Assistance on Self-Sufficiency.” Unpublished manuscript, 2000.
Olsen, Edgar O. "The Simple Analytics of the Externality Argument for Redistribution,"
in M. B. Ballabon (ed.) Economic Perspectives: An Annual Survey of Economics,
Vol. 2. New York: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1981.
———."The Implications of the Experimental Housing Allowance Program for Housing
Policy," in Joseph Friedman and Daniel Weinberg (ed.) The Great Housing
Experiments Beverly Hills, California: Sage Publications, 1983.
———. “The Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Methods of Delivering Housing
Subsidies.” Unpublished manuscript, December 2000.
Olsen, Edgar O., and Barton, David M. "The Benefits and Costs of Public Housing in
New York City." Journal of Public Economics 20 (April 1983): 299-332.
Olsen, Edgar O. and Crews, Amy D. “Are Section 8 Housing Subsidies Too High?”
Unpublished manuscript, December 1996.
Olsen, Edgar O. and Reeder, William. "Misdirected Rental Subsidies." Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 2 (Summer 1983): 614-620.
Painter, Gary. “Does Variation in Public Housing Waiting Lists Induce Intra-Urban
Mobility?” Journal of Housing Economics 6 (1997): 248-276.
Reeder, William J. "The Benefits and Costs of the Section 8 Existing Housing Program."
Journal of Public Economics 26 (April 1985): 349-377.
Reid, William J. “A Benefit-Cost Analysis of Section 23 Leased Public Housing.” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Virginia, January 1989.
Rydell, C. Peter; Neels, Kevin; and Barnett, C. Lance. Price Effects of a Housing
Allowance Program. R-2720. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, September
1982.
Schnare, Ann; Pedone, Carla; Moss, William; and Heintz, Kathleen. The Costs of HUD
Multifamily Housing Programs: A Comparison of the Development, Financing
and Life Cycle Costs of Section 8, Public Housing, and Other Major HUD
Programs. Volume 1 & 2. Cambridge, MA: Urban Systems Research and
Engineering, Inc., May 1982.
Schone, Barbara Steinberg. “Do Means Tested Transfers Reduce Labor Supply?”
Economics Letters 40 (1992): 353-358.
———. “Estimating the Distribution of Taste Parameters of Households Facing Complex
Budget Spaces: The Effects of In-Kind Transfers.” Unpublished manuscript,
1994.

50

Schwab, Robert M. “The Benefits of In-Kind Government Programs.” Journal of Public
Economics 27 (July 1985): 195-210.
Stegman, Michael A. "The Excessive Costs of Creative Finance: Growing Inefficiencies
in the Production of Low-Income Housing." Housing Policy Debate 2 (1991):
357-373.
Struyk, Raymond J. and Bendick, Marc (eds.). Housing Vouchers for the Poor: Lessons
From a National Experiment. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, 1981.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. American Housing Survey for the
United States in 1989. Current Housing Reports. Series H150/89. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1991.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. HUD Statistical Yearbook.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1969-1979.
———. Housing in the Seventies. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1974.
———. Experimental Housing Allowance Program: The 1980 Report. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, February 1980.
———. Characteristics of HUD-Assisted Renters and Their Units in 1989. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1992.
———. HUD Reinvention: From Blueprint to Action. Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, March 1995.
———. Characteristics of HUD-Assisted Renters and Their Units in 1993. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, May 1997.
———. Rental Housing Assistance – The Worsening Crisis: A Report to Congress on
Worst Case Housing Needs. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
March 2000.
United States General Accounting Office, Tax Credits: Opportunities to Improve
Oversight of the Low-Income Housing Programs. Washington, D.C.: United
States General Accounting Office, 1997. GAO/GGD/RCED-97-55.
U.S. House of Representatives. Committee on Ways and Means. 1998 Green Book:
Background Material and Data on Programs within the Jurisdiction of the
Committee on Ways and Means. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
1998.
U.S. House of Representatives. Committee on Banking and Financial Services,
Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity. Basic Laws on Housing
and Community Development (Revised through December 31, 1998).
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, April 1999.

51

Wallace, James E. “Financing Affordable Housing in the United States.” Housing Policy
Debate 6 (1995): 785-814.
Wallace, James E.; Bloom, Susan Philipson; Holshouser, William L.; Mansfield, Shirley;
and Weinberg, Daniel H. Participation and Benefits in the Urban Section 8
Program: New Construction and Existing Housing. Volume 1 & 2. Cambridge,
MA: Abt Associates Inc., January 1981.
Weicher, John C. “Urban Housing Policy,” in P. Miezkowski and M. Straszheim (eds.)
Current Issues in Urban Economics Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University
Press, 1979.
———. “The Voucher/Production Debate,” in Denise DiPasquale and Langley C. Keyes
(eds.) Building Foundations: Housing and Federal Policy Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990.
Weinberg, Daniel H. "Housing Benefits from the Section 8 Program." Evaluation Review
6 (February 1982): 5-24.

52

