                                 )          




                    
                        


                                          !"#$%"&#%
                                         " '  ($


                                        )#&*+!( &,,
                                -""(..///0 &#&!.(( &./,,



                         1  
                                2 3-4 ""' 4
                                  %0&+! 5 ,6
                                       (&+$




           
  

 !" #$ % !  #    &
   !  & '         &  !
 & !  
#&(#&"  #' &3  &! &3"+'+"7+"- 
  *+!  #8"- 
 !"#$%"&#%" '  ($
  )#&*+!( & #,,
(&+$,
91 # 651,


                                              

-+(( & 3&+0 3#+ & :($"+#8#&3-! +3#&(#&" !#' &3 
% &! &3"+'+"7+"- +" "" +3 #&(#&" !#' &3 +"- /#%+" 
07+"  % &! &3"+'+"7+"+!4+- 07"- (& '$ 3 #8$ ' &! 047#4";1<-#"+$+"7
8" &0&+ 8 3$+ +"-  &$7540""+$% &! &3"+'+"7& 4% +"-  3#-$8#8"-
 3 5/-+$ 1-#"+$+"7+#"" 5+" &$3#&(#&" !#' &3 % 3-+%(( &
"#-' ($7 $&! &&#$ +"- ) 3#3$4 073#+ &+!/- "- &"-  3-! "-
%#' % ""#/&-& -#$ &'$4 & $+* $7"#0 ( &% "




 !"#$%"&#%
4$%4 $#&#8 #&#83##%+3
    &3-#3+"
  3-4 """+"4" #8 3-#$#!7
%0&+! 5 
0 !"=%+" 4

" '  ($
   404 &%+$7&#8 #&#8"& (&  4&-+(+3
  &4" 3-##$#84+ 5+' &+"7#8-+3!#5
"2WK"& "
-+3!#51>>6?
" ' *($=!043-+3!# 4
        Corporate governance in the U.S. has changed dramatically throughout the 1980s and 1990s.

Before 1980, corporate governance – the mechanisms by which corporations and their managers are

governed – was relatively inactive. Then, the 1980s ushered in a large wave of takeover1 and

restructuring activity. This activity was distinguished by its use of leverage and hostility. The use of

leverage was so great that from 1984 to 1990 more than $500 Billion of equity was retired on net, as

corporations repurchased their own shares, borrowed to finance takeovers, and were taken private in

leveraged buyouts (LBOs). Corporate leverage increased substantially. Leveraged buyouts were

extreme in this respect with debt levels typically exceeding 80% of total capital. The 1980s also saw the

emergence of the hostile takeover and the corporate raider. Raiders like Carl Icahn and T. Boone

Pickens became household names. Mitchell and Mulherin [1996] report that nearly half of all major US

corporations received a takeover offer in the 1980s. In addition, many firms that were not taken over

restructured in response to hostile pressure to make themselves less attractive targets.

        In the 1990s, the pattern of corporate governance activity changed again. After a steep, but

brief, drop in merger activity around 1990, takeovers rebounded to the levels of the1980s. Leverage

and hostility, however, declined substantially. At the same time, other corporate governance

mechanisms began to play a larger role, particularly executive stock options and the greater involvement

of boards of directors and shareholders.

        In this article, we describe the changes in corporate governance in the 1980s and 1990s. We

then present and evaluate several potential explanations for these patterns. In particular, we consider



                                                      1
three questions: First, what factors were responsible for the 1980s takeover wave and the concomitant

leverage and hostility? Second, why have leverage and hostility not returned with the return of

substantial takeover activity in the 1990s, and what governance mechanisms, if any, have replaced

them? Finally, does the current dominance of shareholder value as a corporate objective reflect

temporary changes in the economic environment or permanent improvements in corporate governance?

        We will argue that the preponderance of the evidence is consistent with an overall explanation

as follows. The real drivers behind the increased dominance of capital markets and the attendant rise of

shareholder value can be traced to deregulation, nationally and internationally, and to new information

and communication technologies. For many companies these changes, which began before 1980,

created a wedge between actual and potential performance. Managers were slow to respond, partly

because of misaligned incentives, but likely also because they were confused and couldn’t figure out the

appropriate response (and didn’t believe that the capital markets knew any better.) The fact that family

firms didn’t seem to respond very differently from the large, publicly owned companies, suggests that it

was difficult to know what should be done.

        At the same time, capital markets grew more powerful with increased institutional investments.

The potential for improved corporate performance paired with empowered investors gave birth to

takeovers, junk bonds and LBOs. In some cases, the capital markets reversed ill-advised

diversification; in others, the capital markets helped to eliminate excess capacity; in others, the capital

markets disciplined managers who had ignored shareholders to benefit other stakeholders. The incentive

and governance features of LBOs are particularly representative of the discipline that the capital markets



                                                      2
 imposed.

        Managers initially fought takeovers with legal maneuvers and by enlisting political and popular

support. They were successful in that hostile takeovers became more costly in the 1990s. But by that

time, managers, boards and institutional shareholders had seen what LBOs and other market driven

restructurings could do. Thanks to lucrative stock option plans, managers could share in the market

returns from restructured companies. Shareholder value became an ally rather than an enemy. This

explains why restructurings continued at a high rate in the 1990s, but for the most part on amicable

terms. There was less of a need for high leverage as deals could be paid for with stock with less worry

that managers would abuse this privilege.

        Will the capital market’s influence continue? We do not have a firm opinion. But we will argue

that shareholder value became dominant in the 1980s and 1990s in part at least because capital markets

have a comparative advantage in undertaking the kind of structural reforms that deregulation and

technological change necessitated. It is possible, therefore, that shareholder value and market

dominance will subside as the need for corporate restructurings declines.




1. Corporate Governance in the 1980s: The Rise of Leveraged Takeovers

        1.1     The Managerial Climate of the Early 1980s

        Many authors have pointed out that the corporate governance structures in place before the

1980s, gave the managers of the large public corporations little reason to focus on shareholder

concerns. Donaldson and Lorsch (1983), Donaldson (1994), and Jensen (1988, 1993) all argue that



                                                    3
before 1980, management was loyal to the corporation, not to the shareholder. The external

governance mechanisms that were formally available to shareholders were little used. External threats

from raiders and takeovers were relatively few. Proxy fights were rare and didn’t have much chance to

succeed. Boards tended to be cozy with management, making board oversight weak. Internal

incentives from management ownership of stock and options were also modest; in 1980, only 20

percent of the compensation of chief executive officers was tied to stock market performance (Hall and

Liebman, 1998). Long-term performance plans were widely used, but they were based on accounting

measures that tied managerial incentives much less directly to shareholder value.




        1.2     The Takeover Boom of the 1980s

        Takeover activity began to accelerate in the early 1980s and boomed throughout much of the

decade. Although the main focus of this section is the 1980s, the discussion also carries into the 1990s,

establishing the basis for later comparisons. (The figures and the analysis below are generally consistent

with the results in Andrade, Mitchell and Stafford in this symposium.)

        Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the extent of the merger boom by presenting measures of merger

activity in recent decades. Figure 1 reports takeover activity as a percentage of U.S. GDP from 1968

to 1999. For a longer historical perspective, Golbe and White (1988) present time series evidence of

U.S. takeover activity from the late 1800s to the mid-1980s. Their findings suggest that takeover

activity above 2 to 3 percent of GDP is unusual. The greatest level of merger activity occurred around

1900 with activity at roughly 10 percent of GNP for a couple of years. By those measures, takeover



                                                    4
 activity in the 1980s is historically high and the activity in the late 1990s is extraordinary. Figure 2

offers another perspective by measuring acquisition volume as a fraction of stock market capitalization.

By this measure, takeover activity was substantial in the 1980s and in the second half of the 1990s,

reaching roughly 10 percent of the stock market in two years in each decade.

        Takeovers in the 1980s were characterized by heavy use of leverage. Firms purchased other

firms in leveraged takeovers by borrowing rather than by issuing new stock or using solely cash on

hand. Other firms restructured themselves, borrowing to repurchase their own shares. Finally, some

firms were taken private in leveraged buyouts or LBO’s. In an LBO, an investor group, often allied

with incumbent management, borrows money to repurchase all of a company’s publicly owned shares

and takes the company private. Kohlberg, Kravis & Roberts (KKR) was one of the earliest and most

prominent LBO investors.

        This pattern of additional debt is clearly illustrated in Figure 3, which reports the net issuance or

retirement of equity by U.S. non-financial corporations as a percent age of total stock market

capitalization from 1973 to 1999. From 1984 to 1990, U.S. non-financial corporations were net

retirers of equity with annual net retirements running at roughly 3 percent of the total stock market value

($ 532 Billion in total over the six years). From 1991 to 1994, those same corporations became net

issuers of equity. Since 1994, U.S. non-financial corporations have again retired equity on net, but at a

lower rate than in the 1980s (roughly 1 per cent per year).

        Figure 4 shows the volume of "going private" transactions. Most of these transactions were

leveraged buyouts. These transactions increased sharply in the 1980s, but virtually disappeared in the



                                                      5
1990s.

         Finally, Figure 5 reports the rate of issuance for non-investment grade or "junk" bonds,

expressed as a percentage of total stock market capitalization. Junk bonds are bonds that are rated

below investment grade by the top bond rating agencies. As such, they have higher yields and higher

risks than investment grade bonds. The use of junk bonds increased substantially throughout the 1980s

together with LBOs. In the mid- to late 1980s, more than 50% of the issues were takeover related.

Drexel Burnham and Michael Milken, who originated this novel use of non-investment grade debt,

underwrote or sold a large fraction of the junk bond issues in the 1980s. The use of junk bonds

declined in the early 1990s with the credit crunch, and returned to 1980s levels in the late 1990s. The

fraction used for takeovers, however, dropped to below 30%.

         Almost half of all major U.S. companies received "hostile" takeover bids in the 1980s, where

hostility is defined as bids pursued without the acquiescence of target management (Mitchell and

Mulherin, 1996). Even those firms that were not actually taken over often decided to restructure in

response to hostile pressure, particularly when corporate raiders had purchased large blocks of shares.

         Figure 6 provides evidence of the high level of hostility in the 1980s, especially as compared to

the 1990s. In the 1980s, between 20 percent and 40 percent of tender offers were contested by

incumbent management.2 In the 1990s, 15 percent or fewer have been contested. In this symposium,

Andrade, Mitchell and Stafford report a similar decline of hostility in the 1990s for mergers overall.

Again, this understates the difference between the 1980s and 1990s because it does not include hostile

pressure from investors with large blocks of shares.



                                                       6
        1.3     Do LBOs and Leveraged Takeovers Provide Productivity Gains?

        When large-scale hostile takeovers appeared in the 1980s, many voiced the opinion that they

were driven by investor greed; the robber barons of Wall Street had returned to raid innocent

corporations. Today, it is widely accepted that the takeovers of the 1980s had a beneficial effect on the

corporate sector and that efficiency gains, rather than redistributions from stakeholders to shareholders,

explain why they appeared.3

        The overall effect of takeovers on the economy is hard to pin down, because so many factors

are involved. For example, the mild resurgence in productivity levels in the 1980s and greater boost in

the second half of the 1990s is consistent with corporate governance boosting productivity – but it is

consistent with other explanations as well.

        One can try to assess whether the combination of takeovers, debt, and hostility is likely to have

improved efficiency, by looking at the evidence on leveraged buyouts. With the use of high leverage

and strong incentive mechanisms (described below), LBOs can be viewed as an extreme manifestation

of the changes reshaping the corporate sector in the 1980s. If LBOs increased value, it seems likely

that the shift in corporate governance increased value in other areas of the economy, too.

        LBOs were associated with three large changes in corporate governance. First, LBOs changed

the incentives of managers by providing them with substantial equity stakes in the buyout company.

Because of high leverage, it was cheaper to give managers a high ownership stake. The purpose was to

give managers the incentive to undertake the buyout, to work hard to pay off the debt, and to increase



                                                    7
shareholder value. If successful, buyout company managers could expect to make a great deal of

money. Kaplan (1989) reports that the chief executive officers of the leveraged buyouts increased their

ownership stake by more than a factor of four, from 1.4 percent pre-leveraged buyout to 6.4 percent

post-leveraged buyout. Management teams, overall, experienced a similar increase. In the early 1980s,

this approach to management compensation was fundamentally different from the prevailing practice.

        Second, the high amount of debt incurred in the leveraged buyout transaction imposed strong

financial discipline on company management. It was no longer possible for managers to treat capital as

costless. On the contrary, failure to generate a sufficient return on capital meant default. This contrasts

sharply with the perceived cost of capital in firms with a conservative capital structure. Because

dividends are discretionary, and often determined by management, the price of equity is much less

tangible than the price of debt.

        Third, leveraged buyout sponsors or investors closely monitored and governed the companies

they purchased. The boards of the LBO companies were small and dominated by investors with

substantial equity stakes.

        The empirical evidence supports the view that leveraged buyouts improved efficiency. In the

first half of the 1980s, buyout companies experienced improved operating profits (both absolutely and

relative to their industry) and few defaults (Kaplan, 1989; Kaplan and Stein, 1993; see also Smith,

1990). However, the leveraged buyout experience was different in the latter half of the 1980s. Roughly

one-third of the leveraged buyouts completed after 1985 subsequently defaulted on their debt, some

spectacularly (Kaplan and Stein, 1993). These defaults led many to question the existence of efficiency



                                                     8
 gains.

          But even for the late 1980s, the evidence is supportive of the efficiency story. The reason for the

defaults was not that profits didn't improve, but that they didn't improve by enough to pay off the

enormous quantities of debt that had been taken on. For example, Kaplan and Stein (1993) find that,

overall, the larger leveraged buyouts of the later 1980s also generated improvements in operating profits

despite the relatively large number of defaults. Even for deals that defaulted, Andrade and Kaplan

(1998) find that the leveraged buyout companies retained approximately the same value they had

attained before the leveraged buyout. In other words, the net effect of the leveraged buyout and default

on capital value was slightly positive.

          The case of Federated Department Stores illustrates this effect (Kaplan, 1994a). The leveraged

buyout firm Campeau acquired Federated in 1988, in what is sometimes considered in the popular

press to be the nadir of leveraged buyouts and the 1980s (Loomis, 1990; Rothchild, 1991). On

January 1, 1988, Federated's debt and equity traded at $4.25 billion. From that point until it emerged

from bankruptcy in February 1992, Federated returned roughly $5.85 billion in value (adjusted for

changes in the S&P 500). In other words, Federated was worth $1.6 billion more after being

purchased by Campeau than it would have been if it had matched the S&P 500. But unfortunately for

him, Campeau paid $7.67 billion for Federated, and so went bust.

          The logical question is, if LBOs increased value, why did so many companies default? The

likely answer is that the success of the LBOs of the early 1980s attracted entrants and capital. Those

entrants understood the basic LBO insights. The entrants bid up the prices of the leveraged buyouts.



                                                      9
As a result, much of the benefit of the improved discipline, incentives, and governance accrued to the

selling shareholders rather than to the post-buyout leveraged buyout investors. The combined gains

remained positive, but the distribution changed.




        1.4     Why Did Financial Markets Become More Active in the 1980s?

        The evidence in the previous section points to efficiency gains as the driving force behind the

1980s takeover wave. What was the underlying source of these efficiencies and why did corporate

governance capitalize on them in the 1980s and not earlier?

        Jensen (1986, 1988, 1989, 1993) takes the view that the 1980s takeovers were ultimately

caused by a failure in the internal governance mechanisms of US corporations. The problems were long

in coming. Ever since the 1930s, management incentives had become weaker as corporations had

become larger, management ownership had shrunk and shareholders had become more widely

dispersed. No one watched management the way J.P. Morgan and other large investors did in the early

part of the 20th century. Boards, which were supposed to be the guardians of shareholder rights, mostly

sided with management and were ineffective in carrying out their duties. One of the big drawbacks of

the corporation, according to Jensen, was that it could and did subsidize poorly performing divisions

using the cash generated from successful ones instead of returning the “free cash flow” to the investors.

        According to Jensen (1993), corporate mismanagement in the 1970s finally caused capital

markets to react. The large windfall gains from the oil crisis that were spent on excessive oil exploration

and diversification were a concrete trigger. But changes in technology and regulation more broadly had



                                                     10
 led to a large amount of excess capacity in many U.S. industries. Managers were unwilling to pair

down their operations or simply exit as long as they had the financial resources to continue. In the early

and mid 1980s, the capital markets finally found the instruments to reduce excess capacity. Leveraged

acquisitions, leveraged buyouts, hostile takeovers, and stock buybacks were successful in eliminating

free cash flow, because the debt service requirements that usually accompanied them prodded

managers to find ways to generate cash to make interest payments.

        Impressed by the performance of the LBOs in the early 1980s, Jensen (1989) went so far as to

forecast that in most cases these new organizational forms would soon eclipse the corporation. Among

the main benefits of LBO associations run by buyout firms like Kravis, Kohlberg and Roberts, was that

they didn’t permit cross-subsidization.

        There is little doubt that the elimination of excess capacity played an important role in the

takeovers of the 1980s, particularly in industries like oil. It is less clear, however, that excess capacity

was the primary driver of the takeover wave in the way Jensen suggests. The excess capacity

explanation makes some strong predictions about investment. Specifically, if firms involved in takeovers

and buyouts were spending too much money on capital expenditures, then after the corporate control

transaction, these companies should spend less. The evidence for this is mixed. Kaplan (1989) and

Kaplan and Stein (1993) find that management buyout firms do make large cuts in capital expenditures.

However, Servaes (1994) finds no evidence that targets of all takeovers, of hostile takeovers, and of

going private transactions were overinvesting in capital expenditures before the takeover. Furthermore,

there do not appear to be significant changes in the ratio of capital expenditures to sales for firms that



                                                      11
went through takeovers in the 1980s (Healy, Palepu and Ruback, 1992; Bhagat, Shleifer, and Vishny,

1990).

         Also, it is not obvious that self-interest alone was the reason why managers didn’t exit industries

with excess capacity or didn’t return free cash flow. Free cash flow is not an accounting number and

how much cash should be returned to investors depends on the estimated returns from internal

investments. It is plausible that some management and board decisions stemmed from uncertainty about

returns and competitive position in a changed market environment. Moreover, returning cash to

investors was not part of the prevailing management culture at the beginning of the 1980s. Managers

were supposed to have a surplus, not a shortage of investment ideas. (Witness the difficulties that

today’s fund managers have with this same issue.)

         A second explanation of why takeovers appeared in the 1980s, offered by Shleifer and Vishny

(1990), is that "the takeover wave of the 1980s was to a large extent a response to the disappointment

with conglomerates" that had been assembled in the previous merger and acquisition wave in the 1960s.

In their view, corporate America in the 1980s "returned to specialization." Companies sold unrelated

businesses and expanded into related businesses. "To a significant extent the 1980s reflect the

deconglomeration of American business. Hostile takeovers and leveraged buyouts ... facilitated this

process." In other words, the 1960s conglomeration wave was a mistake, at least in hindsight,

something managers were slow or unwilling to recognize until capital markets began to exert pressure on

them.

         Again, this argument has strong implications. If mergers were about deconglomeration, then it



                                                     12
 should be true that corporate diversification was value decreasing and deconglomeration value

increasing in the 1980s, and that U.S. business became substantially less diversified in the 1980s after

the wave of deconglomeration. The evidence on these implications is mixed.

        In influential pieces, Lang and Stulz (1994) and Berger and Ofek (1995) find that diversified

firms in the U.S. trade at a discount to single-segment firms in the 1980s and early 1990s. These pieces

suggest that diversification destroys value. Berger and Ofek (1996) find that for diversified firms the

likelihood of a takeover increases with the size of the diversification discount.

        More recent evidence, however, suggests that at least half of the diversification discount (and

potentially a good deal more of it) can be attributed to the fact that diversifying firms are different.

Many of the targets were discounted before they were acquired and became part of a diversified firm

(Graham, Lemmon and Wolf, 2000). Similarly, acquirers apparently trade at a discount before making

diversifying acquisitions (Campa and Kedia, 1999). 4 But the most difficult finding to explain is that the

combined gain to bidder and target shareholders at an acquisition announcement even in diversifying

acquisitions is always positive on average in every study we have seen.

        While U.S. businesses did become less diversified during the 1980s, the extent of the decrease

remains unclear. Montgomery (1994) points out that, in 1991, the typical firm in the S&P 500 had the

same number of industry segments as the typical firm in the S&P 500 in 1981. Comment and Jarrell

(1995), on the other hand, report bigger declines in diversification over the 1980s. Among firms

covered by Compustat, the percentage of firms with a single business segment went up from 36.2

percent in 1978 to 63.9 percent in 1989. Finally, Mitchell and Mulherin (1996) find that takeover



                                                      13
activity in the 1980s clustered in particular industries at particular points in time. In contrast, takeover

activity in the 1960s and 1970s exhibited no such clustering. To them, the 1980s seem less about

breaking up conglomerates than about restructuring certain industries.

        Stein (2001) summarizes the large and conflicting body of evidence on diversification and its

value implications. One of the main observations is that it was primarily the poorly performing

conglomerates that were taken over and restructured (Berger and Ofek, 1996). In that respect,

conglomerates may not be any different from other firms that perform poorly (Morck, Shleifer, and

Vishny, 1989). Overall, these empirical results suggest that deconglomeration played a role in the 1980s

takeovers, but was probably not the primary driver.

        Donaldson (1994) provides yet another perspective on the 1980s takeover wave. He argues

that in the 1980s the balance of power shifted from corporate stakeholders to shareholders, because of

a rise in the number of institutional shareholders. From 1980 to 1996, large institutional investors nearly

doubled their share of ownership of U.S. corporations from under 30% to over 50% (Gompers and

Metrick, 2000), while individual ownership declined from 70% in 1970, to 60% in 1980, to 48% in

1994 (Poterba and Samwick, 1996). The shift towards institutional ownership and the resulting shift in

power are keys for understanding why the takeovers appeared in the 1980s. Donaldson calls the

1980s the “decade of confrontation.”

        One of the important effects of greater institutional ownership was on takeovers. Fund

managers were more interested in squeezing out higher returns and less loyal to incumbent management

than individual investors. Institutional investors were often the key sellers of larger blocks of shares in



                                                      14
 takeovers. This made takeovers easier. Institutional investors also supported takeovers by being large

investors in the buyout funds and in the market for high-yield bonds.

        In summary, we believe the 1980s takeover wave was caused by a complex combination of the

factors mentioned above. Without a large increase in pension assets, which concentrated financial

power, it is less likely that there would have been a willingness and ability to support large multi-billion

dollar takeovers. The scale and scope of the 1980s takeover wave was a product of the increased size

of the financial markets. On the other hand, there must also have been significant inefficiencies in the

way corporations were run. Without inefficiencies, the purpose of takeovers would have been missing.

        The source of the inefficiencies remains open to debate. Jensen (1986, 1988) thinks the

problem is a poorly designed governance system, but his endorsement of the LBO association has not

had material following. In the 1990s, the largest public corporations have become even larger and many

of them have been exceptionally successful. The privatization movement has stopped as seen in Figure

4. In Section 3 we suggest that the efficiencies provided by market intervention and shareholder value

may partly reflect a temporary comparative advantage of these forms of governance.




2.      Why Did Corporate Governance and Mergers in the 1990s Look So Different?

        At the end of the 1980s, the takeover wave ended. As the previous figures show, takeover

volume, going private volume, and the use of leverage declined substantially in 1990. At the time, anti-

takeover legislation and jurisprudence, overt political pressure against leverage 5, the collapse of the high

yield bond market, and a credit crunch were among the explanations proffered for the decline (Jensen,



                                                      15
1991; Comment and Schwert, 1995). Since then, both the political pressure against leverage and the

credit crunch have abated and the non-investment grade bond market has recovered (see figure 6).

Yet, neither the use of extreme leverage nor hostility have come close to their 1980s levels, suggesting

that anti-takeover legislation has had an effect.

        In this section, we document that corporations in the 1990s began to emulate many of the

beneficial attributes of LBOs. This could explain why hostility declined: hostile takeovers were no

longer needed, as companies voluntarily restructured and adopted a shareholder value perspective with

the prodding from time to time of institutional shareholders. The fear of the 1980s hostile takeovers

likely played a part in this development. Also important (and perhaps more so), is that managers

became aware of the potential benefits of pursuing shareholder value by observing the success of LBOs

and takeovers in the 1980s. Helped along by generous stock option programs, management came to

endorse shareholder value in the 1990s and pursue it with vigor.




        2.1     The Rise of Incentive-based Compensation

        Hall and Liebman (1998) find a remarkable increase in equity-based compensation for U.S.

CEOs. From 1980 to 1994, the average annual CEO option grant (valued at issuance) increased

almost seven-fold. As a result, equity-based compensation made up almost 50% of total CEO

compensation in 1994, compared to less than 20% in 1980. The effect of the increase in equity-based

compensation has been to increase CEO pay-to-performance sensitivities by a factor of ten times from

1980 to 1998 (Hall and Liebman, 2000).6 The increase in pay-for-performance sensitivity over this



                                                    16
 period is of the same order of magnitude as the increase for CEOs in LBOs found in Kaplan (1989).

        The results in Hall and Liebman combined with those in Holderness, Kroszner and Sheehan

(1999) suggest that managerial equity ownership is very high today relative to most of the last century

(and perhaps all of it). Holderness et al. compare equity ownership by officers and directors in 1935

and 1995 and find that equity ownership was substantially greater in 1995 than in 1935.

        It is arguably the case that the large payoffs earned by LBO sponsors and, more importantly, by

the top executives of LBO companies made it more acceptable for top executives of public companies

to become wealthy through equity-based compensation.




        2.2     Forcing a Recognition of the Cost of Capital

        The second distinguishing characteristic of LBOs is to incur enough leverage to force

management to view capital as costly, because LBOs have to earn a return on capital sufficient to repay

the interest and principal on the debt. Corporations (and consulting firms) now increasingly try to create

a parallel effect through new performance measurement and compensation programs. For example,

Stern Stewart markets Economic Value Added (EVA) and the Boston Consulting Group markets Total

Business Return (TBR). These programs compare a measure of return on capital – usually the after-tax

profit earned by a company or division – to a measure of the cost of capital – the after-tax profit

required by the capital invested, i.e., the product of capital employed and the weighted average cost of

capital.7 Managers are then monitored and compensated on the extent to which the return on capital

exceeds the cost of capital. This allows boards and CEOs to make sure that managers view capital as



                                                    17
costly.

          While it is reasonable to argue that these programs do not impose as much discipline as the debt

in an LBO would, there is evidence that these programs have LBO-like effects.8 Biddle, Bowen and

Wallace (1999) find that firms that implement EVA, improve operating efficiency, dispose of assets,

reduce investment, and repurchase stock to a greater extent than a control sample of non-implementers.

          There is also anecdotal evidence that companies increasingly approach decisions with the goal

of maximizing shareholder value. For example, consulting firms like McKinsey & Co. routinely measure

the effects of their consulting assignments on shareholder value (Copeland et al., 1994).




          2.3     Monitoring

          The third distinguishing characteristic of LBOs is closer monitoring by shareholders and the

board. There are at least two reasons it is likely that public company shareholders monitor management

more closely in the 1990s than in the 1980s. First, as mentioned earlier, the shareholdings of

professional, institutional investors increased substantially. From 1980 to 1996, large institutional

investors nearly doubled the share of the stock market they owned from under 30% to over 50%

(Gompers and Metrick, 2000). This means that professional investors – who have strong incentives to

generate greater stock returns – own an increasingly large fraction of U.S. corporations.

          Second, in 1992, the SEC substantially reduced the costs to shareholders of mounting proxy

contests that challenged management teams. Under the old rules, a shareholder had to file a detailed

proxy statement with the SEC before talking to more than ten other shareholders. Under the new rules,



                                                     18
 shareholders can essentially communicate at any time in any way as long as they send a copy of the

substance of the communication to the SEC afterward. The rule change has lowered the cost of

coordinating shareholder actions and to block management proposals. Not surprisingly, the Business

Roundtable – a group of 200 CEOs of the very largest U.S. companies – and other management

organizations were extremely hostile to this rule change when it was proposed.

        Shareholder activism has increased in the U.S. since the late 1980s with CALPERS, the

Council of Institutional Investors, the LENS Fund, and Michael Price’s Mutual Shares among the more

prominent activists. Changes in the proxy rules have made this possible. The evidence on the impact of

shareholder activism, however, is mixed. Karpoff (1998) summarizes the results of 20 empirical studies

on the effects of formal shareholder proposals and private negotiations with firms, and finds evidence of,

at best, only small effects on shareholder value.

        Unfortunately, it is difficult to measure the extent and effects of shareholder activity because

much of it is communicated verbally and not reported (Russell Reynolds Associates, 1995).

Interestingly, Gompers and Metrick (2000) find that returns are higher in companies with greater

institutional ownership. This is consistent with a monitoring role for large institutions – greater

institutional ownership implies more effective monitoring, which is associated with higher stock prices.

Furthermore, in a survey of institutional investors, Felton et al. (1997) find that many institutional

investors will pay a premium of approximately 10% for companies with good corporate governance.

        There also is evidence that boards of public companies have changed in the 1990s and become

more active monitors than in the past. Like top management, directors receive an increasing amount of



                                                      19
equity-based compensation. Perry (1999) estimates that the fraction of compensation for directors that

is incentive-based increased from 25% in 1992 to 39% in 1995. Russell Reynolds Associates (1998)

report that the use of incentive-based compensation for directors also increased from 1995 to 1997.

       Boards of public companies have become somewhat smaller over time (Hermalin and

Wesibach, 2000; Wu, 2000). This is interesting because boards of LBO firms are smaller than

otherwise similar firms (Gertner and Kaplan, 1996); and smaller boards are associated with higher

valuations (Yermack, 1996).

       The CEO turnover process also appears to have changed. Huson, Parrino, and Starks (1999)

compare CEO turnover for large companies from 1971 to 1994. They find a marked increase in forced

turnovers and hiring of new CEOs from outside the company. The incidence of forced turnovers and

outside succession is highest from 1989 to 1994.

       The evidence on the relation between turnover and performance is mixed. Huson, Parrino, and

Starks (1999) find that CEO turnover is more sensitive to changes in operating income from 1989 to

1994 than in earlier years. On the other hand, Murphy (1999) finds that CEO turnover is less sensitive

to industry-adjusted stock performance from 1990 to 1995 than in earlier years.




       2.4     Changes in Regulation and Taxation

       Two other corporate governance changes in the 1990s – one in regulation and one in taxation –

are worth mentioning.

       In 1992, the SEC required public companies to provide more detailed disclosure of top



                                                   20
executive compensation and its relation to firm performance, particularly stock performance. This

requirement arguably had two effects. First, it focused boards of directors on stock performance.

Companies now routinely report firm, industry, and market stock performance in their proxy statements.

This represents a substantial shift from the pre-1980s when companies were more likely to focus on

earnings per share, growth, and other measures that might or might not affect company stock

performance. Second, the requirement makes equity-based compensation packages easier to defend.

Boards of directors are less likely to be criticized by shareholders or the media if managers are

compensated based on stock performance.

        In 1993, Congress passed legislation that capped the tax deductibility of top executive

compensation at $1 million unless the compensation was performance-based. Hall and Liebman

(2000), Perry and Zenner (2000), and Rose and Wolfram (2000) find that this legislation had at most a

modest effect on the increased use of performance-based compensation.




        2.5     Summing up the Change in Corporate Governance in the 1990s

        Taken as a whole, the evidence strongly suggests that U.S. corporations have increasingly

pursued shareholder value friendly policies on their own in the 1990s. This also provides the most

plausible explanation of why hostile takeovers and LBOs largely disappeared in the 1990s – they were

no longer needed. A telling piece of anecdotal evidence on the change in the corporate mindset comes

from a 1997 statement on corporate governance by the Business Roundtable(1997). Up until 1995, the

Business Roundtable consistently opposed hostile takeovers and raiders as well as substantial changes



                                                    21
in corporate governance practices. In 1997 the Business Roundtable changed its position to read “the

paramount duty of management and the board is to the shareholder and not to ... other stakeholders.”

Commenting on this, Nell Minow, a prominent shareholder activist noted: “I’m not on the fringe

anymore” (Byrne, 1997).

        We believe management’s acceptance of the shareholders’ perspective was greatly aided by

lucrative stock option plans, which allowed executives to reap big financial benefits from increased share

prices. As a result, the restructuring of corporate America continued in the 1990s on much more

amicable terms than in the 1980s.

        Another reason why the 1990s merger wave differed from the 1980s wave likely has to do with

different stages of the restructuring process. In the 1980s, restructuring was just beginning. The focus

was on forcing corporate assets out of the hands of managers who could not or did not want to use

them efficiently. The results included takeovers and restructurings of companies with excess capacity as

well as bust-up takeovers of inefficient conglomerates. Hostility and leverage were important

accompaniments. The 1990s appear to have been more of a build-up wave with assets reconfigured to

take advantage of growth opportunities in new technologies and markets. This logic also fits with the

evidence of increased use of equity in place of debt.

        The move towards shareholder and market preeminence also is apparent in the way

corporations have reorganized themselves. There has been a broad trend towards decentralization.

Large companies are trying hard to become more nimble and to find ways to offer employees higher-

powered incentives. At the same time, external capital markets have taken on a larger share of the



                                                    22
reallocation of capital. The large volume of mergers is evidence in point. Venture capital funding

commitments also have increased by an order of magnitude over the 1990s (as discussed in this

symposium by Gompers and Lerner). While corporate managers still reallocate vast amounts of

resources in the economy through internal capital and labor markets, the boundary between markets

and managers appears to have shifted. As managers have ceded authority to the markets, the scope

and independence of their decision-making have narrowed.




3.      An Alternative View on Changes in Corporate Governance

        There are two interpretations of the increased influence of markets on corporate decision-

making. One view is that, after a period of corporate mismanagement, including misguided experiments

with conglomerates in the 1960s and waste of free cash flow in the late 1970s and early 1980s, we

have finally seen a return to healthy market capitalism. Shareholder value is back, because it is the most

efficient form of corporate governance.

        While such a conclusion is consistent with much of the evidence we have presented, the

efficiency hypothesis has its weak spots. Chief among them is the U.S. economic performance of the

1960s. How could productivity and GDP growth be so great at a time when managers supposedly

wasted large amounts of money on conglomerates? How could an inefficient governance system

produce so much more wealth? And what about all the family firms that became conglomerates in the

1960s? Family firms are subject to fewer agency problems than widely held companies, yet many of

them followed the general trend. The 1960s, rightly or wrongly, viewed conglomerates more favorably



                                                    23
than we do today. Indeed, stock markets reacted positively to most conglomerates in the 60s

(Matsusaka, 1993). If hindsight can condemn this economically successful period as mismanaged, then

what guarantees that shareholder value will not suffer the same fate?

        As an alternative hypothesis, this section explores the possibility that capital markets have come

to play a bigger role not because they have become better at allocating capital and not because

managers misbehaved, but rather because the market's comparative advantage has been favored by

economy-wide trends in deregulation, globalization, and information technology.9 If the shifts in

corporate governance have been driven by these factors, then the market’s strong influence on

corporate governance may be more transitory.




        3.1 When Markets are Superior Agents of Change

        Markets are more effective than managers when it comes to moving capital from declining

industries to emerging industries. Firms are experts at particular technologies, products and processes. It

would make little sense for shareholders to become directly involved in General Motors's choice of car

models, for instance -- though their opinion may be reflected in the subsequent share price. But if

resources are to shift from car manufacturing to computer manufacturing, there is little reason to believe

that having General Motors start making computers, an area in which the company currently has little

expertise, would make economic sense. Instead, the market may have a role to play in funneling capital

toward the new companies.

        Europe offers a counterexample of where, instead of markets moving capital from sunset



                                                    24
industries to sunrise industries, corporations have tried to do so. Mannesmann and Preussag are

perhaps the best examples. Both were in the metals business just ten years ago. Before the recent

takeover by Vodafone, Mannesmann was well on its way to become a pure wireless operator. In

another five years, Preussag will probably be a pure travel business. While both of these transitions

appear to have been relatively successful, migration of corporate identity as a mechanism for economic

restructuring seems difficult to rely upon. Europe and Japan have clearly had more difficulties

transforming their corporations than the United States in the last two decades.

        A major problem with asking a corporation to migrate between businesses is that it exacerbates

internal conflicts (Milgrom and Roberts, 1988; Meyer, Milgrom and Roberts, 1992). Employees know

that their firm-specific knowledge is likely to become less valuable once the firm changes course and

starts pursuing new lines of business. A new firm, with a lack of commitments and old baggage, can

offer a distinctive competitive advantage in rapidly growing industries such as information technology

and telecommunications. From this perspective, forcing older companies to adhere more rigorously to

maximization of shareholder value reduces those activities of employee influence that cause costly

delays, distorted investment decisions, and misguided efforts to save jobs. If decisions of where to cut

and where to expand jobs were left to a democratic body of workers, the heterogeneity in employee

preferences would make the process of change slow and costly. When shareholders determine in which

direction a company should go, the decision can be made swiftly without favoring any particular group

of workers (Hansman, 1996; Hart and Moore, 1996).

        Markets also have a distinct advantage over corporations when it comes to evaluating and



                                                    25
rewarding future performance. U.S. capital markets have often been accused of short-termism (for

example, Porter, 1992), but insofar as these accusations suggest that investments should not be

evaluated on an ongoing basis in the light of current events, the accusations are largely misplaced.

Especially in a time of technological transition, quick reassessments of where capital should be

reallocated are a rational response to greater uncertainty. Large swings in stock prices arise precisely

because the market takes a long view of growth expectations. Also, while stock prices are highly

imperfect, they have one unmatched virtue: they have integrity, because markets are asking people to

put their money where their mouth is.

        Without the measuring stick of share prices, the long-term effects of management actions would

become much harder to assess. If Netscape, E-Bay or Amazon had been invented inside a big

company, their potential value would probably have been overlooked. Even if some degree of value had

been seen, it would have been difficult or impossible to give management a strong incentive to maximize

the value inherent in these ideas. As independent firms with their own stock prices, management

incentives were altogether different. In times of change, when the future takes on exceptional

significance, the value of market information and market-based incentives is particularly great.

        The hierarchical investment approval process that is characteristic of internal capital markets is

another impediment to innovation within firms. Business history is littered with tales of frustrated

entrepreneurs, who could not realize their ideas as employees, but managed to establish successful new

businesses on their own. Tight screening of projects should not necessarily be seen as a defect of the

large corporation. People within the organization do not carry the responsibility that an entrepreneur



                                                     26
carries. The freedom to pursue innovation needs to be curbed to avoid excessive experimentation and

inattention to the business end of the process. After all, the freedom to pursue innovation with the

company's money needs to be monitored, lest easy money foster excessive experimentation and

inattention to the business end of the process. (Fairchild Technologies and Xerox PARC are famous

examples where the fruits of innovation were reaped by others.) By design, the large corporation is not

set up for revolutionary inventions (Holmstrom, 1989; Bhide, 2000).

        Today, corporations try to adjust to the increased need for innovation by outsourcing some of it

to start-ups. Companies realize that their in-house resources are insufficient to generate the quantity and

variety of new ideas they need, and so they must participate in the market-oriented innovation process,

whether by forming alliances with promising start-ups, often by using corporate venture capital funds,

and sometimes by purchasing firms outright.




        3.2     Will the market’s influence continue to prevail

        The logical next question is whether the capital market's enhanced role will be sustained. One

argument is that the pace of economic change has accelerated and that market flexibility will continue to

be valuable, if not more valuable, over time. Alternatively, one might appeal to history to argue that this

continually faster change is unlikely. Periods of big technological and organizational change are, nearly

by definition, followed by less exciting periods. If change itself is the only driver of market influence,

won't we eventually see a return to old ways of doing business?

        A reversion to the older style of corporate governance in the 1960s and 1970s seems unlikely



                                                      27
for two reasons. First, the institutional and organizational knowledge and infrastructure that have been

developed to deal with corporate restructuring have changed traditional trade-offs. For instance,

financial markets have more timely and better information, many new instruments, and much new

expertise available to help managers reallocate capital. This is also a reason why merger and acquisition

activity is likely to stay at a higher average level in the future.

        The second reason why we will not see a return to the old days is that deregulation and

information technology have brought structural changes that have altered the old trade-offs between

markets and hierarchies. For instance, deregulation has increased market opportunities and competition,

reducing the cost of potential hold-ups in a vertical chain. Improved information technology, including

the Internet, have made access to financial capital easier and reduced the power of physical assets

relative to human capital (Rajan and Zingales, 2000).

        The industrial and organizational implications of these changes have not been easy to predict. In

the 1970s, the common belief was that powerful computers would result in more centralization and

ever-larger corporate structures, since corporations would become better planners and information

processors relative to the market. This matches poorly the growth of networked, market-intermediated

forms of organization both in new and traditional industries. While the current number of alliances, joint

ventures and related hybrids is likely to decline as the rush into new markets declines, it is also clear that

companies have discovered new patterns of cooperation that will have a permanent effect on the

organizational landscape. On the other hand, global companies seem to become ever larger, in contrast

to those arguing the demise of the corporation (Jensen, 1989). Evidently, hierarchies as well as markets



                                                        28
benefit from information technology with the net effects generally ambiguous (Brynjolfson, 1994). As

Baker and Hubbard (2000) have nicely demonstrated in the context of trucking, a detailed structural

study is required to sort out competing effects.




4. Concluding Remarks

        U.S. corporate governance has changed substantially in the last 20 years. The underlying

substance of this transformation has been that U.S. managers have become much more focused on

stock prices. The corporate governance mechanisms that have driven this focus have evolved over time,

from the leveraged hostile takeovers and buyouts of the 1980s to the incentive-based compensation,

activist boards of directors and shareholders in the 1990s.

        We have argued that at least some of the efficiency gains associated with these changes can be

traced to the comparative advantage of markets in undertaking large-scale change. Since, these effects

are temporary, it is possible that the current level of market influence on the governance and

organization of firms is going to abate. It is not hard to build a scenario in which the pursuit of

shareholder value becomes a less important guideline to managers in the next few years. Stock options

were popular when the stock market boomed in the 1960s, but disappeared during the flat market in

the 1970s. If the stock markets are flat or down for the next few years, then the extensive reliance on

stock options may again dissipate, leading managers to have less focus on stock prices.

        But even after taking such reservations into account, it seems to us that a more market-oriented

style of corporate governance than existed up to the early 1980s is here to stay. The growth of mutual



                                                      29
funds and institutional investors seems certain to continue over the next couple of decades. The market-

based system of corporate governance also seems to have a potentially powerful role to play as the

forces of deregulation, globalization, and information technology continue to sweep across the world

economy. It will be revealing to see how market-oriented the corporate governance systems in other

countries will become.

        Historically, U.S. corporate governance has differed in the use of equity-based compensation, in

the ability to repurchase one's own shares, and in allowing a number of takeovers10. In recent years,

other countries have begun to move toward the U.S. model. In Europe, according to accounts in the

popular press, the use of stock options for executives and boards is increasing. Japan has eliminated a

substantial tax penalty on executive stock options.11 In the last several years, France, Germany, and

Japan have made it easier for companies to repurchase their shares. Finally, continental Europe has

recently experienced a rise in hostile takeovers. Escherich and Gibbs (2000) report that 34 hostile bids

with a total value of $406 billion were announced in 1999 in Continental Europe. These included

Vodaphones' bid for Mannesmann, TotalFina's bid for Elf Aquitane, and Olivetti's bid for Telecom

Italia. This volume compares with 52 bids for $69 billion over the entire 1990 to 1998 period.

        In the 1970s and 1980s, many observers criticized the U.S. capital markets and governance

system quite strongly and looked to other systems, particularly the German and Japanese systems, as

being superior (for example, Porter, 1992). But since the mid-1980s, the U.S. style of corporate

governance has reinvented itself, and the rest of the world seems to be following the same path.




                                                   30
                                         Acknowledgements

We thank George Baker, Bradford Delong, Robert Gibbons, Martin Hellwig, Raghu Rajan , John Roberts,

Timothy Taylor, and Michael Waldman for helpful comments.




                                                  31
                                         Figure 1




                          All Acquisition Volume
                              As % of Average GDP
                                  1968-1999
18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
 8%
 6%
 4%
 2%
 0%
  1968   1971   1974   1977      1980        1983        1986        1989   1992   1995   1998
                              Source: Mergerstat, Authors' Calculations




                                            32
                                            Figure 2



                                 All Acquisition Volume
                       As % of Average Total Stock Market Capitalization
                                        1968 - 1999


12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
  1968   1971   1974     1977     1980        1983        1986        1989   1992   1995   1998
                                 Source: Mergerstat, Authors' Calculations




                                               33
                                          Figure 3



             Net Equity Issuance of U.S. Non-financial Corporate Business
                        As Percent of Average Total Stock Market Value
                                         1968 - 1999
 4.00%
 3.00%
 2.00%
 1.00%
 0.00%
-1.00%
-2.00%
-3.00%
-4.00%
-5.00%
     1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
                      Source: Flow of Funds Accounts of the U.S., Author's Calculations




                                             34
                                     Figure 4



                            Going Private Volume
                   As Percent of Average Total Stock Market Value
                                    1979 - 1999
3.00%
2.50%
2.00%
1.50%
1.00%
0.50%
0.00%
     1976   1979   1982       1985           1988        1991          1994   1997   2000
                           Source: Mergerstat, Author's Calculations




                                        35
                                   Figure 5



               Non-InvestmentGradeBondVolume
           (As a % of Average Total Stock Market Capitalization)
                              1977 - 1999
2.00%
1.50%
1.00%
0.50%
0.00%
    1977     1981          1985               1989           1993    1997
                      Source: Merrill Lynch, Authors' Calculations




                                      36
                              Figure 6




                Contested Tender Offers as % of Total
                             1974 - 1999
45%

40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
  1971   1975   1979       1983             1987    1991   1995   1999
                             Source: Mergerstat




                                  37
                                                     References

         Andrade, Gregor, and Steven Kaplan. 1998. “How Costly Is Financial (Not Economic) Distress? Evidence

from Highly Leveraged Transactions That Became Distressed.” Journal of Finance. October, 53, pp. 1443-1494.

         Andrade, Gregor, Mark Mitchell and Erik Stafford. 2001. “New Evidence and Perspectives on Mergers.”

Journal of Economic Perspectives. May.

         Baker, G and T. Hubbard. 2000. “Make Versus Buy in Trucking: Asset Ownership, Job Design and

Information.” Working paper, University of Chicago, September.

         Baker, G. and C. Montgomery. 1995. “Conglomerates and LBO Associations: A Comparison of

Organizational Forms.” Working Paper, Harvard Business School.

         Berger, P., and E. Ofek. 1995. “Diversification’s effect on firm value.” Journal of Financial Economics. 37,

pp. 39-65.

         Berger, P., and E. Ofek. 1996. “Bustup Takeovers of Value-Destroying Diversified Firms .” Journal of

Finance 51, pp. 1175-1200.

         Bernanke, B., and J. Campbell, 1988, "Is there a corporate debt crisis?" Brookings Papers on Economic

Activity, I, 83-139.

         Bhagat, S., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1990. “Hostile Takeovers in the 1980s: the Return to Corporate

Specialization.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, pp.1-72.

         Biddle, Gary, Robert Bowen and James Wallace. 1999. “Evidence on EVA.” Journal of Applied Corporate

Finance. Summer, 12:2, pp. 69-91.

         Business Roundtable. 1997. Statement on Corporate Governance. September.

         Brynjolfsson, E. 1994. “Information Assets, Technology, and Organization.” Management Science, Vol. 40

(12).

         Byrne, John. 1997. “CEOs Catch Up With Shareholder Activist,” Business Week, September 22, p. 36

         Campa, Jose and Simi Kedia. 1999. “Explaining the diversification discount.” Working paper, Harvard



                                                          38
Business School.

         Chandler, A. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business. Cambridge, MA:

The Belknap Press.

         Chandler, A. 1990. Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap

Press.

         Chevalier, Judith. 1999. “Why do firms undertake diversifying mergers? An investigation of the investment

policies of merging firms.” Working paper, University of Chicago.

         Comment, R., and G. Jarrell. 1995. “Corporate Focus, Stock Returns and the Market for Corporate Control.”

Journal of Financial Economics, 37, pp. 67-88.

         Comment, R., and G.W. Schwert. 1995. “Poison or Placebo?” Journal of Financial Economics 39, pp.3-44.

         Copeland, T., T. Koller, and J. Murrin. 1994. Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies.

John Wiley & Sons, New York, New York.

         Del Guercio, D. and J. Hawkins. 1999. “The Motivation and Impact of Pension Fund Activism.” Journal of

Financial Economics. 52, No. 3, pp. 293-340.

         Donaldson, G. and J. Lorsch. 1983. Decision Making at the Top. Basic Books, New York, New York.

         Donaldson, G. 1994. Corporate Restructuring. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

         Escherich, Rick and Paul Gibbs. 2000. Global Mergers and Acquisitions Review. JP Morgan. April.

         Felton, B., A. Hudnut, and J. Von Heeckeren. 1997. “The Dollar Value of Board Governance.” Mckinsey

Quarterly.

         Gertner, R., and S. Kaplan. 1996. “The Value-Maximizing Board.” Working Paper, University of Chicago.

         Gillan, S., and L. Starks. 2000. “Corporate Governance Proposals and Relationship Shareholder Activism:

The Role of Institutional Investors.” Journal of Financial Economics. 57, No. 2, pp. 275-305.

         Golbe, Devra and Lawrence White. 1988. “A Time-Series Analysis of Mergers and Acquisitions in the U.S.

Economy.” In Alan Auerbach, ed., Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences. The University of Chicago

Press, Chicago, IL.

         Gompers, P. and J. Lerner. 2001. “The Venture Capital Revolution.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. May.

                                                          39
         Gompers, P and J. Lerner. 2000b. “The Determinants of Corporate Venture Capital Success: Organizational

Structure, Incentives, and Complementarities.” in R. Morck, ed., Concentrated Corporate Ownership. The University

of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

         Gompers, Paul and Andrew Metrick. 2001. “Institutional Investors and Equity Prices.” Quarterly Journal of

Economics.

         Graham, John, Michael Lemmon and Jack Wolf. 2000. “Does Corporate Diversification Destroy Value?”

Working paper, Duke University. July.

         Hall, B., and J. Liebman. 1998. “Are CEOs Really Paid like Bureaucrats?” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

112, No. 3, pp. 653-691.

         Hall, B., and J. Liebman. 2000. “The Taxation of Executive Compensation.” Working Paper, National Bureau

of Economic Research.

         Hansmann, H. 1996. The Ownership of Enterprise. The Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA.

         Hart, O. and J. Moore. 1996. “The Governance of Exchanges: Members’ Cooperatives Versus Outside

Ownership, Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 12 (4), pp. 53-69.

         Healy, P., K. Palepu, and R. Ruback. 1992. “Do Mergers Improve Corporate Performance?” Journal of

Financial Economics.

         Holderness, C., R. Kroszner, and D. Sheehan. 1999. Were the Good Old That Good? Changes in Managerial

Stock Ownership Since the Great Depression. Journal of Finance. 54:2, pp. 435-470.

         Holmstrom, B. 1989. “Agency Costs and Innvoation,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization. 12.

         Huson, Mark, Robert Parrino and Laura Starks. 1999. “The Effectiveness of Internal Monitoring

Mechanisns: Evidence From CEO Turnover Between 1971 and 1994.” Working paper, University of Texas.:

         Jarrell, Gregg, James Brickley, and Jeffrey Netter. 1988. “The Market for Corporate Control: The Empirical

Evidence Since 1980,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter: 49-68.

         Jensen, M. 1986. “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers.” American

Economic Review. 76, pp. 323-329.

         Jensen, M. 1988. “Takeovers: Their Causes and Consequences.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 2, pp.

                                                          40
21-48.

         Jensen, M. 1989. “The Eclipse of the Public Corporation.” Harvard Business Review. No. 5, pp. 61-74.

         Jensen, M. 1991. “Corporate Control and the Politics of Finance.” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance.

pp. 13-33.

         Jensen, M. 1993. “The Modern Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Finance.

         Jensen, M. and K. J. Murphy. 1990. “Performance Pay and Top Management Incentives.” Journal of

Political Economy. 98, pp. 225-264.

         Jensen M. and Richard Ruback. 1983. “The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific Evidence,” Journal

of Financial Economics, 11.

         Kaplan, S. 1989. “The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operations and Value.” Journal of Financial

Economics. 24, pp. 217-254.

         Kaplan, S. 1994a. “Camp eau's Acquisition of Federated: Post-Bankruptcy Results.” Journal of Financial

Economics.

         Kaplan, S. 1994b. “Top Executive Rewards and Firm Performance: A Comparison of Japan and the U.S.”

Journal of Political Economy. 102, pp. 510-546.

         Kaplan, S. 1997. “The Evolution of U.S. Corporate Governance: We Are All Henry Kravis Now.” Journal

of Private Equity.

         Kaplan, S. and J. Stein. 1993. “The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and Financial Structure in The1980s.”

Quarterly Journal of Economics.

         Karpoff, Jonathan. 1998. “The Impact of Shareholder Activism on Target Companies: A Survey of

Empirical Findings.” Working paper, University of Washington.

         Klein, B, R.A. Crawford and A.A. Alchien. 1978. “Vertical Integration, Appropriable Rents, and the

Competitive Contracting Process.” Journal of Law and Economics. Vol. 21: 297-326.

         La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1997. “ Legal Determinants of External

Finance.” Journal of Finance. 52, pp. 1131-1150.

         La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1998. “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political

                                                          41
Economy. 106, pp. 1113-1155.

         Liebeskind, J. and T. Opler. 1994. “The Causes of Corporate Refocusing: Evidence from the 1980s.”

Working Paper, UCLA.

         Loomis, Carol. 1990. “The Biggest, Looniest Deal Ever.” Fortune, June 18.

         Matsusaka, J. 1993. “Takeover Motives During the Conglomerate Merger Wave.” Rand Journal of

Economics. 24, pp. 357-379.

         McCauley, Robert, Judith Ruud and Frank Iacono. 1999. Dodging Bullets. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.

         Meyer, M., P. Milgrom and J. Roberts. 1992. “Organizational Prospects, Influence Costs and Ownership

Changes.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 1 (1), pp. 9-35.

         Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts. 1988. “An Economic Approach to Influence Activities in Organizations.”

American Journal of Sociology, Vol 94 (Supplement): S154-S179.

         Milstein, Ira. 1993. “The Evolution of the Certifying Board.” Business Lawyer. 48, pp. 1485-1497.

         Mitchell, M. and K. Lehn. 1990. “Do Bad Bidders Become Good Targets?” Journal of Political Economy 98,

pp. 372-398.

         Mitchell, M. and H. Mulherin. 1996. “The Impact of Industry Shocks on Takeover and Restructuring

Activity.” Journal of Financial Economics. pp. 193-229.

         Montgomery, C. 1994. “Corporate Diversification.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 8, pp. 163-178.

         Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1989. “Alternative Mechanisms for Corporate Control.” American

Economic Review.

         Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. “Executive Comp ensation.” In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of

Labor Economics. Volume 3, North Holland, pp. 2485-2525.

         National Association of Corporate Directors. 1995. Report of the NACD Blue Ribbon Commission on

Director Compensation. National Association of Corporate Directors, Washington, DC.

         National Association of Corporate Directors. 1997. Corporate Governance Survey. National Association of

Corporate Directors, Washington, DC.

         Opler, Tim and Jonathan Sokobin. 1996. “Does Coordinated Institutional Activism Work?” Working Paper,

                                                          42
Ohio State University.

        Porter, Michael. 1992. “Capital Disadvantage: America's Failing Capital Investment System.” Harvard

Business Review, September-October, pp. 65-83.

        Poterba, J. and A. Samwick. 1995. “Stock Ownership Patterns, Stock Market Fluctuations, and

Consumption." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 2, 295-357.

        Rajan, R. and L. Zingales. 2000. “The Governance of the New Enterprise,” in X. Vives ed. Corporate

Governance. (Cambridge University Press).

        Romano, Roberta. 1992. “A Guide to Takeovers: Theory, Evidence, and Regulation.” Yale Journal on

Regulation.

        Rothchild, John. 1991. Going for Broke. Simon and Schuster, New York, New York.

        Russell Reynolds Associates. 1995. Redefining Corporate Governance: 1995 U.S. Survey of Institutional

Investors.

        Russell Reynolds Associates. 1998. “1997-1998 Board Practices Survey.”

        Servaes, H. 1994. “Do Takeover Targets Overinvest?” Review of Financial Studies. 7, pp. 253-278.

        Shleifer A. and L. Summers. 1988. “Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers,” in Corporate Takeovers: Causes

and Consequences, Alan Auerbach, ed. University of Chicago Press.

        Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny. 1990. “The Takeover Wave of the 1980s.” Science, 249, August 17, pp. 745-749.

        Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny. 1997. “A Survey of Corporate Governance.” Journal of Finance. June, 737-784.

        Spencer Stuart. 1998. Spencer Stuart Board Index: Board Trends and Practices at Major American

Corporations.

        Stein, Jeremy, 2001, “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment,” forthcoming in Handbook of the

Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris and Rene Stulz. Amsterdam: North-Holland

        Stewart, B. 1991. The Quest for Value. Harpercollins, New York, New York.

        Williamson, O. 1979. “Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual Relations.” Journal of

Law and Economics. Vol 22: 3-61.

        Yates, J-A. 1991. “Investing in Information: The Supply and Demand Forces in the Use of Information in

                                                       43
American Firms, 1850-1920.” In P Temin (ed) Inside the Business Enterprise: Historical Perspectives on the Use of

Information. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

        Yermack, David. 1996. “Higher market valuation of companies a small board of directors.” Journal of

Financial Economics. 40, pp. 185-202.




                                                         44
                                                 Endnotes




1
  We use merger activity and takeover activity interchangeably.
2
  Tender offers are formal offers to purchase a company’s shares for cash. By SEC regulations, a tender
offer must stay open for 20 business days. A tender offer is not necessary for a takeover. Many takeovers
are accomplished by, first, the agreement of the boards of the buyer and seller to an acquisition, and,
second, a subsequent vote of the seller’s (and, in some cases, buyer’s) shareholders. Mergers that use
equity are typically accomplished using the second method rather than through a tender offer.
3
  For evidence on this, see Jarrell, Brickley and Netter (1988), Bhagat, Shleifer and Vishny (1990)
Kaplan (1989), Marais, Schipper and Smith (1989), Rosett (1988) and Jensen (1993). Shleifer and
Summers (1988) argue the reverse, using the hostile takeover of TWA as evidence.
4
   The results in Chevalier (1999), Hyland (1999), Lamont and Polk (1999) also suggest that the
diversification discount can only partially be attributed to diversification destroying value.
5
   Regulatory restrictions were placed on insurance company and savings & loan investments in junk bonds
and on commercial bank loans to LBOs. In addition, the U.S. government prosecuted Michael Milken and
others involved in takeover financing.
6
  This increase in equity-based compensation combined with the strong performance of the stock
market is partially responsible for the even larger realized increases in top executive compensation.
7
   The after-tax profit used in this calculation is not the company’s actual net income, but a construction,
referred to as NOPAT (net operating profit after-tax), which measures the after-tax profit that the company
would have earned if it did not have any debt. For a more detailed description of one of these programs,
EVA, see Stewart (1990).
8
   These programs also avoid any financial distress costs that might be associated with LBO debt.
9
  Historically, the two big drivers of organizational change have been changes in regulation (Shleifer and
Vishny, 1990) and technological innovations (Chandler, 1962, 1977; Yates, 1991).
10
   For example, see Kaplan (1994b), Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and La Porta et al. (1997, 1998).
11
   See “Exercised: Share buybacks in Japan,” The Economist, August 2, 1997, pp. 59-60
and “Buyback fever hits Europe,” Business Week, May 11, 1998, p.46.




                                                    45
