% & '







 







 
 
!"# $!()))
$*++,,,-!!#+$$! +,()))



%  
  .
/010 2   3
-!4# 0)/5(
$!

            ! "  
#  $   %& '#  ()      ' 
*% ' +,%  $ "  *  -  (  '.
         /     (
012("  +) ($    ("   .   
.  '13 '  .
           0
      (

! $ 42
 4 
%!"# $! ()))
$!)00/
6 '/1'50'5(
 
# 3 7- !4! -32 7-2!4! 84
  !# 8  2!79  # 7    ! $!    !# 4 ## 
:$# !4! !#   .,3!  2!79  $!2$ !# $  $!42  2! ;
2 3!  2!4! !#  -!   2!79  $   ! !4 
## 2$!2$!!#8 # 7 22! $!2!#
82!4!  !2! 4#;!4-  $! 2! 
2!79  $   ! !4 #   82 8 !#  2!4! !# 
#4##! $!$!42! 8,2! 8!2!# 

 
  3! 7
$!82
(0< !.
)/00  3
-  .=5)/0
</=;)?);/?>0
@2-; 4

 
2# 28% 
'!#,3! 7
';0= 4 !
 #)001>

“Max Weber was right. If we learn anything from the
history of economic development, it is that culture makes
almost all of the difference.”
Landes (2000)

1. Introduction.
There is substantial evidence that financial development benefits economic growth.1 Across countries,
there are significant differences in the importance of capital markets, in firms’ ability to access external
finance, and in the ownership of publicly traded firms. As La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(2000) show, a common element explaining these differences is the extent to which investors are protected
from expropriation by managers, controlling shareholders, and governments. Policymakers, economists, and
journalists have argued that the appropriate model for the protection of the rights of investors is the so-called
Anglo-Saxon model. Nevertheless, countries that protect their investors as the U.S. and the U.K. do are in
the minority. This is so despite the fact that, as the competition for capital becomes more global, countries with
poor protection of investor rights apparently lose out to countries with better protection of investor rights. Why
is it then that the degree of investor protection differs across countries?
This paper explores whether differences in culture, defined as a system of beliefs that shape the
actions of individuals within a society, can help explain differences in investor protection. One reason why
the Anglo-Saxon form of investor protection might be opposed in a country could simply be because of where
it is coming from. Is it then the case that English-speaking countries differ from other countries in how they
protect investors? More importantly, however, a country’s culture could affect both how financial markets

1

See Levine (1997) for a review of the literature.
1

are viewed within that country and how they contribute to social welfare. The view that culture is an
important determinant of economic institutions has a long tradition, dating back at least to the work of Weber
(1930). This tradition provides powerful arguments for why some cultures are more supportive of financial
markets than others. Weber (1930) argued in his influential work that cultural changes, namely the Calvinist
reformation, played a critical role in the development of capitalism and its institutions. Many others have
emphasized the importance of Western individualism as an explanation for the growth of markets in the West
(see, for instance, Lal (1999) and the references therein). In a seminal paper on the role of culture as a
determinant of institutions, Greif (1994) compares Maghribi traders of the eleventh century and Genoese
traders of the twelfth century and concludes that “Differences in the societal organization of the two trading
societies can be consistently accounted for as reflecting diverse cultural beliefs.” (p. 914). He states that his
“findings suggest the theoretical and historical importance of culture in determining societal organizations, in
leading to path dependence of institutional frameworks, and in forestalling successful intersociety adoption
of institutions.” (p. 914).
Religions are a key component of systems of beliefs. Historically, religions have had a lot to say about
the rights of creditors and much less about the rights of shareholders. As Tawney (1954) shows, the
prohibition of usury was a fundamental tenet of the medieval church. Usury meant receiving interest on loans
and led to excommunication. The Council of Lyons (1274) even prescribed excommunication for anybody
who would let a house to a usurer. The medieval church was intent on restricting economic transactions to
those where one of the parties would not be taking advantage of the other because of greater bargaining
strength. The Calvinist reformation viewed the payment of interest as a normal part of commerce, thereby
making it possible for modern debt markets to develop. In the aftermath of the Calvinist reformation, creditor
rights differed sharply across Protestant and Catholic countries. This raises the question of whether these
differing attitudes toward creditor rights have persisted sufficiently to help understand the variation in creditor

2

rights across countries in the late 20th century.
Cultures change and adapt in response to economic changes, but they generally do so slowly. If
predominant values in some countries are less supportive of market interactions than in other countries, one
would expect investor rights to be less well protected in these countries for a number of reasons . First, the
case to strengthen these rights is less compelling to their citizens and politicians. Second, these countries might
have institutions fostered by their culture that make financial markets less valuable. For instance, extended
families limit the use of markets for individuals since many transactions take place within the extended family
that otherwise would require the use of markets. Third, these countries might have different economic
fundamentals that make market interactions less valuable. For instance, Glaeser and Scheinkman (1998)
provide a model where usury laws serve as a primitive means of social insurance. In their model, economic
conditions can make such laws useful. At the same time, however, the existence of such a form of social
insurance makes financial innovations less profitable and hence slows down financial development. With this
view, if culture explains differences in investor protection, it is that it proxies for more fundamental
differences in economic conditions across countries.
We examine whether simple proxies for culture are helpful in understanding how investor rights differ
across countries. Religion is widely used as a proxy for culture. For instance, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1999) use religion as a proxy for culture in their study of government quality. Besides
religion, it can be argued that beliefs are more easily communicated among countries that share the same
language and therefore are more likely to be common among such countries. We therefore use language as
our second proxy for culture. It is hard to argue that these proxies depend on the degree of financial
development, so that we do not have to worry about reverse-causation arguments. We choose few and
extremely simple proxies for two reasons. First, our study uses 49 countries. Since there are few countries,
there is a substantial risk of overfitting. Some combination of a suitable number of cultural variables could end

3

up explaining the diversity in shareholder and creditor rights spuriously. Overfitting is not a problem with our
choice of proxies and there is much precedent for using them in social sciences. Second, providing a complete
explanation of how cultural variables help understand the diversity in investor rights is beyond the scope of
this paper. Rather, we want to investigate whether cultural variables have to be taken seriously in explaining
that diversity. Strikingly, after controlling for income per capita, language and/or religion are almost always
significant in regressions attempting to predict the degree of investor protection.
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) show that the legal origin of a country’s laws
explains the degree of investor protection in that country. Common law countries protect investors better than
civil law countries. There is some debate as to why it is so. One reason could be that the state has a smaller
role in common law countries than in civil law countries.2 Another reason could be that common law leaves
more room for judges to adapt to changes in the economy and to invoke fairness arguments. In a civil law
country, the judge interprets the law like a theologian interprets the bible. He has no flexibility in how he can
render his decisions. In contrast, common law judges have much more flexibility since they can refer to
precedents and can create precedents of their own. Viewed this way, it would seem that the advantage of
common law countries is that the enforcement of laws can adapt to changes in the economy. Because civil
law countries limit the power of judges, only those attempts to take advantage of investors that are codified
can be reversed and punished. This means that managers or controlling shareholders who are intent in taking
advantage of investors can use the legal code as a roadmap for permissible expropriation in a civil law
country. In contrast, in a common law country, a judge could invoke fairness arguments to force restitution
to expropriated investors even though the acts expropriating investors are not specifically prohibited by law.

2

See La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999). Glaeser and Shleifer (2000)
provide a model where common law emerges as an efficient solution to the problem of designing a legal
system when “the law and order environment is benign to begin with” while civil law emerges as the
efficient solution in countries with weak law and order to begin with.
4

After showing that language and religion are helpful in understanding differences in investor
protection across countries, we examine whether culture proxies are successful because they happen to be
correlated with legal origins. It turns out that this is only partly the case. When we consider shareholder rights,
culture proxies seem to matter mostly but not exclusively because they are correlated with legal origins. For
instance, shareholder rights are better protected in Protestant countries with common law legal origins than
in such countries with civil law origins. Our work therefore strengthens the existing evidence on the
importance of legal origins insofar as shareholder rights are concerned. However, culture proxies seem to
be more important than legal origins for creditor rights. Creditor rights are strongest in countries where the
main religion is Protestant regardless of legal origin. Within civil law countries, the protection of creditor rights
is weaker in Catholic countries. There is no difference in creditor protection between common law Protestant
countries and civil law Protestant countries, but there is a strong difference among civil law countries between
Catholic countries and Protestant countries. Finally, when we consider the enforcement of rights, there is
clear evidence that religion, language, and legal origins all play a role. Protestant countries have better
enforcement of rights than Catholic countries, but for some variables this difference disappears once we also
allow for language to play a role.
Several authors have emphasized the importance of politics in understanding why shareholder and
creditor rights differ across countries. Roe (2000) argues that the existence of strong redistributive or
socialistic movements is more important than legal origins in explaining why financial markets play a weaker
role in some countries than in others. Rajan and Zingales (2000) point out that countries where financial
markets were highly developed at the turn of the 20th century became hostile to financial markets during that
century. They reason that changes in economic conditions can make it particularly valuable for established
firms to oppose new entrants. In such situations, established interests find it optimal to oppose financial
markets since they permit new entrants to obtain funding. Legal origins or cultural variables cannot explain

5

why such changes take place. However, both types of variables can explain why investor protection might
evolve differently across countries in response to changes in economic conditions. If greater investor
protection becomes more valuable because of changes in economic conditions, common law countries or
countries with a culture that is more favorable to market interactions could improve investor protection faster
and more effectively than other countries.
Rajan and Zingales (2000) argue that trade openness is a proxy for the extent to which it is
advantageous for established interests to restrict entry to markets, so that one would expect investor rights
to be more protected in countries that are more open to international trade. At the same time, however, one
would expect countries that benefit more from international trade to have better investor protection. Trade
has to be financed. Trade financing will be harder to obtain and more expensive if the rights of those providing
the financing are poorly protected. Trade financing does not take the form of equity stakes, but rather of
credits. Consequently, one would expect openness to be more closely tied to creditor rights than to
shareholder rights. We find that this is the case. Shareholder rights do not improve with openness, but creditor
rights do so. We find evidence that, as countries become more open, the relation between religion and creditor
rights becomes less important.
Culture matters for investor rights. We know already from the literature that investor rights matter
for financial development. However, we show that religion is important for creditor rights but not for
shareholder rights. Further, language and religion are important for enforcement of rights. This raises the
question of whether culture and legal origins affect different aspects of financial development. The answer
is yes. Stock market development depends on a country’s legal origin. In contrast, debt markets and banking
development depend on culture. In particular, we document that debt issuances relative to GNP are smaller
in Catholic countries than in Protestant countries.
The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we motivate our proxies for culture and show the data

6

we use for our study. In section 3, we investigate the relation between rights variables and culture proxies.
In section 4, we attempt to ascertain whether the success of the culture proxies is simply due to their
correlation with legal origin variables. In section 5, we investigate whether investor rights are stronger in
countries that are more open to international trade and whether the significance of our cultural variables is
due to possible correlation of these variables with openness to international trade. Section 6 shows a direct
relation between financial development measures and our culture variables and extends the analysis allowing
for differences in the type of civil law a country has. Section 7 concludes.

Section 2. Culture proxies: Motivation and data.
The data on legal families, shareholder rights, creditor rights, and the rule of law is taken from La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (LLSV, 1998). The sample includes 49 countries from Asia,
Europe, North America, South America, Africa, and Australia. It does not include countries that recently
were socialist countries. To be included in the sample, the countries had to have at least five non-financial
publicly traded firms with no government ownership as of 1993. The number of countries specifies the number
of observations for the dependent variable in our regressions. Though the literature distinguishes between
three types of civil law (French, Scandinavian, and German), regressions typically only distinguish between
civil law countries and common law countries (see, for instanc e, LLSV (1998)). Since we focus mostly on
regressions, we do not make distinctions among civil law countries. In any case, there is some debate about
what these distinctions really mean. In particular, recent work by Nenova (2000) creates the puzzle that the
benefits from control are lower in countries with a Scandinavian civil law tradition than in common law
countries. Coffee (2001) makes the point that the Scandinavian civil law tradition is sufficiently like other civil
law traditions that the lower benefits from control in Scandinavian countries cannot be explained by
differences in legal regimes. Instead, Coffee (2001) argues that “social norms in Scandinavia may discourage

7

predatory behavior by those in control of the firm.” Differentiating civil law traditions finely may simply
amount to having a dummy variable for Scandinavian countries that picks up the effect of these norms. The
norms that Coffee (2001) focuses on reflect the influence of culture rather than law. All Scandinavian
countries are Protestant countries. Though we can compare civil law Protestant countries to civil law Catholic
countries, sample sizes are too small to compare Protestant countries with Scandinavian civil law to other civil
law countries. We therefore shy away from differentiating the civil law traditions finely and contrast civil law
countries to common law countries. Assuredly, one could make a different choice. We therefore show in
Section 6 that the key result of this paper, namely that law matters more than culture for shareholder rights
but less than culture for creditor rights is not affected by this choice.
Our aim is to test whether simple culture proxies can help explain the diversity in the protection of
investor rights consistently across countries. We therefore restrict our choice to just language and religion as
proxies for culture. We use the 2000 CIA World Factbook to obtain each country’s primary religion and
primary language. These proxies have a long tradition that motivates their use. We define the primary religion
(language) as the religion (language) that is practiced by the largest fraction of the population of a country.
The Anglican religion is included in the Protestant religion. For most countries, more than half the country
practices the primary religion. In Canada, Germany, and Holland, the fraction of the population practicing the
Catholic religion is close to the fraction practicing the Protestant religion. In Korea, the fraction of the
population that is Protestant is only slightly larger than the fraction of the population that is Buddhist.3 Our
results do not seem sensitive to the classification of the religious affiliation of these countries. Our approach
differs from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999), who use the fraction of a country that
practices a given religion in the multiple regressions in their study of the determinants of the quality of

3

The 2000 CIA Factbook states that 49% of the population is Christian and 47% is Buddhist. The
1997 CIA Factbook used Protestant instead of Christian, so that we use Protestant also.
8

governments. We proceed the way we do because we believe that, if religion matters, the religion that is
practiced by the largest fraction of a country should have a unique influence on that country, so that the
impact of religion is not proportional to the fraction of the population of a country that practices a religion.
Hallpike (1986) emphasizes the existence of core principles of societies that are extremely persistent
and include a world-view. He states that “The evidence that societies have core principles is very substantial.
Cross-culturally, we constantly find that groups of societies with common origins (as shown particularly in
membership of the same language family) share many basic features of organization and world-view that
cannot be explained on adaptive or functional grounds.” (p. 293). When considering the role of financial
markets across countries, it is typical to talk about an Anglo-Saxon model. This model is one with diffuse
ownership where stock markets play a crucial role in the allocation of capital. We therefore ask whether
countries where English is the primary language are countries where shareholder and creditor rights are
different from other countries. Table 1 provides a list of countries and shows which countries use English as
their primary language. We see there that English is the primary language for ten countries. The Spanish
language is the only other language that is shared by a significant number of countries since eight countries
have Spanish as their primary language.
Since Weber’s work, religion has been viewed as a key determinant in the growth of capitalism. Lal
(1999) argues that “...cosmological beliefs - an essential element of “culture” - have been crucial in the rise
of the West and the subsequent evolution of its political economy.” (1999, p. 174). There is, however, some
controversy as to whether capitalism and its institutions were fostered by the Protestant reformation as
suggested by Weber or emerged earlier. Lal (1999) argues that individualism “is the unique cosmological
belief of the West.” (p. 174) in contrast to the communalism prevalent in the rest of the world. We therefore
consider whether investor rights differ in countries where the primary religion is Christian as well as whether
rights differ between Protestant and Catholic countries. Table 1 shows that the Christian religion is the

9

primary religion in 32 out of 49 countries. Of these 32 countries, 12 countries have Protestantism as their
primary religion. Seven countries have the Muslim religion as their primary religion and in five countries,
Buddhism is the primary religion. No other religion is the primary religion in more than two countries in our
sample.

Section 3. Culture proxies and investor rights.
Table 2 shows how investor rights differ according to whether a country’s primary language is
English or not, whether the country’s primary religion is Christian or not, and finally, when the primary religion
is Christian, whether it is Protestant or Catholic. In the first three parts of this section, we discuss how
shareholder rights, creditor rights, and the enforcement of investor rights differ according to these religion and
language proxies. In the fourth part of this section, we present multiple regressions that allow us to control
for income per capita and increase the number of language and religion proxies we use.

Section 3.1. Shareholder rights.
Panel A of Table 2 considers shareholder rights. The first right is whether a country mandates one
share one vote. Departures from one share one vote enable shareholders who control less than a majority of
cash flow rights to make decisions for the firm. Strikingly, no English-speaking country mandates one share
one vote. Religion does not affect whether one share one vote prevails. The next six measures are denoted
by LLSV as anti-director rights. They combine these six measures into an anti-director rights index. Each
variable for anti-director rights is a dummy variable that takes value one if a right is mandated in a country
and zero otherwise. The value of the index is obtained by adding the dummy variables for the six rights. The
index provides a summary of how rights differ across countries with different cultures. Anti-director rights
are stronger in English-speaking countries. The differences in the index are not significant between Christian

10

and non-Christian countries or between Protestant and Catholic countries.
Looking at the various anti-director rights, English-speaking and Protestant countries make it easier
for shareholders to vote. No English-speaking country blocks shares before the shareholder meeting, so that
shareholders in these countries do not have to deposit their shares with the company to be able to vote. A
majority of the English-speaking countries allow voting by mail. Cumulative voting or proportional
representation make it easier for minority shareholders to be represented on the board. Catholic countries are
significantly more likely to have cumulative voting or proportional representation, but the other cultural
distinctions we make do not matter. All English-speaking countries have some mechanism for shareholders
to pursue redress against decisions of the company that they believe to be harmful. Less than half of the nonEnglish speaking countries have such a mechanism. Religion seems irrelevant for the existence of such a
mechanism. Preemptive rights enable shareholders to have first right to buy new shares issued by the
company. Such a mechanism protects minority shareholders from having controlling shareholders sell shares
cheaply to some subsets of investors. Preemptive rights are more likely in non-English speaking countries.
Three-quarters of the Catholic countries have such rights, in contrast to less than half the Protestant countries.
Finally, the last variable takes value one if less than 10% of the shareholder votes are required to call a
shareholder assembly. Non-English speaking countries and Catholic countries have lower requirements to call
a shareholder assembly.
The last right considered by LLSV is whether there is a mandatory dividend law or rule. The
mandatory dividend variable takes value zero if a country has no minimum dividend and is equal to the decimal
minimum dividend otherwise. No English-speaking country has such a minimum-dividend rule and no
Protestant country has such a rule. Catholic countries are much more likely to have such a rule than
Protestant countries.
In summary, English-speaking countries and Protestant countries make it easier for shareholders to

11

vote and sue, but harder to make their vote count when they vote.

Section 3.2. Creditor Rights.
Panel B of Table 2 shows how creditor rights vary across countries that differ in religion or language.
Panel B of Table 2 is sharply different from Panel A of the same Table. Looking across the various creditor
rights variables, language is mostly unimportant while religion is crucially important. LLSV combine the first
four rights into an index. The first right is whether the reorganization procedure imposes an automatic stay
on secured assets. In the presence of such a stay, secured creditors cannot get possession of the collateral
in a reorganization. The dummy variable takes value one if there is no automatic stay. The results for that
dummy variable turn out to be similar to the results for most of the creditor rights: language does not matter,
but Catholic countries protect the rights of creditors poorly, so that non-Christian countries protect the rights
of creditors better than Christian countries. The next variable takes value one if secured creditors are paid
first. This dummy variable does not differ significantly across culture proxies, but the sign of the differences
is the same as with the first dummy variable considered. The third variable takes value one if there are
restrictions to going into reorganization. Again, language does not matter, but non-Catholic countries are more
likely to impose restrictions. An important issue in a reorganization is whether management stays in control.
The dummy variable takes value one if management does not stay in control during the reorganization
process. It is highly unusual for management to stay in control in non-Christian countries, but management
almost always stays in control in Catholic countries. Given these results, the creditor rights index, which sums
up the four proxies we have just discussed, shows that creditor rights are higher in non-Christian countries
than in Christian countries and higher in Protestant countries than in Catholic countries. The creditor rights
index can take values from 0 to four. Of all the groups of countries we consider, the Catholic group has the
lowest index, 1.32. The final variable is a dummy variable that takes value one if there is a minimum amount

12

of share capital required for a firm not to be dissolved. No English speaking country has such a rule. The
existence of such a rule does not seem to be related to a country’s primary religion.

Section 3.3. Enforcement of rights and accounting standards.
So far, we have examined how shareholder rights and creditor rights are correlated with our culture
proxies. The rights we considered were rights specified in laws or statutes. The enforcement of these rights
differs across countries. We therefore now consider variables that measure the extent of enforcement of
these variables. The value of each index increases with enforcement. Panel C of Table 2 provides the results
for sample splits based on culture proxies for various enforcement variables and for accounting standards.
Before looking at the results for the individual variables, we can summarize the results of that Panel
as follows. First, language is irrelevant except for accounting standards. Second, religion matters a great deal.
Christian countries have typically better enforcement. The strongest result is, however, that for every variable,
enforcement is significantly stronger for Protestant than for Catholic countries. The first variable is a measure
of the efficiency of the judicial system produced by a country risk rating agency. LLSV use the average from
1980 to 1984. This variable is the same whether countries have English as their primary language or not and
whether countries are Christian or not. However, its score is significantly higher for Protestant countries than
for Catholic countries. The next four variables are significantly higher for Christian countries than for nonChristian countries and significantly higher for Protestant countries than for non-Protestant countries. These
variables are all indexes produced by the country rating agency International Country Risk (ICR). The first
variable measures the rule of law. The second variable estimates the extent of corruption in government. The
third variable assesses the risk of expropriation. The fourth variable is an index capturing the risk of
expropriation by the government. All ICR indices used by LLSV are averages from 1982 through 1995 and
are scaled so that their values go from one through ten, with one representing the worst possible enforcement

13

and ten the highest. The final variable in the table is an index of accounting standards produced by the Center
for International Financial Analysis and Research. With this index, English speaking countries have better
accounting standards than other countries and Protestant countries have higher standards than Catholic
countries.

Section 3.4. Multiple regression analysis.
The comparisons in Table 2 do not take into account the state of development of countries. Further,
it is only possible to make comparisons between two groups at a time. We estimate multiple regressions that
include GNP per capita as an explanatory variable. We would expect that investor rights are better protected
in richer countries. We therefore want to make sure that our culture proxies do not proxy for GNP per capita.
At the same time, however, such an approach may lead us to understate the impact of culture. La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999) find that Catholic countries have lower quality government, but
their results are not significant when they control for GNP per capita. Their interpretation is that “ the adverse
effect of the religious affiliation on the quality of the government is in part captured by per capita income.”
With this view, GNP per capita is affected by culture, which makes it harder to estimate precisely the relation
between investor protection and culture. With the multiple regression, we can also use additional culture
proxies. We use dummy variables PROTESTANT, CATHOLIC, BUDDHIST, MUSLIM, ENGLISH, and
SPANISH. These variables take value one if a country’s primary religion or language is the one of the name
of the dummy variable and zero otherwise. Table 3 presents some of the regressions. We only present
regressions for the anti-director rights index, the creditor rights index, and the enforcement and accounting
indices. We estimate regressions for the individual shareholder and creditor rights, but including these
regressions in our discussion would not affect our conclusions.
The regressions for the anti-director rights index as the dependent variable are reproduced in Panel

14

A of Table 3. The first regression uses the dummies PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC in addition to a
constant and the log of GNP per capita. There is no significant difference between the coefficients of the
religion dummies. The second regression adds the dummies BUDDHIST and MUSLIM. None of the
coefficients on the religion proxies are significant or significantly different from each other. The difference
between the PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC dummies has a p-value of 0.13, though. The third regression
uses the dummies ENGLISH and SPANISH. Countries whose primary language is ENGLISH have a
significantly higher anti-director rights index than countries whose primary language is SPANISH or than
other countries. In these regressions, GNP per capita is not significant. The results therefore confirm our
conclusions in Section 3.1. on shareholder rights and taking into account additional culture proxies has no
impact on our conclusions.
Panel B of Table 3 shows regression estimates for creditor rights. It is immediately clear from the
first regression that whether a country’s primary religion is Catholic instead of Protestant matters a great deal.
The coefficient on the CATHOLIC is negative and has a t-statistic of -4.17. The regression has an adjusted
R2 of 40%. The second regression shows that CATHOLIC remains significant when we add BUDDHIST
and MUSLIM to the regression. These additional dummies are not significant. All religion dummies are
significantly different from the Catholic dummy. The result for MUSLIM is surprising since the Qur'an
prohibits the charging of interest and some fundamentalist countries still have this prohibition. The last
regression of the panel shows that countries with Spanish as the primary language have lower creditor rights
than other countries, but countries with English as the primary language do not have creditor rights that differ
significantly from countries other than those with Spanish as the primary language. Per capita income is
insignificant for the first two regressions, but not for the last one. This provides support for the argument in
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999) that GNP captures part of the effect of religion.
Panel C of Table 3 shows regression estimates for the enforcement of rights. Looking first at judicial

15

efficiency, there is a significant difference between the coefficients on CATHOLIC and PROTESTANT in
the first regression. In the next regression, the coefficient on CATHOLIC is significantly negative and
significantly different from the coefficient on PROTESTANT. The other coefficients on the dummy variables
are not significant and do not differ significantly from other coefficients. Finally, when we turn to the language
regression, we find that judicial efficiency is higher in countries where English is the primary language. None
of the religion dummies are correlated with the rule of law index, but the rule of law is significantly higher for
English-speaking countries than for Spanish-speaking countries. The Protestant countries have a significantly
higher corruption index than all other countries (remember that a higher corruption index means less
corruption). When we add dummy variables for Buddhist and Muslim countries, Protestant countries remain
different and have a higher corruption index than Catholic, Buddhist, or Muslim countries. There is an
extremely sharp difference in the corruption index between countries whose primary language is Spanish and
those whose primary language is English. SPANISH is significantly negative and ENGLISH is significantly
positive. Turning to expropriation risk, once more the only religion difference that matters is the one between
Protestant and Catholic countries. Spanish-speaking countries have a significant negative coefficient. The
results are similar for repudiation risk, except that both Protestant and Buddhist countries have a higher index
than Catholic countries. Finally, the accounting index is significantly lower in Catholic countries. The
difference in the index between Catholic and Protestant countries is also significant. Perhaps not surprisingly
at this point, English-speaking countries have a significant positive coefficient and Spanish-speaking countries
have a significant negative coefficient.

Section 4. Is it culture or legal origins?
LLSV (1998) show that differences in investor protection are highly correlated with differences in
legal origin. Common law countries have better investor protection than civil law countries. Culture could

16

matter simply because it is correlated with legal origin. The dataset gives us some ability to distinguish
between a legal origin explanation and a cultural explanation for differences in investor protection across
countries. However, no civil law country has English as its primary language, all countries with Spanish as
their primary language are Catholic, and no common law country has Spanish as its primary language. First,
we can distinguish between English-speaking common law countries and other common law countries.
Second, there are 12 Protestant countries. Of these countries, six are common law countries and six are civil
law countries. We can therefore investigate whether legal origins matter for Protestant countries. There is
only one common law country whose primary religion is the Catholic religion, so that we ignore that country
in our discussion of the results - one might note, however, that taking the results for that country would not
affect our conclusions. However, we can compare Catholic and Protestant civil law countries.
We have seen that for creditor rights and for legal enforcement, there are strong differences between
Catholic and Protestant countries. If these differences can be explained by differences in legal origins, we
would expect significant differences among Protestant countries depending on their legal origins and no
significant differences between Protestant and Catholic civil law countries. To investigate these differences,
we use regressions where we estimate coefficients on dummy variables that take value one for countries that
share a religion as well as legal origins. Our tests then focus on differences between these coefficients.
Table 4 shows the estimates of regressions for shareholder and creditor rights where we distinguish
between cultural origins and legal origins. To limit the number of regressions we show, we do not reproduce
regressions for individual shareholder and creditor rights. Rather, we simply show regression estimates for
the shareholder rights index and for the creditor rights index. The first regression shows the relation between
the shareholder rights index and religion and legal origins. This regression shows that for shareholder rights,
the coefficients on all civil law origin variables are quite similar and at the same time quite different from the
coefficients on the common law origin variables. The p-value for the difference between common law

17

Protestant countries and civil law Protestant countries is lower than 0.01. In contrast, the p-value for the
difference between civil law Protestant countries and civil law Catholic countries is 0.93. The evidence shows
clearly that differences in shareholder rights cannot be explained by differences in religion but can be
explained by differences in legal origins. The second regression compares whether there is a difference
between English-speaking common law countries and other common law countries as well as between
Spanish-speaking civil law countries and other civil law countries. None of the language differences are
significant. It is important to note that at the level of individual shareholder rights, the differences based on
whether the religion is Protestant or Catholic identified in Table 2 typically persist when we take into account
legal origins. However, the recourse for oppressed minorities is much more likely to be available in common
law countries than in civil law countries. The strength of this relation is such that when the individual rights
are aggregated into the anti-director index, it overwhelms everything else.
The second set of regressions in Table 4 investigates the relation between creditor rights, culture
proxies, and legal origins. The results are sharply different from those for shareholder rights. First, there is
no difference between common law Protestant countries and civil law Protestant countries. Second, there
is a significant difference between civil law Protestant countries and civil law Catholic countries. The second
regression shows that English-speaking common law countries have lower creditor protection than nonEnglish speaking common law countries. In fact, there is no difference between English-speaking common
law countries and civil law countries that do not speak Spanish. This evidence shows that legal origins are not
as important for creditor rights as the branch of Christianity a Christian country belongs to.
We now turn to the enforcement variables, but do not show the regression estimates in a table to save
space. There is never a significant difference between common law Protestant countries and civil law
Protestant countries. Except for the first two variables, we cannot reject the hypothesis that enforcement is
worse in civil law Catholic countries than in civil law Protestant countries. The bottom line from these

18

regressions is that when it comes to enforcement, we find that culture matters but cannot establish that legal
origins matter.
Given the data limitations, it is perhaps more surprising that we can find that something matters than
that we cannot when we try to distinguish between the effect of legal origins and the effect of our culture
proxies. In the regressions of Table 4, we have five different independent variables to estimate jointly the
religion and law origin effects. Because we are splitting a sample of 49 countries into five different groups
and because there is only one common law Catholic country, it makes sense to use a more conservative test
to see whether there is a role for religion when one takes into account legal origins. We estimate regressions
of the rights variables on a constant, a dummy that takes value one for civil law countries, CIVOR, and the
logarithm of GNP per capita. We then add to these regressions PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC. If religion
proxies for legal origins, the religion dummy variables should not be significant in these regressions. We do
not report these regressions in a table. One would expect the religion proxies not to be significant for
shareholder rights and they are not. The results for creditor rights are dramatic. In the regression with
CIVOR and the log of GNP per capita, CIVOR has a coefficient of -1.18 with a t-statistic of –2.83. The
regression has an adjusted R-square of 24%. When we add the religion dummy variables, the adjusted Rsquare increases to 42%. CATHOLIC has a coefficient of -1.57 with a t-statistic of -3.63. The coefficient
on the civil law dummy variable is -0.54 with a t-statistic of -1.59, so that it is not significant at the 10% level.
CIVOR is significant in the presence of the religion variables for judicial efficiency, corruption, and the
accounting index. For the other enforcement indices, CIVOR is significant in the absence of the religion
variables for all indices except the rule of law index. When the regression includes the religion proxies,
CIVOR stops being significant for the repudiation risk index and the expropriation risk index. The difference
between PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC is significant for these indices. For the corruption and accounting
indices, CIVOR is significant but so is the difference between PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC. Finally,

19

for judicial efficiency, CIVOR is significant, but the significance of the difference between PROTESTANT
and CATHOLIC disappears when CIVOR is added to the regression. In summary, in most of the regressions,
the difference between PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC is significant when we add a dummy variable for
civil law.

Section 5. Politics, openness, and finance.
Financial development did not evolve linearly through time. As Rajan and Zingales (2000) show,
financial development was high before World War I. They also report that some civil law countries had a very
high level of financial development. However, the period preceding World War I represents a high point of
financial development that would not be matched again, at least for some indicators of financial development,
until after 1980 for many countries. Both the legal origin variables of LLSV and the culture proxies we use
in this paper stayed mostly unchanged during the 20th century for our sample countries. These variables
cannot therefore explain why financial development fell and then increased again during that century. Rajan
and Zingales (2000) argue that financial development is critically related to a country’s openness to trade and
capital flows. They show that both before World War I and in the late 20th century, countries that are more
open have greater financial development. A possible explanation for this finding is that openness serves as
a proxy for the benefits from letting markets work unimpeded. As political forces that oppose markets get
the upper hand in countries, perhaps because the median voter finds the lack of security resulting from the
working of markets to be too costly, countries close their frontiers so that economic transactions can be
controlled more closely by the government.
As we pointed out in the introduction, trade has to be financed. There can therefore be a mechanical
relation between openness as measured by trade and investor rights, especially creditor rights. The trade
literature has measures of natural openness. These measures estimate what the trade openness of a country

20

would be given some characteristics of that country. Such measures are helpful here because they eliminate
the possibility of a mechanical relation between our measure of openness and investor protection. These
measures can be used to proxy for the incentives a country has to protect investor rights to benefit from trade.
Frankel and Romer (1999) have two measures of natural openness. One measure uses only geographic
characteristics. This measure is based on a gravity model that presumes that countries closer to each other
trade more with each other. The other measure uses factor endowments, including capital. The problem with
the second measure is that one would expect accumulated capital to depend on investor rights. Wei (2000)
provides evidence that corruption is less important in countries that are more naturally open. In his paper,
natural openness is the ratio of trade to GDP predicted by a regression where the explanatory variables are
the logarithm of population, distance, variables measuring access to maritime transportation, and language
dummies. He presents a model using the fact that foreign traders and investors have many options of which
countries to trade with and where to invest. Corruption reduces the benefits from trade, so that countries
which find trade more valuable will invest more to prevent corruption. Wei’s measure includes the language
variables that we use as culture proxies. We therefore use in this section the measure of natural openness
of Frankel and Romer (1999) that is based on geographic characteristics alone. In the next section, we will
discuss some results obtained using Wei’s measure.
With the papers just discussed as well as related papers, openness can lead countries to value investor
rights more or can be correlated with better investor rights as countries become more market oriented.
Therefore, we would like to know whether openness matters for investor rights and whether the success of
our religion and language dummy variables is due to their possible correlation with openness. To examine
these issues, we regress investor rights measures on our culture proxies, openness, the log of GNP per capita,
and CIVOR. For each dependent variable, we use the measure of natural openness of Frankel and Romer
in one regression and a measure of actual openness, the average ratio of imports plus exports to GNP from

21

1985 to 1995, in the other. We also use, but do not report in the table, another measure of actual openness,
namely the ratio of imports plus exports to GNP in 1985. These regressions are reported in Table 5.
The results for the shareholder rights index regressions are striking. Both measures of openness are
negative and significant. Countries that are more open have lower shareholder protection. This negative
coefficient is mostly due to an extremely strong negative relation between openness and the dummy variable
for cumulative or proportional voting. In the regressions, the dummy variable for civil law, CIVOR, is
extremely significant and negative. Absent CIVOR, the coefficients on openness are similar, but CATHOLIC
has a negative significant coefficient as well as ENGLISH. Actual openness explains less than natural
openness - adding actual openness to the regression increases adjusted R-square by about 2% and adding
natural openness by about 10%. Adding CIVOR to the regression with natural openness increases the
adjusted R-square by about 15%. Regardless of the openness measure, none of the culture variables matter
for the shareholder rights regressions, which does not change our earlier conclusions.
When we turn to creditor rights, openness has a significant positive effect on creditor rights. Adding
actual openness does not affect the adjusted R-square, but adding natural openness increases it by 8%.
CIVOR is insignificant. Without openness, however, that dummy variable has a significant negative
coefficient. As before, CATHOLIC has a negative significant impact on the creditor rights index.
CATHOLIC does not proxy for openness in our regressions - it remains significant regardless of whether we
control for legal origins or openness.
As discussed earlier, one would expect there to be larger incentives for a country to respect creditor
rights when international trade is more important for that country. We examine whether the importance of
religion falls as openness increases in the following way. We estimate a regression where we regress the
creditor rights index on a constant, the log of GNP per capita, PROTESTANT, CATHOLIC,
OPENNESS*PROTESTANT, OPENNESS*CATHOLIC, OPENNESS*NON-CHRISTIAN, where NON-

22

CHRISTIAN takes value one for all countries that where the principal religion is neither Protestant nor
Catholic. The estimates and t-statistics are as follows when we use the Frankel and Romer (1999) measure
of natural openness:

5.63 -

0.37 Log GNP per capita -

0.19 PROTESTANT -

1.83 CATHOLIC

(-3.23) (-3.24)

(-0.34)

(-3.25)

+ 0.04 OPENNESS*PROTESTANT +

0.05 OPENNESS*CATHOLIC

(1.27)

(3.42)

+ 0.03 OPENNESS*NON-CHRISTIAN
(2.82)

With this regression, we find a significant negative coefficient on CATHOLIC as expected. The coefficient
on OPENNESS*CATHOLIC is significant positive. Perhaps more importantly, it is also larger than
OPENNESS*PROTESTANT. The difference of the two interaction terms has a p-value of 0.01 for natural
openness and 0.11 for actual openness. None of the other differences are significant. This evidence suggests
that as a country’s openness increases, the fact that its principal religion is Catholic matters less for creditor
rights.
We now turn to the rights enforcement variables. We first look at judicial efficiency. The measure
of openness one uses makes a critical difference. Actual openness increases the adjusted R-square of the
regression by 4%, but natural openness increases it by 10%. With actual openness, nothing is significant. The
measure of average actual openness is available for 43 countries. We use actual openness in 1985 for 49

23

countries and obtained similar results. With natural openness, we find that judicial efficiency increases with
natural openness. Furthermore, when we control for natural openness, judicial efficiency is significantly lower
in Catholic than in Protestant countries. CIVOR is not significant. For the rule of law index, openness is not
relevant. However, countries where Spanish is the principal language have a significantly lower index than
Catholic countries where Spanish is not the principal language and than countries where English is the
principal language.
For corruption, actual openness is not significant and this is the case whether we use the 1985
measure or the average measure. In the same regression without openness, CIVOR has a negative significant
coefficient, PROTESTANT has a significant positive coefficient, and SPANISH has a negative coefficient
with a p-value of 0.11. This indicates that actual openness is correlated with these variables, so that when it
is added to the regression, it becomes impossible to estimate coefficients precisely. Adding actual openness
does not change adjusted R-square, so that openness does not have information in addition to the other
variables in the regression. Adjusted R-square increases by about 1% when we use natural openness and
natural openness has a positive significant coefficient as expected from Wei (2000). Once we do that, the
c oefficient on the civil law dummy variable is significantly negative and the coefficient on PROTESTANT
is significantly positive. The coefficient on CATHOLIC is significant, but it is not significantly different from
the coefficient on PROTESTANT. Protestant countries have a significantly higher corruption index than
Spanish-speaking countries after controlling for legal origins and for openness.
The next two variables are expropriation risk and repudiation risk. For both variables, CIVOR and
the openness measures are not significant. The regressions provide evidence that Protestant countries have
better repudiation risk indices, while Spanish-speaking countries have worse expropriation risk indices. Finally,
for the accounting index, the openness measures are not significant. Adding openness to the regression does
not affect our earlier results that civil law leads to a lower index while Protestant countries have higher values

24

of the index.
The precise construction of the natural openness measure matters. We do not reproduce results using
Wei’s measure of natural openness because it includes the language variables we use. Nevertheless, we
estimated all our regressions using his measure of natural openness. His measure typically explains more than
the Frankel and Romer (1999) measure. In particular, natural openness tends to be positively correlated with
the enforcement of rights, especially with the corruption index.

Section 6. Financial development and culture.
We have shown that culture is correlated with the rights that investors have and with how these rights
are enforced. The literature shows that investor rights matter for financial development. Our results suggest
that culture should affect financial development. However, because we showed that shareholder rights
depended mostly on legal origin rather than culture, we would expect measures of stock market development
to be unrelated to our culture variables. In contrast, we saw that culture is important for creditor rights.
Consequently, culture should affect the development of debt markets and banking.
We consider four measures of financial development for which we have data for 36 of our countries
or more. We obtain this data from Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (1999) and use averages from 1985 to
1995. These measures are equity issues to GDP, long-term private debt issues to GDP, private credit by
deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP, and stock market capitalization to GDP. Beck,
Levine, and Loayza (2000) show that there is a strong relation between private credit measured as we do
here and growth that is due to the relation between private credit and productivity growth. We estimate
regressions of these averages on a constant, logarithm of GNP per capita, a measure of openness,
PROTESTANT, CATHOLIC, ENGLISH, SPANISH, and CIVOR. Without controlling for openness, the
only variable that is significant in explaining equity issues is the dummy variable that takes value one for civil

25

law countries, CIVOR. It has a significant negative coefficient. When we add an openness measure to the
regression, CIVOR remains significant but openness is not significant regardless of the measure. The F-test
does not allow us to reject the hypothesis that the coefficients are equal to zero. We estimate the same
regressions for long-term debt issues. The difference between the coefficients of PROTESTANT and
CATHOLIC is always significant with a p-value lower than 0.01. No other variable is significant, but the Ftest has a p-value of less than 0.01. The adjusted R-square of the regression exceeds 45% for all measures
of openness we use. Except for the log of GNP per capita, none of the coefficients in the regression for credit
are significant and none of the culture coefficients are significantly different from each other. Finally, for
stock market capitalization, CIVOR is significantly negative when we do not control for openness. If the
openness measure is actual openness, CIVOR is insignificant but the 1985 actual openness measure is
significantly positive. When the Frankel and Romer (1999) measure of natural openness is used, natural
openness is not significant but CIVOR is significantly negative. The only other variable that is significant in
the regressions for stock market capitalization is the logarithm of GNP per capita which is always significantly
positive.
The regressions that use openness, legal origin, and the culture variables have two lessons. First, it
is clear that religion is important in explaining debt markets and legal origins and possibly openness are
important in explaining stock market variables. These results reinforce what we learned in the earlier sections:
legal origins are important for shareholder rights and culture is important for creditor rights. At the same time,
however, the regressions suggest that it is difficult to estimate coefficients precisely because of
multicollinearity. An indication that this problem is not trivial is the following. If we regress the financial
development variables on the log of GNP per capita, CATHOLIC, and PROTESTANT, we find that for each
regression either CATHOLIC or PROTESTANT is significant. Catholic countries have significantly fewer
equity issues than other countries, significantly fewer long-term debt issues than Protestant countries,

26

significantly less bank credit than other countries, and significantly lower stock market capitalization. If we
use CIVOR instead of the two religion dummy variables, we find that civil law countries have significantly
less new equity, significantly lower credit from financial institutions, and significantly lower stock market
capitalization.
To understand better which variables are most important in explaining the cross-sectional variation
in financial development, we provide in Table 6 the incremental adjusted R-square for explaining the crosssectional variation in investor rights, enforcement of investor rights, and financial development of adding to
a regression with a constant and the log of GNP per capita, a civil law dummy, PROTESTANT and
CATHOLIC, ENGLISH, and SPANISH, average actual openness from 1985 - 1995, or natural openness.
Ignoring for the moment the last column of Table 6, we see from the other columns that for antidirector rights, the civil law dummy has by far the biggest incremental adjusted R-square. There is no question
therefore that legal origin is the most important variable among the ones considered here to explain the antidirector rights index. Not surprisingly given our earlier conclusions, religion has by far the biggest incremental
adjusted R-square in explaining creditor rights. The incremental adjusted R-squares of the various variables
in the regressions for judicial efficiency are much more bunched together than for either anti-director rights
or creditor rights. The civil law dummy edges out natural openness in having the largest incremental adjusted
R-square. The incremental adjusted R-squares of the various variables for regressions for the rule of law,
corruption, repudiation, and risk of expropriation indices are extremely small, but the language variables have
the highest incremental adjusted R-square in all regressions. For the accounting index, the civil law dummy
variable contributes a sizable incremental R-square. Turning to equity issues, CIVOR has a small incremental
adjusted R-square, but no culture or openness variable does better. With long-term debt issues, the religion
dummy variables have the highest incremental adjusted R-square and they explain more than the log of GNP
per capita. For private credit, language and religion are just about tied for the highest incremental adjusted

27

R-square, but the incremental adjusted R-square of these variables is more than twice CIVOR’s incremental
adjusted R-square. Finally, for stock market capitalization, CIVOR has the highest explanatory adjusted Rsquare, followed closely by actual openness.
The most striking result using Wei’s openness measures is that the difference between actual
openness averaged from 1978 to 1980 and natural openness, which he calls residual openness, is by far the
most successful variable in explaining stock market capitalization to GDP. In other words, the more trade a
country has relative to what would be expected based on geography and language, the greater the
capitalization of the country’s stock market to GDP controlling for GNP per capita. In a regression of the
stock market capitalization to GDP on a constant, the log of GNP per capita, residual openness, a dummy
variable for civil law origin, PROTESTANT, CATHOLIC, ENGLISH, and SPANISH, the log of GNP per
capita and residual openness have highly significant positive coefficients. No other variable is significant though CATHOLIC would be significantly negative for a one-sided test.
The last column of Table 6 uses a finer classification of legal origins. Instead of dividing countries
between common law countries and civil law countries, we look at the incremental explanatory power of
allowing for a different impact of the three civil law traditions, the French, the German, and the Scandinavian.
Strikingly, for anti-director rights, using dummy variables for the three civil law traditions instead of just the
civil law dummy variable leads to a lower adjusted R-square than using only the civil law dummy variable.
For creditor rights, religion explains much more than the three dummy variables. When we turn to the
enforcement variables, the three civil law dummy variables explain more of the cross-sectional variation than
the religion variables. In two cases, for rule of law and risk of expropriation, language explains more than the
three civil law dummy variables. Finally, for the financial development variables, again the three civil law
dummy variables have more explanatory power than CIVOR and, for the case of long-term debt issues, the
three civil law dummy variables have more explanatory power than the religion variables.

28

We also re-estimate the regressions discussed at the end of Section 4 replacing CIVOR with dummy
variables for each of the civil law traditions. When we do that, CATHOLIC is unaffected in the bankruptcy
regressions, but perhaps not surprisingly in light of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
and of the fact that all Scandinavian countries are Protestant countries, the coefficients on religion are hard
to estimate precisely in the enforcement rights regressions. The key issue in evaluating these results is
whether a case can be made that the differences among civil law traditions are important enough to explain
so much of the evidence. As emphasized by Coffee (2001), there is a Scandinavian puzzle. Since the
Scandinavian dummy variable measures how the Scandinavian countries differ, it can stand for anything that
makes that set of countries different.

Section 7. Conclusion.
In this paper, we have shown that investor protection is related to culture. This relation is especially
strong for creditor rights. We find that Catholic countries have significantly weaker creditor rights than other
countries. This result holds when we control for the origin of the country’s legal system as well as for GNP
per capita. Openness reduces the influence of religion on creditor rights, so that Catholic countries where
international trade is more important have better protection of creditor rights. We therefore find strong support
for the view that culture matters, but there is also evidence that the impact of culture is tempered by
openness. Though we find evidence that culture and creditor rights are related, we do not find such evidence
for a shareholder rights index once we control for the legal origin of a country’s legal system. Yet, there are
striking differences between the rights of shareholders across countries that are correlated with religion and
language, but they are harder to explain than the differences in creditor rights. For instance, a shareholder’s
vote is likely to count more in a Catholic country when the shareholder gets to vote, but it is harder for the
shareholder to get to vote in such a country. We also showed that culture is related to the enforcement of

29

rights, with Catholic and especially Spanish-speaking Catholic countries having weaker enforcement of rights.

30

References
Beck, T., R. Levine, and N. Loayza, 2000, Finance and the sources of growth, Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 261-300.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine, 1999, A new database on financial development and structure,
working paper, University of Minnesota.
Coffee, J. C., 2001, Do norms matter? A cross-country examination of the private benefits of control,
unpublished working paper, Columbia Law School, Columbia, New York, NY.
Frankel, J., and D. Romer, 1999, Trade and growth: An empirical investigation, American Economic Review
89, 379-399.
Glaeser, E. L., and J. Scheinkman, 1998, Neither a borrower nor a lender be: An economic analysis of
interest restrictions and usury laws, Journal of Law and Economics, 1-36.
Glaeser, E. L., and A. Shleifer, 2000, Legal origins, working paper, Harvard University.
Greif, A., 1994, Cultural beliefs and the organization of society: A historical and theoretic al reflection on
collectivist and individualist societies, Journal of Political Economy 102, 912-950.
Hallpike, C. R., 1986, The principles of social evolution, Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK.
Lal, D.,1999, Unintended consequences: The impact of factor endowments, culture, and politics on long-run
economic performance, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Landes, D., 2000, Culture makes almost all the difference, in Culture Matters, L. E. Harrison and S. P.
Huntington, eds., Basic Books, New York, NY.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of Political
Economy 106, 1113-1155.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1999, The quality of government, Journal
of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.

31

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 2000, Investor protection and corporate
governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.
Levine, R., 1997, Financial development and economic growth: view and agenda, Journal of Economic
Literature 35, 688-726.
Nenova, T., 2000, The value of corporate votes and control benefits: A cross-country analysis, unpublished
working paper, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 2000, The great reversals: The politics of financial development in the 20th
century, unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
Roe, M., 2000, Political preconditions to separating ownership from corporate control, Columbia Law
School, The Center for Law and Economic Studies, wp 155, New York, NY.
Tawney, R. H., 1954, Religion and the rise of capitalism, Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., New York.
Weber, M., 1930, The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism, Harper Collins, New York.
Wei, S.-J., 2000, Natural openness and good government, unpublished working paper no. 7765, NBER,
Cambridge, MA

32

Table 1. Country characteristics. The table shows the primary language, primary religion, and the
origin of the legal system for each country in the sample. The primary religion (language) of a country is
the religion practiced (language spoken) by the largest fraction of the population. The data on religion and
language is obtained from the 2000 CIA World Factbook. The legal origin variables are obtained from La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny.
Country
Primary Language
Primary Religion
Legal Origin
Argentina

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

Australia

English

Protestant

common

Austria

German

Catholic

civil/German

Belgium

Dutch

Catholic

civil/French

Brazil

Portuguese

Catholic

civil/French

Canada

English

Catholic

common

Chile

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

Colombia

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

Denmark

Danish

Protestant

civil/Scandinavian

Ecuador

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

Egypt

Arabic

Muslim

civil/French

Finland

Finnish

Protestant

civil/Scandinavian

France

French

Catholic

civil/French

Germany

German

Protestant

civilGerman

Greece

Greek

Greek Orthodox

civil/French

Hong Kong

Chinese

Local beliefs

common

India

Hindi

Hindu

common

Indonesia

Bahasa Indonesia

Muslim

civil/French

Ireland

English

Catholic

common

Israel

Hebrew

Judaism

common

Italy

Italian

Catholic

civil/French

Japan

Japanese

Buddhist

civil/German

Jordan

Arabic

Muslim

civil/French

Kenya

English

Protestant

common

Malaysia

Bahasa Melayu

Muslim

common

Mexico

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

Netherlands

Dutch

Catholic

civil/French

New Zealand

English

Protestant

common

Nigeria

English

Muslim

common

33

Norway

Norwegian

Protestant

civil/Scandinavian

Table 1, Continued
Country

Primary Language

Primary Religion

Legal Origin

Pakistan

Punjabi

Muslim

common

Peru

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

Philippines

Pilipino

Catholic

civil/French

Portugal

Portuguese

Catholic

civil/French

Singapore

Chinese

Buddhist

common

South Korea

Korean

Protestant

civil/German

South Africa

English

Protestant

common

Spain

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

Sri Lanka

Sinhali

Buddhist

common

Sweden

Swedish

Protestant

civil/Scandinavian

Switzerland

German

Catholic

civil/German

Taiwan

Chinese

Buddhist

civil/German

Thailand

Thai

Buddhist

common

Turkey

Turkish

Muslim

civil/French

UK

English

Protestant

common

Uruguay

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

US

English

Protestant

common

Venezuela

Spanish

Catholic

civil/French

Zimbabwe

English

Syncretic

common

34

Table 2: Averages of investor rights variables for different cultures. The table shows averages of shareholder rights, creditor rights, and investor rights
enforcement variables for different religions and languages. The primary religion (language) of a country is the religion practiced (language spoken) by the largest
fraction of the population. The data on religion and language is obtained from the 2000 CIA World Factbook. * indicates unequal variances at the 10% level thus tstatistics are calculated assuming unequal variances.
Panel A: Shareholder Rights.
Primary Language
Variable

English

Non-English

10

39

One share one vote

0.000

0.282

Proxy by mail
allowed

0.600

Shares not blocked
before meeting

Primary Religion
Christian

Non-Christian

Catholic

Protestant

32

17

20

12

3.86 *

0.156

0.353

1.45

0.200

0.083

-0.94

0.077

-3.10 *

0.250

0.059

-1.96 *

0.100

0.500

2.41 *

1.000

0.641

-4.61 *

0.625

0.882

2.17 *

0.500

0.833

2.08

Cumulative voting /
proportional rep

0.200

0.282

0.51

0.250

0.294

0.32

0.350

0.083

-1.94 *

Oppressed
Minority

1.000

0.410

-7.39 *

0.469

0.647

1.19

0.400

0.583

0.98

Preemptive right to
new issues

0.300

0.590

1.68

0.625

0.353

-1.84

0.750

0.417

-1.86

% share capital to
call ESM

0.075

0.120

3.08 *

0.115

0.101

-0.79

0.138

0.079

-2.79 *

Anti-director rights

4.10

2.72

-4.04

2.94

3.12

0.47

2.65

3.42

1.58

Mandatory
dividend

0.000

0.060

2.50 *

0.063

0.021

-1.22 *

0.100

0.000

-2.36 *

N

t-stat

Primary Religion

35

t-stat

t-stat

Table 2, Continued.
Panel B: Creditor Rights.
Primary Language
Variable

English

Non-English

10

39

No automatic
stay on assets

0.500

0.487

Secured creditors
paid first

0.900

Restrictions for
going into
reorganization

Primary Religion
Christian

Non-Christian

32

17

-0.07

0.323

0.813

0.778

-1.00

0.767

0.600

0.541

-0.32

Management
does not stay in
reorganization

0.600

0.405

Creditor rights

2.600

Legal reserve as
a % of capital

0.000

N

t-stat

Primary Religion
Catholic

Protestant

20

12

3.71

0.211

0.500

1.62

0.875

0.93

0.684

0.909

1.58

0.452

0.750

2.07

0.316

0.667

1.95

-1.07

0.226

0.875

5.67

0.105

0.417

1.88 *

2.22

-0.76

1.77

3.31

4.57

1.32

2.50

2.93

0.194

5.89 *

0.155

0.155

0.00 *

0.185

0.104

-1.41

36

t-stat

t-stat

Table 2, Continued.
Panel C: Rule of Law.
Primary Language
Variable

English

Non-English

10

39

Efficiency of Judicial
System

8.450

7.466

Rule of Law

7.262

Corruption

Primary Religion
Christian

Non-Christian

32

17

-1.55

7.914

7.201

6.740

-0.52

7.624

7.696

6.692

-1.20

Risk of expropriation

8.179

8.017

Risk of contract
repudiation

7.688

Rating on accounting
standards
GNP per capita (US
$)

N

t-stat

Primary Religion
Catholic

Protestant

20

12

-1.07

7.325

8.896

2.46

5.383

-3.21

7.049

8.583

1.79

7.499

5.762

-2.74

6.788

8.685

2.69

-0.24

8.050

7.295

-2.69

8.106

9.028

1.75

7.553

-0.20

8.036

6.722

-2.60

7.575

8.805

2.31

71.00

58.85

-3.72 *

61.07

60.58

-0.10

54.83

71.27

4.51 *

10,994

11,197

0.06

13,517

6,712

-2.40

11,422

17,009

1.60

37

t-stat

t-stat

Table 3 : Multiple Regressions. The table shows the multiple regression results for the religion and language variables. The primary religion (language)
of a country is the religion practiced (language spoken) by the largest fraction of the population. The data on religion and language is obtained from the
2000 CIA World Factbook. The dummy variables PROTESTANT, CATHOLIC, MUSLIM, BUDDHIST, ENGLISH, and SPANISH take value one if the
name of the variable describes the primary religion or the primary language of the country and zero otherwise. a, b, c denotes that the F-test of no
difference between PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC or ENGLISH and SPANISH is significant at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively, and ***,**,*
denotes that the t-statistic is significant at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively.
Log of GNP
per capita in
US$

CATHOLIC

PROTESTANT

MUSLIM

BUDDHIST

ENGLISH

SPANISH

Intercept

N
Adjusted R2

3.0347
(2.97)***

49
-0.0045

3.8808
(3.48)***

49
-0.0183

2.3458
(1.88)*

49
0.1338

4.5926
(5.29)***

47
0.3991

4.4424
(4.22)***

47
0.3835

5.4962
(5.25)***

47
0.1832

Panel A: Shareholder Rights
Anti-Director
Rights

0.0107
(0.09)

-0.4789
(-1.15)

0.2820
(0.58)

Anti-Director
Rights

-0.0349
(-0.28)

-0.9233
(-1.42)

-0.1380
(-0.20)

Anti-Director
Rights

0.0403
(0.30)

-0.9271
(-1.21)

-0.3766
(-0.546)
1.4151 a
(4.05)***

0.1070
(0.20)

Panel B: Creditor Rights
Creditor Rights

-0.1643
(-1.38)

-1.8228 a
(-4.17)***

-0.5583
(-1.26)

Creditor Rights

-0.1296
(-0.99)

-1.9793 a
(-2.95)***

-0.7317
(-1.06)

Creditor Rights

-0.3448
(-3.07)***

0.1082
(0.17)

-0.5132
(-0.76)
0.0025 b
(0.01)

38

-1.3389
(-2.45)**

Table 3, Continued.
Log of GNP
per capita in
US$

CATHOLIC

PROTESTANT

MUSLIM

BUDDHIST

ENGLISH

SPANISH

Intercept

N
Adjusted R2

0.2396
(0.18)

49
0.4340

1.2775
(0.94)

49
0.4525

0.0594
(0.04)

49
0.4465

-5.8256
(-4.53)***
-6.3872
(-3.53)***
-6.0944
(-5.73)***
-4.0106
(-4.39)***
-3.0984
(-3.23)***
-4.3894
(-4.44)***

49
0.7578
49
0.7505
49
0.7688
49
0.7793
49
0.7847
49
0.8065

Panel C: Rule of Law
b

Efficiency of
judiciary
system

0.8981
(6.57)***

-0.8233
(-1.53)

Efficiency of
judiciary
system
Efficiency of
judiciary
system
Rule of law

0.8981
(6.11)***

-1.8615 b
(-2.83)***

Rule of law
Rule of law
Corruption
Corruption
Corruption

0.2678
(0.45)
-0.7703
(-1.08)

-1.3057
(-1.15)

-1.7015
(-1.53)
1.0306 a
(2.24)**

0.8756
(5.48)***
1.4461
(8.62)***
1.4675
(7.29)***
1.5093
(12.75)***
1.2609
(12.23)***
1.2339
(11.21)***
1.3083
(12.22)***

0.1400
(0.28)
0.5134
(0.59)

-0.3049 a
(-1.01)
-0.9791 a
(-2.68)***

0.9011
(1.40)
1.2630
(1.30)

0.9186
(2.01)**
0.2589
(0.52)

0.6421
(0.75)

-0.5846
(-1.13)

0.4471
(0.48)

-1.0662
(-1.99)**

0.6694 b
(1.51)

-0.7145
(-1.27)

1.0878 a
(2.85)***

-0.8105
(-2.69)**

-0.8964
(-2.18)**

39

Table 3, Panel C: Continued.
Log of GNP
per capita in
US$

CATHOLIC

PROTESTANT

0.9274
(11.28)***
0.9245
(9.09)***
0.9152
(10.59)***

-0.1678 c
(-0.64)
-0.0051 c
(-0.01)

0.2596
(1.09)
0.4239
(0.75)

1.0449
(13.50)***

-0.2499 a
(-0.85)

0.4233
(1.60)

Repudiation of
contracts by
government

1.0144
(11.23)***

-0.0268 a
(-0.06)

0.6627
(1.46)

Repudiation of
contracts by
government
Accounting
standards
Accounting
standards

1.0377
(14.24)***
4.6241
(2.93)***
4.1350
(2.69)***

Accounting
standards

4.2728
(2.72)***

Risk of
expropriation
Risk of
expropriation
Risk of
expropriation
Repudiation of
contracts by
government

MUSLIM

BUDDHIST

0.1815
(0.25)

ENGLISH

4.2141
(1.15)
5.0953
(1.31)

Intercept

N
Adjusted R2

-0.6951
(-1.96)**

0.1067
(0.15)
-0.0307
(-0.02)
0.2947
(0.35)

49
0.7840
49
0.7760
49
0.8096

-1.3768
(-2.15)**

49
0.8126

-1.3314
(-1.37)

49
0.8120

0.2888
(0.49)
0.1908 b
(0.90)

-8.4520 a
(-2.01)**
-7.9700 a
(-1.92)*

SPANISH

0.0346
(0.06)

0.6006
(1.21)

-2.8474
(-0.28)

0.1622 b
(0.79)

-0.8141
(-2.07)**

-1.1967
(-1.70)*
22.2962
(1.47)
26.1497
(1.89)*

49
0.8274
41
0.3798
41
0.3548

9.3506 a
(3.55)***

-10.7905
(-2.23)**

23.3566
(1.51)

41
0.4228

3.4362
(0.81)

40

Table 4. Culture and Law Interactions. The table shows the interaction between the culture (religion or language)
and the legal origin (civil or common) variables. ***,**,* denotes the significance of the t-test at the 1, 5, and 10%
significance levels respectively. a, b, c denotes that the F-statistic of no difference between Catholic, Protestant, and
non-Christian, or English and Spanish keeping legal origins constant is significant at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively.
1, 2, 3 denotes that F-statistic of no difference between civil and common legal origin keeping the religion or the language
the same is significant at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively.

Log(GNP) is US$

Anti-Director Rights

Anti-Director Rights

0.0847
(0.72)

0.1649
(1.79)*

Creditor Rights

Creditor Rights

-0.1111
(-0.89)

-0.2315
(-1.75)*

-1.4021 1
(-2.41)**

-1.2016 b
(-2.53)**

0.5248
(1.09)

-0.9910 a
(-1.86)*

-1.3573 1
(-2.92)***

-2.3086
(-5.46)***

Common Law and
Catholic

0.6152
(1.13)

-2.5577
(-7.95)***

Civil Law and NonChristian

-1.4645 1
(-3.18)***

-1.2153 b
(-2.45)**

Civil Law and
Protestant
Common Law and
Protestant
Civil Law and
Catholic

Common Law and
English
Civil Law and
Spanish
Common Law and
No Spanish or
English
Intercept
N
Adjusted R2

1.9424
(6.71)***

0.4636
(0.94)

0.6781
(1.35)

-0.8395
(-1.46)

1.8027
(4.05)***

1.4939
(3.47)***

3.0639
(3.12)***

0.7711
(0.955)

4.6340
(4.89)***

4.0825
(3.07)***

49
0.2930

49
0.3465

49
0.4282

47
0.3123

41

Table 5: Openness and Finance. The table shows the relationship between openness, culture and the law category. Openness measured using the 1985 actual
openness adjusted for geography as done in Frankel and Romer (1999). The second measure of openness is the average actual openness measure from 1985
-1995. CATHOLIC, PROTESTANT, ENGLISH, and SPANISH are dummy variables that take value one if the name of the variable corresponds to the primary
religion or the primary language of a country. a, b, c denotes that the F-statistc for the test that CATHOLIC and PROTESTANT are equal or SPANISH and
ENGLISH are equal is significant at the 1, 5, and 10 % level of significance and ***, **, * denotes that the t-statistic t is significant at the 1, 5, and 10% levels.
Log of GNP
per capita in
US$

Openness Frankel and
Romer
Geographic

Openness Average
1985 - 1995

Civil Law
Dummy
(CIVOR)

CATHOLIC

PROTESTANT

ENGLISH

SPANIS
H

Intercept

N
Adjust
ed R2

Panel A: Shareholder Rights
Anti-Director
Rights

0.2821
(2.95)***

Anti-Director
Rights

0.1441
(1.19)

-0.0330
(-3.27)***
-1.4954
(-2.10)**

-1.8980
(-4.01)***

-0.1784
(-0.48)

-0.0881
(-0.23)

-0.2599
(-0.45)

0.4466
(0.78)

2.4350
(2.70)***

49
0.4226

-1.8725
(-3.36)***

0.1911
(0.38)

0.1936
(0.38)

0.0058
(0.01)

0.3040
(0.46)

3.6738
(3.83)***

43
0.3463

Panel B: Creditor Rights
Creditor Rights

-0.3314
(-2.83)***

Creditor Rights

-0.2318
(-1.61)

0.0385
(3.68)***
1.2177
(3.02)***

-0.5988
(-1.29)

-1.4283 a
(-2.71)***

-0.0330
(-0.07)

-0.1734
(-0.36)

0.2784
(0.47)

5.4470
(6.16)***

47
0.4849

-0.2841
(-0.48)

-1.7033 a
(-2.55)***

-0.3019
(-0.51)

-0.1662
(-0.28)

0.1930
(0.30)

4.4886
(4.25)***

42
0.4035

0.6336
(0.78)
0.1687
(0.20)

0.5772
(0.56)
0.1499
(0.11)

0.5880
(1.09)
0.3299
(0.54)

0.4953
(0.29)
-0.7641
(-0.44)

49
0.5550
43
0.4965

Panel C: Rule of Law
Efficiency of
judiciary
Efficiency of
judiciary

0.7757
(4.45)
1.0146
(6.44)

0.0490
(3.43)
0.6623
(0.92)

-0.2720 c
(-0.38)
-0.6271
(-0.74)

-0.9770
(-1.07)
-0.8846
(-0.66)

42

Table 5, Panel C, Continued.
Log of GNP
per capita in
US$

Openness Frankel and
Romer
Geographic

Rule of law

1.4043
(7.94)***

-0.0070
(-0.54)

Rule of law

1.3001
(5.66)***
1.1644
(10.72)***
1.2555
(9.70)***
0.8977
(8.77)***
0.8764
(7.23)***
1.0003
(9.95)***
0.9112
(7.65)***
4.9611
(2.82)***

Corruption
Corruption
Risk of
expropriation
Risk of
expropriation
Repudiation of
contracts
Repudiation of
contracts
Accounting
standards
Accounting
standards

4.5540
(2.13)**

OpennessAverage
1985 - 1995

0.6654
(1.08)
0.0215
(2.66)***
0.7420
(1.32)
-0.0090
(-1.61)
0.0863
(0.20)
-0.0081
(-1.00)
0.5897
(1.45)
-0.1634
(-1.57)
0.6696
(0.15)

Civil Law
Dummy
(CIVOR)

CATHOLIC

PROTESTANT

ENGLISH

SPANIS
H

Intercept

N
Adj R2

0.1071
(0.19)

0.6606
(1.24)

0.7673
(1.15)

0.3849 b
(0.60)

-1.2233
(-1.72)*

-5.4443
(-3.70)***

49
0.7625

0.3678
(0.43)
-0.7885
(-1.93)*
-0.7793
(-1.21)
-0.3534
(-0.93)
-0.4374
(-0.72)
-0.4004
(-1.11)
-0.5878
(-0.11)
-16.8076
(-3.09)***

0.6393
(1.06)
0.5188
(1.17)
0.1910
(0.32)
0.4276
(1.03)
0.3503
(0.71)
0.3979
(0.95 )
0.1538 b
(0.30)
2.9875
(0.53)

0.9101
(1.26)
1.1617
(2.26)**
0.7998
(1.29)
0.4000
(1.27)
0.3863
(0.90)
0.6565
(1.87)*
0.5784
(1.29)
8.4387
(1.83)*

0.6868
(0.76)
0.2978
(0.51)
0.2995
(0.42)
-0.3058
(-0.67)
-0.2925
(-0.47)
-0.4644
(-1.24)
-0.0984
(-0.19)
-9.4322
(-1.40)

-1.0511
(-1.48)
-0.5427
(-1.12)
-0.4936
(-0.96)
-0.9523
(-2.00)**
-0.8112
(-1.71)*
-0.9923
(-1.99)**
-0.8100
(-1.74)*
-8.5084
(-1.40)

-5.3824
(-3.14)***
-3.4239
(-3.50)***
-4.0302
(-3.66)***
0.7109
(0.69)
0.7719
(0.64)
-0.6413
(-0.76)
-0.5454
(-0.55)
30.7001
(2.26)**

43
0.7379
49
0.8279
43
0.8064
49
0.8074
43
0.7889
49
0.8302
43
0.8268
41
0.5208

-20.8536
(-2.38)**

8.0322
(1.01)

15.0557
(2.01)**

-13.9787
(-1.50)

-6.6799
(-1.03)

29.4736
(2.02)**

36
0.5082

43

Table 6. Incremental Explanatory Power. This table shows the incremental adjusted R2 from adding OPENNESS,
CIVOR, CIVOR3, PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC, or ENGLISH and SPANISH to regressions of investor rights
variables on a constant and the log of GNP per capita. OPENNESS is either the ratio of trade to GDP from 1985 to 1995
or the Frankel and Romer (1999) measure of geographic openness. PROTESTANT, CATHOLIC, ENGLISH, and
SPANISH are dummy variables that take value one if their name describes the primary religion or language of a country
and zero otherwise. CIVOR takes value one if the origin of a country’s legal system is civil law. ***, **, * denotes that
the t-test is significant at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively. CIVOR3 represents dummy variables for whether a
country’s civil law in of French, Scandinavian, or German origin. a, b, and c denotes that the F-statistic for the test that
CATHOLIC and PROTESTANT are equal, that ENGLISH and SPANISH are equal, or that the dummy variables for
the three distinct civil law origins are equal is significant at the 1, 5, and 10% level.
OPENNESS
Frankel and
Romer
Geographic
(Incr R2)

OPENNESS
Average
1985 - 1995
(Incr R2)

CIVOR
(Incr R2)

CATHOLIC
and
PROTESTANT
(Incr R2)

ENGLISH
and
SPANISH
(Incr R2)

CIVOR3
(Incr R2)

Anti-Director
Rights

0.1036**

0.0459*

0.3596***

0.0165

0.1548 b

0.3430

Creditor Rights

0.1222***

0.0564*

0.1561***

0.3176 a

0.1017 b

0.2124 b

Efficiency of
judiciary system

0.0574**

0.0529

0.0941***

0.0306 c

0.0431 b

0.1296 b

Rule of law

-0.0028

-0.0241

-0.0009***

0.0069

0.0179 b

0.0028

a

0.0860 a

Corruption

0.0011

-0.0113

0.0530

0.0352

Risk of
expropriation

-0.0028

-0.0164

0.0092*

0.0021

0.0277 a

0.0130

Repudiation of
contracts by
government

-0.0032

-0.0055*

0.0082*

0.0142 b

0.0290 a

0.0342 a

Accounting
standards

-0.0152

0.0021

0.2447***

0.1370 a

0.1800 a

0.3266 a

Equity Issues to
GDP

-0.0138

0.0073

0.1552**

0.0399

0.0140

0.1091

Long-Term
Private Debt
Issues to GDP

-0.0224

0.0015

-0.0199

0.1472 a

-0.0077

0.2378 a

Total Private
Credit to GDP

-0.0112

-0.0297

0.0211*

0.0586

0.0519 b

0.1565 a

Stock Market
capitalization to
GDP

-0.0082

-0.0063

0.2009***

0.1044

0.0373 b

0.1960

44

0.0624

a

