                                   !"




                                      


                                             
                                          


                                           #$$%
                                  &''((()''(#$$%



                       !  **!+,!!,,
                                -./.01
                                  ,)23.$-4#
                                        



                    
        !" #    $   %  &  
        '   !     (      #    )      
        (  $   *   +,-,."  
 )     $*  ,+/0.            
         #            "$*   
    1 + 2"       !" $   %  
&       3 )  )45"62  "7   "28
           # !"    2 9  
             $   %  &       


:# 7+     7  2      9" 
 9      " #;  9       2  " 
:  " 2   
2  
  2 
  #$$%
 $..-
5 5$63 //3 %-3$-3 4-35-7354$


                                                 $%#%

             202 8  2 (  93 2  :; 
  )(    8  8 8 (1 8  2    2
2:3212 )8-%4--%7-
            9  2     )) : 8   8(2 
 8 0   1  8 0  0: 2  )8 (  
20 2 80 0: :()
2) 23 ( 2  !( :;
80012032202 :; 00<
80 2 82( 
          1 :3(21 1 3881 
820 0:)8 000 8)822820)
      20(288) 28)=01
(2()=01 88!82 < 8808
0 0:01 320208 
:2: 0 0:)1




                                                          
  800                                               800
  ,                                                      <0*1:
  13 .4>//                                                   ))03?>%7.%
2                                                               @*2
  @22
 &6.4A676A$67-
+<&6.4A676A$-$$
                                           I. Introduction.

       Researchers often analyze the relation between retirement and the incentives created by

pensions and social security in the context of a single equation, reduced form model. Such single

equation, reduced form retirement models are routinely used for behavioral and policy analysis.

For example, the Social Security Administration has contracted to use such a model to predict the

effects of an important change in current policy, increasing the age of eligibility for early social

security retirement benefits.

       Under certain conditions, the coefficients estimated in retirement equations for variables

indicating the future reward from social security and pensions to continued work will allow

prediction of the individual’s response to a change in the reward. For example, if people behave

according to a simple life cycle model and if capital markets are perfect, the estimated

relationship between retirement outcomes on the one hand, and measures of the change in wealth

from social security or pensions with continued work on the other, will indicate how these

financial incentives influence retirement outcomes, and how changes in these programs will

influence retirement behavior. Under other conditions, the coefficients on measures of reward

from continued work from social security and pension wealth will not be stable indicators of

retirement responses to changes in social security rules. Thus, for example, if capital markets are

imperfect, so that some people are liquidity constrained, the coefficient on a variable measuring

the change in the future value of pensions and social security cannot be used to predict the effect

of a change in social security policy. The value of future work depends on unobserved

preferences. Consequently, the coefficient estimated in the retirement equation will change as

policy changes.


                                                  1
       This paper examines the efficacy of a single equation approach to understanding the

effects of current and proposed social security policies and changes in pensions on retirement

outcomes. We would like to determine whether one can interpret the coefficients estimated for

variables measuring the future reward to continued work as deep structural parameters, or

whether the coefficients commonly estimated are composites that can be expected to change as

policies are changed, and so are unreliable predictors of the effects of changes in policies on

retirement outcomes.

       In order to gain further insight into the underlying behavior, we focus on two outcomes

that are jointly determined with retirement. One is accumulated wealth. A second is the timing

of benefit claiming. Our analysis first sketches a theoretical structure that generates various

relationships between retirement and wealth in accordance with the correlation between leisure

and time preference. We then conduct a number of empirical tests to determine whether the

observed parameters obtained in reduced form retirement equations are likely to be useful for

behavioral and policy analysis, or whether it is necessary to specify and estimate a structural

model that specifically incorporates tastes for leisure and time preference, incorporates liquidity

constraints for some, and allows the influence of preferences for retirement and saving to be

separated from the effects of future pension and social security rewards. The tests include an

analysis of the relation between the residuals from reduced form retirement and wealth equations.

In addition they consider whether exogenous factors symmetrically affect retirement and wealth,

as would be expected in simple models with uncorrelated tastes for leisure and time preference,

and whether particular age dummy variables continue to have significant effects on retirement

outcomes even after measures of the timing of social security and pension incentives are


                                                  2
specifically included in the retirement equation. Next we consider the effects of delayed benefit

claiming on the value of future rewards to social security and pensions, and discuss an improved

measure of the option value of pensions and social security, which we call the premium value.

       Findings from these tests raise questions about using a single reduced form retirement

equation to analyze social security or pension policies. Parameters from a reduced form

retirement model predict counter intuitively, for example, that raising the social security early

retirement age will increase the number of early retirements. Although reduced form models of

retirement and wealth accumulation can be improved upon by modifying both the measure of the

retirement variable and the pension premium variable, and by incorporating measures of liquidity

constraints, these improvements are probably not sufficient to allow their use in policy analysis.

       The empirical analysis presented in this paper is based on data from the first four waves

of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a longitudinal survey of a nationally representative

sample of the population who was 51 to 61 years old in 1992. Incentives created by social

security and pensions are measured using linked data. Earnings histories for work through 1991

have been obtained from the Social Security Administration, for respondents who signed

permission forms allowing their earnings records to be used. Detailed descriptions of pension

plan provisions have been obtained from the employers of respondents who indicated they were

covered by a pension on present or past jobs.

       Measures of the accrual in pension and social security values with continued employment

play a central role in any study of the relation of pensions and social security to retirement and

savings behavior. In the present paper, we measure these incentives by the immediate per period

accrual in benefits from postponing retirement by one year, and what we call the premium value,


                                                  3
the difference between the value of potential future benefits, including spikes in benefit accrual at

early and normal retirement ages, and the value from the basic accrual in each period. Thus the

premium value is positive for a person with a defined benefit plan who has not yet reached early

retirement age, where the plan has a sharp spike in the accrual profile at early retirement. But

the premium value is zero for a defined contribution plan with benefits that accrue evenly each

period.

          In the course of our analysis, we also show that when social security incentives are

computed on the assumption that respondents accept benefits immediately upon retiring, the

calculated incentives to retire are much sharper than when the date of benefit acceptance is timed

to maximize the present value of benefits. If covered individuals are constrained to claim benefits

immediately, due say to liquidity constraints, then the reward to postponing retirement, i.e.,

continuing to work, includes the value from postponing benefit receipt. Most of those entering

retirement in fact claim their benefits immediately upon retiring. This raises a question about

whether liquidity constraints or other complexities not reflected in a simple retirement model act

to enhance the rewards to immediate retirement, or whether the decision to claim benefits should

be treated as independent of the decision to retire.

          Evidence from previous studies suggests that in attempting to interpret estimated

coefficients in retirement equations, it may be necessary to modify assumptions about perfectly

operating capital markets, full-information and understanding of the social security system and

their pension plans by all covered workers, equal valuation of own and spouse benefits, and other

key assumptions. Bearing these caveats in mind, we turn first to a discussion of what has been

found in the previous literature, and then to our analysis.


                                                   4
.

               II. What Previous Studies Indicate About Underlying Behavior

       Studies of retirement and saving typically are conducted independently of each other, and

at times involve inconsistent assumptions.1 Most studies of saving take retirement behavior to be

fixed. At best the retirement horizon or expected retirement date is included as a right hand side

variable.2 Studies of retirement typically assume that capital markets are perfect, so that saving

and consumption decisions are made in the background, and do not affect the retirement

decision.3 Nevertheless, previous studies of retirement and saving contain a great deal of

information that will help us to understand the relation between retirement and saving behavior.

       Studies of retirement recognize that pension and social security benefit formulas affect

the reward to continued work, and incorporate these incentives.4 The saving literature is only

now evolving to fully incorporate the influence of pensions and social security on saving.

Although social security and pensions represent half the wealth accumulated for retirement

(Gustman, Mitchell, Samwick and Steinmeier, 1999), many studies of saving ignore pension and



       1
        Two important exceptions that do consider the joint relation between retirement and
saving behavior are Diamond and Hausman (1984) and Kahn (1988).
       2
         See Gustman and Juster (1996) for a discussion of the inconsistencies between the
saving, retirement and pension literatures. In the present paper we control for some factors
correlated with precautionary and bequest motives, but do not explore these motivations
systematically. We also do not consider behavioral reactions to uncertain lifetimes, annuities, the
demand for life insurance, and related issues.
       3
        Rust and Phelan (1997) is an exception. They assume that the capital market is not
operative so that the retirement decision affects the path of consumption.
       4
        See Lumsdaine (1996) and Lumsdaine and Mitchell (1999) for recent summaries of
retirement research.

                                                 5
social security wealth. Moreover, it is not just a question of whether pensions and social security

are accounted for when analyzing saving. Even when pensions are counted as part of wealth,

fundamental questions remain. Gale (1998) argues that it is important to measure properly

pensions, wealth and lifetime earnings, and to include indicators of the stage of the life-cycle if

one is to correctly estimate the pension offset in a wealth equation. Consistent with an

uncomplicated life cycle model, he finds indications of large offsets when using data from the

Survey of Consumer Finances. Yet when Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) follow Gale’s

prescription and estimate the pension offset in wealth equations using HRS data, contrary to

Gale’s predictions, they find very little pension offset. Major advantages of the HRS data

include the fact that pension values are estimated using detailed pension plan descriptions

obtained from respondent employers; lifetime earnings are estimated using both self reported

earnings histories and earnings histories obtained from the Social Security Administration; and

the sample is approaching retirement so that their lifetime earnings and lifetime wealth can be

estimated fairly accurately. Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) find that those with pensions

accumulate more total wealth than those without pensions, holding lifetime income and the

retirement horizon constant. As a result, a wealth equation cannot treat pensions simply as a tax

favored method of saving that is a substitute for other forms of saving.

       Considerable progress has been made in measuring the future value promised by a

pension or social security, and in using these measures in explaining retirement or job mobility.

Lazear and Moore (1988) and Stock and Wise (1990a and b) dub the potential value of the

pension resulting from continued work at the firm for a number of years in the future, the “option

value” of the pension. A related measure is the difference between the projected liability and the


                                                  6
legal liability of the pension, that is the value of a defined benefit plan that accrues from future

expected employment, but is not legally owed to the worker based on employment to date. This

measure is used by Ippolito (1986) to evaluate the implicit pension contract. Gustman and

Steinmeier (1993, 1995) use a measure of pension backloading to estimate the disincentive to

mobility from pensions. Coile and Gruber (1999a and b) adopt a measure they call the peak

value, which is the maximum found for all future dates of retirement, and use it to evaluate

retirement incentives from social security.

       In a reduced form setting, the challenge is to properly value current and future benefits,

especially the spikes in the pension accrual profile seen at the early and normal retirement dates.

Yet one will downplay the relative importance of the spikes in the benefit accrual profile at early

and normal retirement ages by simply adding up the expected future benefit for each year of

future employment. For example, when benefits are simply summed, a defined contribution plan

will have a misleadingly large future value. Below we will blend available measures for valuing

future benefits, basing our evaluation of the expected future value of the pension or social

security on what we will call the “premium value,” by which we measure the difference between

the present value of the future benefit stream and the present value of a stream of benefits equal

each year to the value of the basic level of accrual initially observed for the plan. The “premium

value” differs from “peak value” used by Coile and Gruber (1999 a and b) in that the peak value

counts all increases in benefits with continued work, and thus peak value continues to increase in

time as benefits are accumulated in defined contribution plans, while the premium value does

not.

       Many findings from the literature raise questions about the behavior governing retirement


                                                  7
and saving decisions. People are not very well informed about the details of their pensions.

Many cannot identify what type of pension they have (Mitchell, 1988, Gustman and Steinmeier,

1989 and 1999b). Respondents are especially poorly informed about the location and size of the

spikes in pension benefit accruals created by their defined benefit plans, which are key

determinants of the incentives that pensions create for retirement behavior (Gustman and

Steinmeier, 1999b). Imperfect information about pensions leads to two kinds of problems. One

is that descriptions of pensions (or social security) obtained from respondents may be misleading.

For example, when respondents misidentify plan type, they typically are asked follow up

questions about the wrong type of plan. This problem can be remedied by using linked pension

and social security data obtained from employers and from the Social Security Administration. A

second problem is that the respondents may be guided in their saving or retirement decisions by a

misunderstanding of their pensions. This second problem cannot be fixed through the use of

better data, but must be modeled.

       There also are questions about the behavior that determines when people claim their

social security benefits. There is a literature analyzing when it is optimal to claim benefits.5


       5
         Blinder, Gordon and Wise (1980) and Clark and Gohman (1983) have discussed the
actuarial advantage of delayed claiming of social security benefits. See also Feldstein and
Samwick (1992). Coile, Diamond, Gruber and Jousten (1999) also suggest that it is optimal for
many to delay claiming social security benefits after obtaining eligibility. All of these studies
suggest that it is advantageous to delay claiming benefits, although the behavioral models differ.
Coile et al emphasize the roles of mortality expectations, wealth, age differences with the spouse
and relative earnings differences between spouses to explain delays in benefit claiming. Despite
finding coefficients that are consistent with their theoretical discussion, that those who expect to
live longer and who have younger wives delay claiming benefits longer, Coile et al. find that
relatively few retirees delay claiming their benefits. Our examination of data in the HRS in
Section VII also find very little delayed claiming. For example, using data from the New
Beneficiary Data System, Coile et al. find that only 10 percent of those retiring before age 62
delay claiming benefits by one year or more. The bottom line is that despite all the arguments

                                                  8
From an expected value perspective, it is often optimal not to claim benefits when first eligible,

but to delay claiming benefits so as to disproportionately increase the value of benefits, especially

of spouse and survivor benefits.6 On the other hand, there are reasons for some to claim benefits

before the present value is maximized. Those with private information who believe that they are

likely to die at a younger age, or who are (mortality) risk averse, will claim their benefits earlier.

Models of retirement and saving should be reconciled with observed claiming behavior.

       There are many reasons why social security beneficiaries may not delay their acceptance

of benefits to the optimal time. One possibility is that the primary beneficiary places less weight

on spouse and survivor benefits than on own benefits, which would lead to earlier claiming.7

Another possibility is that, perhaps because they have high discount rates, some consider

themselves to be over-annuitized, and liquidity constrained. A household with little liquid

wealth will not be able to support consumption between retirement and the time of first receipt of

delayed benefits. Positively correlated leisure and time preferences may also make early



given in Coile et al. and in earlier papers that would lead one to expect postponed benefit
claiming by early retirees, most early retirees do not postpone benefit claiming.
       6
        Actuarial returns to social security vary with family status and age, and may be quite
generous at younger ages. Using the social security benefit reduction rate on the assumption of
normal retirement at age 65, at age 62 a 6.67 percent increase in benefits from delaying
retirement for one year raises the benefit by 6.67/.8, or 8.33 percent. Given the life tables, that
adjustment is better than actuarially fair, at least it is if one’s spouse is not over the age of 65.
       7
         The purpose of the Pension Equity Act is to protect spouses from circumstances where
the primary earner takes a single life annuity and leaves the spouse with no pension income once
he dies. For an analogous reason, even though Congress has just abolished the earnings test for
those over 65, Congress refused to abolish the social security earnings test for those between the
ages of 62 and 65. See Gustman and Steinmeier (1998) for an analysis of how the weight given
to spouse and survivor benefits relative to own benefits might affect the decision to accept a
private account under a social security privatization scheme with voluntary participation.

                                                   9
claiming more likely among retirees. Or perhaps some people believe the government will pay

lower social security benefits than they have been promised, attach a great deal of risk to the

future payments promised by social security, and that it therefore is in their interest to collect

their benefits as early as possible.

          It is important to understand claiming behavior in order to properly measure how social

security affects the incentive to retire. We show below that when people claim their social

security benefits so as to maximize expected value, the reward to postponing retirement is lower

than if they claim benefits as soon as they retire. Even if benefits are claimed immediately upon

retirement, as the evidence suggests in most cases it is, retirement and claiming behavior may not

be tied in the respondent’s mind. Accordingly, retirement decisions may not be influenced by the

actuarial increase in the value of social security benefits from delayed claiming. Still another

possibility is that individuals may be sophisticated enough to understand the actuarial return to

postponing benefits, but not sophisticated enough to divorce the decision to retire from the

decision to accept benefits. Thus the extent to which social security creates incentives that

influence retirement outcomes depends on claiming behavior, and the valuation of deferred social

security benefits in turn depends on the reason why most retirees do not defer their benefit

claims.

          When it comes to those who are working part time and are earning enough to be subject

to the earnings test, more are willing to postpone benefit acceptance.8 A person who is working


          8
         Many of those who continue to work have the option of immediately claiming some of
the their benefits, with the remainder postponed due to the earnings test. Gustman and
Steinmeier (1991, p. 742) found, using 1984 data from the Continuous Work History Survey, that
only 30 to 40 percent of working individuals who are eligible for partial benefits at age 62
registered for them.

                                                  10
part time and making more than the earnings test disregard is in roughly the same actuarial

position with regard to the lost benefits as a person who postpones benefit receipt. Both will

have their future benefits increased by a similar amount to cover their lost benefits.

         We are aware of a number of other issues affecting the specification of retirement and

saving equations. Findings are sensitive to how retirement is measured, based on self reported

status, hours of work, or some combination (Gustman, Mitchell and Steinmeier, 1995; Gustman

and Steinmeier, 2001b). Findings will also be influenced by whether the partially retired are

counted as retired or not retired (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1984). We address these issues

below.

            III. Joint Determination of Retirement and Wealth in a Simple Model

         To facilitate the discussion of the relationship between retirement and wealth, let us

examine a simple yet instructive model. In this model, the consumer maximizes a lifetime utility

function:

                                                T
                                               ∫0
                                                        - ρt
                                     U =            e          u [C (t)] d t

subject to a lifetime budget constraint

                                           T
                                          ∫0   C (t) d t = W R

where C(t) is consumption at time t, W is the (constant) wage rate, R is the retirement age,

and T is the lifetime.

         The simple model presented here solves for consumption and wealth, given the optimal

retirement date. The effect of variation in the taste for retirement on saving is then simulated by

varying the date of retirement. A more complete analysis would include leisure in the utility


                                                        11
function, and allow for heterogeneity in the leisure parameter. The results demonstrated here

also hold in a more general model in which leisure is included in the utility function and

retirement is endogenously determined. We have done the required calculations, and they are

quite extensive. The simple model presented here, however, illustrates the major points without

undue complications.9

       The Euler-Lagrange condition for this problem is

                                                                      ρt
                                             U ′ [C (t)] = λ e

where λ is a Lagrangian multiplier which, in this problem, is constant over time.

Differentiating this condition with respect to the retirement date R yields

                                                   ∂C              ∂λ         ρt
                                  U ′′ [C (t)]             =          e
                                                   ∂R              ∂R

Since UO < 0, this condition implies that MC/MR and Mλ/MR are of opposite signs, and

furthermore, since λ is constant over time, that the sign of MC/MR is uniform over time.

       Differentiating the budget constraint with respect to R gives

                                         T    ∂C
                                     ∫   0    ∂R
                                                 dt = W               > 0


Since MC/MR has a uniform sign over time, that sign must be positive. Assets at any point in

time before retirement are simply the difference between the cumulative wages and the

cumulative consumption:

                                                               t
                                    A (t) = W t -          ∫0      C (t ′) d t ′


       9
         Some other potential extensions to the model, such as inserting a real interest rate into
the budget constraint and/or allowing wages to grow over time, would make the algebra more
cluttered, but would not affect any of the major conclusions.

                                                      12
Since an increase in the retirement age uniformly increases consumption over time, it must

reduce the level of assets at any point in time: MA/MR < 0.


Implications of Heterogeneous Leisure Preferences.

       Suppose that different individuals have characteristics (either observed or unobserved)

that make them either more or less inclined to retire early. Let Xi be one such characteristic,

one such that high values of Xi are associated with earlier retirement: MR/MXi < 0. We can

also ask what the effect of Xi is on asset holdings at some time prior to retirement. Since Xi

operates indirectly through the retirement age in the model above, and not directly on either

assets or consumption, MA(t)/MXi = MA(t)/MR MR/MXi > 0. Holding all other things equal, a

characteristic that makes an individual more inclined to retire early also induces that individual to

hold more assets than otherwise.

       A simple interpretation of this is that if the individual plans to retire early, he or she will

hold more pre-retirement assets in order to finance the longer period of retirement without a

sharp cutback in consumption. This finding is noted in the top part of Table 1. There, an earlier

retirement is associated with an increased level of assets at any pre-retirement age.

Implications of Heterogeneous Time Preference.

       Next, let us investigate the effects of heterogeneous time preference, holding leisure

preferences (and hence the retirement date) constant. Without going through the details of the

derivation in the model above, it can be shown that MA(t)/Mρ < 0. Heuristically, an increase in

time preference is associated in the consumption formula with a more rapid decline in

consumption over the lifetime, and hence with a tendency to consume more in the early years.



                                                  13
Increased consumption in the early years will lower the amount of accumulated savings with a

given level of wages.

       The second part of Table 1 indicates these results. A higher level of time preference will

have no effect on the retirement age, given that we are assuming here that leisure preferences are

constant. However, the higher level of time preference will result in lower rates of asset

accumulation and lower levels of assets at any given age.

Correlated Leisure Preferences and Time Preferences.

       The previous few paragraphs have examined either heterogeneous leisure preferences,

holding time preference constant, or heterogeneous time preferences, holding leisure preferences

constant. If the two sets of preferences were independent, then the correlation between early

retirement and higher wealth levels that are implied from the first panel in Table 1 would prevail

overall. That is, an individual with high leisure preferences would be more likely to retire early

and hold more wealth. Because there is no systematic correlation with leisure preferences,

heterogeneous time preference does not change this relationship, although it does spread out the

wealth distribution for a given leisure preference. The net result is that allowing for both

preferences but requiring that they be independent implies that there is still a positive association

between early retirement and wealth holdings, but they are not as tightly correlated as when we

considered heterogeneous leisure with a given time preference.

       However, there is no particular reason to assume that leisure preferences and time

preferences are uncorrelated, and arguments for a correlation are relatively easy to make. A high

time preference is symptomatic of an increased desire for short term gratification, the “I want it

now” attitude. The same desire for short term gratification is likely to carry over into the


                                                 14
leisure/work decision, where it manifests itself as an increased desire for leisure. Thus, it is

plausible to argue for a positive correlation between time preference and leisure preference.

       The lower panel of Table 1 gives the results of combining heterogeneous leisure

preferences with positively associated heterogeneous time preferences. For an individual with

high leisure preferences, retirement is more likely to occur early. Because of the longer

retirement period, there is an incentive to have higher levels of wealth in the years leading up to

retirement. However, offsetting this is the fact that such an individual is likely to have high

levels of time preference as well. High levels of time preference work in the opposite direction

in terms of wealth accumulation and tend to lower the level of wealth. Which effect is dominant

is a priori unclear; hence the wealth of individuals with high leisure preferences is labeled as

“ambiguous.” The net result is that in this situation early retirement may be associated with

either high or low levels of wealth, and the direction of the correlation between retirement and

wealth is not determined.

Implications.

       One of the purposes of this study is to find out what kinds of models are generally

consistent with the data. A model which allows for individual heterogeneity in preferences for

leisure, but which assumes that all individuals have the same time preferences, implies a negative

relationship between retirement ages and wealth levels. A slightly more general version of this

model, which includes both heterogeneous leisure preferences and heterogeneous time

preferences and allows for these preferences to be correlated in plausible ways, can accommodate




                                                 15
cases where retirement ages and wealth levels are not correlated, or are positively correlated.10 A

structural model which explicitly incorporates the distributions of leisure and time preference

will allow the data to tell the story. Evidence on the relation between wealth and retirement will

provide the first piece of evidence as to whether the story is consistent with the simple model that

must underlie a reduced form approach if the coefficients estimated for pension and social

security wealth are to reflect the behavioral response to the incentives created by these plans, or

whether the estimated coefficients are composites which will change in value if pension and

social security rules are changed. Other evidence on whether a simple reduced form approach is

adequate for understanding the effects of pension and social security policies on retirement

outcomes is also developed.



                                     IV. Data and Variables.

       The data used to investigate the relationship between retirement and wealth come from

the first four waves of the original cohorts of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS

began in 1992 with about 9,800 respondents who were born between 1931 and 1941. Spouses

were also interviewed, but unless they were born in this time period they are not included in the

retirement portion of this study, since they are not representative of their respective cohorts. The

study continued to interview the respondents at two year intervals, and the current study uses

these interviews through 1998, which is the last interview available as of this writing.

Defining Retirement:



       10
         A negative relation between retirement and wealth may also result if leisure and time
preference are positively correlated, but the effect of leisure on wealth dominates.

                                                 16
        One of the focuses of the study is retirement, which in the empirical analysis we will take

to be the transition from working in one survey year to being retired in the next. Measures of

retirement as of the survey date are probably more precise and do not require us to infer exactly

when between two surveys an individual actually retired. To implement this retirement

definition, however, we must define exactly what it means to be working and what it means to be

retired. There are several potential ways to measure retirement in the HRS, but these group into

objective based measures, such as whether you have a job in the survey week, and subjective

measures, such as whether or not you consider yourself to be retired.

        These measures are not always consistent. Table 2 gives cross-tabulations of two

measures: usual hours per week and self reported retirement status.11 The percentages along the

diagonal are instances where the two measures agree, and these total to about 83.4% of the

observations. For the remaining observations, which are about one-sixth of the total, there is

disagreement between the objective measure and the self reported retirement status.

        Looking first above the diagonal, these are cases where the respondent is working more

than would be expected with the self reported retirement status. Since the respondent is working,

it is probably not appropriate to classify him or her as completely retired. On the other hand, an

examination of numerous individual records suggests that if the respondent indicates that he or

she is partially or fully retired, there is usually a reason for the response even if the current hours

are in the full-time range. Perhaps the respondent has worked for 60 hours per week in previous

jobs and is now only working 40 hours a week, or sometimes there is a noticeable drop in


        11
        For self reported retirement, there is a not applicable category, which applies to
homemakers and respondents who have not worked for years. Such responses were included in
the completely retired category.

                                                  17
earnings, suggesting an easier job. Frequently the work history contains a change of employer

around the date the respondent says he or she partially or fully retired. In any case, it appears to

be sensible to treat respondents who are working but say they are partially or completely retired

as though they are partially retired, since in most cases there is at least some evidence they are

not working as hard as they did at one time.

       Below the diagonal are cases where the respondent is working less than would be

expected with the self reported retirement status. One cell contains respondents who claim to be

not retired at all even though their usual hours per week at their present job are below 35. To

decide whether such individuals are not retired or partially retired, we looked at previous jobs in

the job history. If there were previous jobs with 35 hours of work or more, then there is evidence

of a reduction of work effort, and the individuals are classified as partially retired. If there is no

evidence of previous jobs with 35 or more hours per week, then there is no evidence of lower

work effort, and the respondents’ claims that they are not retired at all are accepted. For the

respondents who claim to be not retired or partially retired but who do not have current jobs, we

look to see whether they also claim to be unemployed and how long ago their last job was. If

they say they are unemployed and had a job within the previous twelve months, their self

reported status is accepted. But for the remainder of the respondents, who are the large majority

of this group, the claim of not being retired is not accepted, and they are classified as being

completely retired.

       In short, we are making a new definition of retirement status based both on objective

hours and subjective self reports. By themselves, both self reports and objective hours have

problems. Hours measures have problems with individuals who reduce work effort while still


                                                  18
being above 35 hours and with individuals who have always worked less than 35 hours. Self

reports appear to be unreliable both in cases where the individuals have jobs yet say they are

completely retired and with individuals who do not have jobs yet claim to be not retired. The

hybrid measure of retirement that we are using should ameliorate these deficiencies.

Measuring Wealth.

       The second focus of the study is on wealth. The dependent variable in wealth regressions

is defined as nonsocial security, nonpension wealth. The HRS went to a lot of trouble to gather

good wealth numbers, including trying to bracket amounts for which the respondents were unable

to provide exact numbers. This both reduces the need for imputation and probably increases the

accuracy of the imputations that are made, increasing the accuracy of the wealth measures. We

use values imputed by the HRS where required information on wealth is missing.

       Pensions and social security together account for more than half the total wealth of

respondents to the HRS (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1999). Incentives for retirement are

calculated by considering the changes in social security and pension wealth associated with

additional work. Pension incentives are estimated from the matched pension plan formulas

obtained from the employers for covered HRS respondents. These pension plan descriptions

were coded by HRS staff, and the plan values are calculated from these descriptions using the

reported wage and projecting it backwards using the general wage growth rates. Social security

incentives are estimated from the earnings in the social security record, with earnings after 1991

projected using the social security assumptions about real wage growth rates. For respondents

whose social security records could not be obtained, we impute the record before 1991 based on

information in the HRS main survey. Respondents were asked about the starting date on their


                                                19
current job, starting and ending dates for their last jobs (i.e, the job last held by those not working

in 1992), starting and ending dates for the previous 5 year job held before the current or last job,

and the starting and ending dates for up to two other pension-covered jobs. Respondents were

also asked about earnings at these dates. In addition, the survey asked respondents in Wave 3

about the date of entry into the labor force, how many years were worked before the date the

previous job was secured, and the dates that the individual was in jobs not covered by social

security. Wage profiles are forced through all years when the individual implied he or she was

working in jobs covered by social security, with values for missing years projected backward off

the profiles on the basis of experience and education.12 From the social security earnings record

(either actual or imputed if missing), we calculate the respondent’s Average Indexed Monthly

Earnings (AIME) amount, and from that the social security benefit to which the respondent is

entitled (the Primary Insurance Amount, or PIA). The benefit amounts, in turn, are used to

calculate the value of social security and the incentives for retirement arising from social

security.

       The main problem in wealth regressions is one of scale. If wealth is entered in a linear

format as a dependent variable, the wealth regressions are likely to be dominated by those with

high levels of wealth. If instead wealth is entered in a logarithmic format, there is the problem of

what to do with those with zero or negative wealth numbers. These problems can be avoided by


       12
          The wage profile coefficients are taken from Anderson, Gustman and Steinmeier (1999)
and are based on data from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Coefficients are: experience
.0138221, experience squared -.0002827, and experience * education .000996. Note that the
wage profiles are not smooth, as they would be if they were based only on the coefficients in the
wage equation. Rather, they have sharp discontinuous breaks at points where actual wage
observations anchor the profile. Moreover, we do not use wage observations from all years, but
only for the number of years worked as reported in the retrospective work history.

                                                  20
using as the dependent variable the level of wealth as a percentage of potential wealth, which can

be measured as the real value of lifetime household earnings. Lifetime earnings, in turn, can be

measured fairly accurately from the social security earnings records which were collected as part

of the survey. For instances where earnings are masked by the social security earnings maximum

or where earnings were not recorded because the respondent was in a non-covered job, actual

earnings can be inferred, albeit approximately, from the respondents’ reported earnings.13 The

resulting dependent variable, which should lie between zero and one, should not be severely

affected by scale. Roughly speaking, this approach treats a household that has $100,000 in assets

out of $2,000,000 in lifetime earnings as in approximately the same situation as a household that

has $25,000 in assets out of $500,000 in lifetime earnings.14

       Most of the explanatory variables in this study are fairly straightforward, and the

Appendix lists a short description of selected variables. There are a few variables which merit a



       13
         Reported earnings are used if the social security earnings are at the limit in a given year
and reported earnings are higher. Reported earnings are also used if the respondent says that the
job was a state or federal job or a job uncovered by social security, and the social security
earnings over the lifetime of the job are less than 60 percent of the reported earnings. If the
social earnings are over 60 percent of the reported earnings, we assume that the job is in fact a
covered job, and the actual social security earnings are used. In point of fact, in most cases
where the social security earnings are less than 60 percent of the reported earnings, the social
security earnings are sporadic and do not amount to more than a few hundred dollars, strongly
suggesting that they are coming from some kind of secondary activity and not from a primary
job.
       14
          One can expect a nonlinear relationship between wealth and lifetime earnings on both
the low and high ends of the income and wealth distributions. Those with low earnings and
wealth are insured against adverse events by a variety of government income and wealth tested
programs that are not available to those with higher wealth or income (Hubbard, Skinner and
Zeldes, 1995). Moreover, the bequest motive, and tax treatment of bequests, may be very
different between those at the upper end of the income and wealth distributions and those who
have less income and wealth.

                                                 21
few words of additional discussion, however. The most important group of these relate to the

incentives that pensions and social security provide either to keep on working or to retire. The

first two of these variables measure the increases in the present values of future pension and

social security benefits that come with continued work. These are usually called the pension and

social security accruals. If we plot the present value of pensions and social security as a function

of retirement, as in Figure 1, the slope of the present value line is a measure of the accrual at any

point in time.

        Since we are looking at the probability of retiring in the period between one survey and

the next, there are really two accruals that are relevant. In Part A of the figure, the respondent

has a large accrual in the initial survey year (initial year after the initial survey date), but a small

accrual in the second survey year (second year after the initial survey date). Such an individual

would have a high incentive to delay retirement until after the initial survey year, but no further

incentives to delay retirement. Thus, we should expect that high accruals in the initial survey

year should increase retirement during the period. This is contrasted with Part B of the figure,

which illustrates a large accrual during the second survey year. In this case, the respondent will

have a large incentive to delay retirement until after the second survey year, so that a large

accrual in that year should be associated with lower retirement. If the accruals were similar in

both years, the respondent would have no particular incentive or disincentive to retire during the

period, suggesting that the positive effects of an accrual during the first survey year should be of

roughly the same magnitude as the negative effects of an accrual during the second survey year.

        There may also be additional incentives of social security and pensions to continue

employment into future years that are not necessarily captured by the accruals at either the start


                                                   22
or the end of the period over which we are measuring retirement. An example would be a

pension which increases sharply in value a couple of years after the end of the second survey

year. In this case, a respondent might delay retirement not because the current accruals are high,

but because of the prospect of the higher pensions if he or she waits until the sharp increase in

value. This idea is called “option value” by Lazear and Moore (1988) and Stock and Wise

(1990a and b) and “peak value” by Coile and Gruber (1999a and b). However, neither of these

measures quite embraces the idea that we are trying to capture, which is the potential of a future

extra bonus on top of any current accruals. For instance, both the option value and the peak

value would increase more or less indefinitely for defined contribution plans, and yet these plans

in general are not perceived to provide a strong incentive to retire at any particular time.

       For this reason we are introducing a new measure of future incentives which we call the

“premium value.” To calculate this measure, for each future year we calculate the value of the

pension and compare it to the value the pension would have if the current accruals were to

continue until the future year. The premium value, which is analogous to the measure used in

Gustman and Steinmeier (1993, 1995), is simply the maximum of the present value of these

differences. The premium value is illustrated in Figure 2. The dashed line gives the amount that

the pension would be worth if it were to keep accruing value indefinitely at its current rate, while

the solid line gives the actual value of the pension. The premium is the maximum vertical

difference between the solid line and the dashed line. In this case, the pension jumps notably

several years after the current age, perhaps when the respondent becomes eligible for early

retirement and as a result can obtain benefits under a more favorable formula than before. As

illustrated in the figure, the premium is a measure of the extra value of the pension beyond the


                                                 23
value implied in the current accrual.

        Note that a defined contribution plan which increases steadily in value will have a zero

premium value, since there are no future benefits in this type of plan that are not evident in the

current accrual rate. Social security benefits can also have these premium values if the benefit

increases for delaying benefits are more than actuarially fair. Such is frequently the case for

married respondents whose spouses will be collecting benefits based on the respondents’

earnings.

        Table 3 gives the distributions of accruals and premium values for both social security

and pensions. The observations are for individuals in pairs of successive surveys. Since there

are four surveys each respondent can have up to three observations; other restrictions are noted

later in this section. We will refer to the first survey of any pair as the “first survey year” and the

second survey of the pair as the “next survey year.” The accruals are measured at both survey

dates, as suggested by Figure 1. A high accrual in the first survey date and a low accrual in the

next survey date would signify that effective compensation dropped over the two year period, and

this should encourage retirement. The opposite would be true if the accrual on the next survey

date is higher than on the first survey date. The premium values are measured at the later of the

two survey dates, because it is presumably the premium at this time which would induce

respondents to delay retirement. Both the accruals and premium values are expressed as a

percentage of the current earnings. Presumably the incentives from pensions and social security

to continue working are more related to the percentage by which they increase regular earnings

than they are to the absolute values of the amounts.

        Pension and social security accruals each average around 6-8% of current earnings, but


                                                  24
the variation in pension accruals is almost twice as much as for social security accruals. This is

important because if the estimated effects are the same, the differential impact of the accruals on

retirement behavior for the respondents is related to the variance of the accruals and not

necessarily to the mean. With regard to the premium values, when averaged across the whole

population, the premium is actually higher for social security than for pensions, at 18% vs 11%,

but again the variation in premium values for pensions is somewhat greater than for social

security. Part of this comes from the fact that over four times as many respondents have social

security premium values as have pension premium values. If we just look at respondents with

positive premium values (the last panel in the table), both the mean and variation of the pension

premium values are much higher than for the social security premium values.

       The final data issue is the derivation of the sample to be analyzed from the observations

in the data set. This information is reported in Table 4. The HRS interviewed 12,652

respondents in the initial wave in 1992, and by 1998 the survey had conducted almost 45,000

interviews with these individuals. However, only the respondents born between 1931 and 1941

are a representative sample, and imposing this restriction eliminates about a quarter of the

interviews. We require that the individual be initially not retired, i.e., working full time; this

leaves about 18,000 observations. We require usable age and earnings figures, and if the

respondent is married, that the spouse is also interviewed so as to be able to compute household

earnings variables. Finally, we require that if the individual reports a pension on the current job,

the pension be included in the employer-provided pension provider file. We make this last

requirement because the respondent interview provides a very poor basis for imputing pension

accruals and premium values (Gustman and Steinmeier, 2001a). After these restrictions are


                                                  25
imposed, we are left with about 11,700 observations.

       Since retirement is defined as a change in status between one survey and the next, we

must consider periods in which the respondents were interviewed in two adjacent waves.

Dropping interviews for which there was no subsequent interview leaves about 8,900

observations. There are a couple of minor additional deletions because either the work status or

age is not available in the final wave, so that the final number of observations used in the

retirement part of the analysis is about 8,600. For the wealth regressions, there are some

additional deletions. First, it would seem inappropriate to use the same regression for both

married respondents and single respondents. Among the single respondents, there are problems

with divorced and widowed respondents because the survey does not interview the former

spouses, and hence we cannot tell the earnings potential of the household. The sample of the

remaining single respondents, who are the never married group, is small enough that the results

are questionable. Therefore, we only look at married respondents in wealth regressions. This

brings the sample down to about 6,300. We further delete anyone in a household which reports

any substantial inheritance (more than $10,000), or if the total wealth including pensions and

social security exceeds the real value of the earnings for that household. This leaves around

5,600 observations for the wealth regressions.



                             V. Retirement and Wealth Regressions.

       In this section we look at the results of the retirement and wealth regressions. Table 5

presents the principal results. The retirement regression is actually a probit equation, and the

figures reported in the table are the marginal effects, that is, the change in probability of


                                                  26
retirement that results from a one unit change in the independent variable.

       First consider the retirement probit. The dependent variable in this probit is whether or

not a respondent who was fully working in the one survey had completely retired by the next

survey, where retirement is as defined in the previous section. The overall probability of

retirement between one survey year and the next is about 13.6%, so that numbers such as 0.06 or

0.07, while they may appear small, actually represent an increase in retirement rates of about 50

percent. In the retirement equation, the combined pension and social security incentive variables

all come in significant and with the correct sign. We would have expected the two accrual

effects to be approximately equal and of opposite sign, whereas the effect of the final accrual is

almost twice as large. However, the difference is not significant using a likelihood ratio test.15

These coefficients suggest that moving from an accrual value which is one standard deviation

below the mean to one which is one standard deviation above the mean (see Table 3) changes

retirement by around 3 percentage points, or by roughly one-quarter. A similar variation in the

premium value would also change retirement by 2-3 percentage points.16

       The age variables follow the expected path in that the retirement probability steadily

increases at higher ages. There is almost no evidence of a pure age effect at age 65, although



       15
         The fact that the hypothesis that the two accrual coefficients are approximately equal
and opposite in sign means that a uniform upward movement in accrual rates, as would occur
with a defined contribution pension, would leave retirement relatively unaffected.
       16
          At the average earnings for the sample, the coefficient on premium value indicates that
retirement would decrease by 0.072 percentage points, or about 0.036 percentage points per year
since the average period in this study is two years, for each $1000 increase in premium value.
This compares with a figure of 0.054 percentage points per year reported by Coile and Gruber,
1999, Table 6 for their measure of peak value. Coile and Gruber did not find any significant
effect of social security accruals.

                                                 27
there is a considerable effect at age 62. Recall that age is measured at the beginning of the period

and that the period is roughly two years, so respondents aged 60 or 61 at the beginning of the

period will have passed 62 by the end of the period. Thus, the increases in the coefficients at

ages 60 and 61 probably reflect a spike when individuals turn 62. The cause of this spike is still

under debate. It could reflect liquidity constraints that are relaxed when the individual is able to

collect social security benefits, or it could be that individuals do not value (or are not aware of)

the actuarial adjustments to future social security benefits very much, so that at age 62 it appears

that they are giving up benefits by continuing to work. Some argue that it reflects some type of

social norm, although this norm is certainly not reflected in the dates of eligibility for early

retirement under pension plans, which have a modal value for those with defined benefit plans in

the HRS of 55 (Gustman and Steinmeier, 2000). In any case, most observers would probably

agree that a major part of the cause of the retirement increase at age 62 has something to do with

social security, even if the exact process remains unclear.

       The other variables in the retirement probit behave more or less as expected, to the degree

they are significant. The two most important variables are poor health and having been laid off

from the initial job, both of which substantially increase the probability of retirement. Tenure

(years of service) in the initial job is also highly significant, with higher tenure levels appearing

to increase the probability of retirement. Another significant variable is the share that the

respondent has contributed to lifetime household income (as of 1992); primary earners retire

later. The self employed are also likely to retire later. There is no systematic difference in

retirement associated with gender (although primary earners in the family are significantly more

likely to retire later), or with Black or Hispanic status once the other independent variables are


                                                  28
included in the retirement equation. Also note that the planning horizon, which is the closest

direct measure we have to time preference, is not significant in the retirement equation. Lastly,

those who are able to reduce their hours of work without leaving their jobs are less likely to

proceed directly from full time work to full retirement, instead either prolonging the length of

time spent on a job in which the workload can be modified, or partially retiring on such a job.17

       The wealth regression uses the same observations as the retirement equations, less single

respondents, respondents with substantial inheritances, and respondents whose total wealth

exceeds lifetime household earnings. The dependent variable for this regression is the ratio of

non-pension, non-social security wealth in 1992 to lifetime household earnings. This variable

may loosely be interpreted as the fraction of lifetime household resources that have been saved in

addition to pensions and social security. Since many types of wealth, such as household wealth

or financial wealth, cannot really be separated into parts due to each partner, this variable is

necessarily a household variable, although the observations are still individuals. As with the

retirement variable, the magnitude of the coefficients may be a little deceiving. A value of 0.01

is associated with an increase in household wealth of one percent of the lifetime earnings of both

spouses, and this can translate into a sizable sum.

       The first coefficient is that of the log of total lifetime family earnings.18 The sign and

magnitude of this coefficient suggests that, all other things equal, a doubling in earnings causes



       17
        See Gustman and Steinmeier (1984) for an analysis of partial retirement both on the
main job and on other jobs.
       18
          When a quartic in family lifetime earnings percentiles is added to the wealth equation,
the coefficients are not individually or jointly significant over and above the log of family
lifetime earnings, and the remaining coefficients appear to be hardly affected.

                                                 29
the wealth ratio to drop by about one percentage point.19 The next two variables are the ratio of

pension wealth and social security wealth to lifetime household earnings.20 If there were perfect

substitution between pension wealth, social security wealth, and other types of wealth, these

coefficients would be -1, and reductions of other types of wealth would fully offset any pension

or social security wealth. If there were no offset, the coefficients would be 0. In contrast to the

predictions of a simple life cycle model, and consistent with our earlier results with slightly

different specification, these coefficients suggest that the respondents do not reduce the amounts

of other types of wealth very much to offset higher levels of pension and social security wealth.21

       For reasons that are not completely clear, the coefficients on the accrual and premium




       19
          Because the log of lifetime family earnings appears in the denominator of the dependent
variable, there will be some downward bias in the coefficient estimated for lifetime earnings due
to measurement error. When we fit the wealth regression including only
respondents for whom we had social security records, and therefore for which any biases arising
from errors in measuring lifetime household earnings should be less, the coefficient on total
lifetime earnings for the family falls from -.0110 to -.0161, with a t statistic of 2.90. This is
in the opposite direction from the change that would be caused strictly by measurement error in
the lifetime earnings variable, so that there must be some systematic difference between the 4150
observations with an attached social security record, and the 1458 observations for families with
at least one social security record missing. The coefficients on the other covariates are very
similar between the two regressions.
       20
         These ratios are calculated as of 1992, since the social security records provide earnings
information up through 1991. For more detailed analysis of the substitution of pensions and
wealth, see Gustman and Steinmeier (1999).
       21
         We reestimated the wealth equation using median and robust regressions. Among the
differences in the significant coefficients, the coefficient on the log of lifetime family earnings
turned from small and negative (-0.0110) in the OLS equation to small and positive in the robust
regression (.0053); and the coefficient on pension value over lifetime earnings turned from small
and negative (-.0548) to small and positive (.0296).

                                                 30
value variables all are positive, although only one of them is significant.22 Significant coefficients

on other variables have effects in plausible directions. These variables include the race variables,

with the ratio of wealth to lifetime household earnings five percent lower for blacks, the

education variables, with more educated respondents having considerably more wealth (holding

lifetime earnings constant), and the planning horizon variables, with those with short horizons

having less wealth. The tenure variable is also highly significant in increasing wealth. There is

some tendency of older respondents to have higher wealth ratios, but the tendency is fairly noisy.

Households with a larger age difference between spouses, those in poor health and union workers

have lower wealth. Self employment is associated with much higher wealth, suggesting a unique

motivation for wealth accrual by the self employed.

       As indicated in Section III, one of the main interests of these regressions is to see whether

retirement and wealth are correlated, as a model with heterogeneous but uncorrelated retirement

and/or time preferences would suggest. Such correlation of retirement and wealth should be

evident in Table 5, which lists the results for both the retirement and wealth equations. To

facilitate the comparison, the two equations in this table have corresponding observations, except

that the wealth equation is limited to married respondents. However, the retirement equation is

not much changed when it too is limited to married respondents, and a test of the proposition that

married and single respondents have the same coefficients in the retirement equation is not



       22
            When we run the regression with a cutoff point of 0.75 for the ratio of wealth to
income rather than 1.0, the only one of the key coefficients (measuring the effects of lifetime
family income, ratios of social security and pension wealth to total wealth, and measures of the
increments in wealth from additional work) to undergo a significant change is the coefficient on
log of lifetime family earnings. Otherwise the coefficients are not significantly different from
those reported in Table 5, column 3.

                                                 31
rejected.

       Negative correlation of retirement age and wealth, to the extent it exists, should have two

implications. First, the independent variables should work in the same direction in the retirement

and wealth regressions.23 Table 6 contains a summary of the significance of the coefficients

(other than age) in the two equations. If the independent variables work in the same direction in

both equations, there should be a pronounced concentration of entries along the northwest to

southeast diagonal. However, the actual pattern does not yield the impression that there is a

much of any correlation at all between factors affecting early retirement and wealth.

       Because the fit in both the retirement probit and the wealth regression is rather poor, most

of the action is in the unobserved error terms. This means that a perhaps a more important way

that retirement and wealth could be correlated is through a correlation in the error terms. When

this correlation is calculated for individuals who are in both equations, however, the correlation

is a mere -0.008.24 This is in rough agreement with the lack of correlation we observe with

regard to the effects of the observed explanatory variables. Both the explanatory variables and

the error terms seem to be saying that there is not much relation between retirement and wealth.

This means that a model with heterogeneous retirement preferences, even when coupled with

heterogenous time preferences, is inconsistent with the observed pattern of retirement and wealth

as long as the preferences are not assumed to be correlated, and that any model which is used for


       23
          The omission of the pension and social security wealth variables from the retirement
probit does not affect these results; when we run the retirement probit adding these variables,
there is hardly any change in the coefficients.
       24
         For the retirement probit, the error term used in the correlation is either 1 or 0,
depending on whether the respondent actually retired, minus the fitted probability of retirement
from the estimated probit.

                                                32
structural estimation should probably include correlated retirement preferences and time

preferences or something similar to break the implication of correlated retirement and wealth.25



                       VI. Separate Pension and Social Security Effects.

       The equations presented in Table 5 assume that the effects of accruals and premium

values are the same whether they operate through pensions or social security. Table 7 presents

partial results of an additional probit estimation for the retirement regression equation which

splits up the effects of accruals and premium values into separate components for pensions and

social security. The results for the probit where these variables are combined are repeated in the

last column for convenience.

       At first glance it would appear that the effects of the pension and social security variables

are indeed different. To be sure, all three pension effects are approximately both in magnitude

and significance equal to the effects for the combined variables. For the social security variable,

the premium value effect is about the same in both magnitude and significance as for the pension

variable, but both social security accrual variables are smaller in magnitude and are not

significant. The effect for the initial level of the social security accrual measure is even of an

unexpected sign, but the magnitude is very small.

       However, the confidence intervals of the final accrual variable for social security clearly

includes the point estimate of the pension variable, and the same thing is nearly true for the initial

social security accrual variable. This raises the possibility that the two sets of estimates for the



       25
       Such a model should also include the other major motivations for saving, as outlined in
Gustman and Juster (1996).

                                                  33
pension and social security variables are not significantly different and invites a test of the

differences. Twice the difference in the log likelihoods is 3.12, which is clearly not significant

when compared to a chi squared distribution with three degrees of freedom. Recall from Table 3

that the variability of the social security accrual variables was less than half as much as it is for

the pension accruals. Evidently the lower variation in the social security accruals has led to less

accurate estimates of these effects, so that we cannot reject the hypothesis that the effects of the

social security and pension accruals and premium values is the same.26

       One final note pertains to the finding that the point estimates of the effects of the

premium values are approximately the same for pensions and social security. Since the variation

in premium values for pensions is wider than the variation in social security premium values,

especially among the group for whom the premium values are positive, it would appear that the

overall effect of pension premium values on retirement is somewhat larger than the effect of

social security premium values.27



                           VII. Social Security Acceptance Behavior.

       We have so far assumed that in calculating social security accruals and premium values,

those who retire accept their social security benefits upon retiring, or will accept them at age 62 if

they retire before then. In addition, we have assumed that those who do not retire at all do not



       26
         On the other hand, when we run a probit without the social security accruals, a
likelihood ratio test indicates that these two coefficients are not jointly significant.
       27
         We also estimated wealth equations with separate measures of pension and social
security accruals. The findings were similar to the wealth equation reported in Table 5. The only
significant coefficient is for the initial accrual created by pensions.

                                                  34
accept their social security benefits until they retire. The top panel of Table 8 indicates that the

vast majority of those who are retired do claim their benefits, with the share of claimants

increasing with age between 62 and 65.28 At age 62, 69.5 percent of retirees have accepted

benefits. By age 65, the acceptance rate is up to 92 percent. The numbers accepting benefits

among the partially retired are just slightly lower. Among those who are not retired, 11.5 percent

claim benefits at age 62, rising to 42.1 percent by age 65.

       The second panel of Table 8 shows that using the social security interest rate

assumptions, benefit acceptance was optimal only for a modest fraction of those 62 to 65 who

actually accepted them. Among the completely retired who are 62 years old, more than four-

fifths of those who accepted benefits would have increased the present value of their benefits if

they had delayed collecting them. Among 64 year old retirees, only a little more than a third of

those accepting benefits should have. For the most part, this occurs because for a 62 year old

beneficiary, delaying benefits for a year increases future benefits from 80 percent of the full

amount to 86 2/3 percent. This is about a 8 2/3 percent increase in benefits, and for a married

male, this increase applies not only to his own benefits as long as he is alive but most likely to his

wife’s widows benefits for as long as she outlives him. Given their joint life expectancy, an 8

2/3 percent increase is more than actuarially fair, and it increases the expected present value of

the benefits to delay them. The same thing applies to 64 year old beneficiaries, though with

somewhat less force.

       The third panel examines who should postpone acceptance, and it includes all individuals



       28
        These numbers understate the fraction of eligible beneficiaries who accept benefits at
age 62. See Olson (1999).

                                                  35
in the sample even if they are not currently eligible because of the earnings test. About 90

percent of married males and half of married females should postpone benefit receipt, while no

single males over 63 or single females over 65 should delay. For single individuals, the change

in the early retirement penalty is barely actuarially advantageous in the 62-64 age range and

certainly not after 65. For married couples, the calculations consider the total lifetime household

social security value. They assume that it would be advantageous for one spouse to delay

accepting benefits, but only if the other spouse does also. In the final panel, we see that among

those for whom it would be optimal to postpone benefit acceptance, the average gains from doing

so are close to $7,000 in total present value for both males and females at age 62. The value

declines with age for married males because of the actuarial factors discussed in the last

paragraph. It remains over $7,000 for married females, even at age 64 or 65, because the

calculations assume that when the wife postpones, it is optimal for the husbands also to postpone

so as to increase not only his own benefits, but also the widow’s benefits, and thus to increase the

total present value of benefits.29

        Evidence that benefit claiming is being driven by liquidity constraints, and not by the

reward to postponing benefit receipt, can be seen in the first two rows of Table 9. The dependent

variable is whether the individual had already claimed benefits on the survey date, and the age




        29
          The observations are respondents as of the four survey dates, and consequently the
sample changes from one age to the next. In the last panel, the sample also changes because of
differential percentages with non-zero gains. These account for the fact that the amounts in the
last panel, which should show a monotonic decrease for a particular individual, do not always do
so.

                                                36
variable is the age on that date.30 Among those who are retired, those with a higher ratio of

nonpension, nonsocial security wealth to social security wealth, are significantly less likely to

have accepted benefits. Moreover, among those who have fully retired, those with the strongest

incentive to postpone benefit receipt, as measured by a higher social security premium, are most

likely to accept benefits. With the overwhelming majority of those who have retired claiming

benefits, these regressions appear to distinguish behavior only among a minority of retirees who

are on the margin of claiming benefits, and not to tell a clear and consistent story about what is

motivating the overwhelming majority of retirees to claim their benefits earlier than optimal.

       To this point we have assumed that even though the older population is failing to

postpone benefit receipt so as to maximize the present value of expected future benefits, they still

include the value of delaying a claim to benefits as part of the reward to delayed retirement. One

way to remove the value of delayed benefit receipt from the reward to delayed retirement is to

calculate the social security incentives to retire on the assumption that whenever the individual

retires, benefits will be claimed at the optimal age. To further investigate this issue, we have

reestimated the retirement equation, measuring social security incentives assuming that benefits

are evaluated as if they are claimed at the optimal age. When the regression combines the

incentive from social security and pensions, the effect of computing social security incentives at

the optimal retirement age is to drop the coefficient on the premium value by one third, from -




       30
          The dependent variable is defined as whether the individual had already claimed
benefits on the survey date, instead of a measure of the age of claiming, in order to minimize the
recall bias as to exactly when the individual started to receive benefits.

                                                 37
.022 to -.014.31 When pension and social security incentives are measured separately, the

coefficient on the social security premium value is reduced from -.024 to -.010, and the t statistic

on the social security premium becomes insignificant at -1.08. Accordingly, if increases in social

security benefits from delaying benefit receipt are not taken into account when deciding on the

retirement date, then the size of the reward to delaying retirement is reduced, and in addition, the

effect of each dollar of reward in the form of increased social security benefits on retirement is

also reduced to insignificance.



                                    VIII. Sensitivity Analysis.

       There are several additional questions which might be raised about these results,

particularly the retirement equations. In this section we will look at some of these issues.

       The first question that might be raised is whether the self employed respondents are

driving the results. Recall that the self employed have large coefficients, especially in the wealth

equation, and that the conditions under which they work may make the retirement decision for

these respondents much different from the other respondents. The real question is whether the

retirement equation will look very different if the self employed are excluded.

       This question is examined in the second column of Table 10. This column estimates the

probit only for those who are not self employed. Compare this to the first column, which

estimates the equation for the entire sample. The effects of the two accrual variables are virtually

identical, both for the pension versions of the variables and for the social security versions of the



       31
        The t-statistic on the measure of the combined premium declines from -2.85 to -2.08.
The coefficients on the two delta measures change only very slightly.

                                                 38
variables. The magnitudes of the premium values for both pensions and social security are 20 to

25% lower with the restricted sample, and are no longer significant. However, when the

premium value variables are combined, the resulting variable is significant (This result is not

shown in the table). There is no evidence in the second column of Table 10 that the premium

value effect of pensions is any different than the premium value effect of social security.

        Another question relates to using some observations where the social security values are

imputed. In our analysis we exclude observations where the respondent indicated there was a

pension, but the pension plan description was not collected from the employer. We do so on the

grounds that the imputations of pension incentives (accruals and premium values) from the

respondent information only is mostly noise. The same problem is less true of social security,

since social security operates with a uniform set of rules which are known even if the respondent

did not give permission to obtain the social security record. Whether including these imputed

records has affected the results is an open question, however, since we must still impute the wage

history if the social security record is missing.

        The third column of Table 10 gives the results of the retirement probit when the sample

only includes those for whom social security records were actually obtained. There are some

differences here, and the standard errors are in general larger, as one would expect given the

reduction in the sample size. The two social security accrual variables are still insignificant, but

the effect of the social security premium value variable is almost twice as large. With regard to

the pension variables, the premium value effect and the effect of the final accrual are very close,

but the effect of the initial accrual is just less than half as great as in the base estimates.

        However, for all six variables the confidence intervals constructed around the estimates


                                                    39
with the restricted sample include the value estimated from the full sample. This leads to the

possibility that the effects between the two estimates are not significantly different. One can do

the test by estimating over the two subsamples (with and without matched social security

records) and comparing the log likelihoods to the full sample. When this is done, the test statistic

is 69.06, which compares to a 5% significance level statistic of 76.88 for 55 degrees of freedom.

Thus we would conclude that although the point estimates are different, particularly for a couple

of variables, the differences are not statistically significant.

        The next question relates to the definition of retirement. In Section IV we argued that

both objective based retirement definitions, such as that based on hours, and self reported

retirement definitions have problems. We developed a hybrid definition of retirement that

combines the information in the objective measures with the self reports to give what we feel is a

more sensible result when the objective measure differs from the self reported measure.

However, we would like to know how sensitive the results presented here are to this approach.

The last two columns of Table 10 suggest the point estimates are not too sensitive to the

specification of the dependent variable. The significant social security accrual variables hold up

under the changed specification and the premium variables are of the same sign but the

coefficient estimates slip below significance. There is only one surprise. The coefficient on the

final accrual measure for social security is positive and almost significant, changing sign in an

unexpected direction when the dependent variable is defined using only self reported status.



                               IX. Probability of Partial Retirement

        To this point we have examined only the flow from full time work into full retirement. In


                                                   40
this section we examine other flows away from full time work, both the flow from full time work

to any kind of retirement and the flow specifically to partial retirement. Probit estimates for

these flows are reported in Table 11, using the same set of explanatory variables as was used in

Table 5. The left equation is a probit for leaving full time work for any retirement, either partial

or full, while the right equation is a probit for leaving full time work for partial retirement only.

For some variables, the effect in the partial retirement equation is to amplify the effect in the full

retirement equation in Table 5, while for others the effect in the partial retirement equation

offsets the effect in the full retirement equation. Although the pattern of significant coefficients

is somewhat different for the leaving full time work equation in Table 11 as compared to the full

retirement equation in Table 5, there appears to be no more correspondence between these

coefficients and the wealth equation than there was for the full retirement equation in Table 5.

This implies that the conclusions reached in Section V are not substantially altered by

considering retirement as a move from full time work to either partial retirement or full

retirement.

       The coefficient on earnings in the partial retirement equation is negative and of about the

same size as the negative coefficient in the equation for full retirement, so that higher earnings

are twice as effective in slowing the flow from full time work as is suggested by the coefficient in

the full retirement equation. Similarly, a higher pension premium reduces the flow into partial

retirement, in addition to reducing the flow into full retirement. In contrast, the negative

coefficient on the measure of initial benefit accrual in the partial retirement equation offsets to

some degree the positive coefficient in the equation for full retirement. The result is that while a

high initial period benefit increment increases the flow to full retirement in the following period,


                                                  41
the effect on the flow out of full time work is about only about three-quarters as much.

       Notice next that the age effects are significant and in the same direction in the equations

for partial and full retirement, but they are substantially smaller in the partial retirement equation.

Among the other independent variables, note that while self employment reduces the flow from

full time work to complete retirement, it increases the flow into partial retirement by even more.

Interestingly, those who are free to reduce hours of work on their jobs are two percent less likely

to move from full time work into full retirement, and are 3.5 percentage points more likely to

flow into partial retirement. Having experienced a past layoff raises the likelihood of moving

into full retirement by 15 percent, and in addition, increases the likelihood of moving from full

time work into partial retirement by another 4 percent, altogether increasing the likelihood of

leaving full time work by almost a fifth.




  X. Pitfalls to Using Reduced Form Retirement Equations for Analyzing Social Security

                                               Policies

       Our findings suggest caution is required when using reduced form equations to evaluate

new policies. The basic problem is that because the omitted factors are related systematically

both to retirement outcomes and to the measured reward to postponing retirement, a simple

retirement equation credits the effects of the omitted factors to the included measures of social

security benefit changes. New policies will change the relationship between retirement and the

increase in the value of social security benefits with postponed retirement, resulting in incorrect

predictions of the effects of new policies.


                                                  42
       When we fit single equation retirement models, we found a variety of evidence that

important behaviors have been omitted. Consider, for example, variables measuring the age of

the respondent, in the form of a series of dummy variables, one for each year of age. These age

variables suggest there is a sharp increase in the probability of retirement at age 62. This is a

sign that even though the equations include measures of the increase in the value of social

security with delayed retirement, the cause of the increased retirement at age 62 has not been

identified by the model. That is, if the measures of social security and pension increases that are

incorporated in the reduced form models captured the full effects of the monetary value of social

security and pension incentives on retirement, there would be no significant, differential effect of

an age 62 dummy on retirement. Without knowing the cause of the increased retirement at age

62, we cannot determine how much of this increase in retirement is due to the social security

early retirement age. Since the early retirement age has not changed in decades, it cannot be

directly included in an analysis. It is conceivable to introduce other variables which would

measure the effect, but one would still have to be wary as long as there was any residual increase

in retirement around age 62 in the equation.

       The omission of important factors from reduced form retirement equations creates a

major problem for policy simulations. An example is estimating the impact of raising the early

retirement age. The estimated relation of the probability of retiring to measures of changes in the

value of social security benefits when retirement is postponed will be biased. This is readily seen

from the coefficients on the pension and social security premium variables in the retirement

equations we have estimated. The negative coefficients on the premium variables suggest that if

the social security early retirement age were to be abolished, more people would retire earlier


                                                 43
rather than later -- a counter intuitive prediction. The reason is that raising the early retirement

age to 65 would reduce the reward to continued work, since some of that reward results from

deferred claiming of benefits. In other words, with an early retirement age raised to say 65, there

would be no benefit from deferring claiming associated with the decision to postpone retirement

from 62 to 63, to 64 or to 65. Consequently, given available parameter estimates, a reduced form

model with the expected negative sign on the pension premium or a related variable will predict

that raising the early retirement age will, if anything, reduce the age of actual retirement.

       Yet intuitively we expect that raising the social security early retirement age would have

an effect in the opposite direction from that predicted by the reduced form retirement equation.

Many members of the population will defer retirement if social security benefits are not available

until age 65, some because they are liquidity constrained, others for other reasons.

       These findings notwithstanding, the Social Security Administration and others have

begun to use single equation retirement models in an effort to understand how social security

benefits affect retirement behavior, and the implications of changing such features as the social

security early retirement age.

                                         XI. Conclusions.

       This paper began with a simple theoretical model of the relationship between retirement

and wealth accumulation. If the only heterogeneity were in retirement preferences, those who

retire early would be found to accumulate more wealth, enabling them more closely to maintain

consumption in retirement. Heterogeneity in time preferences has much the same effect in

inducing a positive correlation between wealth and early retirement. A model with both types of

heterogeneity maintains this result as long as the two types of heterogeneity are uncorrelated.


                                                  44
Only when heterogeneity in retirement preference is positively correlated with heterogeneity in

time preference may the positive relation between early retirement and wealth be broken.

       We estimated a reduced form model of retirement and wealth accumulation, and asked

whether the variables have corresponding effects in both equations, as would be predicted by the

simpler versions of the model. We do find some variables which induce early retirement and

which also induce higher wealth. However, in many cases the coefficients do not have

comparable effects in retirement and wealth equations. Moreover, the unobservables from the

retirement and wealth equations are only weakly correlated. This suggests that more than

heterogeneous leisure preferences is required to explain the observed patterns.

       There is even more direct evidence of the need for a more comprehensive model of

behavior, and of internal inconsistencies in the simple retirement equations that are being

estimated. Social security incentives are often measured by the increment in the value of benefits

associated with deferred retirement. The increment in the value of benefits depends, however, on

when benefits are claimed. Our findings show that using SSA interest rate projections, those

who retire completely are claiming their benefits too early to be maximizing the expected value

of these benefits. Yet measures of social security benefit accrual used in these retirement models

often include in their measure of the gain to deferring retirement, the increase in the value of

benefits from deferred claiming. On the one hand, early retirees are seen not to defer benefit

acceptance despite the actuarial advantage. On the other hand, later retirees are said to defer their

retirement in order to gain the advantage of deferring benefit acceptance.

       In addition to the inconsistencies in assumed behavior, there is the direct evidence of

omitted variable bias we discussed above. Age effects remain unexplained by the measures of


                                                 45
incentives from pensions and social security that are included in the reduced form retirement

models. Moreover, predictions of the effects of major policies, such as raising the social security

early retirement eligibility age, appear to be in the wrong direction.

       The evidence gathered in this paper will be of help in specifying a proper structural model

of retirement and wealth determination. The advantage of estimating structural models is that it

is possible to investigate the effects of policy changes, such as increasing the early retirement

age, even if those changes have not been observed in the data sets used to estimate the model.

The evidence suggests that there are more complexities in behavior than those created by either

heterogeneous retirement preferences or heterogeneous time preferences alone, and that

correlated heterogeneity in retirement preferences and time preferences is also probably required

to generate the observed relations between retirement and wealth.

       Heterogeneity in time preferences, combined with liquidity constraints that bind for some

individuals, implies that individuals with high time preference and imperfect ability to borrow

may value future income from pensions and social security much less that the amounts calculated

using the market interest rate. The failure of most retirees to delay claiming social security

benefits suggests that many individuals value future benefits less than using the interest rate

would suggest. This raises questions about the way social security and pension benefits are

calculated as explanatory variables in reduced form retirement equations. In a world with

heterogeneous time preferences and liquidity constraints, it may not be appropriate to evaluate

payments streams using an interest rate which is constant across individuals. Structural models

that allow for the possibility of heterogeneous time preferences and liquidity constraints, and

apply an internal rate for discounting by those who are liquidity constrained, may allow for a


                                                 46
more natural treatment of this problem. Analyses in which at least some respondents poorly

understand the benefit schedule, or do not value spouse and survivor benefits in accordance with

their expected value, may also be appropriate.

       These findings are unsettling for public policy analysis. Reduced form equations, such as

the retirement equation or the wealth equation, must be used with great caution in situations

where they are applied to analyze new policy initiatives. Unobserved heterogeneity interacts

with the observable variables to produce the estimated coefficients in these equations, but the

comparable interactions are not necessarily the same if the policy changes in new ways.

Structural models which depend on the underlying utility parameters, are less subject to this

criticism. But such models are almost certainly more difficult to estimate, and the researcher

must incorporate the heterogeneity into the model in sensible (and testable) ways.




                                                 47
                                  Figure 1

                            Patterns of Accruals


                     A. High Accrual in Initial Survey

Present Value




                                                                       Age
          Initial Survey Date                      Next Survey Date



                     B. High Accrual in Final Survey

Present Value




                                                                       Age
                Initial Survey Date                 Next Survey Date



                                      48
                             Figure 2

                          Premium Values




Present Value




                                           Premium




                Current                              Age
                 Age




                                49
                                Table 1

         Effects of Leisure Preferences and Time Preferences
                      on Retirement and Wealth


                      Effects of Leisure Preference

Leisure Preference                  Low                 High

Retirement Decision                 Late                Early
Level of Wealth                     Low                 High


                       Effects of Time Preference

Time Preference                     Low                 High

Retirement Decision              No Effect            No Effect
Level of Wealth                   High                  Low


    Effects of Positively Correlated Leisure and Time Preferences

Leisure Preference                  Low                 High

Retirement Decision               Late                  Early
Level of Wealth                 Ambiguous             Ambiguous




                                   50
                                                 Table 2

                             Objective vs. Self Reported Retirement

                                    (Figures are percentages of total)


                                      Self Reported Retirement Status

Usual Hours               Not Retired             Partially         Completely
  per Week                  at All                Retired            Retired     Total

   More than 35               47.6%                   2.9                 0.4     50.9
   1-35                        3.9                    3.4                 0.8      8.0
   0                           5.5                    3.2                32.4     41.1

 Total                        57.0                      9.5              33.6    100.0

1. Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                   51
                                                Table 3

                                     Accruals and Premium Values
                                    for Pensions and Social Security


                          (Accruals and Premium Values are Expressed
                             as Percentages of the Current Earnings)

                                     Mean              Standard Deviation        Percent Nonzero

                                               Accruals at the Start of the Period

Pension                                 8.5%                    27.6%                   42.7%
Social Security                         6.1                     11.4                    78.0
Combined                               14.6                     29.8                    85.2

                                               Accruals at the End of the Period

Pension                                 6.6                     23.1                    43.9
Social Security                         5.6                     10.8                    80.0
Combined                               12.2                     25.4                    86.6

                                                          Premium Values

Pension                                10.6                     46.1                    14.2
Social Security                        17.9                     38.4                    61.3
Combined                               22.2                     57.1                    50.9

                                    Premium Values (for Respondents with Nonzero Values)

Pension                                74.8                    100.9
Social Security                        29.2                     45.6
Combined                               43.7                     74.0

1. Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                  52
                                                     Table 4

                                             Derivation of the Sample


                                    Wave 1             Wave 2           Wave 3   Wave 4   Total

Interviews                          12652              11316            10653    10119    44740
  Age-Eligible Interviews            9824               8804             8312     7886    34826

In Initial Year
  Working Full Time                  6310               4927             3845     3088    18170
  With Nonmissing Age                6310               4742             3845     3088    17985
  With Nonmissing Earnings           5343               3962             3211     2527    15043
  With Nonmissing Spouse             5194               3847             3075     2381    14497
  With Nonmissing Pension            4072               3069             2523     2008    11672
In Next Survey Year
  With Interview                     3739               2844             2332        0     8915
  With Nonmissing Work Status        3735               2842             2331        0     8908
  With Nonmissing Age                3474               2825             2331        0     8630


1. Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                       53
                                            Table 5

                                Retirement and Wealth Equations

                                          Full Retirement Probit      Wealth Regression

                                          Marginal
                                           Effect     t-statistic   Coefficient   t-statistic

Constant                                                              0.2272        3.42
Measures of earnings:
  Log of annual earnings                  -0.0143       -2.48
  Log of lifetime family earnings                                    -0.0110       -2.48
Pension & social security values:
  Pension value / lifetime earnings                                  -0.0548       -2.65
  Social security / lifetime earnings                                 0.1000        2.57
Pension & social security incentives:
 Initial accrual / annual earnings         0.0348        3.29         0.0142        2.46
 Final accrual / annual earnings          -0.0656       -3.63         0.0111        1.64
 Premium value / annual earnings          -0.0216       -2.85         0.0038        1.23
Age binary variables:
  50                                                                 -0.0407       -1.07
  51                                       0.0114       0.47         -0.0129       -1.33
  52                                       0.0025       0.12         -0.0076       -0.90
  53                                       0.0531       2.66          0.0007        0.09
  54                                       0.0449       2.42          0.0023        0.32
  56                                       0.0290       1.58          0.0121        1.68
  57                                       0.0474       2.57          0.0044        0.62
  58                                       0.0584       3.06          0.0149        2.01
  59                                       0.1100       5.41          0.0074        0.95
  60                                       0.1849       8.35          0.0128        1.65
  61                                       0.2559      10.54          0.0148        1.78
  62                                       0.2514       8.55          0.0009        0.09
  63                                       0.3232       8.92          0.0231        1.69
  64                                       0.3252       6.85         -0.0081       -0.44
  65                                       0.3110       3.69          0.0699        2.05
Personal characteristics
  Female                                  -0.0026       -0.23         0.0101        1.52
  Married                                 -0.0318       -2.19
    Age difference if married             -0.0003       -0.39        -0.0017       -4.83
  Race
    Black                                  0.0008        0.08        -0.0511       -9.16
    Hispanic                              -0.0218       -1.60        -0.0171       -2.49
  Fair or Poor Health                      0.1035        8.69        -0.0145       -2.62

                                              54
    Not available                                                          -0.0575           -0.46
  Education
    Less than high school                    0.0149         1.49           -0.0203           -4.13
    Some college                            -0.0125        -1.27            0.0211            4.41
    Undergraduate degree                    -0.0032        -0.24            0.0223            3.41
    Graduate work                           -0.0058        -0.43            0.0366            5.61
  Children                                   0.0102         0.69            0.0029            0.28
  Planning horizon
    Next year                                0.0048         0.56           -0.0204           -4.63
    More than ten years                      0.0077         0.56            0.0084            1.27
    Not available                            0.0245         1.09            0.0096            0.93
  Word recall (number of words)              0.0000        -0.01            0.0006            0.84
    Not available                           -0.0172        -0.80           -0.0227           -2.15
  Share of lifetime household earnings      -0.0773        -3.82            0.0100            0.98
Job Characteristics
  Self employed                             -0.0298        -2.26            0.1072           16.65
    Not available                            0.8905        11.82            0.1409            1.02
  Years of service                           0.0016         4.54            0.0012            7.07
    Not available                            0.2678         2.43            0.0141            0.30
  Industry:
    Manufacturing                            0.0124            1.08        -0.0038           -0.72
    Public administration                    0.0170            1.06        -0.0061           -0.81
  Occupation:
    Management or professional               0.0016         0.14            0.0128            2.52
    White collar                            -0.0025        -0.27            0.0064            1.39
  Covered by union                           0.0133         1.45           -0.0106           -2.36
    Not available                            0.1045         0.85           -0.0197           -0.31
  Covered by pension                         0.0224         2.23           -0.0075           -1.50
    Not available                           -0.1186       -31.42           -0.0926           -0.62
  Firm with more than 100 employees          0.0174         1.57           -0.0010           -0.18
    Not available                            0.0309         1.80           -0.0127           -1.56
  Availability of reduced hours             -0.0231        -2.16            0.0071            1.27
  Laid off from initial job                  0.1497         8.00           -0.0080           -0.96

Pseudo R2 or Adjusted R2                              0.1024                         0.146
Number of Observations                                 8612                          5608

1. The probit estimates are the marginal effects on the probability of retirement of a one unit
change in the explanatory variable.

2. Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                 55
                                              Table 6

                                       Patterns of Coefficients
                               in the Retirement and Wealth Equations


                                                        Retirement Equation

                                    Significantly              Not            Significantly
                                      Negative              Significant         Positive

                Significantly
                  Negative                1                     7                  1

    Wealth          Not
   Equation      Significant              5                     11                 4

                Significantly
                  Positive                1                     4                  1



1. Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                56
                                              Table 7

                       Comparison of Pension and Social Security Effects
                                   in the Retirement Probit

                                    (t-statistics in parentheses)


                                           Pension           Social Security   Combined

Initial Accrual / Annual Earnings          0.0402                   -0.0077     0.0348
                                           (3.59)                   (-0.22)     (3.29)

Final Accrual / Annual Earnings            -0.0679                  -0.0378     -0.0656
                                           (-3.42)                  (-0.88)     (-3.63)

Premium Value / Annual Earnings            -0.0202                  -0.0242     -0.0216
                                           (-2.17)                  (-2.11)     (-2.85)

   Log Likelihood                                     -3073.38                 -3074.94

1. Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                 57
                                               Table 8

                               Social Security Benefit Acceptance3


                                                                   Age
                                          62                 63            64            65

Current Retirement Status:                            Actual Benefit Acceptance Rates
 Not Retired                            11.5%              22.5%          20.4%         42.1%
 Partially Retired                       65.3               77.4           79.8          89.8
 Completely Retired                      69.5               83.8           88.7          91.8

                                                  Percentage of Actual Acceptors for
Current Retirement Status:                         Whom Acceptance Was Optimal
 Not Retired                             3.9%            9.1%           9.1%         36.3%
 Partially Retired                       13.2            23.9           23.1          63.8
 Completely Retired                      16.6            29.0           37.7          65.7

                                              Percentage of All Potential Recipients
Demographic Group:                            Who Should Delay Benefit Acceptance
 Married Males                          91.9%         91.0%          87.2%           38.1%
 Single Males                            93.6           0               0              0
 Married Females                         55.9          51.1           44.4            40.5
 Single Females                          83.8          83.3           60.2             0

                                               Average Present Value of Delay
Demographic Group:                         Among Those Who Would Gain From Delay
 Married Males                         $7,991      $5,496        $2,684       $1,806
 Single Males                             293         -              -           -
 Married Females                        7,786       7,260         7,161        7,220
 Single Females                         1,778         654             92         -


1. Social Security receipt refers to the previous year in 1992, the previous month in 1994, and
   current receipt in 1996 and 1998.
2. Social Security receipt excludes respondents who currently or previously received SSDI
   disability or SSI before age 65.
3. These numbers understate the fraction of eligible beneficiaries who accept benefits at age 62.
   See Olson (1999).
4. Source: authors’ calculations.



                                                 58
                                                              Table 9

                                     Probits for Social Security Acceptance by Retirement Status

                                                                              Retirement Status

                                              Completely Retired               Partly Retired                Not Retired
                                            Coefficient  t-statistic       Coefficient   t-statistic   Coefficient   t-statistic

Liquidity constraint measure (see note)       -0.0492       -2.91            -0.0708       -1.74          0.0136        0.4
Social security premium ($1,000's)             0.0110        6.26             0.0050        1.55         -0.0030       -0.88
Age
  63                                           0.1052        8.33             0.0760        2.67          0.1461        4.67
  64                                           0.1330       10.26             0.1297        4.29          0.1628        4.21
  65                                           0.1699       12.78             0.1658        5.33          0.3972        7.69
  66                                           0.1649       11.27             0.1777        5.42          0.6266        9.27
  67                                           0.1468        7.14             0.1760        3.32          0.6207        5.42
Female                                        -0.0048       -0.32             0.0133        0.33          0.0395        1.16
Married                                       -0.0179       -1.12            -0.0725       -1.5          -0.1184       -2.56
  Age difference if married                   -0.0014       -0.98            -0.0036       -1.19         -0.0002       -0.07
Race
  Black                                       -0.0940       -5.32            -0.0821       -1.95         -0.0623       -1.94
  Hispanic                                    -0.1101       -4.86            -0.1296       -2.01         -0.1303       -3.22
Fair or poor health                           -0.0374       -2.89            -0.0090       -0.24          0.1380        3.93
  Not available                               -0.1979       -0.96
Education
  Less than high school                        0.0059        0.4             -0.0256       -0.69          0.0625        1.94
  Some college                                 0.0005        0.03            -0.0996       -2.63         -0.0437       -1.42
  Undergraduate degree                        -0.0690       -2.72            -0.1519       -3.15         -0.0508       -1.26
  Graduate work                               -0.1367       -4.94            -0.1779       -3.71         -0.1310       -3.76
Children                                      -0.0154       -0.71             0.2268        3.16          0.0837        1.83

                                                                 59
  Not available                                 0.0256         0.23
Planning Horizon
  Next year                                    -0.0126         -0.97             0.0291         1                0.0906          3.2
  More than ten years                          -0.0166         -0.75            -0.0275        -0.59             0.0796          1.63
  Not available                                -0.0119         -0.46            -0.1266        -1.58             0.0718          1.16
Word recall (number of words)                   0.0061          2.62             0.0074         1.52            -0.0047         -0.99
  Not available                                -0.0049         -0.17             0.0646         1.07            -0.0382         -0.67
Share of lifetime household earnings            0.0671          4.15             0.0157         0.23            -0.2573         -4.51

Pseudo R2                                              0.110                           0.116                            0.185
Number of observations                                 4236                            1031                             1446

1. The probit estimates are the marginal effects on the probability of retirement of a one unit change in the explanatory variable.
2. The liquidity constraint measure is the ratio of non-pension, non-social security wealth to social security wealth.
3. Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                                   60
                                                        Table 10
                                         Sensitivity Tests for Retirement Probit


                                                                           Excluding       Using Self
                                                      Excluding Self        Imputed         Reported    Using Objective
                                     Base Estimates     Employed         Social Security   Retirement     Retirement
Pensions
 Initial Accrual / Annual Earnings      0.0402            0.0430             0.0198         0.0355          0.0441
                                        (3.59)            (3.67)             (1.24)         (3.47)          (3.71)

 Final Accrual / Annual Earnings        -0.0679           -0.0626            -0.0512        -0.0634        -0.0704
                                        (-3.42)           (-3.06)            (-2.38)        (-3.40)        (-3.33)

 Premium Value / Annual Earnings        -0.0202           -0.0163            -0.0215        -0.0147        -0.0134
                                        (-2.17)           (-1.67)            (-1.89)        (-1.71)        (-1.42)

Social Security
 Initial Accrual / Annual Earnings      -0.0077           0.0056             -0.0029        -0.0197        -0.0171
                                        (-0.22)           (0.15)             (-0.07)        (-0.63)        (-0.46)

 Final Accrual / Annual Earnings        -0.0378           -0.0393            -0.0081        0.0451         -0.0303
                                        (-0.88)           (-0.80)            (-0.18)        (1.92)         (-0.71)

 Premium Value / Annual Earnings        -0.0242           -0.0180            -0.0460        -0.0147        -0.0078
                                        (-2.11)           (-1.48)            (-2.81)        (-1.37)        (-0.72)

Number of Observations                   8612              7377               6585           8469            8513

1. Source: authors’ calculations.



                                                           61
                                           Table 11

                 Probits for Leaving Full-Time Work and for Partial Retirement


                                        Leaving Full-Time Work          Partial Retirement

                                         Marginal                     Marginal
                                          Effect      t-statistic      Effect     t-statistic

Measures of earnings:
  Log of annual earnings                  -0.0349       -4.90         -0.0160       -4.09
Pension & social security incentives:
 Initial accrual / annual earnings         0.0271       1.82          -0.0272       -1.98
 Final accrual / annual earnings          -0.0671      -3.20           0.0029        0.25
 Premium value / annual earnings          -0.0283      -3.05          -0.0068       -1.18
Age binary variables:
  51                                      0.0316        1.05           0.0228        1.16
  52                                      0.0061        0.23           0.0040        0.24
  53                                      0.0557        2.31           0.0029        0.19
  54                                      0.0750        3.30           0.0325        2.15
  56                                      0.0765        3.35           0.0473        3.03
  57                                      0.1137        4.96           0.0678        4.23
  58                                      0.1220        5.18           0.0692        4.19
  59                                      0.1679        6.91           0.0605        3.66
  60                                      0.2987       11.58           0.1276        6.79
  61                                      0.3780       13.79           0.1449        7.20
  62                                      0.3508       10.55           0.1273        5.35
  63                                      0.4574       11.36           0.1830        6.05
  64                                      0.5336       10.12           0.2880        6.88
  65                                      0.4224        4.30           0.1385        2.10
Personal characteristics
  Female                                  -0.0170      -1.21          -0.0135       -1.58
  Married                                 -0.0196      -1.09           0.0087        0.83
    Age difference if married             -0.0015      -1.39          -0.0010       -1.58
  Race
    Black                                  0.0000       0.00           0.0000        0.00
    Hispanic                              -0.0241       1.36           0.0028        0.25
  Fair or Poor Health                      0.1061       7.27          -0.0035       -0.42
  Education
    Less than high school                  0.0001       0.00          -0.0141       -1.92
    Some college                          -0.0066      -0.52           0.0040        0.54
    Undergraduate degree                  -0.0060      -0.35          -0.0041       -0.41

                                              62
    Graduate work                           -0.0023            -0.14        0.0031             0.30
  Children                                   0.0053             0.28       -0.0056            -0.47
  Planning horizon
    Next year                               -0.0009        -0.09           -0.0054            -0.83
    More than ten years                      0.0220         1.27            0.0116             1.13
    Not available                           -0.0390        -1.48           -0.0473            -3.60
  Word recall (number of words)              0.0011         0.64            0.0011             1.10
    Not available                            0.0039         0.13            0.0277             1.39
  Share of lifetime household earnings      -0.0926        -3.59           -0.0128            -0.84
Job Characteristics
  Self employed                              0.0184            1.08        0.0390          3.68
    Not available                            0.8118                        0.9371         22.77
  Years of service                           0.0019            4.30        0.0002          0.57
    Not available                            0.3881            3.00        0.1012          1.37
  Industry:
    Manufacturing                           -0.0071        -0.49           -0.0201            -2.31
    Public administration                    0.0408         1.96            0.0220             1.65
  Occupation:
    Management or professional               0.0171         1.23            0.0152         1.81
    White collar                             0.0094         0.79            0.0123         1.71
  Covered by union                           0.0299         2.47            0.0141         1.79
    Not available                            0.0347         0.24           -0.0688        23.09
  Covered by pension                        -0.0049        -0.38           -0.0266        -3.39
    Not available                           -0.2030       -12.94           -0.0636        23.49
  Firm with more than 100 employees          0.0055         0.39           -0.0097         1.19
    Not available                            0.0318         1.55            0.0016         0.15
  Availability of reduced hours              0.0134         0.95            0.0354         3.99
  Laid off from initial job                  0.1980         8.67            0.0413         3.07

Pseudo R2                                             0.1011                         0.0778
Number of Observations                                 8612                           8612

1. The probit estimates are the marginal effects on the probability of retirement of a one unit
change in the explanatory variable.
2. Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                 63
                                           References
        Anderson, Patricia, Alan Gustman and Thomas Steinmeier. 1999. “Trends in Labor
Force Participation and Retirement: Some Evidence on the Role of Pensions and Social Security
in the 1970's and 1980's”. Journal of Labor Economics 17(4), pt. 1, October: 757-783.
        Blinder, Alan S., Roger H. Gordon and Donald E. Wise. 1980. “Reconsidering the Work
Disincentive Effects of Social Security”. National Tax Journal 33(4): 431-442.
        Clark, Robert L. and Stephan F. Gohman. 1983. “Retirement and the Acceptance of
Social Security Benefits”, National Tax Journal 36(4): 529-534.
        Coile, Courtney, Peter Diamond, Jonathan Gruber and Alain Jousten. 1999. “Delays in
Claiming Social Security Benefits”. NBER Working Paper 7318. August
        Coile, Courtney and Jonathan Gruber. 1999. “Social Security and Retirement”. Paper
presented at Summer Institute, National Bureau of Economic Research.
        _______________. Forthcoming. “Social Security Incentives for Retirement”, in David
A. Wise, editor. What’s New in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman. 1984. “Individual Retirement and Savings
Behavior”. Journal of Public Economics 23: 81-114.
        Feldstein, Martin and Andrew Samwick. 1992. “Social Security and Marginal Tax
Rates”. National Tax Journal 45: 1-22.
        Gale, William G. 1998. “The Effects of Pensions on Wealth: A Re-evaluation of Theory
and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 106: 706-723.
        Gustman, Alan L. and F. Thomas Juster. 1996. "Income And Wealth Of Older American
Households: Modeling Issues For Public Policy Analysis". In Hanushek and Maritato, editors,
Assessing Knowledge of Retirement Behavior. National Academy Press: 11-60.
        Gustman, Alan L., Olivia S. Mitchell, and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1995. “Retirement
Measures in the Health and Retirement Study”. Journal of Human Resources 30, Supplement:
S57 to S83.
        Gustman, Alan L., Olivia S. Mitchell, Andrew A. Samwick, and Thomas L. Steinmeier.
1999. "Pension and Social Security Wealth In The Health And Retirement Study". In J. Smith
and R. Willis, editors. Wealth, Work and Health, Innovations in Measurement in the Social
Sciences. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press: 150-207.
        Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1984. “Partial Retirement and the Analysis
of Retirement Behavior,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 37(3): 403-415.
        ________________. 1989. “An Analysis of Pension Benefit Formulas, Pension Wealth
and Incentives from Pensions”. Research in Labor Economics (10): 53-106.
        ________________. 1991. "Changing Social Security Rules For Workers Over 65:
Proposed Policies And Their Effects", Industrial And Labor Relations Review 44(4): 733-745.
        ________________. 1993. "Pension Portability And Labor Mobility: Evidence From
The Survey Of Income And Program Participation", Journal of Public Economics 50: 299-323.
        ________________. 1995. Pension Incentives and Job Mobility, Kalamazoo, MI:
Upjohn.
        ________________. 1998. “Privatizing Social Security: First-Round Effects of a
Generic, Voluntary, Privatized U.S. Social Security System”. In Martin Feldstein, editor.
Privatizing Social Security. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 313-357.
        ________________. 1999 . "Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis with Data From

                                             64
the Health and Retirement Study". In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
50: 271-326.
        ________________. 2000. “Employer-provided Pension Data in the NLS Mature
Women’s Survey and in the Health and Retirement Study”. In Research in Labor Economics,
19: 215-252.
        ________________. 2001a. “What People Don’t Know About Their Pensions and Social
Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data From the Health and Retirement Study”. In William G.
Gale, John B. Shoven and Mark J. Warshawsky, editors, Public Policies and Private Pensions.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
        ________________. 2001b. “Retirement Outcomes in the Health and Retirement Study”.
Social Security Bulletin, Perspectives 64(4).
        Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner and Stephen P. Zeldes. 1995. "Precautionary
Saving and Social Insurance”. Journal of Political Economy 103:360-99.
        Ippolito, Richard A. 1986. Pensions, Economics and Public Policy. Homewood,
Ill.:Dow Jones-Irwin, for the Pension Research Council.
        Kahn, James A. 1988. “Social Security, Liquidity, and Early Retirement”. Journal of
Public Economics 35: 97-117.
        Lazear, Edward P. and Robert L. Moore. 1988. “Pensions and Mobility”. In Pensions in
the U.S. Economy, edited by Zvi Bodie, John Shoven, and David Wise. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 163-188.
        Lumsdaine, Robin L. 1996. “Factors Affecting Labor Supply Decisions and Retirement
Income”. In Eric A. Hanushek and Nancy Maritato, editors, Assessing Knowledge of Retirement
Behavior. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 61-115.
        Lumsdaine, Robin L. and Olivia S. Mitchell. 1999. “New Developments in the
Economic Analysis of Retirement”. In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors. Handbook of
Labor Economics. Amsterdam, Holland: 3261-3308.
        Olson, Janice A. 1999. “Who is “62 Enough”? Identifying Respondents eligible for
Social Security Early Retirement Benefits in the Health and Retirement Study”. Social Security
Bulletin 62(3): 51-56.
        Rust, John and Christopher Phelan. 1997. "How Social Security and Medicare Affect
Retirement Behavior". Econometrica 65(4): 781-831.
        Stock, James and David Wise. 1990a. “Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and
Retirement,” Econometrica 58(5): 1151-1180.
        _______________. 1990b. “The Pension Inducement to Retire: An Option Value
Analysis”. In David A. Wise, Editor, Issues in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 205-224.




                                             65
                                             Appendix

                                       Partial List of Variables



                                        Variable Definitions

Wealth                                         Non-pension, non-social security wealth as of 1992
Earnings                                       1992 earnings (amounts < $100 disregarded)
Social security value                          Household social security wealth, assuming spouse
                                               works to expected retirement age
Pension value                                  Pension value as of 1992
Married                                        Binary variable for being married in the initial year
Health                                         Binary variable for fair/poor health in initial year
Children                                       Binary variable for at least one child
Word recall                                    Number of words recalled in second attempt
Share of lifetime household earnings           Respondents share of sum of lifetime earnings of
                                               respondent and spouse (as of 1992)
Reduced hours                                  Binary variable if respondent can reduce hours in
                                               the current job
Laid off from initial job                      Binary variable if respondent was laid off from
                                               initial job during the period




                                                 66
