                                   ! " #$!%     $




                                                      


                                              
                                              
                                             


                                              &'('
                                    )**+++, * *+&'('



                        !$"! "-"!".$   
                                 /010.  23
                                    , 4.0'/5&
                                        

            ! " #
   $ % &"   '( )*+ !,-   *./%.)/%0- 1 *./%.0%2/0-  +
  3 % %4    5  672700)"        89
    +             :; 4      "          "5 
 77     %% % 7 #7 7  7 %%9    < 
 #= >?% "            #%9
,  $ @ A  5A     B  <
"  >  ( $( , #(C, A# = 
        @&$' >$      
! " #   %9 D E(1       %4" 1  
        #  @&   $  %


F5#$  @%    4= %,  " %
   1 1      #5E  1      "  
     F   "   %
   
  4   
!   !&'('
'00/
6!%/'04%/(0


                                            $%#%


       2272 3  2889,77   , 
       $2 :2       74
 :272 3  ;2/17: 22 :  3: 
8 2<'0=>8 272 3  2  2 ,; ,:
;2/17: 8 ,: 283  3-48 2  
 , 2  2:82 + ;23 77
 +   :2 :  +3  <882,+,7
7  8 :2 3 2  :2  +2>+




                                        
 3  2                               # %   28.  
4.0'/?54                                  !+3:
                                                      '00/    
                                                      3 4$?0'0&4 

 
  822
 3 3:
 , 4.0'/5&4 
 @&$
                                             THE VALUE SPREAD

      The ratio of book value to market value of common equity (i.e., the book-to-market ratio) is an
important determinant of the cross-section of average equity returns. Firms with high book-to-market ratios
have higher average returns than firms with low book-to-market ratios [Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein
(1985), Fama and French (1992), and others]. Thus the book-to-market ratios have information concerning
subsequent expected returns. Simultaneously, differences in firms’ book-to-market ratios are also related to
differences in future expected cash-flow and earnings growth as well as future profitability. Low-book-to-
market firms grow faster and are persistently more profitable than high-book-to-market firms. Intuitively,
both expected returns and expected growth play a role in determining the market price and thus the book-to-
market ratio.
      We decompose the cross-sectional variance of firms’ book-to-market ratios using a long (1937-1997)
U.S. panel and a shorter (1982-1998) international panel. Our variance decomposition shows what fraction
of the cross-sectional dispersion in the book-to-market ratios is caused by variation in expected returns and
what fraction by variation in expected cash flows.          Provided that book-to-market does not behave
explosively, an approximate identity equates the current book-to-market ratio with an infinite discounted
sum of future stock returns and profitability. This identity implies that a low current book-to-market ratio
has to be justified by either high expected future profitability or low expected future returns. Therefore, to a
very accurate approximation, all cross-sectional variation in the book-to-market ratios must necessarily be
accounted for by cross-sectional variation in expected long-horizon stock returns and/or profitability.
      The observation that the cross-sectional variation in the book-to-market ratios is related to cross-
sectional variation in future profitability is not new. For example, Fama and French (1995) show that a high
book-to-market ratio signals persistent poor earnings and profitability and a low book-to-market ratio signals
strong earnings and profitability. The novel part of our analysis is that by using a present-value model we
are able to measure exactly how much the cross-sectional variation in expected profitability contributes to
the cross-sectional variation in firms' book-to-market ratios. Therefore, our analysis is able to quantitatively,
not just qualitatively, comment on the source of the heterogeneity in valuation ratios across firms.
      Our first and most basic finding is easily summarized. We find that transitory variation in 15-year
expected returns is responsible for only a small fraction of the cross-sectional book-to-market variance. In
the long U.S. panel, approximately 80% of the unconditional cross-sectional variance of the book-to-market
ratios can be explained by expected future 15-year profitability and persistence of valuation levels, while
just 20% can be explained by transitory variation in expected returns. This fraction appears stable across
time and across types of stocks.
      It is interesting to relate our basic cross-sectional result to aggregate time-series results in the
previous literature. Earlier studies [Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane (1992), Vuolteenaho (2000),
and others] examine the time series of aggregate scaled-price measures to quantify the nature of the
information they contain. These papers find that the substantial majority of the information in the time
series of scaled prices is about expected returns, and relatively little is about cash flows. For example,
Vuolteenaho (2000) finds that almost all of the time-series variation in the aggregate book-to-market ratio is
due to expected stock returns and approximately none due to expected profitability. Our observation that
the cross-section of individual stocks looks very different from aggregate indices in this regard is interesting
in its own right but may also be relevant for the interpretation of the previous aggregate studies. If the cross-
section of valuation ratios is largely driven by rational cash-flow expectations, the conclusion that the
aggregate valuation ratios are exclusively driven by irrational sentiment is perhaps less plausible.
      Our results also suggest that most of a growth stock’s atypical valuation is simply due to high
expected profitability rather than due to that stock having a low expected return. For example, Cisco
Systems and General Motors have approximately the same book value (Cisco $29.7 vs. GM $31.5 billion)
but Cisco has a far greater market value (Cisco $175.6 vs. GM $31.3 billion). According to our results,
most of the difference is because equity on Cisco’s books is expected to be more productive than that on
GM’s.1 However, some reversion toward book value in the form of higher relative stock returns for GM is
to be expected.
      Note that our basic decomposition is silent as to whether the information we measure in a firm's
book-to-market ratio concerning subsequent returns is due to risk or mispricing. In the above example, for
example, the higher expected equity returns for GM relative to Cisco may or may not be due to mispricing
of either stock; the difference may be risk-related. However, even if one takes the extreme stand and
characterizes the expected-return component of book-to-market as a market-inefficiency phenomenon, our


                                                       2
evidence suggests that at most about 20% of the variation in valuation ratios across firms can be linked to
capital-market inefficiencies. Most of that variation represents differences in expected future profitability,
heterogeneity that is considerably less controversial.
       We refine our basic result by extending our analysis of the cross-sectional heterogeneity of valuation
ratios. First, we replicate our measurements using a shorter international panel (1982-98, 23 countries
excluding the United States). While the short time dimension of our international sample reduces the
statistical precision of our estimates, the international point estimates support the conclusions drawn from
the U.S. sample. At the five-year horizon, approximately 41% of the variation in the country-adjusted book-
to-market ratios can be allocated to expected country-adjusted profitability, 14% to expected country-
adjusted stock returns, and the remaining 47% to persistence of the country-adjusted book-to-market ratios.
The fact that we obtain similar point estimates from a largely independent sample lends credibility to our
basic result.
       Second, in order to continue to study the relation between the results at different levels of
aggregation, we further split the information in book-to-market concerning future returns and future
profitability into intra- and inter-industry components. We find that the book-to-market effect in returns is
mostly an intra-industry effect. This confirms evidence at the monthly horizon presented by Cohen and
Polk (1999), Lewellen (1999), Asness, Porter, and Stevens (2000). More importantly, these results show
that controlling for industry effects does not alter our variance decomposition results.
       Third, we document statistically strong results concerning the predictability of returns on strategies
that go long value stocks and short growth stocks. The above variance-decomposition results suggest that
the difference in average returns between value and growth stocks may vary through time with the value
spread (i.e., the book-to-market ratio of a typical value stock minus that of a typical growth stock). In other
words, if the variance decomposition is constant over time with a non-trivial portion of the variance
allocated to expected returns, the level of the value spread should predict returns on value minus growth
strategies. Stocks whose book equity is cheap should have especially high expected returns at times when
their book equity is especially cheap.
       We test this hypothesis on the Fama-French (1993) HML portfolio and find that the HML value
spread indeed has strong predictive power for HML returns, evidence that the expected return on the HML
portfolio varies over time. Our expected-return estimates suggest that the expected return on HML was zero


                                                         3
or negative in the periods 1948-53 and 1977-1979. Point estimates obtained from an international analysis
are consistent with the U.S. HML-predictability results. Our findings are also consistent with those of
Asness, Friedman, Krail, and Liew (2000) who examine the cross-section of scaled-price measures and
returns on scaled-price portfolios. Using data from a relatively recent period (1982-1999) and a sample of
U.S. stocks listed on I/B/E/S, they find that value spreads and spreads in projected earnings growth have
predictive power for the time-series of monthly returns on value versus growth strategies.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the data. Section II presents
the variance-decomposition framework and results. Section III concentrates on predicting value-minus-
growth returns. Section IV concludes.


                                                   I.   Data

A.   U.S. panel data set
       The basic U.S. data come from the merger of three databases. The first one of these, the Center for
Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) monthly stock file, contains monthly prices, shares outstanding,
dividends and returns for NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks. The second database, the COMPUSTAT
annual research file, contains the relevant accounting information for most publicly traded US stocks. The
COMPUSTAT accounting information is supplemented by the third database, Moody’s book equity
information collected by Davis, Fama, and French (2000).2 The basic merged data covers the period 1928-
1997, but we only include the period 1937-1997 in our long U.S. panel. (We also obtain our main stated
results in the data set that includes the early years.) In the final sample, all variables are of annual frequency
and the panel contains 192,661 firm-years. Appendix 1 contains detailed data definitions.
       Although the basic data set has some data as early as year 1928, we begin our long U.S. panel data set
at the end of year 1937 in order to ensure a meaningful quantitative interpretation of the book-to-market and
profitability series. The logic behind this choice is based on disclosure regulation. Before the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, there was essentially no regulation to ensure the flow of accurate and systematic
accounting information. Among other things, the act prescribes specific annual and periodic reporting and
record-keeping requirements for these companies. The companies required to file reports with the SEC must
also "make and keep books, records, and accounts, which, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
the transactions and disposition of the assets of the issuer.” In addition, the legislation introduces the



                                                        4
concept of “an independent public or certified accountant” to certify financial statements and imposes
statutory liabilities on accountants.
          While the value-relevant information may have been disclosed via other channels, it is clear that
interpreting the pre-1934 and post-1934 book-to-market ratios as having similar information content would
be unrealistic. After studying the implementation of the act, we also decided to exclude the 1934-37 data
segment. This period could reasonably be characterized as an initial enforcement period, after which
reporting conventions have converged to their steady states.3

B.   International panel data set
          In addition to the long U.S. panel, we also construct a shorter international panel. The annual
international panel is constructed from a monthly data set created by Grantham, Mayo, Van Otterloo & Co.
(GMO). GMO’s monthly data set is in turn constructed from the Morgan Stanley Capital International data
and various real-time data sources. The international panel spans the period 1982-98. The number of
countries in the data set begins at 19 and ends at 22, and 23 different countries are included in the panel at
various points of time. U.S. data are not included. The international panel contains 27,913 firm-years.


               II. Decomposing the cross-sectional variance of firms’ book-to-market ratios
          It is well known that firms’ book-to-market (BE/ME) ratios describe cross-sectional variation in
returns and profitability. For example, Fama and French (1995) show that value stocks typically have
higher stock returns and lower profitability than growth stocks. However, calculating how each of these two
effects contribute to the cross-sectional spread in firms' BE/ME ratios requires a quantitative framework.
We employ Vuolteenaho’s (2000) return-profitability model to decompose the cross-sectional variance of
BE/ME ratios into three components: 1) covariance of future market-adjusted stock returns with past
market-adjusted BE/ME ratios, 2) covariance of future market-adjusted profitability (i.e., accounting return
on equity – ROE) with past market-adjusted BE/ME ratios, and 3) persistence of market-adjusted BE/ME
ratios.
          The following intuition underlies the decomposition. Suppose two firms (neither one of which pays
dividends or issues equity) have different BE/ME ratios. Over time, this value spread can close by either
high BE/ME firms experiencing higher stock returns than low BE/ME firms or by high BE/ME firms being
less profitable and growing their book equity slower than the low BE/ME firms. On the one hand, if the



                                                      5
spread closes via stock returns, the covariance of past relative BE/ME ratios and future relative returns is
positive. On the other hand, if the spread closes via profitability, the covariance of past relative BE/ME
ratios and future relative profitability is negative. There is also a third possibility – the spread may not close
completely. In this case, the difference in BE/ME ratios persists, and the covariance of past and future
relative BE/ME ratios is high.

A.   Approximate model of the book-to-market ratio
       To derive Vuolteenaho’s (2000) return-profitability model necessitates three specific assumptions.
First, because the model is stated in terms of logarithms, one must assume book value, BE, market value,
ME, and dividends, D, are strictly positive. Although this assumption is not necessarily satisfied for all
individual firms, it is almost surely satisfied for the BE/ME-sorted portfolios we use in our tests. Second,
one must assume firms' log BE/ME ratios to be stationary, even though both log book and market equity
series have an integrated component. Third, we assume that earnings, dividends, and book equity series
satisfy the clean-surplus relation. 4 The clean-surplus relation ties the income statement and balance sheet
dynamics together. In that relation, earnings, dividends, and book equity satisfy:
                                             BE t − BE t −1 = X t − Dt                                        (1)

– book value today equals book value last year plus earnings ( X t ) less (net) dividends.
       The reported earnings, dividends, and book values do not always strictly adhere to the above clean-

surplus relation. In order to exactly satisfy this assumption in our sample, we define our earnings series as

the sum of dividends and the change in book equity. This approach is partly dictated by necessity (the early

data consists of book-equity series but does not contain earnings).5

       Accounting and stock returns remain to be defined. Let rt denote the log stock return and et the log

clean-surplus accounting return on equity, defined as


                                                        ∆ME t + Dt      
                                           rt ≡ log1 +                                                    (2)
                                                          ME t −1        

                                                        ∆BE t + Dt      
                                           et ≡ log1 +                                                    (3)
                                                          BE t −1        

Substituting the log dividend-growth rate, ∆d t , the log dividend-price ratio, δ t , and the log dividend-to-
book-equity ratio, γ t ≡ d t − bt , to the return definitions (2) and (3) yields



                                                         6
                                         rt = log(exp(−δ t ) + 1) + ∆d t + δ t −1                          (4)

                                         et = log(exp(−γ t ) + 1) + ∆d t + γ t −1 .                        (5)

Finally, we denote the log BE/ME ratio by θ t :
                                                    θ t = log(BE t ME t )                                  (6)

      An inconvenient nonlinear law describes the evolution of a firm's BE/ME ratio if that firm pays
dividends. However, a linear model can do a good job of approximating the nonlinear evolution of
θ t = log(BE t ME t )
                                                  et − rt = ρθ t − θ t −1 + κ t                            (7)

where ρ is a parameter, κ t approximation error, and ρ < 1 if the firms pay any dividends and ρ = 1 if the
firms do not. This approximation can be justified by the following logic. We approximate both stock and
accounting returns by a first order Taylor series approximation, choosing the same expansion point:
                         rt = log(exp(−δ t ) + 1) + ∆d t + δ t −1 ≈ α − ρδ t + ∆d t + δ t −1               (8)

                         et = log(exp(−γ t ) + 1) + ∆d t + γ t −1 ≈ α − ργ t + ∆d t + γ t −1               (9)

Subtracting (9) from (8) yields the linearized accounting identity (7).
      Iterating (7) forward yields the first result.6 Using the convenient linear form of equation (7) it is
possible to express the BE/ME ratio as an infinite discounted sum of future profitability and stock returns:
                                     N                 N                 N
                            θ t −1 = ∑ ρ j rt + j − ∑ ρ j et + j + ∑ ρ j κ t + j + ρ N +1θ t + N ,        (10)
                                     j =0              j =0              j =0



If the BE/ME ratio is well behaved and ρ < 1 , the last term of (10) converges to zero as N → ∞ :
                                              ∞               ∞                 ∞
                                   θ t −1 = ∑ ρ j rt +i − ∑ ρ j et + j + ∑ ρ j κ t + j .                  (11)
                                             j =0             j =0              j =0



This approximate model for a firm's BE/ME provides the foundation for our variance decomposition.

B.   Cross-sectional variance decomposition
      If all firms have stationary BE/ME ratios with the same unconditional mean, the cross-sectional
variance of firms' log BE/ME ratios can be decomposed into two parts: predictability of market-adjusted
stock returns and predictability of market-adjusted returns on equity. In other words, if there is cross-
sectional spread in log BE/ME ratios, current relative log BE/ME ratios must covary with future relative log
stock returns and/or future relative log profitability. In the sections that follow, we will typically refer to
these variables without the relative, market-adjusted, or log modifier for ease of description. Similarly, we


                                                                     7
will use “unconditional variance” of BE/MEs to refer to the unconditional variance of cross-sectionally
demeaned BE/MEs; the true unconditional variance would include time variation in the cross-sectional
mean of BE/MEs.
                                                                              ~
      To derive the variance decomposition, we multiply both sides of (12) by θ t −1 , drop the approximation
error, and take unconditional expectations:

                                                                          [                ]                         [             ]
                                            ∞                           ∞
                                      ~                        ~                           ~
                                  var(θ ) ≈ ∑ ρ j cov r~t + j ,θ t −1 − ∑ ρ j cov e~t + j ,θ t −1                                                       (13)
                                                       j =0                                        j =0



Since all firms are assumed to have stationary BE/ME ratios with equal unconditional expectations, the third
term, corresponding to the BE/ME ratio far into the future, drops out, even if ρ = 1 . Equation (13) shows
that (under the maintained assumptions) the unconditional cross-sectional variance of firms’ BE/ME ratios
is due to cross-sectional covariance of future stock and/or accounting relative returns with past BE/ME
                                                                                                   ~
ratios. Above, market-adjusted quantities are denoted by tildes. It is important to note that var(θ ) in
equation (13) corresponds to the average squared market-adjusted BE/ME ratio, and that this variance
metric is thus best interpreted as the typical cross-sectional dispersion in BE/MEs.
      Due to the infinite sums, implementing the above variance decomposition (13) requires an assumed
auxiliary statistical model and the assumption of equal long-run BE/ME ratios for all firms. If one is
unwilling to make such assumptions, a different variance decomposition can be used. The infinite sums in
(13) can be replaced with finite sums if an additional term is included. Working with equation (10) without
taking the limit N → ∞ and repeating the above steps yields

                                                   [                  ]                        [                 ]                     [            ]
                            N                           N
                      ~                        ~                           ~                   ~        ~
                  var(θ ) ≈ ∑ ρ j cov r~t + j ,θ t −1 − ∑ ρ j cov e~t + j ,θ t −1 + ρ N +1 cov θ t + N ,θ t −1                                          (14)
                                 j =0                                         j =0



Compared to equation (13), equation (14) has an additional term: The last term of (14) is a catchall
predictability term that captures the profitability and stock-return predictability beyond horizon N, as well as
cross-sectional heterogeneity of the mean BE/ME ratios.
      A relative variance decomposition may be easier to interpret. Assuming that the cross-sectional
variance of the BE/ME ratios is not zero, one can divide both sides of equation (14) by the unconditional
BE/ME variance:

                                             [                ]                            [               ]
                          N                                           N
                                                     ~                                            ~
                         ∑ρ
                          j =0
                                   j
                                        cov r~t + j ,θ t −1           ∑ρ
                                                                      j =0
                                                                                 j
                                                                                     cov e~t + j ,θ t −1                      ~
                                                                                                                               [       ~
                                                                                                                          cov θ t + N ,θ t −1   ]
                    1≈                        ~                   −                        ~                   + ρ N +1              ~                  (15)
                                        var(θ )                                      var(θ )                                 var(θ )



                                                                                       8
The three terms in (15) represent the fraction of variance attributable to the three sources. The relative
variance decomposition is particularly easy to interpret – each component in (15) corresponds to a simple
regression coefficient. The predictive regression coefficient of long-horizon returns less the predictive
regression coefficient of long-horizon profitability plus a measure of the persistence of BE/ME spread must
be equal to one.
          Past research that decomposes the time-series variance of aggregate portfolios often uses vector
autoregressions (VARs) instead of long-horizon regressions. In our cross-sectional application, the long-
horizon regression methodology is preferable to the more common VAR methodology. The difficulty with
the VAR methodology arises from rebalancing effects. Appendix 2 discusses this problem in more detail.

C.   Cross-sectional variance-decomposition results using the U.S. panel
      To implement the cross-sectional variance decomposition, each year we create 40 value-weight
portfolios of stocks by sorting on BE/ME and track the subsequent stock returns, profitability, and book-to-
market ratios of these portfolios. For example, in 1997 (the last year of the U.S. sample) the low BE/ME
portfolio has a value-weight average BE/ME of .04, while the highest portfolio is at 2.82. The mean
portfolio BE/ME is .62, while the standard deviation across portfolios is .54. Dispersion in BE/ME has
risen and fallen many times over the years. For 1987 the standard deviation (.55) is almost identical to the
1997 value, but for 1991 it is more than twice as high (1.18).
      Equation (15) implies that the coefficients in the following three separate, forward-looking
regressions measure the percentage of information in a firm’s BE/ME ratio concerning aspects of the firm's
future:
                                     N −1
                                                                          ~
                                    ∑ρ
                                     j =0
                                                j   ~
                                                    rt + j ,i = b(~
                                                                  r , N ) θ t −1,i + ε ( r~, N , i)
                                     N −1
                                                                        ~
                                    ∑ρ
                                     j =0
                                                j
                                                    e~t + j = b(e~, N ) θ t −1,i + ε (e~, N , i )      (16)
                                            ~                              ~           ~
                                     ρ Nθ t + N −1 = b(~
                                                       r , N ) θ t −1,i + ε (θ , N , i)

We estimate these coefficients using the 40 BE/ME-sorted portfolios and report the combined results in
Table 1 Panel A. Thus, we regress the future returns, profitabilities, and book-to-market ratios for the 40
buy-and-hold portfolios on the portfolios’ current book-to-market ratios. As we are interested in a cross-
                                                                                                ~
sectional variance decomposition, all variables are cross-sectionally demeaned. For example, θ t ,i is the
aggregate book equity of the stocks in portfolio i in the end of year t divided by the portfolio’s aggregate


                                                                       9
market value less the average of these ratios across the 40 portfolios in the end of year t. In the system of
                                                                   ~
regressions described in equation (16), b(~
                                          r , N ) − b( ~
                                                       e , N ) + b(θ , N ) ≈ 1 .
         The N=1 row of the table breaks the BE/ME ratio into information about future 1-year returns, about

future 1-year ROE, and about the future 1-year-ahead BE/ME ratios. The split is 3% for future returns, 15%

for future profitability, and 83% for persistence in BE/ME ratios. At one-year horizon, the BE/ME ratio

predicts all three variables with the expected signs. Because BE/ME ratios are quite persistent, the largest

component of the unconditional variance of BE/ME ratios is due to covariance with next year’s BE/ME

ratio.

         Of course, next year’s BE/ME ratio also has information about future returns and ROEs beyond one

year. Subsequent rows of the table exploit this by looking further ahead, to 2, 3, 5, 10 and 15 years. Figure

1 graphs these coefficients as a function of the forecast horizon. 20% of BE/ME information is about 15-

year returns, 58% about 15-year profitabilities. The remaining 26% of the information is about 15-year-

forward BE/ME ratios, a residual component we will refer to as the persistent component of the BE/ME

ratios. The stationarity and homogeneity assumptions would guarantee that even the persistent component

is informative about future returns and profitability beyond 15 years. Given the facts about the first 15 years

(i.e., the return coefficients level at 20% while profitability coefficients continue to increase as a function of

N), it seems safe to assume that most of the remaining information in the persistent component of BE/ME

ratios concerns cash flows and not returns.

         Our general interpretation of these regression results in Table 1 Panel A is thus as follows. Most of

the information in the BE/ME ratios of individual firms is about future profitability. About 20% of cross-

sectional differences in BE/ME ratios can be attributed to differences in expected returns. Differences in

expectations of future profitability explain the other 80%.

         Our procedure imposes the discount coefficient rho (ρ) to be constant across firms. Because long-run

dividend yields and pay-out ratios may vary systematically with BE/ME ratios, the assumption of a constant

discount coefficient may lead to a poor approximation. Fortunately, our regressions provide a natural way

to evaluate the effect of the approximation error on the variance-decomposition results. Repeating the

derivations in equations (10)-(15) and carrying the approximation error along shows that the variance
                                                                                ~
component due to the approximation error equals 1 − b(~ r , N ) + b(e~, N ) − b(θ , N ) . The approximation
error’s share of the unconditional variance is thus 0.01% at the one-year horizon and -4.74% at the 15-year


                                                       10
horizon. These computations indicate that the error in the constant-rho linear approximation does not

materially affect our results.

       Table 1 Panel A also reports the standard errors for the variance decomposition. Although we use

regression coefficient point estimates obtained using pooled OLS, the usual OLS standard errors are likely

to be significantly understated.     The problem with OLS standard errors arises from two well-known

sources. First, the regression residuals may be correlated in the cross-section.    If this correlation is related

to the explanatory variables, the standard errors are not valid. Second, because we use overlapping

dependent variables, the regression residuals are likely to be autocorrelated. A more general and precise

statement of these problems is that the covariance matrix of the pooled regression errors is not proportional

to an identity matrix. In order to calculate appropriate standard errors that account for correlation of the

residuals both over time and in the cross-section, we adapt Rogers’s (1983, 1993) standard-error formulas to

our regressions. Appendix 3 contains the details of these calculations.

       Not surprisingly, the statistical evidence that the past BE/ME ratios predict future BE/MEs is

overwhelming, as t-statistics in the last column are uniformly high. Predictions of future BE/MEs start out

at t-statistics above 70 and remain above 2.0 even 15 years out. There is a high degree of persistence in

firms’ BE/ME ratios.

       The ability of BE/ME to predict profitability at longer horizons is also very convincing. The t-

statistics in the early years range from 3 to 11, and even toward the 15-year mark stay above 2.0. The

reduction in statistical significance results from an increase in the standard errors as we look farther into the

future. We suspect that this is mainly due to the longer prediction horizon generating a smaller number of

independent observations in our sample.

       This problem is particularly severe in the prediction of returns, especially for horizons longer than

three years. Although the coefficients on future expected returns grow with the horizon, the standard errors

grow even faster and as a consequence the t-statistics fall below 2.0 in the later years. Because we use long-

horizon regressions and compute corrected standard errors, we cannot reject the hypothesis that none of the

BE/ME variance is due to expected returns at conventional levels for the 15-year horizon specification (the

associated t-statistic is 1.82). This is consistent with our conclusion that, in the cross-section, firms’ BE/ME

ratios are mainly driven by expected profitability, not expected returns.




                                                       11
D.   Cross-sectional variance-decomposition results using the international panel
          Table 2 Panel A estimates the system of regression equations (16) using the international panel.

Again, the N=1 row of the table breaks the BE/ME ratio into information concerning the future 1-year

returns, future 1-year ROE, and future 1-year-ahead BE/ME ratios. The split is again close to 3% for future

returns. In the international panel, the remaining portion contains less information about future profitability

(11%) and more about persistence in BE/MEs (85%).

          As before, we look further ahead. However, data availability limits our long-horizon estimates to 2,

3, and 5 years. After 5 years, the precision of the variance-decomposition estimates and the accuracy of the

asymptotic standard errors decrease dramatically. 18% of BE/ME information is about 5-year returns, 33%

about 5-year profitabilities. The remaining 49% of the information is about the 5-year-forward BE/ME

ratios.

          One might argue that a portion of the cross-sectional variance of the unadjusted BE/ME ratios is due

to permanent differences in accounting measures across countries. This argument suggests that once this

noise due to accounting standards is removed, the country-adjusted BE/ME should contain a higher

percentage of information concerning returns and/or transitory profitability. Therefore, we refine our

variance decomposition of Panel A by adjusting each variable (BE/ME, return, and profitability) by

subtracting the appropriate value-weight country measure.

          However, the results (reported in Panel B) are quite similar to the unadjusted decomposition. In fact,

for the adjusted data, only 14% of the cross-sectional variance of country-adjusted BE/ME is due to cross-

sectional differences in expected returns. As with the unadjusted results, virtually half of the cross-sectional

variance is due to persistence in country-adjusted BE/ME.

          As mentioned before, given the stationarity and homogeneity assumptions, the persistent component

should be informative about future returns and profitability beyond 5 years. This fact combined with our

data limitations in the international panel make measurement of the percentage of cross-sectional

differences in the BE/ME ratios attributable to differences in expected returns more difficult. Still, it seems

safe to say that, as in the domestic results, most of the information in the BE/ME ratios of individual firms is

about future profitability. While these international results are noisier, we interpret them as supporting our

main results obtained from the U.S. data.




                                                        12
E.   U.S. intra-industry results
      This section examines the role of industry in the pieces of information contained in the BE/ME ratios.

We are interested in two industry-related phenomena. First, we decompose the cross-sectional variance of

the industry-adjusted BE/ME ratios. This decomposition answers the question: to what extent is within-

industry variation of the BE/ME ratios driven by within-industry variation in expected profitability and/or

returns?   Second, we decompose the variance of raw (i.e., not industry-adjusted) BE/MEs into six

components by further separating the profitability, return, and BE/ME-persistence components of Table 1

Panel A into inter- and intra-industry parts. This decomposition shows whether inter-industry or intra-

industry phenomena are the main drivers of the cross-section of raw BE/MEs.

      Table 1 Panel B decomposes the variance of intra-industry BE/MEs using Fama-French (1996)

industry classifications. Just as persistent differences in accounting standards across countries might

introduce noise to comparisons of BE/ME among stocks of different nations, similarly persistent differences

in accounting standards across U.S. industries could cause persistent BE/ME differences. Such differences

in industry BE/ME would be unrelated to near-term predictability of either profitability or returns. In

section II.C’s decomposition, (Table 1 Panel A) we sort firms into 40 portfolios based on their raw BE/ME

ratio. But in Panel B we sort stocks into portfolios based on intra-industry BE/ME. Intra-industry BE/ME

is defined as the difference between a firm’s BE/ME and the value-weight average BE/ME of the industry

the firm is in. Thus the test assets for Table 1 Panel B are portfolios that are more industry-balanced than

those in Table 1 Panel A as every industry is likely to have firms that are high, medium, and low in their

industry-relative BE/ME ratio.

      We find that the importance of future return, ROE, and BE/ME in explaining current BE/ME relative

to a firm’s industry, is quite comparable to their importance in explaining overall BE/ME. Over 15 years,

returns explain 19% of cross-sectional variation, ROEs 58%, and future BE/ME 27%, similar to the

corresponding numbers in Table 1 Panel A.

      Table 3 examines the relative importance of industry and intra-industry variation to the BE/ME cross-

section. The test portfolios are created by sorting on the raw BE/ME ratios, and the only difference between

the portfolios used in Table 1 Panel A and Table 3 is that portfolios used in Table 3 exclude stocks that

cannot be assigned to an industry of at least ten firms. In an extension of the concept of intra-industry

BE/ME, each of the three variance components – future returns, future ROEs, and future BE/ME – are



                                                    13
subdivided into two pieces. The first pieces, labeled intra-industry in the table, are computed for each firm

as the excess of its return, ROE or future BE/ME over the return, ROE or future BE/ME for the industry the

firm is in. The second component, labeled industry in the Table, is simply the value-weight return, ROE, or

future BE/ME for the relevant industry as a whole. Since a firm’s return in any given year is the sum of the

return on the firm’s industry for that year and the excess return of the firm over that industry return; and

since the same can be said for ROE or future BE/ME, it is clear that we can replace our 3-component

decomposition with a new 6-component decomposition, while preserving the original identity.

       The coefficients in Table 3 show that regardless of horizon roughly 80% of the information in the

raw BE/ME ratio concerns the firm’s behavior relative to its industry, while the remaining percentage is

informative about the industry as a whole. Looking a single year ahead, the coefficient on intra-industry

return is .021, while that on industry return is .0055. The ROE coefficients are -.132 and -.014, respectively,

while the BE/ME coefficients are .634 and .194, respectively. This suggests that while the majority of the

return information in the BE/ME ratio is about intra-industry return, a non-trivial portion concerns the return

on the industry as a whole. Fifteen years out, the intra-industry return explains 16.4% of firm BE/ME, while

industry return explains 4.5%. These results are similar in spirit to Lewellen (1999). His analysis

documents that controlling for industry does not significantly reduce the degree of cross-sectional spread in

sensitivity to the HML factor of Fama and French (1993).

      The dominance of intra-industry information is even greater in the profitability series. The coefficient

on intra-industry ROE is nine times larger than that on industry ROE after one year, and is nineteen times

larger (-.503 vs. -.026) after fifteen years. It is no surprise that most of the information in the BE/ME ratios

is about intra-industry performance rather than industry performance – after all, if this were not the case,

BE/ME would essentially just be a proxy for industry. But it is interesting to observe that as regards the

relation between BE/ME and returns, both intra-industry and industry components are important, while the

relation between the BE/ME ratio and future ROE is primarily based on industry-relative information.

F.   Does the variance-decomposition vary as a function of firm characteristics
       The relative importance of the three elements of the decomposition -- transitory variation in expected

returns, transitory variation in profitability and persistant differences in the BE/ME ratios -- may be different

for different firms. Such variation can be examined via a conditional variance decomposition. We analyze

this possibility by initially sorting firms each year into three groups based on a particular firm characteristic.


                                                       14
We then sort firms into five portfolios based on BE/ME and estimate the variance decomposition separately

within each of the three groups. This conditional variance decomposition is simply the best estimate of

equation (15) for a particular type of firm.

       Natural firm characteristics to examine are size and the BE/ME ratio itself, which have the advantage

that conditioning on them does not reduce the size of the sample. Size (i.e. market capitalization) may

proxy for liquidity or speed of information dispersion, factors which may influence the amount of transitory

variation in returns. Similarly, a variance decomposition conditional on the BE/ME ratio may highlight

asymmetries in the amount of transitory variation due to expected returns, perhaps as a result of short sale

constraints that prevent liquidity providers from selling stocks with very low expected returns. Therefore,

we sort firms into three size groups based on NYSE breakpoints to examine how the variance

decomposition varies with market capitalization (Table 4 Panel A) and we sort firms into three groups based

on firm BE/ME (Table 4 Panel B) to examine how the decomposition depends on BE/ME.

       The decomposition conditional on size indicates that the book-to-market ratios have less information

concerning differences in expected returns among large firms than small or medium-sized firms. However

the differences do not seem economically large and are not statistically significant. For large firms,

approximately 16% of the information in the BE/ME ratios is due to differences in expected returns while

for small firms this number is 18%. One might initially be surprised by this result, as previous literature, for

example Fama and French (1993), has generally indicated that the value effect is stronger among small

stocks. These two potentially conflicting pieces of evidence are reconcilable. First, the split is quite

different at short horizons (4.5% due to expected 1-year returns for small firms and only 2.3% for large).

However, this difference is counterbalanced by the fact that at short horizons, large stocks have more

persistent BE/ME. The regression coefficient of future 1-year BE/ME on current BE.ME is .8757 for large

stocks but only .8141 for small stocks. Small stock BE/MEs have more return information in the short run,

but also more profitability information. In the long run these effectively cancel, leaving the total split

between return and profitability information similar for small and large stocks. Second, note that since N-
                                                                                                              ~
year returns in the first equation in the system of regressions in (16) are given by the product, b(~
                                                                                                    r , N )θ t −1 ,
a large cross-sectional variation in expected returns can generated by either a large b( ~
                                                                                         r , N ) or a large
           ~
spread in θ t −1 . This observation is central to our ability to forecast the returns on value versus growth

strategies in section III and applies here as well. Small stocks do have a stronger value effect, even at long


                                                        15
horizons, not because their BE/ME ratios have more information concerning future returns but rather

because their BE/ME’s are more dispersed. This difference in dispersion is substantial: For the smallest

third, the average cross-sectional variance of log BE/ME for the five BE/ME quintiles was 0.53; higher than

the corresponding value of 0.39 for the largest third of the sample.

         Panel B of Table 4 allows the decomposition to vary with BE/ME. Largely by construction, the

medium-BE/ME third has an average cross-sectional variance of log BE/ME of just 0.03, while both the

high-BE/ME (0.14) and low-BE/ME (0.22) stocks exhibit far more spread. At the 1-year horizon, high-

BE/ME firms’ BE/MEs have more information concerning expected returns. As the horizon increases, the

percentage of information in the BE/ME ratios concerning differences in future returns remains relatively

low for low BE/ME firms. It is only at the 15-year horizon that the information content becomes roughly

equal.

         In general, the differences we document in the decomposition as a function of size and BE/ME are

not economically large. Moreover, our general conclusion that most of the cross-sectional dispersion in the

BE/ME ratios is due to differences in cash flows is consistently true across the subsets of firms we study.

G. Does the variance decomposition vary as a function of market-wide instruments?
         The relative importance of the three drivers of the value spread may also vary over time. This time

variation can also be examined via a conditional variance decomposition. In this case, the conditional

variance decomposition is simply the best estimate of equation (15) at any point in time. While there are

many ways to estimate a conditional version of (15), we begin with perhaps the simplest approach. We

write the three regression coefficients in (15) as linear functions of variables with intuitive predictive

content.

         We limit ourselves to simple market-wide instruments including the median firm's BE/ME ratio, the

cross-sectional variance of firms' BE/ME ratios, the cross-sectional variance of firms' profitability, the cross-

sectional covariance of firms' BE/ME ratios and profitability, and bond-yield variables. Our choice of

market-wide instruments attempts to use information in a particular cross-section of the BE/ME ratios to

draw inferences about the time-series properties of the information in a typical firm's BE/ME ratio. For

example, if the correlation between the BE/ME ratios and firm profitability is higher than normal, then one

might expect that the typical firm's BE/ME ratio probably contains more information concerning future

expected cash flows than future expected returns. Similarly, if the typical firm is cheap as represented by a


                                                       16
higher than normal median BE/ME, one might expect the typical firm's BE/ME ratio to contain more

information concerning expected returns. This conclusion follows from the results of Vuolteenaho (2000)

who finds that most of the time variation in the aggregate BE/ME ratio is due to changes in future expected

returns.

       We do not show the results of these conditional variance decompositions because, in general, we do

not find any periods in time where BE/ME ratios contain more information about expected returns. Thus

the percentage of information in the BE/ME ratio is relatively constant, perhaps surprisingly so. Of course,

as we emphasized earlier, the value spread does move quite a lot through time. If the information content in

the value spread is constant, then expected returns to a value strategy should exhibit rich, time-varying

patterns as the value spread moves around. We analyze this possibility in the next section.


                                     III. Predicting value versus growth returns
       Consider a portfolio that is long high-BE/ME stocks and short low-BE/ME stocks. Fama and French

(1993,1996) popularize such a zero-investment portfolio (HML) in numerous applications. First, Fama and

French construct six value-weight portfolios from the intersections of the two size and the three BE/ME

groups. The HML portfolio is then formed by buying both the small and the large high-BE/ME portfolios

(combined position denoted by H) and selling short both the small and the large low-BE/ME portfolios

(combined position denoted by L). The two components of HML are thus high- and low-BE/ME portfolios

with about the same weighted-average size.

       The conditional variance decomposition above can be used to motivate a forecasting model for the

return on the HML portfolio. Apply (12) to both the H and L portfolio, difference, and reorganize:
                     ∞                                             ∞                    ∞                
                    ∑ρ      j
                                Et −1rt HML
                                        +j  = (θ tH−1 − θ tL−1 ) + ∑ ρ j Et −1etH+ j − ∑ ρ j Et −1etL+ j    (17)
                     j =0                                           j =0               j =0              

This motivates a predictive regression:
                                  RtHML = a + b (θ tH−1 − θ tL−1 ) + c (etH−1 − etL−1 ) + ε t ,               (18)

where the past profitability spread is used as a proxy for the spread in discounted future expected

profitability. Since most of the empirical work that relies on the time-series of returns on the HML portfolio

uses simple (not log) returns, we use annual simple returns as the dependent variable in our regression.




                                                                 17
      We present OLS estimates of the coefficients in HML forecasting regressions similar to equation

(18). Furthermore, as one might expect an increase in the expected return on HML to be associated with an

increase in the volatility of the HML return, we also produce maximum-likelihood GLS estimates based on

an accompanying model (using the same instruments) of the log variance of the HML portfolio:
                               RtHML = Z t −1β + ε t , ε t ~ N [0, exp( Z t −1γ )] ,                      (19)

where Z t −1 are the lagged predictor variables (including the value spread) and β , γ are parameters. Since

the above specification produces conditional variance estimates, it enables us to compute a time-series of

estimated Sharpe ratios as well as estimated expected returns. For a detailed exposition of the iterative

estimation procedure and the standard-error formulas, see Greene (1997, p. 557-569).

      Figure 2 displays the log BE/ME of the high-, medium-, and low-BE/ME portfolios created by Fama

and French (1993). One can see from the figure that the log BE/MEs of the three size-balanced portfolios

move around quite a bit over the 61-year period. While the level of BE/MEs appears volatile and persistent,

the value spread (the difference between H and L portfolios’ BE/MEs) appears to be following a mean

reverting process.

      Table 5 Panel A shows the regression results. In that table, we report the coefficients in an OLS

regression, the GLS counterpart, and the coefficients ( γ ) in the exponential-linear conditional-variance

model. In the discussion, we focus on the GLS estimates of the conditional mean. As expected, we find

that the difference between BE/MEs of the low- and high-BE/ME portfolios, the value spread, is a

significant predictor of the return on the HML portfolio. The simple regression coefficient of the value

spread is 0.287; the t-statistic is 3.14. This result indicates that the annual expected return on HML is time-

varying. As the annual standard deviation of the value spread is 8.75 percentage points, this predictive

regression implies substantial time variation in the HML premium: the standard deviation of the fitted

values of HML is 1.3 times the unconditional mean HML return.

      Figure 3 graphs the expected return on the HML portfolio using this specification. As a measure of

the economic significance of our finding, Figure 3 also graphs the associated conditional Sharpe ratio. As

specified in equation (19), we generate these estimates each year by using the value spread to predict the

return and log variance of HML. In general, we find that the point estimates of the HML Sharpe ratio vary

over time considerably.




                                                        18
      In order to examine the robustness of our results to data-snooping concerns, we re-estimate this

simple forecasting model using the international panel. We hope that the international sample provides an

out-of-sample test of our finding of time-variation in the expected return on value-versus-growth strategies

in the US sample. As with the US value spread, our forecasting variable seems well-behaved. As the

international sample is only 17 years long, we estimate the predictability using country-adjusted variables in

the hope of increasing the precision of our regression coefficients. The results, reported in Table 5 Panel B,

are imprecise but the coefficients are consistent with the domestic estimates.

      Table 5 Panel A also contains multiple regressions with additional predictor variables. In the

multiple regression specified by equation (18), the value spread’s coefficient and t-statistic are 0.2915 and

3.14, respectively. However, the recent difference in ROE’s between value and growth stocks does not

provide additional predictive power (coefficient of 0.0030, t-statistic 0.5913). We also report a specification

with the value spread interacted with the median BE/ME ratio of the market. In the conditional variance

decompositions discussed in section II.F, this variable, though statistically insignificant, was the most

successful in tracking time-variation in the information content of firms’ BE/ME ratio. As with the

conditional variance decompositions, this variable is only marginally significant.

      We complete our analysis of time-variation in the return on value-versus-growth strategies by

investigating what macroeconomic variables are correlated with the value spread. In particular, we regress

the value spread on several variables that intuitively might explain movements in the value spread. These

regressions are shown in Table 6. We initially regress the value spread on the median BE/ME ratio. This

variable has no explanatory power by itself (t-statistic of –0.12). We turn to the default spread (the

difference in yields between BAA and AAA long-term corporate bonds) that, like the median BE/ME ratio

is an indicator of low frequency movements in business conditions. We find that the value spread has a

positive and statistically significant coefficient on the default yield spread. The coefficient is 0.153 with an

associated t-statistic of 2.0. Almost a quarter of the variation in the value spread can be linked to

movements in this variable alone. We also include the median BE/ME ratio and the lagged profitability

spread: The median BE/ME ratio is now statistically and economically significant and the lagged

profitability spread is marginally so. The full model now explains over 42% of the movements in the value

spread.




                                                      19
      When we add both the median BE/ME ratio and the default spread to the return-predictive

regressions in Table 4, we find that the value spread remains significant (coefficient of .394, t-statistic of

3.1) while the median BE/ME ratio is now statistically significant (coefficient of .128, t-statistic of 1.8) at

the 10% level. Unreported orthogonalized regressions show that the component of the value spread that is

correlated with the market’s BE/ME ratio or default yield spread does not predict HML returns. The

predictive ability of the value spread is entirely due to the component that is orthogonal to these market-

wide instruments.


                                                IV. Conclusions
      The present-value formula allows us to decompose the cross-sectional variance of firms’ book-to-

market ratios into three components: 1) covariance of future stock returns with the past book-to-market

ratios, 2) covariance of future profitability (i.e., accounting return on equity) with the past book-to-market

ratios, and 3) persistence of the book-to-market ratios. We estimate this decomposition from a large (1937-

1997) panel with three simple long-horizon regressions.

      Our results suggest that approximately 20% of the cross-sectional dispersion of book-to-market ratios

can be explained with expected 15-year stock returns, 58% with expected 15-year profitability, and 26%

with 15-year persistence of book-to-market ratios. Intuition and the time-series behavior of returns and

profitability suggest that the persistence of the book-to-market ratios is mostly due to cross-sectional

variation in expected profitability beyond the 15-year horizon.       Hence, we aggressively interpret our

regressions as suggesting that approximately 20% of the dispersion in the book-to-market ratios is due to

dispersion in expected stock returns and 80% due to dispersion in expected profitability.

      We document similar results for an international panel covering 23 countries (excluding the US) over

the 1982-1998 period. As with the domestic panel, most of the variation in the book-to-market ratios, even

after adjusting for differences in accounting practices across countries, is due to information concerning

expected future profitability.

      One could conjecture from the above variance decomposition result that the expected annual

premium on Fama and French’s (1993) HML portfolio is time-varying. Our empirical evidence confirms

that supposition: the expected return on a value-minus-growth strategy is atypically high at times when the

value spread is wide and the market is cheap.



                                                      20
                                              Appendix 1: U.S. data
      In order to be included in our U.S. sample, a firm-year must satisfy the following data requirements.

When using COMPUSTAT as our source of accounting information, we require that the firm must be on

COMPUSTAT for two years. This requirement avoids potential survivor bias due to COMPUSTAT

backfilling data. Also, due to data-quality concerns, all predictive tests require the dependent variable to

correspond to year 1937 or later.

      Book equity is defined as the stockholders’ equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes (data item 74)

and investment tax credit (data item 208) (if available), plus post-retirement benefit liabilities (data item

330) (if available) minus the book value of preferred stock. Depending on availability, we use redemption

(data item 56), liquidation (data item 10), or par value (data tiem 130) (in that order) for the book value of

preferred stock. Stockholders’ equity used in the above formula is calculated as follows. We prefer the

stockholders’ equity number reported by Moody’s, or COMPUSTAT (data item 216). If neither one is

available, we measure stockholders’ equity as the book value of common equity (data item 60) plus the par

value of preferred stock. (Note that the preferred stock is added at this stage because it is later subtracted in

the book equity formula.) If common equity is not available, we compute stockholders’ equity as the book

value of assets (data item 6) minus total liabilities (data item 181), all from COMPUSTAT.

      The BE/ME ratio used to form portfolios in May of year t is book common equity for the fiscal year

ending in calendar year t-1, divided by market equity at the end of May of year t.7 We require the firm to

have a valid past BE/ME. Moreover, in order to eliminate likely data errors, we discard those firms with

BE/ME ratios less than .01 and greater than 100.

      When computing stock returns, we include delisting data when available on the CRSP tapes. In some

cases, CRSP records delisting prices several months after the security ceases trading and thus after a period

of missing returns. In these cases, we calculate the total return from the last available price to the delisting

price and pro-rate this return over the intervening months.

      The clean-surplus ROE is calculated as follows. We compute the firm's annual earnings using the

assumption of clean surplus accounting and the firm's dividends from CRSP. The formula used for

computing log ROE is
                                        (1 + Rt ) M t −1 − Dt   Bt           Dt  
                             et = log                                 − 1 −      ,              (A2.1)
                                                 Mt             Bt −1   Bt −1  



                                                           21
where M denotes market and B book equity, D dividends, and R the stock return. This relation is simply that
earnings this year equals the change in book equity plus dividends with an appropriate adjustment for equity
offerings.


                             Appendix 2: Why not VARs with managed portfolios?
       At first, it may seem that a VAR model would be a simpler and more elegant alternative to our long-
horizon regressions. It is tempting to include, for example, HML return, HML value spread, and HML
profitability spread into a VAR model state vector and compute the variance decomposition along the lines
of Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Vuolteenaho (2000).                                It turns out, however, that the economic
interpretation of the VAR-based variance decomposition may be materially different from the long-horizon
regression variance decomposition we advocate. The difference between the two methods originates from
the fact that the HML portfolio’s weights are managed.
       To illustrate this point, consider a general managed portfolio series and a VAR model. Let rt t −1 ,
θ tt −1 , and ett −1 denote the log return, log book-to-market, and log profitability on a buy-and-hold portfolio.
The superscript in the above variables denotes the time when the buy-and-hold portfolio was formed.
Adapting the basic linearized book-to-market law (7) to this notation yields:
                                                 ett −1 − rtt −1 ≈ ρθ tt −1 − θ tt−−11                                  (A1.1)

As one can see, the basic identity describes the evolution of a buy-and-hold portfolio’s book-to-market.
       An equation describing the book-to-market evolution of a managed portfolio must include an
additional term due to rebalancing. Adding ρ (θ tt − θ tt −1 ) to both sides of (A1.1) results:
                                         ett −1 − rt t −1 + ρ (θ tt − θ tt −1 ) ≈ ρθ tt − θ tt−−11                      (A1.2)

Equation (A1.2) describes the evolution of a managed portfolio series. The change in managed portfolio
book-to-market is explained by three terms: managed portfolio profitability, managed portfolio return, and a
rebalancing term.
       Comparison of equations (A1.1) and (A1.2) highlights the difference between a VAR variance
decomposition and a long-horizon regression variance decomposition. A long-horizon regression is based
on iteration of (A1.1). A VAR-model maps a vector [ rtt−−12 , θ tt−−11 , ett−−12 ] to [ rt t −1 , θ tt , ett −1 ] and, thus, can
only implement a variance decomposition based on iterating equation (A1.2). The more aggressively the
portfolio is rebalanced, the larger the difference between the two.



                                                                    22
         Experiments with a first-order VAR specification indicate that the covariance term,

                                                                [
                                                          cov ∑i =0 ρ i +1 (θ tt++ii − θ tt++ii −1 ), θ tt−−11
                                                                     ∞
                                                                                                                 ],                                              (A1.3)
                                                                                 var θ    t −1
                                                                                         t −1



is economically quite large (contributing approximately 30% of the total cross-sectional variance). Thus,
interpretation of a VAR-based variance decomposition with managed portfolios is difficult.


                                                       Appendix 3: Regression standard errors
         In many finance applications, the available data set contains perhaps seventy overlapping cross-
sections, each with hundreds or even thousands of data points. In such cases, incorrectly assuming that the
errors covariance matrix is proportional to an identity matrix can yield standard errors that are severely
biased downwards. This bias is due to the fact that error correlations are often systematically related to the
explanatory variables. Fortunately, the statistics literature has proposed a solution for a similar problem
frequently arising with complex surveys: Rogers’s (1983, 1993) robust standard errors. Compared to the
popular Fama-MacBeth (1973) procedure, this method has the practical advantage of giving the standard
errors for pooled-OLS/WLS coefficients – allowing for, among other things, the use of common time-series
variables in the regressions.
         A simple exposition of Rogers’s (1983, 1993) standard errors starts from the familiar formula for
OLS standard errors. Let X denote the panel of explanatory variables, Ω the covariance matrix of the
panel of errors, and X t − N +1,t + N −1 and Ω t − N +1,t + N −1 a single cluster of explanatory variables and the
corresponding error covariance matrix. A cluster is defined as the set of cross-sections whose errors are
correlated with the errors of the year-t cross-section. Assuming that the errors may be dependent within a
cluster but are independent across clusters allows writing

                     ( X ′X ) −1 X ′ΩX ( X ′X ) −1 = ( X ′X ) −1 ∑ [X t′− N +1,t + N −1 Ω t − N +1,t + N −1 X t − N +1,t + N −1 ]( X ′X ) −1 .
                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                                                 (A3.1)
                                                                            t =1


We denote regression errors by ε , and notation for fitted values is modified with a hat.                                                                              As
X t′− N +1,t + N −1 Ω t − N +1,t + N 11 X t − N +1,t + N −1 = E ( X t′− N +1,t + N −1ε t − N +1,t + N −1ε t′− N +1,t + N −1 X t − N +1,t + N −1 ) , Rogers’s standard errors
are computed by substituting in-sample estimates of the errors for true errors to get an in-sample variance
estimator of regression coefficients:

                                 ( X ′X ) −1 ∑ [X t′− N +1,t + N −1εˆt − N +1,t + N −1εˆt′− N +1,t + N −1 X t − N +1,t + N −1 ]( X ′X ) −1
                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                 (A3.2)
                                                t =1




                                                                                     23
Under plausible assumptions, these standard errors are consistent in T, i.e., they converge as the time
dimension of the panel grows. In order to ensure that the effect of a single cluster on the coefficient
estimates vanishes as more and more clusters are included, Rogers’s assumptions include that the time-
series of X t′− N +1,t + N −1ε t − N +1,t + N −1ε t′− N +1,t + N −1 X t − N +1,t + N −1 is well behaved.
          The above standard-error formula can be interpreted as generalized White’s standard errors; in the
special case of only one observation per cluster (e.g., a univariate time series with serially uncorrelated
errors), the standard errors are equivalent to White (1980) heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors. The
method can also be interpreted as an application of Hansen’s (1982) Generalized Method of Moments or as
a multivariate generalization of Hansen-Hodrick (1980) standard errors.




                                                                                 24
1
    The Cisco Systems’ and General Motors’ data are from finance.yahoo.com as of 3/7/2001.
2
    We thank Kenneth French for providing us with the data.
3
    Merino and Mayper (1999) provide statistics on the enforcement of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act. In
    the first 10 years of the enforcement of the 1934 act, the SEC began 279 proceedings. Of these
    proceedings, 272 were begun in the 1933-37 period and only seven began in the latter five years. In these
    proceedings, the SEC identified numerous types of accounting and non-accounting violations by publicly
    traded firms. The above indicates that enforcement was broad and active in the first five years, whereas in
    the 1938-42 period, few enforcement proceedings were initiated. While the total number of identified
    problems in firms’ statements was similar during both the 1933-37 (101 accounting violations) and 1938-
    42 (83 accounting violations) period, it appears that in the latter period, only the worst violators were
    examined, in which many errors per registration statement were uncovered. This decline in proceedings
    may signal increasing compliance by registrants or declining interest by the SEC in regulatory
    enforcement. We believe the former cause was the driving force behind the reduced number of new
    proceedings. It is thus reasonable to characterize the 1933-37 period as the initial and strict enforcement
    period and the 1938-42 as the beginning of a steady-state level of enforcement.
4
    The clean-surplus relation has also been used in equity valuation by Ohlson (1995), Feltham and Ohlson
    (1999), and others.
5
    In their Appendix, Frankel and Lee (1999) list the accounting standards that violate clean-surplus
    accounting. They argue that these violations of the clean-surplus accounting are largely unpredictable.
    Thus, using reported earnings instead imputed clean-surplus earning would probably not materially affect
    our variance-decomposition results.
6
    The accounting identity, which holds for every sample path, can be iterated forward or backward. In a
    previous version of this paper, we also iterated (7) backwards in order to calculate a backward-looking
    cross-sectional variance decomposition.
7
    Some earlier research [see, for example, Fama and French (1992)] uses ME at the end of year t-1 to
    compute BE/ME. In order that our decomposition of BE/ME hold, however, we use the May of year-t
    market equity as the denominator in BE/ME.
                                                 References
Asness, C., J. Friedman, R. Krail, and J. Lieu, 2000, Style timing: Value versus growth, Jounal of Portfolio
          Management, Spring.
Asness, C., R. B. Porter, and R. Stevens, 2000, Predicting stock returns using industry relative firm
          characteristics, University of Florida working paper.
Campbell, J. Y. and R. J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends and
          discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Cochrane, J. H., 1992. Explaining the variance of price-dividend ratios, Review of Financial Studies 5, 243-
          280.
Davis, J. L., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French, 2000. Characteristics, covariances, and average returns: 1929 to
          1997, Journal of Finance, 55, 389-406.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 47,
          427-465.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of
          Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns, Journal of
          Finance 50, 131-155.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1996. Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies, Journal of
          Finance 51, 55-84.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial Economics 43, 153-193.
Fama, E. F. and J. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests, Journal of Political
          Economy 81, 607-636.
Feltham, G. A. and J. A. Ohlson, 1999, Residual earnings valuation with risk and stochastic interest rates,
          Accounting Review 74, 2-23.
Frankel, R., and C. M. C. Lee, 1999, Accounting diversity and international valuation, working paper,
          Johnson Graduate School of Management.
Green, W. H., 1997, Econometric Analysis (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NY).
Hansen, L. P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized methods of moments estimators, Econometrica
          50, 1029-1054.
Hansen, L. P., and R. J. Hodrick, 1980, Forward exchange rates as optimal predictors of future spot rates:
          An econometric analysis, Journal of Political Economy 88, 829-853.
Lewellen, Jonathan, 1999, The time-series relations among expected return, risk, and book-to-market,
          Journal of Financial Economics 54, 5-44.
Merino, B. and A. Mayper, 1999, The rhetoric and reality of American dream: Securities legislation and the
          accounting profession in the 1930s, working paper, University of North Texas.
Ohlson, J. A., 1995, Earnings, book values, and dividends in equity valuation, Contemporary Accounting
          Research 11, 661-87.
Rogers, W. H., 1983, Analyzing complex survey data, Rand Corporation memorandum. Santa Monica, CA.
Rogers, W. H., 1993, Regression standard errors in clustered samples, Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints
          STB-13 – STB-18, 88-94.
Rosenberg, B., K. Reid, and R. Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of market inefficiency, Journal of
          Portfolio Management 11, 9-17.
Vuolteenaho, T., 2000, Understanding the aggregate book-to-market ratio, working paper, Harvard
          University Department of Economics.
White, H., 1980, A heteroscedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test of
          heteroscedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.
             Table 1: Decomposition of the unconditional book-to-market variance (U.S. data)
       This table reports the unconditional variance decomposition of firms' log book-to-market ratios
(BE/ME) computed from the U.S. data sample (1937-1997, 192,661 firm-years). Panel A uses basic data
and Panel B industry-adjusted data. We use Fama and French’s (1997) industry classifications. The first
column shows the horizon N. The second column shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of
cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted future stock return on cross-sectionally demeaned
BE/ME. The third column shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-sectionally
demeaned, N-period discounted future profitability (ROE) on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME. The
fourth column shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-
period-in-the-future discounted BE/ME on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME.
                                  N −1
                                                         ~
                                  ∑j =0
                                       ρ j~
                                          r = b( ~
                                                 r , N ) θ + ε (~
                                                   t + j ,i     r , N , i);
                                                                          t −1,i


                                   N −1
                                                                         ~
                                  ∑ρ
                                   j =0
                                              j
                                                  e~t + j ,i = b(e~, N ) θ t −1,i + ε (e~, N , i);
                                          ~                    ~        ~             ~
                                   ρ Nθ t + N −1,i = b(θ , N ) θ t −1,i + ε (θ , N , i )
                                                              ~
                                   b( ~
                                      r , N ) − b(e~, N ) + b(θ , N ) ≈ 1
Each data point consists of the value-weight BE/ME (θ), return (r), and ROE (e) for one of 40 portfolios
we form each year by sorting firms on BE/ME. The identity derived in the paper guarantees that the
expected-return column minus the expected-profitability column plus the future-BE/ME column equals
approximately one. Reversing the sign of the profitability column provides a %-variance decomposition
of the cross-sectional variance of firms' log BE/ME ratios. All variables are log transformed before
demeaning, as specified by the identity. The discount coefficient rho (ρ) equals 0.96. The point estimates
are produced by pooled OLS and the standard errors (in parentheses) are produced using GMM. The
applicable standard-error formulas account for cross-sectional and serial correlation of the errors.

                 Panel A: Basic U.S. data (ρ=0.96)
                     N      Expected returns                  Expected profitability                 Future BE/ME
                    1        0.0272 (0.0083)                     -0.1469 (0.0097)                    0.8258 (0.0127)
                    2        0.0559 (0.0242)                     -0.2386 (0.0360)                    0.7055 (0.0378)
                    3        0.0809 (0.0441)                     -0.3006 (0.0613)                    0.6194 (0.0607)
                    5        0.1198 (0.0834)                     -0.3826 (0.0895)                    0.5012 (0.0954)
                    10       0.1734 (0.0951)                     -0.4938 (0.1185)                    0.3399 (0.1441)
                    15       0.1996 (0.1097)                     -0.5832 (0.1754)                    0.2646 (0.0967)

                 Panel B: Industry-adjusted U.S. data (ρ=0.96)
                     N      Expected returns                  Expected profitability                 Future BE/ME
                    1        0.0236 (0.0078)                     -0.1209 (0.0080)                    0.8590 (0.0086)
                    2        0.0510 (0.0262)                     -0.2103 (0.0300)                    0.7459 (0.0267)
                    3        0.0763 (0.0464)                     -0.2765 (0.0547)                    0.6584 (0.0451)
                    5        0.1163 (0.0840)                     -0.3679 (0.0857)                    0.5359 (0.0786)
                    10       0.1677 (0.0999)                     -0.4853 (0.1445)                    0.3596 (0.1153)
                    15       0.1859 (0.1092)                     -0.5784 (0.1549)                    0.2743 (0.0909)
    Table 2: Decomposition of the unconditional book-to-market variance (international data)
       This table reports the unconditional decomposition of firms' log book-to-market equity ratios
(BE/ME) computed from the international data sample (1982-1998, 27,913 firm-years). Panel A uses
basic data and Panel B country-adjusted data. The first column shows the horizon N. The second
column shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period
discounted future stock return on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME. The third column in shows the
simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted future
profitability (ROE) on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME. The fourth column shows the simple
predictive regression coefficient of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period-in-the-future discounted
BE/ME on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME.
                                 N −1
                                                        ~
                                   ∑  ρ j~
                                   j =0
                                         r = b( ~
                                                r , N ) θ + ε (~
                                                   t + j ,i    r , N , i);t −1,i


                                   N −1
                                                                         ~
                                   ∑ρ
                                   j =0
                                              j
                                                  e~t + j ,i = b(e~, N ) θ t −1,i + ε (e~, N , i);
                                          ~                    ~        ~             ~
                                   ρ Nθ t + N −1,i = b(θ , N ) θ t −1,i + ε (θ , N , i )
                                                              ~
                                   b( ~
                                      r , N ) − b(e~, N ) + b(θ , N ) ≈ 1
Each data point consists of the value-weight BE/ME (θ), return (r), and ROE (e) for one of 40 portfolios
we form each year by sorting firms on BE/ME. The identity derived in the paper guarantees that the first
column minus the second column plus the third column equals approximately one. Reversing the sign of
the second column provides a %-variance decomposition of the cross-sectional variance of firms' log
book-to-market ratios. All variables are log transformed before demeaning, as specified by the identity.
The discount coefficient rho (ρ) equals 0.96. The point estimates are produced by pooled OLS and the
standard errors (in parentheses) are produced using GMM. The applicable standard-error formulas
account for cross-sectional and serial correlation of the errors.

                 Panel A: Basic international data (ρ=0.97)
                    N       Expected returns                  Expected profitability                 Future BE/ME
                    1        0.0348 (0.0155)                     -0.1114 (0.0102)                    0.8546 (0.0156)
                    2        0.0849 (0.0471)                     -0.1978 (0.0326)                    0.7199 (0.0390)
                    3        0.1192 (0.0812)                     -0.2516 (0.0422)                    0.6312 (0.0629)
                    5        0.1775 (0.1181)                     -0.3288 (0.0466)                    0.4899 (0.0834)

                 Panel B: Country-adjusted international data (ρ=0.97)
                    N       Expected returns                  Expected profitability                 Future BE/ME
                    1        0.0317 (0.0131)                     -0.1188 (0.0077)                    0.8546 (0.0139)
                    2        0.0664 (0.0311)                     -0.2225 (0.0268)                    0.7228 (0.0305)
                    3        0.0921 (0.0310)                     -0.2967 (0.0344)                    0.6277 (0.0346)
                    5        0.1401 (0.0410)                     -0.4110 (0.0274)                    0.4726 (0.0339)
                    Table 3: Decomposition into inter-industry and intra-industry components (U.S. data)
       This table reports the unconditional decomposition of firms' log book-to-market ratios (BE/ME)
computed from the U.S. data sample (1937-1997, 192,661 firm-years). We use Fama and French’s
(1997) industry classifications. The first column shows the horizon N. The second and third columns
show the simple predictive regression coefficients of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted
future industry stock return on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME and the simple predictive regression
coefficient of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted industry-adjusted future stock return on
cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME. The fourth and fifth columns shows the simple predictive
regression coefficient of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted future industry profitability
(ROE) on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME and the simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-
sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted industry-adjusted future ROE on cross-sectionally demeaned
BE/ME. The sixth and seventh columns show the simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-
sectionally demeaned, N-period-in-the-future discounted industry BE/ME on cross-sectionally demeaned
BE/ME and the simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period-in-the-
future discounted industry-adjusted BE/ME on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME. Each data point
consists of the value-weight variables for one of 40 portfolios we form each year by sorting firms on
BE/ME. Because of the identity, a particular linear combination of the coefficients equals one:
N −1                                                                 N −1
                                       ~                                                               ~                                 ~                  ~          ~             ~
∑ρ
 j =0
        j   ~
            rt + j ,ii = b ( ~                        rii , N , i ); ∑ ρ j e~t + j ,ii = b( e~ii , N ) θ t −1,i + ε ( e~ii , N , i ); ρ Nθ t + N −1,ii = b (θ ii , N ) θ t −1,i + ε (θ ii , N , i );
                             rii , N ) θ t −1,i + ε ( ~
                                                                   j =0
N −1                                                              N −1
                                     ~                                                              ~                                ~                  ~         ~             ~
∑ρ
 j =0
        j   ~
            rt + j , I = b( ~                       rI , N , i ); ∑ ρ j e~t + j , I = b ( e~I , N ) θ t −1,i + ε ( e~I , N , i ); ρ Nθ t + N −1, I = b (θ I , N ) θ t −1,i + ε (θ I , N , i )
                            rI , N ) θ t −1,i + ε ( ~
                                                                  j =0

                                                    ~                                         ~
                    b( ~
                       rii , N ) − b(e~ii , N ) + b(θ ii , N ) + b(~
                                                                   rI , N ) − b(~
                                                                                e I , N ) + b(θ I , N ) ≈ 1
Reversing the signs of the fourth and fifth columns provides a %-variance decomposition of the cross-
sectional variance of firms' log book-to-market ratios. All variables are log transformed before
demeaning, as specified by the identity. The discount coefficient rho (ρ) equals 0.96. The point estimates
are produced by pooled OLS and the standard errors (in parentheses) are produced using GMM. The
applicable standard-error formulas account for cross-sectional and serial correlation of the errors.

   N             Industry’s                  Expected                        Industry’s                   Expected        Industry’s       Expected
                  expected                    industry-                       expected                industry-adjusted expected future    industry-
                   returns                adjusted returns                  profitability                profitability      BE/ME       adjusted BE/ME
   1          0.0055 (0.0031)                0.0214 (0.0058)              -0.0141 (0.0021)               -0.1318 (0.0097)                 0.1935 (0.0094)                0.6336 (0.0156)
   2          0.0102 (0.0092)                0.0449 (0.0162)              -0.0225 (0.0068)               -0.2142 (0.0351)                 0.1765 (0.0235)                0.5318 (0.0472)
   3          0.0141 (0.0158)                0.0654 (0.0301)              -0.0280 (0.0105)               -0.2713 (0.0598)                 0.1639 (0.0347)                0.4587 (0.0758)
   5          0.0230 (0.0269)                0.0971 (0.0588)              -0.0336 (0.0186)               -0.3471 (0.0870)                 0.1463 (0.0447)                 0.3576 (0.118)
  10          0.0442 (0.0444)                0.1382 (0.0683)              -0.0376 (0.0168)               -0.4416 (0.1015)                 0.1064 (0.0406)                0.2279 (0.1609)
  15          0.0450 (0.0315)                0.1639 (0.1067)              -0.0258 (0.0797)               -0.5027 (0.1009)                 0.0855 (0.0444)                0.1733 (0.1174)
                 Table 4: Decomposition of the unconditional book-to-market (U.S. data)
       This table reports the unconditional variance decomposition of firms' log book-to-market ratios
(BE/ME) computed from the U.S. data sample (1937-1997, 192,661 firm-years) for three groupings
based on either firm size (Panel A) or firm BE/ME (Panel B). We calculate yearly market capitalization
breakpoints for the size groupings in Panel A using only NYSE stocks. The first column shows the
horizon N. Within each grouping, the first column shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of
cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted future stock return on cross-sectionally demeaned
BE/ME. The second column shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-sectionally
demeaned, N-period discounted future profitability (ROE) on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME. The
third column shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period-
in-the-future discounted BE/ME on cross-sectionally demeaned BE/ME.
                                  N −1
                                                         ~
                                 ∑j =0
                                       ρ j~
                                          r = b( ~
                                                 r , N ) θ + ε (~
                                                  t + j ,i      r , N , i);
                                                                         t −1,i


                                 N −1
                                                                        ~
                                 ∑ρ
                                  j =0
                                             j
                                                 e~t + j ,i = b(e~, N ) θ t −1,i + ε (e~, N , i);
                                         ~                    ~        ~             ~
                                 ρ Nθ t + N −1,i = b(θ , N ) θ t −1,i + ε (θ , N , i )
                                                               ~
                                    b( ~
                                       r , N ) − b(e~, N ) + b(θ , N ) ≈ 1
Each data point consists of the value-weight BE/ME (θ), return (r), and ROE (e) for one of 5 portfolios
we form each year by sorting firms on BE/ME within each group. The identity derived in the paper
guarantees that the expected-return column minus the expected-profitability column plus the future-
BE/ME column equals approximately one. Reversing the sign of the profitability column provides a %-
variance decomposition of the cross-sectional variance of firms' log BE/ME ratios. All variables are log
transformed before demeaning, as specified by the identity. The table displays the appropriate discount
coefficient rho (ρ) for each group. The point estimates are produced by pooled OLS and the standard
errors (in parentheses) are produced using GMM. The applicable standard-error formulas account for
cross-sectional and serial correlation of the errors.
                           Panel A: %-variance decomposition conditional on firm size
                          ~                                   ~                                     ~
    Small (ρ=0.99)   var( θ ) = 0.53 Medium (ρ=0.98) var( θ ) = 0.46           Big (ρ=0.95)    var( θ ) = 0.39
N Expected Expected          Future    Expected     Expected        Future Expected     Expected         Future
   returns profitability     BE/ME      returns    profitability    BE/ME returns      profitability     BE/ME
1 0.0449     -0.1404         0.8141      0.0466      -0.1636        0.7916   0.0231      -0.1036         0.8757
   (0.0107)  (0.0085)       (0.0147     (0.0124)     (0.0090)      (0.0186) (0.0094)     (0.0039)       (0.0100)
2 0.0946     -0.2614         0.6441      0.0940      -0.2653        0.6443   0.0442      -0.1832         0.7770
   (0.0351)  (0.0391)       (0.0580)    (0.0264)     (0.0246)      (0.0497) (0.0274)     (0.0152)       (0.0251)
3 0.1350     -0.3204         0.5454      0.1259      -0.3313        0.5483   0.0640      -0.2458         0.6966
   (0.0583)  (0.0455)       (0.0619)    (0.0409)     (0.0379)      (0.0777) (0.0484)     (0.0304)       (0.0410)
5 0.1899     -0.4239         0.3912      0.1830      -0.4013        0.4273   0.0920      -0.3425         0.5763
   (0.0959)  (0.0748)       (0.0791)    (0.0754)     (0.0628)      (0.1132) (0.0842)     (0.0691)       (0.0702)
10 0.2030    -0.5587         0.3139      0.2310      -0.5027        0.2918   0.1326      -0.5007         0.3772
   (0.1924)  (0.2140)       (0.0596)    (0.1633)     (0.2271)      (0.1216) (0.1458)     (0.2090)       (0.1116)
15 0.1787    -0.6923         0.2788      0.2568      -0.5845        0.2440   0.1574      -0.6149         0.2689
   (0.1918)  (0.2919)       (0.1476)    (0.2322)     (0.3638)       (1186)  (0.1611)     (0.3045)       (0.0689)


                     Panel B: %-variance decomposition conditional on firm book-to-market
                          ~                                   ~                                      ~
     Low (ρ=0.95)    var( θ ) = 0.22 Medium (ρ=0.96) var( θ ) = 0.03         High (ρ=0.97)      var( θ ) = 0.14
N Expected Expected          Future    Expected     Expected        Future Expected     Expected         Future
   returns profitability     BE/ME      returns    profitability    BE/ME returns      profitability     BE/ME
1 0.0102     -0.1638         0.8283      0.0375      -0.0873        0.8792   0.0240      -0.1479         0.8176
   (0.0155)  (0.0117)       (0.0225)    (0.0184)     (0.0069)      (0.0177) (0.0180)     (0.0179)       (0.0244)
2 0.0234     -0.2730         0.7072      0.0568      -0.1568        0.7930   0.0541      -0.2507         0.6761
   (0.0419)  (0.0473)       (0.0686)    (0.0466)     (0.0291)      (0.0476) (0.0435)     (0.0613)       (0.0627)
3 0.0362     -0.3388         0.6321      0.0805      -0.1959        0.7318   0.1022      -0.3223         0.5502
   (0.0760)  (0.0822)       (0.1184)    (0.0881)     (0.0558)      (0.0819) (0.0611)     (0.1033)       (0.0916)
5 0.0573     -0.4344         0.5208      0.0890      -0.2966        0.6261   0.1614      -0.3841         0.4242
   (0.1634)  (0.1268)       (0.2033)    (0.1760)     (0.1105)      (0.1250) (0.0986)     (0.1275)       (0.1200)
10 0.0985    -0.5790         0.3477      0.1222      -0.4834        0.4527   0.1427      -0.4789         0.3764
   (0.2853)  (0.2744)       (0.3745)    (0.2989)     (0.2958)      (0.1773) (0.1147)     (0.1715)       (0.2274)
15 0.1349    -0.6763         0.2712      0.1476      -0.6193        0.3652   0.0943      -0.6949         0.2948
   (0.4153)  (0.5269)       (0.3090)    (0.3565)     (0.4163)      (0.1384) (0.1315)     (0.1767)       (0.2667)
                                            Table 5: HML-return predictability
       The table reports regressions predicting the simple return on the HML portfolio. Each regression
contains a constant and the HML value spread. In addition, some of the regressions contain
combinations of the following variables: the lagged ROE of the HML portfolio, market BE/ME, default
yield spread (Moody’s BAA less AAA corporate-bond yield), and an interaction term between the value
spread and the median BE/ME of the market.
       The HML value spread is defined as the difference between the log BE/ME of the H portfolio and
the log BE/ME of the L portfolio. The HML ROE is defined as the difference between the log ROE of
the H portfolio and the log ROE of the L portfolio. These portfolios are constructed following Fama and
French’s (1993) methodology. The international HML portfolio is country balanced, i.e., for each
country, the stocks are first sorted into the six elementary portfolios based on country-specific break
points and all stocks in each elementary portfolio are value weighted.
       For each specification, we report three rows. The first row reports the OLS estimates of linear-
regression coefficients of HML return on predictor variables. OLS R2 on the first row is adjusted for
degrees of freedom. The second row reports the maximum-likelihood GLS estimates of linear-regression
coefficients of HML return on predictor variables. GLS R2 on the second row is the variance of fitted
values (computed using GLS parameter estimates) divided by the sample variance of HML return. The
third row shows the maximum-likelihood GLS coefficients in an exponential-linear conditional-variance
model, shown in equation (19) of the text. T-statistics are in parentheses.

 Panel A: U.S. HML return (1938-1997)
  Parameter estimate                                                     Market Default yield Value spread *           St. dev.
          (t-statistic)   Constant Value spread Lagged ROE               BE/ME       spread market BE/ME            R2 Et-1(Rt)

    OLS return coeff. -0.323 (-2.4)     0.246 (2.8)                                                               0.108   0.040
    GLS return coeff. -0.376 (-2.8)     0.287 (3.1)                                                               0.160   0.047
 GLS variance coeffi. -7.239 (-4.2)     1.830 (1.6)
    OLS return coeff. -0.322 (-2.4)     0.256 (2.8)    0.001 (0.2)                                                0.093   0.040
    GLS return coeff. -0.360 (-2.7)     0.292 (3.1)    0.003 (0.6)                                                0.156   0.045
 GLS variance coeffi. -7.491 (-4.4)     1.907 (1.6)   -0.017 (-0.3)
    OLS return coeff. -0.317 (-2.4)     0.263 (3.0)                                                 0.035 (1.1) 0.111     0.043
    GLS return coeff. -0.414 (2.9)      0.334 (3.2)                                                 0.044 (1.3) 0.226     0.054
 GLS variance coeffi. -6.971 (-4.0)     1.957 (1.7)                                                 0.758 (1.8)
    OLS return coeff. -0.311 (-2.4)     0.285 (3.0)    0.004 (0.7)                                  0.045 (1.3) 0.103     0.044
    GLS return coeff. -0.425 (-3.0)     0.376 (3.5)    0.006 (1.0)                                  0.056 (1.6) 0.254     0.058
 GLS variance coeffi. -7.537 (-4.4)     2.452 (2.0)    0.026 (0.4)                                  0.732 (1.6)
    OLS return coeff. -0.339 (-2.4)     0.269 (2.6)                                 -0.011 (-0.4)                 0.094   0.040
    GLS return coeff. -0.342 (-2.5)     0.246 (2.4)                                  0.031 (0.8)                  0.186   0.049
 GLS variance coeffi. -5.508 (-3.0)     0.092 (0.1)                                  0.815 (2.0)
    OLS return coeff. -0.301 (-2.3)     0.253 (2.9)                   0.055 (1.1)                                 0.111   0.043
    GLS return coeff. -0.386 (-2.8)     0.317 (3.2)                   0.075 (1.4)                                 0.222   0.054
 GLS variance coeffi. -6.590 (-3.8)     1.713 (1.5)                   1.167 (1.8)
    OLS return coeff. -0.380 (-2.8)     0.388 (3.4)                   0.148 (2.1)   -0.079 (-1.8)                 0.143   0.049
    GLS return coeff. -0.432 (-3.0)     0.394 (3.1)                   0.128 (1.8)   -0.041 (-0.8)                 0.249   0.057
 GLS variance coeffi. -5.899 (-3.2)     1.563 (0.4)                   1.287 (0.3)   -.0578 (1.0)
Panel B: Country-balanced international HML return (1983-1998)
 Parameter estimate                                     St. dev.
         (t-statistic)   Constant Value spread       R2 Et-1(Rt)

    OLS return coeff. -0.117 (-0.5)   0.131 (0.7) -0.030   0.013
    GLS return coeff. -0.151 (-0.8)   0.159 (1.0) 0.056    0.016
 GLS variance coeffi. -8.438 (-1.8)   2.309 (0.6)
                                      Table 6: Explaining the value spread
       The table reports regressions explaining the spread in the book-to-market ratios of the HML
portfolio’s components. The regressions contain combinations of the following as explanatory variables:
the lagged ROE of the HML portfolio, market BE/ME, and the default yield spread (Moody’s BAA less
AAA corporate-bond yield).
       The HML value spread is defined as the difference between the log BE/ME of the H portfolio and
the log BE/ME of the L portfolio. The HML ROE is defined as the difference between the log ROE of
the H portfolio and the log ROE of the L portfolio. These portfolios are constructed following the Fama
and French’s (1993) methodology.
       For each specification, we report the OLS estimates of linear-regression coefficients of the HML
value spread on predictor variables. The OLS R2 is adjusted for degrees of freedom. t-statistics are in
parentheses.

                           Constant      Market BE/ME Default yield       Lagged    R2
                                                        spread             ROE

                          1.475 (14.6)     -0.017 (-0.1)                           -0.016
                          1.333 (20.4)                      0.153 (2.0)            0.239
                          1.084 (16.4)     -0.312 (-3.6)    0.256 (4.6)            0.421
                          1.043 (15.5)     -0.322 (-3.6)   -0.622 (-1.1) 0.244(3.9) 0.421
              Figure 1: Decomposing the cross-sectional BE/ME variance (U.S. sample)
       The figure shows the unconditional decomposition of the cross-sectional log book-to-market
(BE/ME) variance estimated from the U.S. data sample (1937-1997, 192,661 firm-years). The x-axis
shows the horizon N. The height of the top area shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of
cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted future stock return on cross-sectionally demeaned
BE/ME. The height of the bottom area shows the negative of the simple predictive regression coefficient
of cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period discounted future profitability (ROE) on cross-sectionally
demeaned BE/ME. The height of the middle area shows the simple predictive regression coefficient of
cross-sectionally demeaned, N-period-in-the-future discounted BE/ME on cross-sectionally demeaned
BE/ME. All variables are log transformed before demeaning, as specified by the identity.

                          Figure 2: Time-series evolution of BE/MEs (U.S. sample)
       The figure plots the time-series evolution (1937-1997) of the log book-to-market ratios of H, M,
and L portfolios. The portfolios are constructed using Fama and French’s (1993) methodology: H is a
size-balanced portfolio of high-book-to-market stocks, M that of medium-book-to-market stocks, and L
that of low-book-to-market stocks.
              Figure 3: Conditional expected return and Sharpe ratio on HML (U.S. sample)
       This figure shows a time series of the estimated conditional mean and Sharpe ratios on the HML
portfolio. The estimates are produced from maximum-likelihood GLS regressions, shown in equation
(19) of the text, that relate the expected return and log of the return variance using linear regressions to a
constant and the HML value spread. The coefficient estimates are reported in the first row of Table 5
Panel A.
                        Figure 1: Decomposing the cross-sectional BE/ME variance (U.S. sample)

                        1


                       0.9


                       0.8


                       0.7
fraction of variance




                       0.6


                       0.5


                       0.4


                       0.3


                       0.2


                       0.1


                        0
                             0                 5                                    10      15
                                                   years from portfolio formation
              Figure 2: Time−series evolution of BE/MEs (U.S. sample)




  1




 0.5




  0




−0.5




 −1




−1.5

       1940         1950       1960        1970       1980       1990
Figure 3: Conditional expected return and Sharpe ratio on HML (U.S. sample)
                         Conditional expected return (+/− 2 s.e.)

  0.2

 0.15

  0.1

 0.05

   0

−0.05
        1940     1950        1960             1970                1980   1990


                          Conditional Sharpe ratio (+/− 2 s.e.)
   2

  1.5

   1

  0.5

   0

 −0.5

  −1
        1940     1950        1960             1970                1980   1990
