                                 *   




                                        


                                           
                                          !
                                         "#$#% &%''


                                       (#%)+,-.
                               "/00111%()0$01+,-.



                                 2                   
                                   34.42$$5"&$$ %&
                                      #')62 4,37+
                                            #




                          
          !  "    #" $ %& 
' ()             ' ( ! * '
" %"    + ,*% '!-" . /0 '  / 
1 223% +455%66%226378 + %  '9%%& ' ()      
        1 . 7  * %


:, .  ,*% '         ;,%<    '%" 
  )   )  (   ,- (  )     '  
     :   '   %
($#%%5# ##8#(%&(1"
 6   !%' "#$#% &%''
  (#%)(+,-.
  #,443
9 (36-64636467


                                              $%#%


        $"(1":&#!##8#(%$6(% )6'((%5%#%5$#%
%%&5(%(#5)(1"( ;# <!#('"##8#(%;;5#$%($&#(&$!
55(&%';(!5(<5(%(#5;($%''($%(;5&$#%$$5!5;;5 "(&)"
;#%%5###8#(%$;&";#%%5#' (%6$&$(;;#%%5#' (%;#(
;&!'# (&"##8#(%;;5"#% $%0#(#%5$$($##8#(%61#"
"#% $%#!;#%%5'!;(#)%5##%'&5#%)1($%''%5$#;;%##%)
5($$##8#%)5(&%#$6)$5(%'!$5"((%(%6$)( %%$5(%'
% %)(<=(% ) $!$ %' ( %"%5 " ##8#(% ;;5 #%!6 " 5(%'##(%
5(% )%5;;5#$)(%5;#%%5###8#(%#$55(&%';(




                                                        !
 (&#%# $#!                                              &%# $#!
1>(6>344,?                                               &"6 ,??4+
%'                                                           %' 


 "#$#% &%''
 ('(;( %($(;"' $ 
$"#%)(%6 ,4..3
1    Introduction

One of the most fundamental national policy decisions of the past 25 years has been the
financial liberalization of a country’s equity market. We will present evidence, some dramatic,
that financial liberalizations are important for economic growth prospects. One might think
that financial liberalizations may be subsumed by other variables that are commonly used
in the economic growth literature. We find that this is not the case. Indeed, one could view
much of our paper as an exercise to drive out the liberalization effect. In the end, we cannot.
    In order to investigate the impact of liberalization on economic growth, we need to
understand how our contribution fits into the recent economic development literature. Much
of the current research on economic growth has been framed in the context of the debate
about ‘convergence’ between low-income and high-income countries. Early investigations
found that there was a positive unconditional relation between the initial level of income
and subsequent growth - which suggested that wealthy countries would enjoy higher growth
rates in the future, i.e. convergence did not appear to materialize. Barro (1997a) and Barro
and Sala-i-Martin (1995) argue that this type of exercise is misspecified. It is important
to control for determinants of the long-run level of per capita GDP. That is, if one holds
constant initial levels of human capital and other determinants of the steady state level of
per capita GDP, poorer countries do grow faster per capita than wealthy countries. This is
called ‘conditional convergence.’ Sachs and Warner (1995a) emphasize that policy choices,
such as respect for private property rights and open international trade, are particularly
important determinants of long-run growth prospects. This suggests that poor countries can
become part of the ‘convergence club’ by implementing appropriate policies.
    Recently, endogenous growth theory has sought to potentially explain why rich countries
may continue to outgrow poorer countries [see for example Aghion and Hewitt (1992), Rebelo
(1991)], since technological advance exhibits increasing returns to scale. In these models,
government policies also play a large role ensuring a climate in which the creation of ideas
and technological advances can thrive. In his seminal paper on endogenous economic growth,
Lucas (1988) wrote: “Is there some action the government of India could take that would


                                               1
lead the Indian economy to grow like Indonesia’s or Egypt’s? If so, what, exactly? The
consequences for human welfare involved in questions like these are simply staggering: Once
one starts to think about them, it is hard to think about anything else.”
   Our paper is related to the literature on policy impacting economic growth. We examine
one of the most profound policy reforms: the financial liberalization process of developing
economies’ equity markets. There are many ways in which the liberalization process may
contribute to increased growth. Improved risk sharing may lower the cost of capital enticing
additional investment. Improved risk sharing may also lead to investments in riskier higher
expected return projects [see Obstfeld (1994)], but it may also lead to lower precaution-
ary savings and reduce growth [Devereux and Smith (1994)]. Open capital markets may
mean more efficient markets, and generally increase financial development. There is now
a large literature documenting how improved financial intermediation can enhance growth
[see e.g. Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990); Bencivenga and Smith (1991), St.-Paul (1992)
and Bencivenga, Smith and Starr (1996)]. Just as the adoption of better policies and an
improvement of institutions permits countries to benefit from frontier technology (Klenow
and Rodriguez-Clare (1997), financial liberalization may permit countries to benefit from
frontier financial technology that the endogenous growth literature has shown may lead to
increased growth.
   Although there has been substantial research on the relation between financial develop-
ment and economic growth, both the finance and development literature lacks a compre-
hensive analysis of the effects of the liberalization process on economic growth. Levine and
Zervos (1995) include a market integration measure in their cross-sectional growth regression,
but it is not clear how the measure relates to the liberalization process and the regression
omits the temporal dimension of financial liberalization. Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and
Henry (2000a,b) find that liberalizations have tended to reduce the cost of capital and in-
crease investment. Sachs and Warner (1995a) find that one of the openness variables most
significantly affecting economic growth is the black market exchange rate premium, but
this measure is probably correlated with the existence of capital controls (Bekaert (1995)),
and hence related to capital market liberalizations. Finally, Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad


                                              2
(2000) establish that economic growth increases after liberalizations in 30 emerging markets,
even when controlling for a number of standard determinants of economic growth.
   Our study addresses four questions using a large cross-section of countries similar to the
set of countries used in the empirical growth literature.

(i) Did financial liberalizations spur economic growth?
Our paper begins by adding a financial liberalization indicator variable to a standard growth
regression. Since financial liberalization has a temporal dimension, our econometric method-
ology uses a General Method of Moments estimator (Hansen (1982)) on panel data with
overlapping observations. We find a significant liberalization effect that is distinct from the
impact of financial development.

(ii) How did liberalization increase growth?
Using aggregate data, it is difficult to establish how liberalization leads to increased growth.
However, our analysis provides some new insights. First, we decompose GDP into the
proportions due to investment, consumption, government and the trade sector. We find
that investment to GDP rises after capital market liberalizations. In most of our samples,
we find that the consumption to GDP ratio decreases and the trade balance becomes more
negative. There is little evidence that the size of the government sector changes around
financial liberalization. Our analysis suggests that the capital flowing in after liberalization
was not squandered on increased consumption as has been claimed in the literature on the
recent Mexico and South-East Asian crises.
   Second, increased investment may be due to better growth opportunities and/or a lower
cost of capital. We introduce some cost of capital proxies to our regressions to investigate
whether they drive out the liberalization effect, but they fail to do so.
   Third, if markets are imperfect and financing constraints exist (see e.g. Hubbard (1998)
and Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998)), external finance is more costly than internal finance,
and investment will be sensitive to cash flow. Financial liberalization may affect economic
growth by reducing capital market imperfections, which might in turn reduce the external
finance premium. Rajan and Zingales (1998) show that financially constrained industries


                                               3
grow faster in more financially developed countries, whereas Love (2000) shows that the sen-
sitivity of investment to cash flow, an indicator of financing constraints, depends negatively
on financial development. Laeven (2000) shows that liberalization of the banking sector
reduces the imperfections firms face when dealing with financial markets. Equity market
liberalization has a double effect, it directly reduces financing constraints in the sense that
more foreign capital becomes available, and foreign investors may insist on better corporate
governance that indirectly reduces the wedge between internal finance and external finance.
Hence, the cost of capital may go down because of improved risk sharing or because of the
reduction in financing constraints or both. Although it is difficult to distinguish between
the two effects, we shed indirect light on this in two ways. First, we introduce an instru-
ment for imperfections in capital markets using the insider trading rule dummy developed
by Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000). The inclusion of this variable does not subsume the
liberalization effect. Second, we suspect that external financing constraints will be more
likely to be relaxed through foreign investment when the financial system is Anglo-Saxon
(La Porta et al. (1997, 1998)). Hence, when we examine country-specific liberalization ef-
fects (see iii), we investigate whether the magnitude of the liberalization effect depends on
the legal system.


(iii) What drives cross-country differences in the liberalization effect?
As is typical in cross-country growth regressions, the coefficient on liberalization measures an
average growth effect. However, local conditions or policies will likely cause some deviation
from the average liberalization effect. We investigate whether the presence of schooling, a
small government sector, the legal system [see La Porta et al. (1997, 1998)], and democratic
institutions help differentiate the magnitude of the liberalization effect across countries.
Alternatively, the strength of the liberalization effect may be due to forces outside the control
of the government, such as the diversification potential of the local equity market for world
investors. We test the importance of this channel as well. Finally, it is difficult to measure
how comprehensive liberalizations are across countries, but we attempt to measure their
intensity by their effects on capital flows.


                                                4
(iv) What is the effect of liberalization on convergence?
    One of the main debating points in the growth literature is the rate of convergence
between poor and rich countries. Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992) show that relatively homo-
geneous countries or regions which should have similar long-run growth levels (such as the
OECD countries or American states) display much stronger convergence that the countries
in the world at large. Sachs and Warner (1995a) show that convergence is faster among
open economies (in terms of trade policy). Our estimates show that adding the liberaliza-
tion variable increases the convergence coefficient in our largest sample by almost one third.
Finally, a large difference between the neoclassical models and endogenous growth theory
is that endogenous growth theory is likely to imply divergence of income levels across time.
Therefore, we also investigate how the drive towards liberalization over the last two decades
has affected the dispersion of incomes across countries.
    The paper is organized as follows. The second section describes both the data we use and
the econometric framework. Some summary statistics are presented in this section. The third
part of the paper examines the determinants of economic growth and the role of financial
liberalizations. The fourth section explores the channels of growth. Next, we examine
country specific liberalization effects. Then, we summarize our results on convergence. Some
concluding remarks are offered in the final section.


2     Empirical Model and Data Description

2.1    Econometric framework

Define the logarithmic growth in real GDP per capita for country i between t and t + k as
follows:
                                           1X k
                              yi,t+k,k   =       yi,t+j i = 1, . . . , N                   (1)
                                           k j=1

where yi,t = ln( GDPi,t GDPi,t−1
                 POP / POP       ) and N is the number of countries in our sample. Let the
                     i,t     i,t−1

initial level of log GDP per capita be denoted as Qit and the country’s long-run (steady
state) per capita GDP as Q∗i . Taking a first-order approximation to the neoclassical growth


                                                   5
model [see e.g. Mankiw (1995)], we can derive: yi,t+k,k = −λ[Qit − Q∗i ], where λ is a positive
convergence parameter. The literature often implicitly models Q∗i as a linear function of a
number of structural variables such as the initial level of human capital. 1 If human capital
is very low in a particular poor country, then this poor country need not grow faster than a
rich country with much higher human capital; it depends on whether its initial GDP level is
higher or lower than its long-run level appropriate for this level of human capital. Hence, a
prototypical growth regression can be specified as

                                     yi,t+k,k = −λQi,t + γ 0 Xit + ²i,t+k,k ,                               (2)

where Xit are the variables controlling for different levels of the long-run per capita GDP
level across countries. Our main addition to the literature is to examine the effect of adding
a financial liberalization, in particular equity market liberalization variable, Libi,t , to the
growth regression.
       There are a number of important methodological considerations. First, most of the
empirical growth literature relies on purely cross-sectional regressions, where the structural
variables Xi are often taken contemporaneously with the growth rates yi . The estimation
methods are OLS or instrumental variables, the latter typically using past levels of the
variables as instruments.2 An example of this approach is Sachs and Warner (1995a,b)
who try to assess the effect of trade openness on growth using this regression framework.
However, in our context, this methodology misses the important temporal dimension of the
liberalization process.3 Since so many countries recently liberalized their equity markets,
most of the power of our test may derive from the temporal dimension. Hence, we use panel
techniques, combining time-series with cross-sectional information.
       Islam’s (1995) main motivation in using panel techniques is the fact that allowing for fixed
effects will mitigate the omitted variable problem that plagues the usual regression setup.
   1
       In the basic neo-classical model, long-run growth is zero; in generalized versions there is growth, equal
across all countries, driven by technological progress (see Jones (2000)).
   2
     An exception is Frankel and Romer (1999).
   3
     Slaughter (1998) criticizes the Sachs and Warner (1995a) work on trade liberalization for missing the
intertemporal dimension.


                                                        6
Harrison (1996) uses panel techniques to look at the effect of trade policy on economic growth,
finding weaker results than Sachs and Warner (1995b). Caselli, Esquivel and Lefort (1996)
criticize the endogeneity problems that plague many standard regressions. They use a GMM
instrumental panel estimator on differenced data. Barro (1997c) criticizes these methods for
losing critical cross-sectional information by differencing and allowing measurement error
dominate the results. He demonstrates how SUR panel results (albeit with only three time
series observations) closely replicate the cross-sectional results, and are quite different from
the panel regressions with fixed effects. Our method attempts to combine the best of both
of these techniques.
   Our main regression is specified as:


                           yi,t+k,t = βQi,1980 + γ 0 Xi,t + αLibi,t + ²i,t+k,k                           (3)

where Qi,1980 represents the logarithm of GDP in 1980.
   To maximize the time-series content in our regression, we use overlapping data and deal
with the resulting moving average component in the residuals by adjusting the standard
errors as a cross-sectional extension to Newey and West (1987). However, we do not include
fixed effects, nor do we first-difference the data – we simply estimate a level regression.
Since the time-series observations are over a relatively short time span, we include initial
log GDP per capita (in 1980), Qi,1980 , as one of the regressors. This avoids the econometric
problems introduced by resetting the initial GDP for every time-series observation. When we
examine convergence as implied by our estimates, we examine robustness to this particular
assumption using a number of alternative specifications.
   Note that our regressors are all pre-determined. We identify the parameters by assuming
E[gt+k ] = 0, with                                                  
                                               ²1,t+k,k ⊗ x1,t      
                                                                    
                                             =                      
                                                        ..
                                      gt+k              .                                              (4)
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                                   ²N,t+k,k ⊗ xN,t
where xi,t = [Qi,1980 , X0i,t , Libi,t ]0 . The estimator of θ = [β, γ 0 , α]0 can then be written as:

                             θ̂ = [(X0Z)S−1  0   −1  0   −1  0
                                         T (Z X)] [(X Z)ST (Z Y)]                                        (5)

                                                      7
where, given Xi = [x0i,t ] and Yi = [yi,t+k,k ],
                                                                             
                                                                 ···
                                                      X1     0          0 
                                    X1                                  
                                                     
                                                    0      X2 · · ·   0 
                                                                           
                                 X=          
                                      .
                                    ..       , Z = 
                                                      .
                                                                              
                                                                                                   (6)
                                                    ..                     
                                                                           
                                         XN                                  
                                                          0   0    · · · XN

and ST is the estimated variance covariance matrix of the sample orthogonality conditions,
gt+k , taking all possible autocovariances into account.
      This estimator looks like an instrumental variable estimator, but it reduces to pooled
OLS under simplifying assumptions on the weighting matrix. A more detailed discussion
of this estimator is found in Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2000). Since the system is
over-identified, the procedure also yields a natural specification test. In particular, a test of
overidentifying restrictions can be constructed as follows:

                                     T · [gT0 S−1
                                               T gT ] ∼ χ [N(K − 1)]
                                                         2
                                                                                                    (7)

                1   PT
where gT =      T    t=1   gt+k .4
      Second, growth regressions have been criticized for being contaminated by multicollinear-
ity [see Mankiw (1995), Elliot (1993)]. In a pure cross-sectional regression, the regressors
may be highly correlated (highly developed countries score well on all proxies for long-run
growth), the data may be measured with error, and every country’s observation is implicitly
viewed as an independent draw. It is therefore likely that standard errors underestimate the
true sampling error. In our panel methods, we can accommodate heteroskedasticity both
across countries and across time and correlation between country residuals by choosing the
appropriate weighting matrix W . In the tables, we report results using the method that
accommodates overlapping observations, groupwise heteroskedasticity but does not allow
for temporal heteroskedasticity nor SUR effects. Results reported in the appendix demon-
strate that the main results remain largely robust to accommodating these effects. Moreover,
Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2000) report a Monte Carlo experiment that shows that for
  4
      For simplicity of notation, we do not distinguish between population and sample constructs.



                                                      8
the simplest possible weighting matrix choice standard t-tests are well behaved (are correctly
sized) for a sample smaller than the one considered here. For more intricate weighting ma-
trices, including the one used here, there is slight over-rejection at the asymptotic critical
values, which should be taken into account in judging the evidence.
       Third, we have to choose k. Since our sample is relatively short, starting only in 1980,
and many liberalizations only occurred in the 1990s, the use of k = 10, which is typical
in the literature, is problematic. Whereas Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999) criticize the use of
shorter intervals because of the noise introduced by business cycle variation in GDP, both
Islam (1995) and Caselli, Esquivel and Lefort (1996) find very similar results using k = 5
versus k = 10. This motivates us to use k = 5 for most of our tables, but we ran the data
through for k = 3, k = 7 and k = 10 as well, finding the main results to be resilient to the
choice of k. Moreover, in one robustness experiment, we introduce variables controlling for
the world business cycle.
       Fourth, there is a growing literature on the robustness of variables in standard growth
regressions. Levine and Renelt (1991) find that most variables are in a particular sense
“fragile.” Recently, Dopelhoffer, Miller and Sala-i-Martin (2000) have criticized this study
as being too harsh for some of the standard righthand side variables. One danger generated
by all the studies trying to find the strongest regressors is that statistical inference is devoid of
meaning by data-mining bias. For our purposes, we are primarily interested in the robustness
of any effect the liberalization dummy may have on growth. Therefore we start by a simple
regression that closely mimics the regression in Barro (1997c).
       At first, we exclude the macro-variables in Barro (1997c)5 and the financial development
variables used in studies such as King and Levine (1993a,b) and Atje and Jovanovic (1992)
because we want to separately assess whether these variables drive out the liberalization
effect. Henry (2000a) and Mathieson and Rojas-Suarez (1992) discuss how policy reforms in
   5
       We never include investment/GDP, since, as Levine and Renelt (1991) also admit, the influence on
growth of most variables we include as independent variables, works through investment/GDP and it is
clearly endogenous. Basically, higher growth can come about by higher investment or by a more efficient
resource allocation.




                                                    9
developing countries typically involve domestic macro-reforms (including for example trade
openings) and financial market reform so that our equity market liberalization indicator
may be partially subsumed by the variables measuring macro-economic performance, trade
openness or financial development.
   Fifth, perhaps the main methodological issue regarding our sample is the construction of
the financial liberalization indicator variable and the question whether liberalization of the
equity market is a truly exogenous event or not. Our liberalization indicator builds on the
work of Bekaert and Harvey (2000) who consider a number of different definitions of finan-
cial liberalization. They examine ‘official liberalizations’ based on the dates of regulatory
changes, as well as the dates by which foreigners could access the local market with closed
end funds or ADRs. Bekaert and Harvey also examine a date implied by a sharp upward
movement in equity capital flows. We choose to focus on the ‘official liberalization’ date.
We have augmented Bekaert and Harvey (2000) by adding the inclusion date for a number
of markets that the International Finance Corporation recently added to the IFC composite
index. We also added liberalization dates for three developed countries: Japan, Spain and
New Zealand (all dates can be found in Appendix Table A1). Although timing capital mar-
ket reforms is prone to errors, the use of annual data helps in that small timing errors are
inconsequential. Nevertheless, we conduct several robustness experiments to increase our
confidence that the liberalization effect is not spurious.
   As with the effect of financial development on growth, endogeneity issues loom large. Is
the liberalization decision an exogenous political decision, or do countries liberalize when they
expect improved growth opportunities? These concerns are highly relevant for countries that
joined a free market area like Spain and Portugal in the European Union, where membership
simultaneously requires relaxing capital controls and favorable growth conditions. Such
liberalizations are rare in our sample (Spain and perhaps Mexico) and we believe, as do Sachs
and Warner (1995a) for trade liberalizations, that we can take the liberalization decision as
an exogenous event. Our test design definitely suffers less from endogeneity concerns than
earlier tests of the links between general financial development and growth. Nevertheless,
sections 3.3 and 3.4 consider a number of robustness experiments that further enhance our


                                               10
confidence that it is liberalization driving growth and not vice versa.


2.2     Data and Summary Statistics

The detailed description of our data is provided in the appendix Table A1. We employ
four different data samples, largely determined by data availability. Economic growth rates,
the components of GDP (consumption, government, investment and trade), and the official
financial liberalization indicator are available for all samples. The samples are divided pri-
marily by control (additional right-hand side) variable availability. Samples I and II, our
largest, include 95 and 75 countries, respectively, and employ primarily macroeconomic and
demographic data. Samples III and IV, on the other hand, include 50 and 28 countries,
respectively, and employ, in addition to the macroeconomic and demographic data, data de-
scribing the state of general equity market financial development in each country. Appendix
Table A2 describes the different sets of control variables that we use.
   Table 1 (panel A) presents evidence on the rates of economic growth averaged over varying
horizons both before and after the official equity market liberalization date for those countries
that undergo liberalization in our sample. Regardless of the horizon, most countries exhibit
larger average real GDP growth after liberalization. For example, 16 of 22 countries exhibit
larger real economic growth in the five years after liberalization than in the five years before,
the difference being 1.6% on average.
   Panel B of Table 1 presents some summary information about the cross-sectional differ-
ences between countries that have always been liberalized (17 developed countries) and those
that have never experienced a liberalization (51 countries). The differences are stark. The
average real growth rate for the countries that have always been liberalized (in our sample)
is about 2.3%. The growth rate for the countries that have never liberalized is approximately
zero.
   However, this type of analysis is unconditional in that it does not control for other
influences on growth. Next, we will examine the relationship between liberalization and
growth after controling for a range of demographic, economic and financial conditions.



                                               11
3     Liberalization and Economic Growth

3.1    The liberalization effect in a classic growth regression

Panel A of Table 2 describes the results of a standard growth regression which includes a
constant, initial GDP (1980), government consumption to GDP, secondary school enrollment,
population growth, and life expectancy as explanatory variables. We present results for
k = 5, for the four samples.
    The results are broadly consistent with the previous literature. Initial GDP enters with
a very significant negative coefficient suggesting that low initial GDP levels imply higher
growth rates - conditional on the other variables. This is the so-called conditional convergence
result. In most of the samples, the secondary school enrollment variable is significant and
positive suggesting that countries with high human capital will benefit from higher growth
rates. Similarly, life expectancy has a positive coefficient suggesting that long life expectancy
is associated with higher economic growth. Barro (1997a,c) documents analogous results for
these variables. Population growth has a significantly negative coefficient in the regression.
It is also the case that countries with large government sectors are more likely to have lower
growth rates - although this is not significant in all the samples. This result is consistent
with Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995).
    The introduction of the liberalization indicator to the classic growth regression in panel
B of Table 2 does not significantly change the coefficients nor the significance of the usual
macro economic variables. However, the liberalization coefficient is positive and significant
in all four samples and four to nine standard errors from zero. For example, in sample III
(50 countries), the liberalization coefficient is 0.0113 and five standard errors from zero. This
suggests that, on average, a liberalization is associated with a 1.13% increase in the real per
capita growth rate in GDP. The effect ranges from 0.95% in sample I to 1.30% in sample
IV. The one coefficient that does change significantly relative to its standard error in three
of the four samples is the coefficient on intial GDP. We find stronger evidence of conditional
convergence, once we control for liberalization. We further analyze this result in Section 6.
    We also conducted the test of the over-identifying restrictions, described in equation

                                               12
(7). The test does not reject for any of the samples with p-values over 0.6. When the
liberalization indicator is introduced, the p-values increase even further. Consequently, the
regressions appear well-specified and we do not report the test for our other specifications.


3.2    Robustness

At this point, we have introduced financial liberalization in the standard cross-sectional
growth regression frequently examined in macroeconomics. We find that liberalization ap-
pears to increase growth by 1.1% a year. How robust is this result?
   We carry out a number robustness experiments. First, we use an alternative set of
liberalization dates from Bekaert and Harvey (2000). This set of dates is what they refer to
as the ‘first sign’ dates. This is the earliest of the dates representing: official liberalizations,
first American Depositary Receipt (ADR) listing and first country fund launch. The results
in panel A of Table 3 suggest that both the coefficients on the main control variables and
the coefficient on the liberalization indicator are robust to using the ‘first sign’ dates.
   Another robustness exercise focuses on the role of Latin American countries. Indeed, it is
important to know whether the impact of liberalization is simply a local rather than global
phenomenon. One might argue that since many of the liberalizations occurred in the late
1980s and early 1990s and given the poor economic performance of Latin American coun-
tries during the debt crises in the 1980s, that most of the positive impact of liberalizations is
being driven by Latin American economies performing better in the 1990s. To test this, we
augment our regressions with an indicator variable for Latin American countries to see if the
liberalization effect holds for both Latin American countries and non-Latin American coun-
tries. The results presented in panel B of Table 4 are surprising. For both Latin American
and non-Latin American countries, the liberalization effect is positive and significant. What
is striking is that both the statistical and economic impact of liberalizations is stronger in
non-Latin American countries. Hence, we can safely conclude that our results are not being
driven by a small number of Latin American countries.
   Given that our growth horizon is fairly short (five years) and that the financial liberal-
izations are clustered during a particular period, we investigated, following Henry (2000b),

                                                13
whether our result was due to a correlation with the world business cycle. Panel C adds the
lagged OECD GDP growth rate as well as the lagged GDP-weighted world real interest rate
to the benchmark regression model. While the world growth and interest rate variable enter
the regression significantly in some of our samples, there is little impact on the liberalization
coefficients. The lagged interest rate variable also controls for “capital push” effects. It has
been argued that low interest rates in the U.S. in the early nineties led to massive U.S. cap-
ital outflows, much of it benefitting emerging markets. Since many liberalization dates are
close to this period of low interest rates, the liberalization effect may have partially captured
this exogenous capital flow effect. However, the interest rate variable does not even have the
right sign. Panel D contains a stronger test for a spurious business cycle effect in that the
contemporaeous values of the world growth and interest rate variables are included. While
the world real interest rate is only significant in the largest sample, the contemporaneous
OECD growth is strongly associated with country growth. It enters the regression with co-
efficients more than four standard errors from zero. However, the inclusion of this variable
has no significant impact on the liberalization coefficients. Indeed, the coefficients in all four
samples are slighly higher than the benchmark regression (Table 2) and the standard errors
are the same.
       The clustering of the liberalization dates towards the end of the sample for a number of
countries leads to additional questions. Is it just that developing countries are doing better
in the second set of the sample but the actual liberalization and hence the liberalization
event itself is immaterial? To address this critique, we conduct a small Monte Carlo analysis
that randomizes the liberalization dates across countries.
       It is important to realize that our liberalization effect both incorporates a cross-sectional
dimension (the growth of liberalized versus closed economies) and a temporal effect (the
growth of liberalizing economies after versus before the liberalization). Unreported results
suggest that both components are important,6 therefore, the Monte Carlo fully randomizes
   6
       These results are available on request. We considered a regression making all closed economies open and
vice versa, leaving the liberalization dates intact, to attempt to differentiate cross-sectional from temporal
effects. See also Table 10 for related results.



                                                       14
the liberalization dates. Consistent with proportions in the overall sample (95 countries),
there is a 54% chance of being a totally closed economy, a 18% chance of being a totally
liberalized economy, and a 28% chance of being a liberalizing economy with a liberalization
date corresponding to one of the dates occurring in sample. For each Monte Carlo replication,
we draw 95 uniform random numbers on the interval 1 to 95, and randomly assign one of
the existing liberalization dummies to each country. Since this is done with replacement,
the design only replicates the actual frequencies present in the sample when the number of
observations is large. We retain all the other variables for the various countries and we re-run
the regression. We repeat this experiment 1000 times. Hence, the regressions have purely
random liberalization events but are otherwise identical to the regressions run previously.
   Table 4 presents some relevant quintiles of the empirical distribution for the coefficients
and for the t-statistics. The first columns confirm the robustness of the other coefficients
to the presence of random liberalization events. The final column is the one of interest. It
shows that the liberalization effect we find is very unlikely to be a lucky constellation of
liberalization dates. The median coefficient is -0.0003 with a t-statistic of 0.13. The 97.5th
percentile of the distribution shows a coefficient of 0.0051 and a t-statistic of 3.14. This
is well below our estimated coefficient of 0.0095 and t-statistic of 5.84 reported in Table
2. Hence, the empirical p-value is less than 0.001. In fact, none of the simulated samples
displays a t-statistic larger than the one found in the data. We interpret the Monte Carlo
evidence as showing that the impact of the liberalization indicator is not by chance and not
simply associated with the clustering of liberalizations in the late 1980s and 1990s.
   We also investigated the sensitivity of our results to the choice of time horizon for eco-
nomic growth. Our results might be specific to the five year intervals. Appendix Table A3
presents the classic growth regression with the liberalization indicator for four time horizons:
three, five, seven and 10 years. For sample III, the coefficient ranges from 0.0082 for the
10-year horizon to 0.0137 for the three year horizon. The coefficients are always more than
five standard errors from zero. However, these represent annual growth rates. The total
logarithmic growth due to liberalization is obtained by multiplying these coefficients by the
growth interval, making the total growth 4.1% over three years, 5.7% over five years, and


                                              15
8.2% over ten years. Hence, 70% of the liberalization effect on growth takes place in the five
years following the liberalization. This suggests that the growth effect is not permanent, a
conclusion more consistent with the neoclassical growth model than with endogenous growth
theory.
      Our final robustness exercise assesses whether our choice of weighting matrix impacted
our results (see Appendix Table A4). We examine two additional weighting matrices. Ma-
trix 1 refers to a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and restricted SUR effects.7
Weighting matrix 2 refers to a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity (this matrix
is used in the main tables). Weighting matrix 3 refers to a simple pooled OLS. Focussing
on sample III, we find that the coefficient on the liberalization indicator is slightly smaller
with weighting matrix 1 (0.0091 versus 0.0113 reported in text). While the standard error
is slightly larger, the coefficient is still almost four standard errors from zero. For sample
II however, the liberalization coefficient is positive but not significant. Similarly, the coef-
ficient using weighting matrix 3 is slightly smaller (0.0104 versus 0.0113) but in this case
the standard error is much larger than in the base case (0.0034 versus 0.0020 reported in
the text). Nevertheless, even with weighting matrix 3, the liberalization effect is statistically
significant in all but one of the samples.


3.3       Macro-economic reforms versus financial liberalizations

Next, we add two macroeconomic variables to the regression that are often included as
regressors in cross-country regressions. The first variable is inflation. Barro (1997a,c) finds
a significant negative relation between inflation and economic growth, and finds that the
result is primarily due to a strong negative relation between very high inflation rates (over
15%) and economic growth. We include inflation in two different specifications, one in levels
and one as a range. The inflation spread is the high-low range (subtract lowest value from
highest) over the previous five years of inflation rates and proxies for the inflation variability.8
      Given that the extreme skewness in inflation is primarily due to inflation in Latin-
  7
      Given the small sample and the large number of non-diagnonal terms, we restrict them to be the same.
  8
      See Alizadeh, Brandt and Diebold (1999) for an analysis of range based estimators for variability.


                                                    16
American countries, we introduce a dummy for Latin America in both inflation specifications.
       Our second variable is a measure of trade openness, the ratio of exports plus imports to
GDP. The effect of trade integration and trade liberalization on growth is the subject of a
large literature. Dollar (1992), Lee (1993), Edwards (1998), Sachs and Warner (1995a) and,
more recently, Wacziarg (2000) have established that lower barriers to trade induce higher
growth. Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999) have recently criticized these studies on many grounds.
However, Rodriguez and Rodrik primarily question whether trade policy rather than trade
volume has affected growth. In our study, we are interested in the effect of financial market
liberalization not in testing the impact of trade policy. Indeed, we introduce these variables
at this stage because both trade volume and inflation may be affected by macro-economic
reforms aimed at stabilizing an economy. That is, the usual economic reform package involves
trade reform and inflation-reducing measures. Since such macro-economic reforms are often
part of the same reform package that also liberalizes capital controls and opens up the
equity market to foreign investment, our liberalization effect may simply be proxying for the
macro-economic effect.
       Table 5 augments the regressions in Table 2 by adding the trade and inflation variables.
In all samples, the coefficient on trade openness is highly significant and positive suggesting
countries that are open will have higher growth than countries that are relatively closed.
These results are consistent with the case made by Edwards (1998) and Sachs and Warner
(1995a).
       The results for the inflation variable are mixed. While Barro (1997) finds a consistently
negative relation between inflation and economic growth, we find that most of the coefficients
on inflation are not significantly different from zero. However, in sample IV (28 countries),
inflation has a significantly negative coefficient for non-Latin American countries. The results
of the inflation spread variable are often significant with an unexpected positive coefficient.9
   9
       We also estimated a regression without the Latin American indicator. The coefficient on the single
inflation variable was not significantly different from zero. We also considered a regression with dummies
for Brazil and Argentina only, the largest outliers in inflation data. Here, we find negative but insignificant
coefficients, whereas the effect for Argentina and Brazil is negative and significant.




                                                      17
       The addition of the two reform variables has a dramatic impact on the coefficients on the
size of the government sector and secondary school enrollments. For example, comparing
Table 2 to Table 3, the coefficient on government consumption to GDP is more negative
and significant in samples I, II and III but the negative effect of government on GDP is
decreased in sample IV and is insigificant in the specification that includes the inflation
spread variable. Secondary school enrollment is now only significant in the regression with
28 countries (sample IV). For example, in Table 2 enrollment had a coefficient of 0.0305 in
the regression with 95 countries and was four standard errors from zero. In Table 3, the
coefficient is 0.0100 and is not significantly different from zero. These results are consistent
with Islam (1995) who points out the lack of robustness of the human capital effect on
growth. The other coefficients are not affected.
       Importantly, the liberalization variable is not impacted by the inclusion of the trade and
inflation variables. In Table 2, the coefficient on the liberation indicator is 0.0113 for the
50 country sample. The coefficient is 0.0112 in the regression with the reform variables.
The standard error is similar across the two different specifications with the coefficient being
about five standard errors from zero. Only in sample IV does the liberalization effect visibly
decrease from 1.3% to around 0.80%.


3.4        Financial development versus financial liberalization

There is a significant literature that studies the relation between financial development and
growth (see, e.g. McKinnon (1973) and Patick (1966)). Interestingly, it possible to learn
something from the time when the U.S. was an emerging market. Rousseau and Sylla (1999)
show that early U.S. growth in the 1815-1840 period was finance led. One of their proxies for
financial development is the number of corporations - which is similar to one of our financial
development variables.
       King and Levine (1993a) study the impact of banking sector development on growth
prospects.10 Panel A of Table 6 examines the role of the banking sector by adding private
  10
       Jayarathne and Strahan (1996) find that banking deregulation led to higher regional economic growth
in the U.S.


                                                     18
credit to GDP to the growth regression. Higher private credit is associated with higher
economic growth which is consistent with King and Levine’s main results. In all the samples,
the variable is at least three standard errors from zero. There is little impact on the other
variables by including the private credit variable. The liberalization indicator remains highly
significant in all but the sample with the smallest number of countries. Its value drops
respectively by 0.15%, 0.24%, 0.10% and 0.13% in the four samples.
       Atje and Jovanovic (1989), Demurgüç-Kunt and Levine (1996a,b), Demurgüç-Kunt and
Maksimovic (1996) and Levine and Zervos (1996, 1998) examine the effect of stock market
development on economic growth. In panel B, we add equity turnover (a measure of trading
activity) and the log of the number of companies qualifying for the country index (reflects the
size of the equity market).11 These financial variables are only available for the two smaller
sets of countries: 50 and 28 countries. The results show that both the turnover and number
of companies variables are significant and positive implying a positive relation between stock
market development and economic growth. The turnover results are consistent with Levine
and Zervos. No one has previously examined the number of stocks included in the index.
       The presence of the financial development variables does not knock out the liberalization
effect. The liberalization indicator is highly significant in the sample with 50 countries (four
standard errors from zero). The liberalization indicator, while positive, is not significantly
different from zero in the smallest sample of countries. Taken together, financial development
variables do have a non-neglible effect on our liberalization indicator. For sample III, we
started with an equity market liberalization driving up economic growth by 1.15%. After
taking into account financial development indicators, the effect is down to 0.83%. Our
interpretation is that less than 30% of the liberalization effect can be attributed to the
beneficial effects it has on financial development.
       We do not believe our original effect spuriously reflects a financial development effect.
  11
       We do not consider market capitalization to GDP, since this variable is hard to interpret. Having a
measure of overall equity value in the numerator, it may simply be a forward looking indicator of future
growth or it may be related to the cost of capital. In addition, Rousseau and Wachtel (2000) find market
capitalization to GDP to have a weaker impact than value traded in their cross-country analysis of growth.




                                                     19
To marshall evidence in favor of this interpretation, we regressed our financial development
variables onto the independent variables in the classic growth regression. The findings are
reported in Table 7.
       Our left hand side variables in the regressions are future turnover and the future number
of companies in the index as indicators for stock market development and future private
credit to GDP as the proxy for bank development, where we take averages exactly as in the
growth regressions. The independent variables are the same regressors as in our basic growth
regression. We focus the discussion on the k = 3 results (averages over three years). We are
not much interested in the relations between the financial development indicators and most
right hand side variables, since any significant relation may reflect the joint development of
the economy and the financial sector. For example, it is not surprising that initial log GDP
is a positive significant predictor of turnover and private credit to GDP. Although positive,
in the number of companies regression, the coefficient on initial log GDP is insignificant. Of
main interest is the coefficient on the liberalization indicator. The coefficient is positive in
all the regressions we run and at least 7.5 standard errors from zero. Private credit/GDP
increases by between 0.13 and 0.23 (the mean value of the variable in sample III is 0.591)
whereas the log of number of stocks increases by almost 0.47 (mean value is 5.33)12 Perhaps
the most striking effect is on turnover, which increases by 0.166 (mean value is 0.299). Indeed,
in 16 of the 20 markets, turnover increases. More precisely, in 13 of these markets, turnover
increases by more than 50%. In nine of the markets, turnover more than doubles.
       Although this does establish that liberalization predicts future financial development, it
does not establish causality and it does not exclude the possibility that only highly developed
financial markets liberalize. To investigate the plausibility of the latter argument, we consider
a number of cross-sectional probit analyses. Our dependent variable is now the liberalization
event, 1 for a liberalized market, zero for a non-liberalized market and our independent
variables are the growth indicators and the financial development indicators, averaged over
the 5 previous years. That is, the regression is:
  12                                ∆x
       ∆log(x)/∆Libt = 0.4681, so    x /∆(Libt )   = 0.4681, that is, this represents a 47% increase in the number
of stocks.



                                                          20
                                   Libi,t = f(B0 Xi,t−1 ) + ²i,t

where Libi,t is a {0, 1} variable indicating liberalization and Xi,t−1 includes the average over
the past five years of turnover, private credit to GDP and the number of companies in the
index, all measured starting the year before liberalization. We also include initial GDP and
the size of the government sector.
   Panel B of Table 7 reports purely cross sectional probit models using quasi-maximum
likelihood estimation (QMLE) methods (with robust standard errors) for several different
years. Since the number of non-liberalized countries in the sample with financial data is
rather limited, the estimation is noisy. Nevertheless, there does not appear to be a significant
relation between financial development and future liberalization. Moreover, the signs are
not consistently positive across samples. Furthermore, the past log GDP level only enters
significantly in the 1987 panel, although its coefficient is always positive. Taken together,
we feel that liberalization can be taken to be an exogenous event that enhances financial
development but is not a by-product of financial development.
   Of course, we must realize that a country cannot liberalize its financial markets when
it does not have financial markets. Although our previous exercises controlled for financial
development, we selected countries for which we had data on financial markets and therefore
were already somewhat financially developed. Hence, by comparing samples I and II with
samples III and IV, we basically exclude countries without financial markets and part of the
effect that we measure for samples I and II may be a financial under-development phenom-
enon. Since the liberalization effect is in fact larger for samples III and IV (see panel B of
Table 2), this problem does not appear to bias our results towards finding large liberalization
effects for our largest samples.
   Clayton, Jorgensen and Kavajecz (2000) examine the impact of the existence of financial
exchanges on a 16 macroeconomic and financial variables. They find that there is no signif-
icant association between the existence of a financial exchange and increased GDP growth
prospects. These results are consistent with the theme of our paper. The existence of a
capital market is not sufficient for higher growth prospects – the market needs to function

                                                21
efficiently. Financial market liberalization increases the probability that markets operate
effectively.


4         The sources of the liberalization effect

4.1          Liberalization and the components of GDP

Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000b) argue that liberalizations impact investment.
Both of these studies use a very small number of countries. Panel A of Table 8 examines
the classic growth regression with investment to GDP as the dependent variable, and then
introduces the financial liberalization indicator. The results suggest that liberalizations are
associated with significantly higher investment to GDP ratios. In each of the samples,
the liberalization indicator is more than two standard errors above zero.13 Overall, the
investment to GDP ratio appears to increase by at least one percent after liberalization.
The 0.79% in sample III effect is the only coefficient below one percent that we find in the
four regressions. Interestingly, Wacziarg (2000) has established that trade openness affects
growth by mainly raising the ratio of investment to GDP.
         If investment to GDP increases, some other components of GDP must decrease. In
the rest of the table, we look at the other components, private consumption, government
consumption and the trade balance. A standard macro-economic interpretation of the recent
currency crises in Mexico and South-East Asia is that these countries ran large current
account deficits, and used the capital to go on an unproductive consumption and investment
binge, which eventually led to pressure on their currencies. Since financial liberalization
made borrowing from abroad easier, the proponents of this interpretation typically advocate
some form of capital controls. Our results here can indirectly shed light on this.
         Panel B of Table 8 shows that the impact on consumption is inconsistent across the dif-
ferent samples, using the official liberalization indicator. In sample II (75 countries), there is
    13
         We also investigated the sensitivity to the alternative liberalization dates. The liberalization effect is even
larger given these alternative dates. For example, in sample III the coefficient on the official liberalization
indicator is 0.0079 while the first sign indicator has a coefficient of 0.0119.



                                                            22
a strong negative impact on consumption which is statistically significant. In the other sam-
ples, the estimated coefficient is not significant at conventional levels. Interestingly, when the
first sign liberalization indicator is used (not reported), the impact on the consumption ratio
is negative in all samples. In samples I, II and III, it is significantly negative. These results
are inconsistent with the hypothesis that most of the capital flowing in after liberalizations
was squandered on consumption.
   The final panels of Table 8 detail the impact of liberalizations on the government sector
and the relative trade balance. Liberalizations have an inconsistent impact on the size of
the government sector. The coefficient is negative for the largest sample, but positive and
significant for the smallest sample. The trade balance is negatively affected by financial
liberalization, and significantly so, worsening between 0.6% and 2.3% of GDP. On aver-
age, financial liberalization has helped to bring in foreign capital that financed additional
investment with a worsened current account as a result.
   In the neo-classical growth model, one important channel to increased growth is increased
savings rates, and hence investment. Bonser-Neal and Dewenter (1999) do not find a signif-
icant effect of financial development on savings rates in a sample of 16 developing countries.
Despite the links we find between liberalization and financial development, our strong results
for higher investment rates are not necessarily inconsistent with the results of Bonser-Neal
and Dewenter since our trade balance findings demonstrate the importance of foreign savings
fueling increased investment.


4.2    Liberalization and the cost of capital

Section 4.1 established that investment increases substantially after liberalizations. An ob-
vious channel for increased investment is a lower cost of capital, brought about by reduced
prices of risk and risk exposures (see Errunza and Losq (1985), Bekaert and Harvey (1995)
and Stulz (1995)). Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000) argue that financial liber-
alizations led to lower costs of capital. However, the cost of capital is notoriously difficult to
measure. Since financial integration constitutes a major structural break, the use of an asset-
pricing model such as the CAPM to compute the cost of capital is fraught with difficulty

                                               23
(see Bekaert and Harvey (1995, 2000)). We use two proxies for the cost of capital.
       Erb, Harvey and Viskanta (1996a) argue that country credit ratings have the ability
to explain both the cross-section of expected returns and of volatility. They argue that in
emerging, segregated markets, the credit rating is a useful proxy for the cost of equity capital.
If this is correct, liberalization should reduce the cost of capital and improve credit ratings,
not only because of a reduction in political risk, but also because of the standard integration
effect. Nevertheless, although we expect this measure to be positively related to economic
growth, the mechanism is not necessarily a reduced cost of capital. The standard empirical
growth literature has shown political unrest to be negatively related to growth. Our credit
ratings will obviously be negatively correlated with political unrest measures (see e.g. Barro
(1997a)).14
       Panel A of Table 9 adds the log of the credit rating to the benchmark regression. The
rating is highly significant in the group of 75 countries (10 standard errors from zero) and the
group of 50 countries (4 standard errors from zero) but it is not significant for the smallest
group of countries. The significant coefficients are positive suggesting the higher the rating
the better the growth prospects. Although this result is subject to multiple interpretations,
the main point of interest is to see whether the liberalization effect survives. We find that the
liberalization indicator is strongly significant in samples III and IV but no longer significant
in sample II.15
       Our second proxy builds on Bekaert and Harvey (2000) who suggest that dividend yields
are a reasonable way to examine the impact on the cost of capital. Even though dividend
yields reflect both expected growth and the cost of capital, they may be valuable in picking
  14
       Erb, Harvey and Viskanta (1996b) show that the correlation between the International Country Risk
Guide measure of political risk and the Institutional Investor Country Credit Rating (the measure we use)
is 30.0%.
   15
      To explore the sample II results further, we estimated a model that included the liberalization indicator,
the country credit rating and the interaction between the credit rating and the liberalization indicator. All
three of these coefficients are highly significant with the coefficient on the liberalization indicator being four
standard errors from zero. The interaction specification suggests that the impact of credit rating on growth
is greatly diminished once you liberalize.



                                                       24
up permanent changes in the cost of capital. Unfortunately, we have only the smallest sample
to work with for the dividend yield regression. Moreover, there is quite a bit of cross-country
variation in dividend yields due to country-specific corporate and tax policies. Since we are
only interested in the change in the cost of capital after liberalization, we control for these
country-specific factors, by country-specific demeaning of the dividend yields.16 Hence, we
measure whether growth is large after periods of low dividend yields.
       When we add the dividend yield variable to the benchmark regression, we find an in-
significant coefficient. We do not report the results for this regression. The specification we
report in panel B of Table 9 also includes an interaction term between the dividend yield and
the liberalization indicator. Whereas the dividend yield remains insignificant in the growth
regression, the interaction of the dividend yield and the liberalization indicator has a nega-
tive effect on growth. The interaction term weights the countries that underwent the largest
decreases in the dividend yield with a larger negative weight. The negative, marginally sig-
nificant, coefficient then means that the lower the cost of capital, the larger economic growth
is subsequently. Nevertheless, despite the inclusion of the dividend yield, the liberalization
effect remains strongly significant. It enters the regression reported in panel B of Table 9
with a coefficient of 0.016 and is more than three standard errors from zero. Interestingly, the
coefficient on the liberalization indicator is larger than the 0.013 reported in the benchmark
regression in Table 2.
       Since the cost of capital affect should operate through increased investment, panels C
and D repeat our analysis of panels A and B but with investment to GDP on the left-hand
side. In panel C, the credit rating variable is no longer significant in sample II but highly
significant in sample III and marginally significant in sample IV. The liberalization variable
is always positive and strongly or marginally significant. When we compare its magnitude
to the original investment effect in Table 8, it is apparent that the inclusion of the credit
rating only marginally reduces the liberalization effect. In panel D, we record both a strong
liberalization affect (over 2%) and a very strong interaction effect with dividend yields (the
  16
       For the countries that liberalize, we demean using the pre-liberalization data to calculate the mean. For
countries that do not liberalize, we use all the data to demean.



                                                        25
lower the dividend yield, the larger the liberalization effect). Moreover, the sign on the
dividend yield variable itself has the right (negative sign) and is almost significant (t-statistic
of 1.78). We interpret this to mean that lower costs of capital provided a channel for more
investment and larger economic growth. Of course, we cannot exclude the possibility that
the decrease in the dividend yield can also be a direct indication of growth opportunities.


4.3    Insider trading and financial liberalizations

Section 4.1 established that investment increased substantially post liberalization, whereas
section 4.2 showed that the cost of capital may have mattered in increasing the rate of
physical investment. However, both cost of capital proxies have multiple interpretations. The
credit rating may simply reflect political risk and the dividend yield growth opportunities.
Moreover, the liberalization effect is not fully driven out by including these variables in the
regression. Hence, we have not been able to conclusively establish that it is the cost of capital
rather than perhaps the availability of (foreign) capital that led to increased investment, and
subsequently growth.
   The recent literature on financing constraints stresses both the availability of capital
and its cost. If capital markets are imperfect, external capital is likely to be more costly
than internal capital and a shortage of internal capital will reduce investment below first-
best optimal levels. Recent empirical work by Rajan and Zingales (1998), Love (2000) and
Laeven (2000) shows that financial development may help relax these financing constraints
and increase investment. Financial liberalization will make available more foreign capital
but this does not necessarily resolve the market imperfections that lead to a wedge between
the internal and external finance cost of capital. However, since we have established that lib-
eralizations bring about financial development, they should also reduce financing constraints
and the external finance cost of capital premium. At our aggregate data level, it is difficult
to ascribe part of the liberalization effect to this factor. Our only attempt relies on the work
of Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000).
   Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000) argue that the enforcement of insider trading laws makes
developing markets more attractive to international investors. They present evidence that

                                                26
associates insider trading laws with a lower cost of capital in a sample of 95 countries.
Importantly, Bhattacharya and Daouk distinguish between enactment of insider trading
laws and the enforcement of these laws. [These dates are provided in appendix A3.]
       Insider trading laws, and especially their enforcement, may be quite closely related to the
corporate governance problems that lead to the external finance premium. Enforcement of
insider trading laws may be a good instrument for reduced external financing constraints. It
is possible that the enactment of such rules are particularly valued and perhaps demanded
by foreigners before they risk investing in emerging markets. By adding the Bhattacharya
and Daouk dummy, we can see whether these laws matter for economic growth and whether
they drive out the liberalization effect.
       Panels A and B of Table 10 examine the impact of the enactment and enforcement of
insider trading laws on economic growth. The existence of these laws has no significant
effect on economic growth, as evidenced in panel A. However, insider trading prosecutions
present a different story. In all of the samples, the coefficient on insider trading prosecution
is positive suggesting higher growth prospects. The coefficient is more than three standard
errors from zero in all but the smallest sample, where it is 1.3 standard errors above zero.
The magnitude of the effect varies between 0.15% (sample IV) and 0.37% (sample III).
       The financial liberalization impact survives the inclusion of the insider trading variable.
In the three largest samples, the liberalization variable is more than four standard errors
above zero. In the smallest sample, the coefficient is positive and three standard errors
from zero.17 The coefficients on the liberalization indicator are remarkably similar to those
reported in the benchmark regression in Table 2. The coefficients are never more than 0.03%
lower than those reported in Table 2. For example, in the largest sample the coefficient drops
from 0.95% in Table 2 to 0.92% in panel B of Table 10. Consequently, the liberalization effect
we find does not appear to be driven by the relaxation of financing constraints as proxied
by the insider trading variables.18
  17
       Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000) examine the differential impact of insider trading laws and financial
liberalizations on the cost of capital. While they find that both factors are important, the liberalization
effect is more prominent.
   18
      When we use investment to GDP as the left-hand side variable, the liberalization effect remains intact


                                                     27
4.4     Financial liberalizations and the efficiency of investment

Apart from increasing investment, financial liberalizations may have improved the efficiency
of capital allocation. An obvious channel through which this could occur is the financial
development (see section 3.4) and improved market efficiency (see previous section) liberal-
izations might bring about. In a recent paper, Wurgler (2000) demonstrates an empirical
link between financial development and the efficiency of capital allocation. He shows that
countries with developed financial sectors increase investment more in their growing indus-
tries and decrease investment more in their declining industries than those with undeveloped
financial sectors.
    Our empirical setup is not well suited to address this question since we do not have in-
vestment/GDP on the right-hand side of our regressions. Ideally, we would like to investigate
whether the same investment/GDP rate at time t increases future growth more for liberal-
ized countries than for closed countries. One simple regression that accomplishes this is the
one in which we replace the secondary school enrollment and government sector variables,
which are highly correlated with investment/GDP, by investment/GDP and we introduce
an interaction variable between investment/GDP and our liberalization variable.
    We do indeed find that the interaction variable is positive – it is always larger than 0.03 –
and highly significant. This result suggests that in addition to driving up investment/GDP,
liberalizations also contributed to the efficiency of investment. When we introduce a separate
liberalization indicator in this regression, the interaction result remains significant in three
of our samples and drives out the independent liberalization effect. But in sample IV, our
smallest sample, the direct liberalization effect survives and drives out the interaction effect.
and the insider trading variables carry negative coefficients. On interpretation is that the liberalization effect
subsumes the insider trading effect, since the two variables are highly correlated with liberalizations often
preceding insider trading prosecutions.




                                                       28
5    Cross-country differences in the liberalization effect

Our battery of regressions suggest that it is difficult to diminish the impact of liberalizations
on economic growth. But our framework, by construction, forces a common coefficient
relating liberalizations to growth in every country. The coefficient is best interpreted as an
average effect, conditioning on a number of control variables. It makes sense that there are
country-specific deviations from the average. It is of great interest to investigate what might
make a country have a greater (or lesser) response to a financial liberalization. In his book
on trade openness, Rodrik (1999) argues that openness may not be suitable for all countries.
Likewise financial liberalization may not bring the anticipated benefits depending on the
strength of the domestic institutions and other factors.
    Our method involves interacting the liberalization indicator with country-specific vari-
ables that potentially could enhance or diminish the liberalization effect. We examine six
different variables. First, we examine the role of human capital. Bekaert, Harvey and Lund-
blad (2000) present evidence on a small group of countries that the impact of liberalization
is enhanced for those countries with high secondary school enrollment. The second variable
is the size of the government sector. Is it the case that countries with small government
sectors are more likely to benefit from financial liberalizations? For these two first vari-
ables, we have already used data on government/GDP and secondary school enrollment.
To test whether a more educated work force and smaller government sector enhance the
effects of liberalization, we look at the cross-sectional distribution of the 5-year average of
these variables before the liberalization. We then consider different coefficients for three
groups of countries: always liberalized, liberalizing countries with small government sectors
or secondary enrollments preliberalization and liberalizing countries with large governments
sectors or secondary enrollment. The median liberalizing country(ies) get a value of 0.5 for
both groups.
    The results of these experiments are contained in Table 11. In panel A, it is clear that
education is a crucial factor in harvesting the benefits of a liberalization. The countries with
a high secondary school enrollment have significant positive coefficients on the liberalization


                                               29
indicator in all the samples. However, the countries with low secondary school enrollment
have negative but insignificant coefficients in all the samples. We can reject the equality of
the coefficients at the 1% level in all four samples. It is also the case that the size of the
government sector appears to matter (see Panel B). Countries with smaller government sec-
tors had positive significant coefficients on the liberalization indicator in all but the smallest
sample. The coefficients on the countries with larger government sectors were never more
than two standard errors from zero. However, we can reject the equality of the coefficients
across small and large government sectors at the 5% level in all four samples.
       Third, we follow Barro (1997b) and look at the structure of government. The effects of
democracy on growth are not obviously positive (see Barro (1997b) and Tavares and Wacziarg
(2000)). It is possible, however, that democratic countries get a larger boost from financial
liberalizations since non-democratic countries may be less amenable to foreign investors. To
measure democracy, we use the [0,1] index developed by Barro (1997b) and scale the liberal-
ization variable with this index.19 If democratic countries record much larger liberalization
effects than non-democratic countries, our liberalization coefficient should increase and be
interpreted as the growth effect for a fully democratic country. 20
       The results are contained in panel C of Table 11. In all of the samples, the liberalization
indicator interacted with the democracy indicator is positive and significantly different from
zero. However, the magnitude of the coefficient to the liberalization indicator is lower than
the one reported in the benchmark regression in Table 2 in all four of the samples. The main
reason is that among the liberalized and liberalizing countries these is little variation in the
democracy index: most of the values are 1.0 or close to 1.0.
       Fourth, we revisit the literature on the rule of law and finance. La Porta et al. (1997,
1998) assert that countries with an Anglo-Saxon legal system tend to protect investors much
better than do countries with a French civil law system. We examine whether different
types of legal systems lead to a differential impact of liberalizations across countries. We
  19
       A value of 1 means represents a fully democratic country and a value of zero represents an undemocratic
country.
  20
     Barro’s classification did not extend to all of our countries. There was only one liberalized country that
we were missing, Nigeria, and we assigned a value based on the African average.


                                                       30
primarily differentiate between the French and the Anglo-Saxon systems. We also have
another category, that includes countries with the German or Scandinavian legal origins and
a few countries we could not classify.21 Since corporate governance may be an important
factor in financial markets, it is conceivable that Anglo-Saxon countries record larger gains
from liberalization.
       The results are presented in panel D of Table 11. The strongest growth effects are found
for English law systems. The next most important legal systems are the ‘others’ category.
The Wald test rejects the equality of the coefficients across different legal systems at the
1% level of significance. The weakest impact on economic growth arises from countries
with French legal origins. This is consistent with the argument in La Porta et al. (1998)
that French law provides little investor protection, which may also result in keeping foreign
investors out.
       In addition, we examine the role of capital flows directly. One might enact financial
liberalizations but if no capital flows in, there is unlikely to be much benefit in terms of
lower costs of capital. To differentiate countries according to capital flows, we use the recent
high-quality data on U.S. foreign holdings computed by Warnock and Mason (2000), who
report estimates of U.S. holdings of foreign stocks. We compute these holdings as a fraction
of local market capitalization for these countries for which we have that information and as a
percent of GDP. For the U.S., we use the fraction of the US stock market held by foreigners.
Unfortunately, we only have data for 1997.22 Since these data are percentages, we can
again scale the liberalization dummy with this “foreign holdings” variable. We again expect
the liberalization coefficient to be much larger than our previously estimated coefficients,
indicating that it is important to actually attract foreign capital. Of course, foreign capital
will be attracted by good growth opportunities, so a positive effect is not surprising.
       The results are contained in panels E and F of Table 11. When scaling by holdings
to GDP (in panel E), the coefficients on the liberalization dummy decrease in samples II
  21
       Our classification by the origin of legal systems is taken from Levine, Loayza and Beck (1999) who
extend the original La Porta et al. (1997) sample.
  22
     Holdings data are from the U.S. Treasury Department’s comprehensive survey of U.S. holdings of foreign
equities, conducted as of December 31, 1997.


                                                    31
through IV and the t-statistics invariably decrease relative to the results in Table 2. When the
liberalization indicator is scaled by U.S. holdings to market capitalization, we find that the
liberalization indicator has roughly the same t-statistics as those obtained in the benchmark
regression. However, the coefficients are much larger in magnitude, as we would expect if
foreign ownership is important.
         Finally, we examine the role of global portfolio diversification. Is it the case that countries
with low correlations with the world market return receive more capital after liberalizations
and grow more? We rescale the correlations to be between zero and one with one representing
perfect negative correlation.23
         The results are presented in panel G of Table 11. For this scaling factor, we needed
equity returns and hence could work with only the smallest sample. The standard error is
large relative to the coefficient. There is no evidence that global diversification plays a role
in the relation between liberalization and growth.


6         Convergence and Financial Liberalization

One of the primary coefficients we estimate from the perspective of the empirical growth
literature is the λ parameter, which measures the speed of convergence for poor countries.
Table 12 summarizes the estimates of the λ parameter over our various different samples and
distinguishes the estimates with and without a liberalization indicator variable.
         The main idea behind conditional convergence is that countries only show convergence
once we control for the determinants of steady state per capita GDP level. This also implies
that if the regression omits important determinants of the steady state development level,
the convergence speed may be underestimated.
         Many of the patterns we see in the convergence coefficients are consistent with intuition.
    23
         We compute total return correlations with the world MSCI portfolio return for in the following two
ways. For liberalizing countries, we use the five years (or most recently available) pre-liberalization to
estimate correlations. For fully liberalized countries, we use the first five-years (1980-1984) correlations.
We then scale the correlations to fall between zero and one using the following transformation: scaling =
ln(2-correlation)/ln(3).



                                                      32
When we move from sample I to sample IV, we increase the data requirements, inadvertently
making the group of countries we consider more homogeneous with respect to steady state
levels of GDP. As the results in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1997c) would suggest, we indeed
find stronger convergence for the smaller sets of countries.
   Table 12 shows that for all samples convergence is stronger when the liberalization in-
dicator is included reaching a maximum of 0.0104 in the largest sample for the model that
includes banking development indicators. This is consistent with the Sachs and Warner
(1995a) argument that efficient economic institutions are necessary for economic growth and
therefore for economic convergence. In other words, they believe that efficient economic
institutions are important determinants of long-run growth and that the failure to observe
convergence for the poorest countries is reversible by adopting the right policies. Although
they focus on trade openness, we show that financial liberalization may be equally important.
   Sachs and Warner (1995a) also show that trade-liberalized countries as a group show
stronger convergence than closed economies. In our regression framework, this suggests
an interaction variable between the liberalization indicator and initial GDP. The result is
reported in panel A of Table 13. The convergence coefficient for the liberalized countries
equals the coefficient on the initial GDP plus the coefficient on the interaction variable.
For samples I and II, the interaction variable is significantly negative suggesting stronger
convergence among liberalized economies than among segmented ones. For samples III
and IV, there is no significant effect, perhaps because these samples are somewhat more
homogeneous to start with, containing only economies with a certain level of equity market
development.
   Our regression differs from the usual empirical growth literature, in that we kept initial
GDP constant at the 1980 level. To check the importance of this assumption, we consider
two additional experiments. In the first, we reset initial GDP just once in the beginning of
1990 (panel B of Table 13). In the second, we re-set initial GDP when countries liberalize,
at the GDP level at liberalization (panel C of Table 13). The results of these experiments
suggest that there is little sensitivity to adjusting the initial level of GDP. The coefficient on
initial GDP is similar to the results presented in Table 2.


                                               33
    There is also a substantial literature on σ-convergence, the idea that the dispersion of
income across countries should fall with development. Although Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1995) clearly show that the neoclassical model does not necessarily imply σ–convergence,
many find the hypothesis of independent interest, also because endogenous growth models
typically imply the divergence of incomes (see Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997)). Ben-
David (1993) and Sachs and Warner (1995a) have demonstrated σ-convergence for trade-
liberalized countries but their work has been severely criticized by Slaughter (1998). In our
framework, we simply test the hypothesis whether the number of liberalized countries has
resulted in lower dispersion of incomes across countries. The regression is a pure times series
regression of the following form:


                                σt2 = a + bt + cCUMLIBt + et

where t represents a time dummy, σ is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the log GDP
per capita levels and CUMLIB is the number of liberalized countries.
    Panel D, Table 13 shows that dispersion is increasing over time in our sample (the b
coefficient is significantly positive) which is consistent with the results in, for example, Quah
(1993). The c coefficient is negative and almost three standard errors below zero indicating
that liberalizations counteract the dispersion of incomes.


7    Conclusions

Our research demonstrates that financial liberalization did increase economic growth. We
augment the standard set of variables used in economic development research with an indica-
tor variable for financial liberalization. We find that a financial liberalization leads to a one
percent increase in annual real per capita GDP growth over a five year period, and find this
increase to be statistically significant. This result is robust to a wide variety of experiments
including: an alternative set of liberalization dates, different groupings of countries, regional
indicator variables, different weighting matrices for the calculation of standard errors and
four different time-horizons for measuring economic growth.


                                               34
   The liberalization effect is also economically important. Consider the following exercise.
Using the classic growth regression framework, we examine the impact on growth for a
developing country that liberalizes. We assume that the human capital variables (education
and life expectancy) move from the 25th percentile of all countries to the median. We also
move the size of the government sector and the population growth from the 75th percentile
to the cross-sectional median. We calculate the predicted positive impact on growth given
the changes in these four variables. We compare this to the impact of a liberalization. In
the sample with 50 countries, the rather dramatic changes in the classic regression variables
add 1.9% to real economic growth. The liberalization indicator adds 1.1%. Hence, the
liberalization is contributing close to 40% of the total growth increment.
   Our analysis also investigates the channels whereby liberalizations impact economic
growth. We establish that the liberalization effect is not spuriously accounted for by macro-
economic reforms and does not reflect a business cycle effect. Although financial liberal-
izations further financial development, measures of financial development fail to fully drive
out the liberalization effect. We do find that the investment/GDP ratio increases, with
investment partially financed by foreign capital inducing worsened trade balances post lib-
eralization. However, we fail to convincingly attribute the increased growth to a direct cost
of capital effect or the relaxation of financing constraints.
   The liberalization effect that we measure is an average effect. Our paper also sheds light
on country-specific conditions that might lead a particular country to benefit more or less
than average after experiencing a financial liberalization. We find that large secondary school
enrollment, as well as a small government sector and an Anglo-Saxon legal system enhance
the liberalization effect.
   Although our regressions are predictive, it is important to keep in mind that they re-
veal association not causality. While our analysis describes a number of plausible channels
through which the liberalization effect may have occurred, the answer to the question ‘does’
rather than ‘did’ financial liberalization affect economic growth? remains somewhat elusive.
The best way to address this question is to model the transition process and use finer data
than the country level to explore the decisions of firms in liberalizing countries. We are


                                               35
currently pursuing this research direction. Also, we measure an average growth effect. If
true, the distribution of the welfare gain is an important social issue. Das and Mohapatra
(2000) show that the gains from increased growth are unequally distributed, accruing mostly
to the top quintile of the population.




                                            36
  8    Bibliography


Aghion, P. and P. Howitt, 1992, A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction, Economet-
  rica, 60, 323-351.
Alizadeh, S., and M. Brandt and F. Diebold, 1999, Range-Based Estimation of Stochastic
   Volatility Models, or Exchange Rate Dynamics are More Interesting Than You Think, man-
   uscript, New York University.
Atje, R., and B. Jovanovic, 1989, Stock Markets and Development, European Economic Review
  37, 632-640.
Barro, R., 1997a, Determinants of Economic Growth, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Barro, R. J., 1997b, Determinants of Democracy, Harvard Institute for International Develop-
  ment, Development Discussion Paper No. 570.
Barro, R. J., 1997c, Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study,
  Harvard Institute for International Development, Development Discussion Paper No. 579.
Barro, R. J. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1992, Convergence, Journal of Political Economy 100 (2:223-
  251).
Barro, R. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic Growth McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Bekaert, G., 1995, Market Integration and Investment Barriers in Emerging Equity Markets,
  World Bank Economic Review 9, 75-107.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 1995, Time-varying World Market Integration, Journal of Fi-
  nance 50, 403-444.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets, Journal
  of Finance 55, 565-614.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, 2000, Emerging Equity Markets and Economic
  Development, Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming. Also available as NBER
  working paper #7763.
Ben-David, D., 1993, Equalizing Exchange: Trade Liberalization and Income Convergence,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, 653-679.
Bencivenga, V. R., and B. D. Smith, 1991, Financial Intermediation and Endogenous Growth,
  Review of Economic Studies 58, 195-209.
Bencivenga, V. R., B. D. Smith and R. M. Starr, 1996, Equity Markets, Transactions Costs,
  and Capital Accumulation: An Illustration, The World Bank Economic Review 10, 241-265.
Bhattacharya, U. and H. Daouk (2000), The World Price of Insider Trading, working paper,
  Indiana University.
Bonser-Neal, C. and K. L. Dewenter, 1999, Does Financial Market Development Stimulate

                                               37
  Savings? Evidence from Emerging Markets, Contemporary Economic Policy, 370-380.
Caselli, F., G. Esquivel and F. Lefort, 1996, Reopening the Convergence Debate: A New Look
  at Cross-Country Growth Empirics, Journal of Economic Growth 1, 363-389.
Clayton, M. J., B. N. Jorgensen, and K. A. Kavajecz, 2000, On the Formation and Structure
  of International Exchanges, Working paper, New York University.
Das, M., and S. Mohapatra, 2000, Income Inequality: The Aftermath of Stock Market Liberal-
  ization in Emerging Markets, manuscript, Columbia University.
Demurgüç-Kunt, A., and R. Levine. 1996a. Stock Markets, Corporate Finance, and Economic
  Growth: An Overview, World Bank Economic Review, 10, 223-240.
Demurgüç-Kunt, A. and R. Levine, 1996b, Stock Market Development and Financial Interme-
  diaries: Stylized Facts, World Bank Economic Review, 291-322.
Demurgüç-Kunt, A., and V. Maksimovic. 1996. Stock Market Development and Financing
  Choices of Firms, World Bank Economic Review, 10, 341-370.
Devereux, M. B. and G. W. Smith, 1994, International Risk Sharing and Economic Growth,
  International Economic Review 35, 535-551.
Dollar, David, 1992, Outward-Oriented Developing Countries Really Do Grow More Rapidly:
  Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-85, Economic Development and Cultural Change, April, 523-
  544.
Doppelhofer, G., R. I. Miller and X. Sala-i-Martin, 2000, Determinants of Long-Term Growth:
  A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach, NBER Working Paper
  7750.
Elliot, G., 1993, Spatial Correlation and Cross-Country Regressions, manuscript, Harvard Uni-
   versity.
Edwards, S., 1998, Openness, Productivity, and Growth: What Do We Really Know?, Economic
  Journal, 108, 383-398.
Erb, C., C. R. Harvey and T. Viskanta, 1996a, Expected Returns and Volatility in 135 countries,
  Journal of Portfolio Management, 22, Spring, 46-58.
Erb, C., C. R. Harvey and T. Viskanta, 1996b, Political Risk, Economic Risk and Financial
  Risk, Financial Analysts Journal November/December, 29-46.
Errunza, V. R., and E. Losq, 1985, International Asset Pricing Under Mild Segmentation:
  Theory and Test, Journal of Finance 40, 105–124.
Frankel, J. and D. Romer, 1999, Does Trade Cause Growth, American Economic Review 89,
   379-399.
Gilchrist, S. and C. Himmelberg, 1998, Investment, Fundamentals and Finance, NBER Macro-
   economics Annual, MIT Press.
Greenwood, J., and B. Jovanovic, 1990, Financial Development, Growth, and the Distribution
  of Income, Journal of Political Economy, 1076-1107.

                                               38
Hansen L., 1982, Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators,
  Econometrica, 50, 1029-1054.
Harrison, A., 1996, Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for Devel-
  oping Countries, Journal of Development Economics 48, 419-447.
Henry, P., 2000a, Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity
  Prices, Journal of Finance 55, 529-564
Henry, P., 2000b, Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms, Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics
Hubbard, G., 1997, Capital Market Imperfections and Investment, Journal of Economic Liter-
  ature 36, 3.
Islam, N. 1995, Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics
   107, 1127-1170.
Jayaratne, J. and P. E. Strahan, 1996, The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
  Deregulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics CXI, 639-670.
Jones, C. I., 2000, Introduction to Economic Growth, Norton.
Kaminsky, G. L. and C. Reihart, 1998, Financial Crises in Latin America: Then and Now,
  American Economic Review 88, 444-449.
Kaminsky, G. L. and C. Reihart, 1999, Papers on Crises and Contagion The Twin Crises:
  The Causes of Banking and Balance of Payments Problems, American Economic Review 89,
  473-500.
King, R. G., and R. Levine. 1993a. Finance, Entrepreneurship and Growth. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 32, 513-542.
King, R. and R. Levine, 1993b, Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 108, 717-738.
Klenow, P. J. and A. Rodriquez-Clare, 1997, Economic Growth: A Review Essay, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 40, 597-617.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes; A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1997, Legal Determinants of
  External Finance, Journal of Finance, 52, 1131-1150.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes; A. Shleifer, and R.W. Vishny, 1998, Law and Finance,
  Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Laeven, L., 2000, Financial Liberalization and Financing Constraints: Evidence from Panel
  Data on Emerging Economies, Working paper, World Bank.
Lee, J.W., 1993, International Trade, Distortions and Long-run Economic Growth, IMF Staff
  Papers 40, 299-328.
Levine, R., N. Loayza and T. Beck, 1999, Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
  Causes, manuscript, World Bank.


                                              39
Levine, R. and D. Renelt, 1991, A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth Regressions,
  American Economic Review 82, 942-963.
Levine, R., 1991 Stock Markets, Growth, and Tax Policy, Journal of Finance 46, 1445-1465.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos, 1996, Stock Market Development and Economic Growth, World Bank
  Economic Review 10, 323-340.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos, 1998, Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth, American Eco-
  nomic Review 88:3, 537–558.
Love, I., 2000, Financial Development and Financing Constraints: International Evidence from
  the Structural Investment Model, manuscript, Columbia University.
Lucas, R. 1988. On the Mechanics of Economic Development. Journal of Monetary Economics
  22, 3-42.
Mankiw, N. G., 1995, The Growth of Nations, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,
  275-310.
Mathieson, D. and L. Rojaz-Suarez, 1992, Liberalization of the Capital Account: Experiences
  and Issues, Staff papers, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
McKinnon, R. I. 1973. Money and Capital in Economic Development, Washington, D.C.:
  Brookings Institution.
Newey, W., and K. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Au-
  tocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.
Obstfeld, M., 1994, Risk Taking, Global Diversification and Growth, American Economic Re-
  view 84, 1310-1329.
Pagano, M. 1993, Financial Markets and Growth: An Overview, European Economic Review
  37, 613-622.
Patrick, H., 1966, Financial Development and Economic Growth in Underdeveloped Countries,
  Economic Development Cultural Change 14, 174-89.
Quah, D., 1993, Galton’s Fallacy and Tests of the Convergence Hypothesis, Scandinavian Jour-
  nal of Economics 95, 427-443.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic
  Review 88, 559-586.
Rebelo S., 1991, Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Economic Growth, Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 99, 500-521.
Rodriguez, F. and D. Rodrik, 1999, Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to
  the Cross-National Evidence, NBER Working Paper 7081.
Rodrik, D., 1999, Determinants of Economic Growth, Overseas Development Council, Wash-
  ington, DC.
Rousseau, P. L. and R. Sylla, 1999, Emerging financial markets and early U.S. growth, Working

                                              40
  paper, New York University.
Rousseau, P. L., and P. Wachtel, 2000, Equity markets and growth: Cross-country evidence on
  timing and outcomes, 1980–1995, Journal of Banking and Finance 1933-1958.
Sachs, J. D. and A. M. Warner, 1995a, Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-118.
Sachs, J. D. and A. M. Warner, 1995c, Economic Convergence and Economic Policies, Harvard
  University and Harvard Institute for International Development.
Saint-Paul, G. 1992. Technological Choice, Financial Markets and Economic Development,
   European Economic Review 36, 738-781.
Slaughter, M. J., 1998, International Trade and Per Capital Income Convergence: A Difference
   in Difference Analysis, NBER working paper.
Stiglitz, J. E. 1989, Financial Markets and Development, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 5,
   55-68.
Stulz, R. M., 1995, International Asset Pricing: An Integrative Survey, Handbook of Modern
   Finance, R. Jarrow, M. Maksimovic and W. Ziemba, eds., North Holland-Elsevier, 201-223.
Tavares, J. and R. Wacziarg, 2000, How Democracy Affects Growth, European Economic Re-
  view, forthcoming.
Warnock, F. and M. Mason, 2001, The Reliability of U.S. Data on Transactions in Foreign
  Equities, Emerging Markets Quarterly, forthcoming.
Wacziarg, R., 2000, Measuring the Dynamic Gains From Trade, World Bank Economic Review,
  forthcoming.
Wurgler, J., 2000, Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 58, 187-214.




                                              41
Appendix Table A1: Data for Growth Analysis

                                                GDP
                                           (Consumption,                   Pop      Log(Life                 Priv Credit/   ln(# of              Dividend   Log(Credit Insider Trading   Insider Trading   Official Financial
                                                             Enrollment                          Inflation                            Turnover
                                            Invest, Gov't,                Growth   Expectancy)                  GDP         stocks)               Yield      Rating)         Law           Prosecution      Liberalization
Country                    Sample              Trade)
Algeria                    (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Argentina                  (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1991              1995               1989
Australia                  (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1991              1996               1980*
Austria                    (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1993                                 1980*
Bangladesh                 (I,II,III)            b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1995              1996
Barbados                   (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b                                                          1987
Belgium                    (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1990              1994
Benin                      (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Botswana                   (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Brazil                     (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1976              1978               1991
Burkina Faso               (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Cameroon                   (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Canada                     (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1966              1976               1980*
Central African Republic   (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Chad                       (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Chile                      (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1981              1996               1992
Colombia                   (I,II,III)            b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1990                                 1991
Congo, Rep.                (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Costa Rica                 (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1990
Cote d'Ivoire              (I,II,III)            b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b
Denmark                    (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1991              1996               1980*
Dominican Republic         (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Ecuador                    (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1993
Egypt, Arab Rep.           (I,II,III)            b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1992                                 1997
El Salvador                (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Fiji                       (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Finland                    (I,II,III)            b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1989              1993               1980*
France                     (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1967              1975               1980*
Gabon                      (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Gambia, The                (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Germany                    (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1994              1995               1980*
Ghana                      (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b                                                          1993
Greece                     (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1988              1996               1987
Guatemala                  (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1996
Guyana                     (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Haiti                      (I)                   b              b           b          b            b            b
Honduras                   (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1988
Iceland                    (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1989
India                      (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1992              1996               1992
Indonesia                  (I,II,III)            b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1991              1996               1989
Iran, Islamic Rep.         (I,II)                b              b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Ireland                    (I,II,III,IV)         b              b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1990                                 1980*
Appendix Table A1 (continued)
                                                                         Pop      Log(Life                 Priv Credit/   ln(# of              Dividend   Log(Credit Insider Trading   Insider Trading   Official Financial
                                                Log(GDP)   Enrollment                          Inflation                            Turnover
Country                         Sample                                  Growth   Expectancy)                  GDP         stocks)               Yield      Rating)         Law           Prosecution      Liberalization

Israel                          (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1981              1989               1996
Italy                           (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1991              1996               1980*
Jamaica                         (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1993
Japan                           (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1988              1990               1983
Jordan                          (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b                                                 1995
Kenya                           (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1989
Korea                           (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b                                                 1992
Kuwait                          (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Lesotho                         (I)                b          b           b          b            b            b
Madagascar                      (I)                b          b           b          b            b            b
Malawi                          (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Malaysia                        (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1973              1996               1988
Mali                            (I)                b          b           b          b            b            b
Malta                           (I)                b          b           b          b            b            b                                                          1990
Mauritius                       (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1988
Mexico                          (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1975                                 1989
Morocco                         (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1993                                 1997
Nepal                           (I)                b          b           b          b            b            b
Netherlands                     (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1991                                 1980*
New Zealand                     (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1988                                 1987
Nicaragua                       (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Niger                           (I)                b          b           b          b            b            b
Nigeria                         (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1979                                 1995
Norway                          (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1985              1990               1980*
Oman                            (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1989              1999
Pakistan                        (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1995                                 1991
Paraguay                        (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1999
Peru                            (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1991              1994
Philippines                     (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1982                                 1991
Portugal                        (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b            1986                                 1986
Rwanda                          (I)                b          b           b          b            b            b
Saudi Arabia                    (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b            1990
Senegal                         (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Sierra Leone                    (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Singapore                       (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1973              1978               1980*
South Africa                    (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1989                                 1992
Spain                           (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1994              1998               1985
Sri Lanka                       (I,II,III)         b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b                      b                                                 1992
Swaziland                       (I)                b          b           b          b            b            b
Sweden                          (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1971              1990               1980*
Switzerland                     (I,II,III,IV)      b          b           b          b            b            b            b         b          b           b            1988              1995               1980*
Syrian Arab Republic            (I,II)             b          b           b          b            b            b                                             b
Appendix Table A1 (continued)
                                                                                        Pop          Log(Life                      Priv Credit/      ln(# of                 Dividend      Log(Credit Insider Trading       Insider Trading      Official Financial
                                                      Log(GDP)         Enrollment                                     Inflation                                 Turnover
Country                          Sample                                                Growth       Expectancy)                       GDP            stocks)                  Yield         Rating)         Law               Prosecution         Liberalization

Thailand                         (I,II,III,IV)            b                 b             b              b               b              b              b            b            b             b               1984               1993                  1987
Togo                             (I)                      b                 b             b              b               b              b
Trinidad and Tobago              (I,II,III)               b                 b             b              b               b              b              b            b                          b               1981
Tunisia                          (I,II,III)               b                 b             b              b               b              b              b            b                          b               1994
Turkey                           (I,II,III)               b                 b             b              b               b              b              b            b                          b               1981               1996                  1989
United Kingdom                   (I,II,III,IV)            b                 b             b              b               b              b              b            b            b             b               1980               1981                 1980*
United States                    (I,II,III,IV)            b                 b             b              b               b              b              b            b            b             b               1934               1961                 1980*
Uruguay                          (I,II)                   b                 b             b              b               b              b                                                      b               1996
Venezuela                        (I,II,III)               b                 b             b              b               b              b              b            b                          b               1998                                     1990
Zambia                           (I,II)                   b                 b             b              b               b              b                                                      b               1993
Zimbabwe                         (I,II,III,IV)            b                 b             b              b               b              b              b            b            b             b                                                        1993

Totals                                                        95                95             95             95               95             95             50          50           28            75         60                  29                     27
Notes:                                                                                                                                                                                                      Note: 16 full liberalized and 52 not liberalized
(1) The macroeconomic data are available for all countries from 1980 through 1997 from the World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM. These are listed in columns (1)-(6)
(2) The financial data are available from 1980 through 1997 from either Morgan Stanley Capital Market International or Standard and Poor's Emerging Stock Markets Factbook. These are listed in columns (7)-(10).
(3) Country Credit Ratings. These are listed in column (11)
(4) Insider trading laws established (column (12)), and the first prosecution under these laws (column (13)). From Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000)
(5) The official liberalization takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. Liberalization dates are based upon the chronology presented in Bekaert and Harvey (2000).
Developed markets are assumed liberalized before 1980 unless otherwise noted (denoted 1980*), and frontier markets are assumed not to have liberalized.
Appendix Table A2
Control Variables in the Growth Regressions

                                        Source                           Expected Effect on Growth
Classic Growth Regression
Log(GDP)                                World Bank                                  (-)
Govt/GDP                                World Bank                                  (-)
Enrollment                              World Bank                                  (+)
Pop Growth                              World Bank                                  (-)
Log(Life Expectancy)                    World Bank                                  (+)

The Liberalization Effect in a Classic Growth Regression
add Official Financial Liberalization    Bekaert and Harvey (2000)                  (+)

Macroeconomic Reforms versus Financial Liberalization
add Trade/GDP                       World Bank                                      (+)
and Inflation or Inflation Spread   World Bank                                      (-)

Financial Development versus Financial Liberalization
add Priv Credit/GDP                    World Bank                                   (+)
and ln(# of stocks) (when available)   S&P EMDB                                     (+)
and Turnover (when available)          S&P EMDB                                     (+)

The Sources of the Liberalization Effect
add Log(Credit Rating)                   CCR                                        (+)
or Dividend Yield                        S&P EMDB                                   (-)
or Insider Trading Law                   Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000)              (+)
or Insider Trading Prosecution           Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000)              (+)
Appendix Table A3: The Liberalization Effect at Various Horizons
The Liberalization Effect in a Classic Growth Regression
Panel A: Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate

                                    Sample I                                    II                                      III                                     IV
                                      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10
Constant                            -0.2033    -0.2281   -0.2395   -0.2266   -0.2006   -0.2374   -0.2399   -0.2242   -0.1102   -0.1493   -0.1468   -0.1518   -0.1819   -0.2018   -0.2257   -0.3264
 Std. error                          0.0214    0.0179    0.0161    0.0145    0.0273    0.0214    0.0195    0.0183    0.0364    0.0286    0.0240    0.0259    0.0738    0.0658    0.0583    0.0555
Log(GDP)                            -0.0106    -0.0094   -0.0094   -0.0080   -0.0100   -0.0088   -0.0087   -0.0069   -0.0113   -0.0115   -0.0132   -0.0127   -0.0152   -0.0158   -0.0177   -0.0200
 Std. error                          0.0007    0.0007    0.0006    0.0005    0.0008    0.0007    0.0007    0.0006    0.0008    0.0008    0.0006    0.0006    0.0013    0.0011    0.0011    0.0011
Govt/GDP                             0.0089    -0.0039   -0.0074   -0.0168   -0.0054   -0.0178   -0.0184   -0.0315   -0.0102   -0.0187   -0.0330   -0.0431   -0.0123   -0.0301   -0.0399   -0.0224
 Std. error                          0.0103    0.0087    0.0074    0.0061    0.0116    0.0098    0.0082    0.0066    0.0130    0.0105    0.0092    0.0077    0.0197    0.0165    0.0146    0.0129
Enrollment                           0.0348    0.0305    0.0295    0.0403    0.0207    0.0112    0.0144    0.0375    0.0292    0.0243    0.0287    0.0603    0.0552    0.0566    0.0746    0.1232
 Std. error                          0.0095    0.0077    0.0066    0.0048    0.0117    0.0097    0.0080    0.0053    0.0135    0.0116    0.0094    0.0068    0.0198    0.0171    0.0150    0.0125
Population Growth                   -0.6637    -0.5594   -0.6287   -0.4713   -0.6841   -0.5731   -0.6764   -0.5274   -0.8156   -0.8159   -0.9900   -1.0103   -1.1144   -1.1013   -1.0647   -1.0548
 Std. error                          0.0682    0.0621    0.0581    0.0446    0.0802    0.0691    0.0649    0.0483    0.1001    0.0835    0.0700    0.0582    0.1384    0.1151    0.1004    0.0914
Log(Life Expectancy)                 0.0711    0.0755    0.0792    0.0727    0.0706    0.0781    0.0794    0.0712    0.0521    0.0627    0.0665    0.0662    0.0766    0.0838    0.0926    0.1192
 Std. error                          0.0058    0.0049    0.0044    0.0040    0.0072    0.0056    0.0051    0.0048    0.0096    0.0076    0.0063    0.0069    0.0188    0.0167    0.0146    0.0140
Official Liberalization Indicator    0.0123    0.0095    0.0066    0.0071    0.0115    0.0083    0.0049    0.0041    0.0137    0.0113    0.0123    0.0082    0.0146    0.0130    0.0145    0.0089
 Std. error                          0.0017    0.0016    0.0015    0.0012    0.0019    0.0017    0.0016    0.0014    0.0022    0.0020    0.0017    0.0016    0.0037    0.0036    0.0034    0.0032


Panel B: Annual Average Investment/GDP
                                    Sample I                                    II                                      III                                     IV
                                      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10
Constant                            -0.2055    -0.3370   -0.3971   -0.4537   -0.2136   -0.3165   -0.4345   -0.4568   -0.3117   -0.4205   -0.4305   -0.5335   0.2280    0.1725    0.0079    -0.2363
 Std. error                          0.0211    0.0287    0.0232    0.0230    0.0243    0.0326    0.0267    0.0261    0.0573    0.0632    0.0628    0.0638    0.0906    0.1188    0.1118    0.1187
Log(GDP)                            -0.0103    -0.0157   -0.0185   -0.0213   -0.0089   -0.0130   -0.0148   -0.0155   -0.0103   -0.0148   -0.0185   -0.0218   -0.0068   -0.0109   -0.0179   -0.0231
 Std. error                          0.0006    0.0011    0.0008    0.0006    0.0007    0.0010    0.0008    0.0007    0.0011    0.0015    0.0012    0.0012    0.0015    0.0020    0.0023    0.0026
Govt/GDP                            -0.0362    -0.0147   0.0067    0.0166    -0.0406   -0.0285   -0.0470   -0.0572   -0.0033   0.0023    0.0078    -0.0091   -0.0947   -0.1097   -0.1271   -0.1489
 Std. error                          0.0107    0.0149    0.0111    0.0086    0.0121    0.0152    0.0125    0.0112    0.0159    0.0207    0.0186    0.0131    0.0253    0.0315    0.0316    0.0138
Enrollment                           0.8350    0.7288    0.6549    0.6045    0.7878    0.6498    0.5297    0.4812    0.8256    0.7024    0.5995    0.5254    0.8718    0.7951    0.7396    0.6857
 Std. error                          0.0138    0.0156    0.0148    0.0123    0.0160    0.0187    0.0184    0.0174    0.0203    0.0232    0.0266    0.0203    0.0254    0.0303    0.0361    0.0311
Population Growth                    0.1183    0.2270    0.0867    -0.0881   0.2666    0.2899    0.4689    0.2925    0.1838    0.0554    -0.3714   -0.5290   -0.6030   -0.8799   -1.2529   -1.3109
 Std. error                          0.1008    0.0796    0.0797    0.0679    0.0615    0.0759    0.0870    0.0649    0.1611    0.1637    0.1813    0.1155    0.1473    0.2153    0.1934    0.1674
Log(Life Expectancy)                 0.0778    0.1230    0.1463    0.1688    0.0791    0.1175    0.1551    0.1666    0.1021    0.1428    0.1592    0.1965    -0.0296   -0.0029   0.0550    0.1280
 Std. error                          0.0058    0.0083    0.0068    0.0066    0.0070    0.0092    0.0079    0.0078    0.0148    0.0166    0.0159    0.0169    0.0237    0.0302    0.0289    0.0305
Official Liberalization Indicator    0.0097    0.0141    0.0141    0.0115    0.0096    0.0116    0.0131    0.0072    0.0071    0.0079    0.0060    0.0015    0.0131    0.0127    0.0123    0.0078
 Std. error                          0.0015    0.0025    0.0018    0.0015    0.0015    0.0026    0.0023    0.0017    0.0026    0.0034    0.0038    0.0030    0.0044    0.0053    0.0071    0.0077
Appendix Table A3: The Liberalization Effect at Various Horizons (continued)
Panel C: Annual Average Consumption/GDP
                                    Sample I                                    II                                      III                                     IV
                                      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10
Constant                             1.4604    1.7627    1.7613    1.6852    0.8899    0.9759    1.0462    1.1279    0.5105    0.5343    0.6491    0.6550    1.1956    0.6856    0.9807    0.8971
 Std. error                          0.0272    0.0429    0.0156    0.0109    0.0504    0.0642    0.0348    0.0268    0.0518    0.0811    0.0379    0.0378    0.0488    0.1171    0.0712    0.0863
Log(GDP)                            -0.0377    -0.0418   -0.0399   -0.0445   -0.0267   -0.0270   -0.0294   -0.0306   -0.0228   -0.0206   -0.0181   -0.0164   -0.0055   -0.0093   -0.0002   0.0046
 Std. error                          0.0006    0.0017    0.0006    0.0005    0.0011    0.0020    0.0010    0.0010    0.0011    0.0021    0.0012    0.0014    0.0006    0.0017    0.0011    0.0015
Govt/GDP                            -0.5441    -0.4817   -0.4092   -0.2823   -0.5826   -0.4814   -0.4372   -0.3582   -0.4134   -0.4089   -0.3700   -0.3278   -0.7584   -0.8128   -0.7402   -0.7256
 Std. error                          0.0099    0.0269    0.0138    0.0110    0.0218    0.0292    0.0198    0.0168    0.0208    0.0259    0.0175    0.0165    0.0160    0.0283    0.0148    0.0164
Enrollment                          -0.3266    -0.2665   -0.2455   -0.2503   -0.5782   -0.5038   -0.4829   -0.4902   -0.4446   -0.4503   -0.4103   -0.3525   -0.7241   -0.7622   -0.7245   -0.7224
 Std. error                          0.0109    0.0227    0.0097    0.0073    0.0180    0.0266    0.0150    0.0143    0.0223    0.0276    0.0156    0.0145    0.0168    0.0376    0.0252    0.0291
Population Growth                   -0.9893    -2.5579   -2.7676   -3.1305   -0.7182   -1.8045   -1.8509   -2.2612   0.3717    0.4181    0.3312    0.5175    -0.0789   0.0178    0.3283    0.2671
 Std. error                          0.1232    0.1410    0.0523    0.0423    0.1159    0.1917    0.1090    0.0933    0.1113    0.1986    0.1160    0.1256    0.0941    0.2088    0.1007    0.1115
Log(Life Expectancy)                -0.0802    -0.1442   -0.1491   -0.1244   0.0462    0.0247    0.0103    -0.0064   0.1110    0.1006    0.0665    0.0574    -0.0609   0.0692    -0.0218   -0.0112
 Std. error                          0.0063    0.0118    0.0040    0.0028    0.0124    0.0168    0.0083    0.0071    0.0125    0.0208    0.0087    0.0086    0.0126    0.0292    0.0175    0.0207
Official Liberalization Indicator    0.0062    0.0082    -0.0023   -0.0101   -0.0088   -0.0246   -0.0208   -0.0317   -0.0100   -0.0085   -0.0170   -0.0230   0.0084    0.0123    -0.0035   -0.0162
 Std. error                          0.0011    0.0043    0.0012    0.0009    0.0016    0.0046    0.0015    0.0018    0.0029    0.0049    0.0025    0.0021    0.0033    0.0071    0.0058    0.0078

Panel D: Annual Average (Exports-Imports)/GDP
                                    Sample I                                    II                                      III                                     IV
                                      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10      k=3         5         7         10
Constant                            -0.3146    -0.1833   -0.2057   -0.1964   0.3422    0.4063    0.4321    0.4289    1.0018    1.0657    1.0784    1.0559    -0.1510   0.1080    0.4258    0.3702
 Std. error                          0.0231    0.0192    0.0154    0.0142    0.0454    0.0350    0.0198    0.0095    0.0731    0.0652    0.0558    0.0602    0.0572    0.0565    0.0513    0.0738
Log(GDP)                             0.0387    0.0433    0.0477    0.0496    0.0324    0.0326    0.0365    0.0340    0.0343    0.0354    0.0362    0.0346    0.0156    0.0196    0.0238    0.0207
 Std. error                          0.0007    0.0007    0.0006    0.0006    0.0009    0.0008    0.0007    0.0007    0.0010    0.0009    0.0009    0.0009    0.0009    0.0008    0.0006    0.0011
Govt/GDP                            -0.2159    -0.2353   -0.3379   -0.3838   -0.1549   -0.1624   -0.2499   -0.2150   -0.3567   -0.3058   -0.3067   -0.2676   -0.0841   -0.0580   -0.0395   0.0043
 Std. error                          0.0068    0.0074    0.0096    0.0064    0.0188    0.0173    0.0178    0.0172    0.0281    0.0261    0.0218    0.0268    0.0135    0.0119    0.0091    0.0150
Enrollment                          -0.4177    -0.3607   -0.3125   -0.2463   -0.0507   0.0080    0.0430    0.1000    -0.2282   -0.1525   -0.1383   -0.1102   -0.0995   -0.0222   0.0294    0.0768
 Std. error                          0.0109    0.0102    0.0115    0.0089    0.0133    0.0104    0.0088    0.0058    0.0210    0.0179    0.0145    0.0150    0.0151    0.0146    0.0119    0.0228
Population Growth                    0.5653    0.4565    1.4112    1.5194    0.0744    -0.0973   0.3062    0.2080    -0.4449   -0.4199   -0.2451   -0.1708   0.7476    0.6206    0.5288    0.2790
 Std. error                          0.1413    0.1452    0.0478    0.0420    0.1290    0.0991    0.0747    0.0700    0.1534    0.1428    0.1030    0.1112    0.1287    0.1112    0.0884    0.1319
Log(Life Expectancy)                 0.0229    -0.0179   -0.0235   -0.0319   -0.1378   -0.1557   -0.1701   -0.1687   -0.2788   -0.3016   -0.3086   -0.3044   0.0161    -0.0582   -0.1459   -0.1305
 Std. error                          0.0057    0.0045    0.0044    0.0043    0.0115    0.0090    0.0053    0.0029    0.0178    0.0157    0.0131    0.0144    0.0153    0.0152    0.0135    0.0194
Official Liberalization Indicator   -0.0117    -0.0211   -0.0163   -0.0102   -0.0108   -0.0107   -0.0077   -0.0038   -0.0040   -0.0061   -0.0012   0.0057    -0.0251   -0.0231   -0.0171   -0.0146
 Std. error                          0.0016    0.0017    0.0014    0.0013    0.0015    0.0013    0.0014    0.0019    0.0030    0.0029    0.0029    0.0037    0.0022    0.0024    0.0028    0.0044
Appendix Table A3: The Liberalization Effect at Various Horizons (continued)
Panel E: Annual Average Government/GDP
                                      Sample I                                                  II                                                    III                                                      IV
                                        k=3           5            7           10             k=3            5           7            10            k=3            5           7            10               k=3            5           7            10
Constant                               0.0173      0.0275       0.0076      -0.0401          0.0049       0.0123      0.0125       -0.0446         0.0624       0.0911      0.1287       0.2355             0.1786       0.2702      0.4531       0.8280
 Std. error                            0.0110      0.0109       0.0129      0.0142           0.0128       0.0130      0.0173       0.0192          0.0158       0.0204      0.0229       0.0230             0.0209       0.0292      0.0341       0.0267
Log(GDP)                               0.0038      0.0069       0.0094      0.0113           0.0030       0.0055      0.0076       0.0095          0.0011       0.0014      0.0016       0.0016             0.0029       0.0040      0.0067       0.0110
 Std. error                            0.0005      0.0006       0.0005      0.0008           0.0005       0.0007      0.0007       0.0011          0.0003       0.0004      0.0006       0.0006             0.0003       0.0005      0.0005       0.0005
Govt/GDP                               0.9045      0.8426       0.7892      0.6969           0.9209       0.8756      0.8380       0.7580          0.9525       0.9187      0.8846       0.8404             0.9816       0.9701      0.9385       0.8983
 Std. error                            0.0099      0.0113       0.0081      0.0097           0.0092       0.0111      0.0070       0.0078          0.0058       0.0072      0.0072       0.0071             0.0076       0.0099      0.0112       0.0053
Enrollment                             0.0331      0.0377       0.0225      0.0192           0.0200       0.0258      0.0139       -0.0018         0.0217       0.0169      0.0097       -0.0181            0.0268       0.0330      0.0238       -0.0019
 Std. error                            0.0035      0.0046       0.0049      0.0054           0.0038       0.0052      0.0065       0.0063          0.0055       0.0076      0.0092       0.0087             0.0063       0.0100      0.0127       0.0108
Population Growth                      0.1355      0.2806       0.5992      0.9696           0.1303       0.2772      0.5909       1.1894          -0.0827      -0.0861     -0.0970      -0.2117            0.0796       0.1707      0.0808       -0.0609
 Std. error                            0.0862      0.0853       0.0534      0.0649           0.1026       0.1075      0.0608       0.0694          0.0317       0.0309      0.0362       0.0375             0.0448       0.0558      0.0584       0.0287
Log(Life Expectancy)                  -0.0101      -0.0168      -0.0156     -0.0062          -0.0059      -0.0117     -0.0154      -0.0051         -0.0164      -0.0228     -0.0309      -0.0535            -0.0490      -0.0733     -0.1203      -0.2156
 Std. error                            0.0024      0.0025       0.0035      0.0040           0.0029       0.0032      0.0048       0.0058          0.0041       0.0054      0.0061       0.0059             0.0053       0.0074      0.0086       0.0069
Official Liberalization Indicator     -0.0016      -0.0027      -0.0012     0.0023           0.0004       0.0006      0.0037       0.0124          0.0019       0.0053      0.0088       0.0123             0.0012       0.0041      0.0053       0.0109
 Std. error                            0.0006      0.0006       0.0006      0.0011           0.0008       0.0009      0.0010       0.0019          0.0009       0.0013      0.0017       0.0021             0.0011       0.0019      0.0022       0.0019

I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is either the k-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product, investment/GDP, consumption/GDP,
government/GDP, or trade balance/GDP ratios. Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth rate
of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. The weighting matrix we employ in our
GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Appendix Table A4: The Liberalization Effect with Various Weighting Matrices
The Liberalization Effect in a Classic Growth Regression
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)

                                  Panel A: Weighting Matrix 1                                      Panel B: Weighting Matrix 2                                   Panel C: Weighting Matrix 3
                                    Sample I       II           III               IV                 Sample I       II           III               IV             Sample I       II        III              IV
Constant                            -0.1971     -0.1679      -0.0934           -0.3154               -0.2281     -0.2374      -0.1493           -0.2018           -0.3292    -0.3419    -0.3063          -0.4314
 Std. error                          0.0268     0.0313       0.0487            0.1040                 0.0179     0.0214       0.0286            0.0658             0.0428    0.0535     0.0774           0.1457
Log(GDP)                            -0.0080     -0.0077      -0.0107           -0.0169               -0.0094     -0.0088      -0.0115           -0.0158           -0.0079    -0.0074    -0.0098          -0.0182
 Std. error                          0.0010     0.0013       0.0012            0.0020                 0.0007     0.0007       0.0008            0.0011             0.0016    0.0018     0.0018           0.0025
Govt/GDP                             0.0047     0.0225       -0.0043           -0.0202               -0.0039     -0.0178      -0.0187           -0.0301           -0.0139    -0.0345    -0.0459          -0.0069
 Std. error                          0.0119     0.0135       0.0181            0.0286                 0.0087     0.0098       0.0105            0.0165             0.0190    0.0223     0.0256           0.0359
Enrollment                           0.0397     0.0083       0.0693            0.0601                 0.0305     0.0112        0.0243           0.0566             0.0213     0.0041    0.0287           0.0913
 Std. error                          0.0128     0.0128       0.0200            0.0297                 0.0077     0.0097       0.0116            0.0171             0.0165    0.0227     0.0234           0.0298
Population Growth                   -0.6900     -0.8364      -0.8771           -1.0310               -0.5594     -0.5731      -0.8159           -1.1013           -0.0276    -0.0701    -0.2163          -0.8516
 Std. error                          0.0798     0.0883       0.1149            0.1727                 0.0621     0.0691       0.0835            0.1151             0.0444    0.0551     0.1420           0.2870
Log(Life Expectancy)                 0.0655     0.0609       0.0457            0.1123                 0.0755     0.0781        0.0627           0.0838             0.0954     0.0994    0.0957           0.1407
 Std. error                          0.0076     0.0090       0.0131            0.0270                 0.0049     0.0056       0.0076            0.0167             0.0124    0.0148     0.0206           0.0367
Official Liberalization Indicator    0.0055     0.0017       0.0091            0.0112                 0.0095     0.0083        0.0113           0.0130             0.0117     0.0108    0.0104           0.0057
 Std. error                          0.0023     0.0027       0.0026            0.0046                 0.0016     0.0017       0.0020            0.0036             0.0037    0.0040     0.0034           0.0044

I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product. Log(GDP) is
the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth rate of total
population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. The
weighting matrices we employ in our GMM estimation provide a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and SUR effects (Matrix 1), cross-sectional heteroskedasticity (Matrix 2), and no cross-
sectional error structure (Matrix 3 –pooled OLS). All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 1: Unconditional Analysis of GDP Growth
         Before and After Financial Liberalization

Panel A: Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate
    Years
     -10            -7             -5             -3           Country                3               5              7             10
   -0.0054       -0.0104        -0.0102        0.0105        Argentina            -0.0100          0.0182         0.0143            *
   -0.0042       0.0139         0.0019         -0.0216          Brazil             0.0031          0.0160         0.0160            *
   0.0237        0.0507         0.0527         0.0541            Chile             0.0631          0.0663            *              *
   0.0126        0.0206         0.0245         0.0179         Colombia             0.0187          0.0261         0.0204            *
   0.0151        0.0082         0.0116         0.0207           Greece             0.0214          0.0157         0.0105         0.0131
   0.0301        0.0315         0.0323         0.0209            India             0.0420          0.0468            *              *
   -0.0185       -0.0294        0.0057         0.0498           Jordan            -0.0021             *              *              *
      *              *          0.0344         0.0357           Japan              0.0211          0.0265         0.0272         0.0336
   0.0783        0.0800         0.0813         0.0699           Korea              0.0535          0.0580            *              *
   0.0279        0.0176         0.0097         -0.0114        Malaysia             0.0583          0.0566         0.0574         0.0575
   0.0010        -0.0258        -0.0085        -0.0231         Mexico              0.0252          0.0187         0.0054            *
   0.0207        0.0169         0.0182         0.0102       New Zealand           -0.0025          -0.0097        0.0012         0.0052
   0.0152        0.0188         0.0051         -0.0143         Nigeria             0.0128             *              *              *
   0.0343        0.0315         0.0303         0.0294          Pakistan            0.0240          0.0221         0.0149            *
   -0.0092       -0.0156        0.0192         0.0249        Philippines          -0.0169          -0.0017        0.0076            *
   -0.0174       -0.0161        -0.0074        -0.0177      South Africa          -0.0152          -0.0045           *              *
   0.0412        0.0345         0.0352         0.0359         Thailand             0.0936          0.0869         0.0808         0.0757
   -0.0284       -0.0184        -0.0111        -0.0248       Venezuela             0.0459          0.0144         0.0087            *
   -0.0070       -0.0042        0.0011         -0.0186       Zimbabwe              0.0013          0.0131            *              *
   0.0407        0.0341         0.0369         0.0392         Indonesia            0.0685          0.0622         0.0614            *
   0.0197        0.0139         0.0039         -0.0010         Portugal            0.0597          0.0558         0.0472         0.0363
   0.0174        0.0302         0.0354         0.0393           Turkey             0.0118          0.0268         0.0157            *
   0.0125        0.0083         0.0051         0.0068            Spain             0.0315          0.0374         0.0346         0.0254
   0.0258        0.0229         0.0203         0.0296         Sri Lanka            0.0427          0.0390            *              *

   0.0142         0.0136         0.0178        0.0151          Average            0.0271           0.0334         0.0277         0.0432
                                                            # of increases    16 (of 24 valid)    16 (of 22)     11 (of 15)      4 (of 6)




Panel B: Cross-Sectional Comparison
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate

                                  k=3             5               7                 10
Full Liberalized                 0.0234        0.0226          0.0213             0.0204
Never Liberalized               -0.0008        0.0014          0.0018             0.0032

The variable we explore in this table is the k-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product. Official liberalization
means that the equity market is liberalized. Full Liberalized denotes countries that are fully liberalized throughout our sample, whereas
Never Liberalized denotes countries that never undergo financial liberalization.
Table 2: Classic Growth Regression and the Impact of Liberalization
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)


Panel A: Classic Growth Regression                                                                             Panel B: Classic Growth Regression with Liberalization Indicator
                            Sample I         II             III            IV                                                                                   Sample I          II           III          IV
Constant                    -0.2369       -0.2581        -0.1559        -0.3438                                Constant                                         -0.2281        -0.2374      -0.1493      -0.2018
 Std. error                  0.0181       0.0216         0.0295         0.0538                                  Std. error                                       0.0179        0.0214       0.0286       0.0658
Log(GDP)                    -0.0071       -0.0069        -0.0093        -0.0156                                Log(GDP)                                         -0.0094        -0.0088      -0.0115      -0.0158
 Std. error                  0.0006       0.0006         0.0007         0.0011                                  Std. error                                       0.0007        0.0007       0.0008       0.0011
Govt/GDP                    -0.0044       -0.0175        -0.0212        -0.0158                                Govt/GDP                                         -0.0039        -0.0178      -0.0187      -0.0301
 Std. error                  0.0085       0.0096         0.0105         0.0164                                  Std. error                                       0.0087        0.0098       0.0105       0.0165
Enrollment                   0.0277       0.0059         0.0162         0.0624                                 Enrollment                                        0.0305        0.0112       0.0243       0.0566
 Std. error                  0.0079       0.0098         0.0119         0.0174                                  Std. error                                       0.0077        0.0097       0.0116       0.0171
Population Growth           -0.5978       -0.6037        -0.9389        -1.2056                                Population Growth                                -0.5594        -0.5731      -0.8159      -1.1013
 Std. error                  0.0577       0.0642         0.0791         0.1121                                  Std. error                                       0.0621        0.0691       0.0835       0.1151
Log(Life Expectancy)         0.0746       0.0806         0.0624         0.1182                                 Log(Life Expectancy)                              0.0755        0.0781       0.0627       0.0838
 Std. error                  0.0049       0.0057         0.0079         0.0140                                  Std. error                                       0.0049        0.0056       0.0076       0.0167
                                                                                                               Official Liberalization Indicator                 0.0095        0.0083       0.0113       0.0130
                                                                                                                Std. error                                       0.0016        0.0017       0.0020       0.0036

I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product.
Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth
rate of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero
otherwise. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 3: Robustness of the Liberalization Effect
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)


Panel A: Sensitivity to Alternative Liberalization Dates                                                         Panel B: Sensitivity to Regional Influences
                                           Sample I          II             III            IV                                                                         Sample I          II           III           IV
Constant                                   -0.2240        -0.2344        -0.1373        -0.2351                  Constant                                             -0.2268        -0.2347      -0.1571       -0.2095
  Std. error                                0.0178        0.0213         0.0290         0.0653                    Std. error                                           0.0180        0.0214       0.0288        0.0645
Log(GDP)                                   -0.0093        -0.0088        -0.0105        -0.0150                  Log(GDP)                                             -0.0096        -0.0090      -0.0117       -0.0158
  Std. error                                0.0006        0.0006         0.0007         0.0012                    Std. error                                           0.0007        0.0007       0.0007        0.0011
Govt/GDP                                   -0.0019        -0.0158        -0.0236        -0.0229                  Govt/GDP                                             -0.0049        -0.0197      -0.0236       -0.0318
  Std. error                                0.0088        0.0099         0.0107         0.0165                    Std. error                                           0.0088        0.0099       0.0106        0.0169
Enrollment                                  0.0304        0.0108         0.0224         0.0572                   Enrollment                                            0.0305        0.0110       0.0225        0.0553
  Std. error                                0.0078        0.0098         0.0116         0.0173                    Std. error                                           0.0078        0.0098       0.0115        0.0171
Population Growth                          -0.5531        -0.5682        -0.7913        -1.1104                  Population Growth                                    -0.5454        -0.5569      -0.7493       -1.0934
  Std. error                                0.0620        0.0686         0.0838         0.1183                    Std. error                                           0.0631        0.0706       0.0857        0.1158
Log(Life Expectancy)                        0.0742        0.0772         0.0582         0.0900                   Log(Life Expectancy)                                  0.0754        0.0777       0.0649        0.0854
  Std. error                                0.0048        0.0056         0.0077         0.0170                    Std. error                                           0.0049        0.0057       0.0077        0.0164
First Sign Liberalization Indicator         0.0102        0.0091         0.0105         0.0094                   Official Liberalization Indicator (Latin)             0.0089        0.0075       0.0068        0.0138
  Std. error                                0.0015        0.0016         0.0018         0.0033                    Std. error                                           0.0034        0.0034       0.0035        0.0071
                                                                                                                 Official Liberalization Indicator (Not-Latin)         0.0108        0.0099       0.0136        0.0133
                                                                                                                  Std. error                                           0.0016        0.0017       0.0019        0.0035

Panel C: Sensitivity to Business Cycle:                                                                          Panel D:     Sensitivity to Business Cycle:
         Lagged World Growth and Real Interest Rates                                                                           Contemporaneous World Growth and Real Interest Rates
                                           Sample I          II             III            IV                                                                         Sample I          II           III           IV
Constant                                   -0.2334        -0.2453        -0.1654        -0.2437                  Constant                                             -0.2241        -0.2371      -0.1536       -0.2240
 Std. error                                 0.0185        0.0220         0.0304         0.0678                    Std. error                                           0.0185        0.0220       0.0309        0.0670
Log(GDP)                                   -0.0095        -0.0089        -0.0118        -0.0162                  Log(GDP)                                             -0.0093        -0.0087      -0.0115       -0.0161
 Std. error                                 0.0007        0.0007         0.0008         0.0011                    Std. error                                           0.0007        0.0007       0.0008        0.0011
Govt/GDP                                   -0.0053        -0.0188        -0.0211        -0.0293                  Govt/GDP                                             -0.0084        -0.0203      -0.0233       -0.0307
 Std. error                                 0.0088        0.0099         0.0107         0.0165                    Std. error                                           0.0087        0.0098       0.0107        0.0165
Enrollment                                  0.0322        0.0117         0.0244         0.0559                   Enrollment                                            0.0367        0.0174       0.0302        0.0634
 Std. error                                 0.0077        0.0098         0.0116         0.0169                    Std. error                                           0.0076        0.0098       0.0115        0.0164
Population Growth                          -0.5503        -0.5553        -0.7864        -1.0202                  Population Growth                                    -0.5574        -0.5619      -0.7824       -1.0136
 Std. error                                 0.0627        0.0701         0.0853         0.1195                    Std. error                                           0.0623        0.0699       0.0855        0.1240
Log(Life Expectancy)                        0.0762        0.0793         0.0656         0.0924                   Log(Life Expectancy)                                  0.0744        0.0778       0.0631        0.0883
 Std. error                                 0.0049        0.0057         0.0079         0.0170                    Std. error                                           0.0050        0.0057       0.0081        0.0168
OECD GDP growth (lagged)                    0.0614        0.0349         0.0444         0.0424                   OECD GDP growth (contemporaneous)                     0.1469        0.1177       0.1435        0.1695
 Std. error                                 0.0317        0.0342         0.0334         0.0413                    Std. error                                           0.0301        0.0328       0.0315        0.0394
World real interest rate (lagged)           0.0337        0.0473         0.0834         0.1069                   World real interest rate (contemporaneous)           -0.0625        -0.0484      -0.0132       -0.0182
 Std. error                                 0.0325        0.0352         0.0350         0.0434                    Std. error                                           0.0282        0.0309       0.0300        0.0372
Official Liberalization Indicator           0.0101        0.0089         0.0123         0.0133                   Official Liberalization Indicator                     0.0097        0.0085       0.0124        0.0141
 Std. error                                 0.0016        0.0017         0.0020         0.0036                    Std. error                                           0.0016        0.0017       0.0020        0.0036

I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product. Log(GDP) is
the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth rate of total
population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. The
first sign liberalization indicator takes the value of one after the first of the following events: the officially liberalization date, the introduction of an ADR, or the introduction of a country fund. Latin refers to
an indicator that takes the value of one if the country is in Latin America. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard
errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 4: Monte Carlo Analysis of the Liberalization Effect
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)
1000 Replications

                  Randomized Lib Indicator                    Intercept
                   Coefficient    T-stat                       Coefficient      T-stat
Mean                   -0.0002      -0.1305                         -0.2396     -10.7595
Median                 -0.0003      -0.1924                         -0.2389     -10.7420
2.50%                  -0.0057      -3.1250                         -0.2626     -11.6792
5.00%                  -0.0048      -2.8700                         -0.2555     -11.4214
95.00%                  0.0043       2.8300                         -0.2267     -10.1928
97.50%                  0.0051       3.1353                         -0.2219     -10.0328


                  Log(GDP)                                    Gov/GDP
                   Coefficient       T-stat                    Coefficient      T-stat
Mean                   -0.0069       -11.4466                      -0.0077        -0.6372
Median                 -0.0069       -11.4953                      -0.0078        -0.6453
2.50%                  -0.0074       -12.5111                      -0.0162        -1.0363
5.00%                  -0.0073       -12.1652                      -0.0111        -0.9087
95.00%                 -0.0066       -10.6587                      -0.0033        -0.2659
97.50%                 -0.0065       -10.3595                      -0.0025        -0.2101


                  Enrollment                                  Population Growth
                   Coefficient       T-stat                    Coefficient    T-stat
Mean                    0.0272          4.5188                     -0.5897    -13.5067
Median                  0.0273          4.5373                     -0.5920    -13.5972
2.50%                   0.0222          3.6523                     -0.6247    -14.5933
5.00%                   0.0233          3.8723                     -0.6158    -14.1923
95.00%                  0.0305          5.1040                     -0.5594    -12.5882
97.50%                  0.0318          5.3153                     -0.5491    -12.2674


                   Log(Life Expectancy)
                     Coefficient       T-stat
Mean                       0.0753        12.9693
Median                     0.0751        12.9638
2.50%                      0.0705        12.1558
5.00%                      0.0716        12.3863
95.00%                     0.0797        13.6292
97.50%                     0.0806        13.9367
This Table presents evidence from a Monte Carlo procedure (with 1000 replications) that
mimics the GMM estimation presented in Table 2, for our largest sample of 95 countries.
The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic
product. Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of
government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio;
Population growth is the growth rate of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log
life expectancy of the total population; and the randomized “liberalization” variable is
simulated based upon the procedure documented in the text. The weighting matrix we
employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity.
We present the 2.5%, 5.0%, 50%, 95%, and 97.5% percentile for the estimated coefficients
and t-statistics.
Table 5: Macroeconomic Reforms and Financial Liberalization
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)

Panel A: Inflation                                                                                          Panel B: Inflation High-Low Spread
                                        Sample I          II             III           IV                                                                     I            II           III          IV
Constant                                -0.2447        -0.2628        -0.1494       -0.1717                 Constant                                      -0.2368       -0.2549      -0.1564      -0.3184
  Std. error                             0.0181        0.0216         0.0294        0.0631                    Std. error                                  0.0183        0.0218       0.0292       0.0708
Log(GDP)                                -0.0094        -0.0088        -0.0120       -0.0167                 Log(GDP)                                      -0.0095       -0.0089      -0.0120      -0.0170
  Std. error                             0.0007        0.0007         0.0008        0.0011                    Std. error                                  0.0007        0.0007       0.0008       0.0011
Govt/GDP                                -0.0122        -0.0263        -0.0303       -0.0344                 Govt/GDP                                      -0.0207       -0.0339      -0.0318      -0.0251
  Std. error                             0.0091        0.0103         0.0109        0.0134                    Std. error                                  0.0093        0.0104       0.0107       0.0169
Enrollment                               0.0100        -0.0167        0.0057        0.0574                  Enrollment                                    0.0128        -0.0146      0.0066       0.0364
  Std. error                             0.0083        0.0103         0.0121        0.0169                    Std. error                                  0.0083        0.0104       0.0119       0.0171
Population Growth                       -0.4966        -0.4954        -0.8100       -1.1441                 Population Growth                             -0.5210       -0.5098      -0.8138      -1.1565
  Std. error                             0.0589        0.0684         0.0842        0.1167                    Std. error                                  0.0595        0.0686       0.0839       0.1207
Log(Life Expectancy)                     0.0789        0.0840         0.0638        0.0775                  Log(Life Expectancy)                          0.0775        0.0825       0.0656       0.1133
  Std. error                             0.0049        0.0057         0.0078        0.0159                    Std. error                                  0.0050        0.0057       0.0078       0.0180
Trade                                    0.0095        0.0108         0.0090        0.0084                  Trade                                         0.0092        0.0105       0.0087       0.0089
  Std. error                             0.0011        0.0012         0.0012        0.0013                    Std. error                                  0.0011        0.0012       0.0012       0.0013
Inflation (Latin)                        0.0001        0.0001         0.0005        0.0003                  Inflation Spread (Latin)                      0.0002        0.0002       0.0005       0.0006
  Std. error                             0.0002        0.0002         0.0003        0.0004                    Std. error                                  0.0001        0.0001       0.0002       0.0003
Inflation (Non-Latin)                    0.0030        0.0021         0.0042        -0.0492                 Inflation Spread (Non-Latin)                  0.0050        0.0041       0.0081       0.0651
  Std. error                             0.0022        0.0024         0.0039        0.0134                    Std. error                                  0.0019        0.0020       0.0030       0.0207
Official Liberalization Indicator        0.0102        0.0084         0.0112        0.0088                  Official Liberalization Indicator             0.0113        0.0094       0.0115       0.0074
  Std. error                             0.0016        0.0017         0.0020        0.0034                    Std. error                                  0.0016        0.0017       0.0019       0.0036

I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product.
Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the
growth rate of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; Trade/GDP is the sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured as a share of
GDP; Inflation as measured by the annual growth rate of the GDP implicit deflator; Inflation Spread is the high-low spread of observed annual inflation over the previous 5-years; and the official
liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. Latin refers to an indicator that takes the value of one if the country is in Latin America. The
weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 6: Financial Development versus Financial Liberalization
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)

Panel A: Banking Sector Development                                                                                          Panel B: Banking Sector and Equity Market Development
                                         Sample I          II             III           IV                                                                          Sample III        IV
Constant                                 -0.2288        -0.2481        -0.1450       -0.3366                                  Constant                               -0.1373       -0.3304
  Std. error                              0.0182        0.0216         0.0291        0.0708                                     Std. error                            0.0309       0.0746
Log(GDP)                                 -0.0104        -0.0099        -0.0133       -0.0186                                  Log(GDP)                               -0.0126       -0.0180
  Std. error                              0.0007        0.0008         0.0008        0.0013                                     Std. error                            0.0008       0.0013
Govt/GDP                                 -0.0233        -0.0371        -0.0323       -0.0124                                  Govt/GDP                               -0.0387       -0.0127
  Std. error                              0.0095        0.0108         0.0110        0.0188                                     Std. error                            0.0109       0.0185
Enrollment                                0.0067        -0.0248        -0.0080       0.0226                                   Enrollment                             -0.0069        0.0143
  Std. error                              0.0086        0.0107         0.0126        0.0182                                     Std. error                            0.0127       0.0184
Population Growth                        -0.5323        -0.5195        -0.8594       -1.2297                                  Population Growth                      -0.8127       -1.3198
  Std. error                              0.0587        0.0684         0.0848        0.1290                                     Std. error                            0.0901       0.1419
Log(Life Expectancy)                      0.0768        0.0825         0.0651        0.1203                                   Log(Life Expectancy)                    0.0606        0.1155
  Std. error                              0.0050        0.0058         0.0077        0.0180                                     Std. error                            0.0083       0.0187
Trade                                     0.0092        0.0107         0.0096        0.0102                                   Trade                                   0.0110        0.0119
  Std. error                              0.0011        0.0011         0.0012        0.0014                                     Std. error                            0.0012       0.0015
Inflation Spread (Latin)                  0.0002        0.0002         0.0006        0.0008                                   Inflation Spread (Latin)                0.0005        0.0009
  Std. error                              0.0001        0.0001         0.0002        0.0003                                     Std. error                            0.0002       0.0003
Inflation Spread (Non-Latin)              0.0053        0.0042         0.0087        0.0736                                   Inflation Spread (Non-Latin)            0.0075        0.0961
  Std. error                              0.0019        0.0020         0.0031        0.0215                                     Std. error                            0.0024       0.0226
Private Credit                            0.0086        0.0100         0.0087        0.0066                                   Private Credit                          0.0051        0.0059
  Std. error                              0.0020        0.0021         0.0022        0.0026                                     Std. error                            0.0022       0.0026
Official Liberalization Indicator         0.0098        0.0076         0.0104        0.0061                                   Turnover                                0.0076        0.0078
  Std. error                              0.0016        0.0017         0.0019        0.0036                                     Std. error                            0.0023       0.0023
                                                                                                                              Log(# of dom companies)                 0.0010        0.0014
                                                                                                                                Std. error                            0.0004       0.0006
                                                                                                                              Official Liberalization Indicator       0.0083        0.0036
                                                                                                                                Std. error                            0.0019       0.0036
I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic
product. Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio;
Population growth is the growth rate of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; Trade/GDP is the sum of exports and imports of goods
and services measured as a share of GDP; Inflation as measured by the annual growth rate of the GDP implicit deflator; Inflation Spread is the high-low spread of observed annual
inflation over the previous 5-years; PrivCredit/GDP is private credit divided by GDP; log(# of stocks) is the log of the number of domestic companies; Turnover is the ratio of equity
market value traded to the MCAP; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. Latin refers to an indicator that
takes the value of one if the country is in Latin America.
The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 7: Financial Liberalization and Financial Development

Panel A: Effects of Financial Liberalization on Financial Development

     Sample III: 50 countries                                                       Sample III: 50 countries
     Dependent Variable: Average Turnover              k=1        2         3       Dependent Variable: Average Log(# of stocks)      k=1        2         3

     Constant                                         -1.3634   -1.4573   -1.5860   Constant                                         -1.2640   -1.1084   -0.9963
      Std. error                                      0.2319    0.2121    0.1982     Std. error                                      1.0370    1.0100    0.9699
     Log(GDP)                                         0.0211    0.0200    0.0161    Log(GDP)                                         0.0058    0.0048    0.0017
      Std. error                                      0.0062    0.0058    0.0057     Std. error                                      0.0261    0.0260    0.0259
     Govt/GDP                                         -0.3103   -0.3185   -0.3387   Govt/GDP                                         -1.2926   -1.3743   -1.4821
      Std. error                                      0.1012    0.0909    0.0843     Std. error                                      0.3406    0.3320    0.3160
     Enrollment                                       0.1094    0.1109    0.0808    Enrollment                                       0.1441    0.0992    -0.0221
      Std. error                                      0.0903    0.0819    0.0805     Std. error                                      0.3707    0.3682    0.3593
     Population Growth                                0.9376    1.1719    1.3368    Population Growth                                -3.5210   -4.0686   -4.2086
      Std. error                                      0.7442    0.6752    0.6314     Std. error                                      2.5320    2.4068    2.1532
     Log(Life Expectancy)                             0.3183    0.3431    0.3839    Log(Life Expectancy)                             1.5207    1.4988    1.4925
      Std. error                                      0.0606    0.0558    0.0530     Std. error                                      0.2681    0.2609    0.2515
     Official Liberalization Indicator                0.1611    0.1605    0.1660    Official Liberalization Indicator                0.4675    0.4566    0.4681
      Std. error                                      0.0157    0.0147    0.0144     Std. error                                      0.0585    0.0589    0.0599


     Sample I: 95 countries                                                         Sample III: 50 countries
     Dependent Variable: Average Private Credit/GDP    k=1        2         3       Dependent Variable: Average Private Credit/GDP    k=1        2         3

     Constant                                         -0.9338   -0.8889   -0.8891   Constant                                         -0.7842   -0.7317   -0.7002
      Std. error                                      0.0699    0.0718    0.0721     Std. error                                      0.2572    0.2517    0.2475
     Log(GDP)                                         0.0850    0.0878    0.0870    Log(GDP)                                         0.1303    0.1300    0.1291
      Std. error                                      0.0041    0.0041    0.0042     Std. error                                      0.0066    0.0066    0.0066
     Govt/GDP                                         0.2554    0.2068    0.1757    Govt/GDP                                         0.2000    0.1869    0.1703
      Std. error                                      0.0478    0.0465    0.0454     Std. error                                      0.1127    0.1096    0.1062
     Enrollment                                       0.5231    0.5822    0.5971    Enrollment                                       1.2484    1.2502    1.2397
      Std. error                                      0.0445    0.0452    0.0457     Std. error                                      0.0916    0.0902    0.0904
     Population Growth                                -0.1110   0.0049    0.0848    Population Growth                                2.4165    2.5392    2.6223
      Std. error                                      0.1996    0.2000    0.2002     Std. error                                      0.7425    0.7276    0.7205
     Log(Life Expectancy)                             0.1196    0.1025    0.1039    Log(Life Expectancy)                             -0.0262   -0.0386   -0.0438
      Std. error                                      0.0223    0.0229    0.0231     Std. error                                      0.0665    0.0651    0.0640
     Official Liberalization Indicator                0.2223    0.2226    0.2285    Official Liberalization Indicator                0.1144    0.1227    0.1290
      Std. error                                      0.0091    0.0093    0.0095     Std. error                                      0.0139    0.0142    0.0146
Table 7 (continued)
Panel B: Effects of Financial Development on Probability of Financial Liberalization
Dependent Variable: 1996 Official Liberalization Indicator
Independent Variables are average of previous 5 years
50 countries

      Dependent Variable: 1996 Official Liberalization Indicator                                                Dependent Variable: 1993 Official Liberalization Indicator

      Constant                                                -11.773                                           Constant                                                 -6.044
        Std. error                                            16.468                                              Std. error                                             4.260
      Log(GDP)                                                 0.669                                            Log(GDP)                                                 0.720
        Std. error                                             1.484                                              Std. error                                             0.654
      Govt/GDP                                                14.476                                            Govt/GDP                                                -11.585
        Std. error                                            23.590                                              Std. error                                             4.929
      Private Credit                                           -2.561                                           Private Credit                                           0.438
        Std. error                                             6.957                                              Std. error                                             3.111
      Turnover                                                 7.376                                            Turnover                                                 0.175
        Std. error                                            11.816                                              Std. error                                             1.848
      Log(# of dom companies)                                  0.939                                            Log(# of dom companies)                                  0.537
        Std. error                                             0.862                                              Std. error                                             0.300


      Dependent Variable: 1990 Official Lib Indicator                                                           Dependent Variable: 1987 Official Lib Indicator

      Constant                                                 -6.908                                           Constant                                                -11.137
        Std. error                                             2.507                                              Std. error                                             3.909
      Log(GDP)                                                 1.370                                            Log(GDP)                                                 1.405
        Std. error                                             0.741                                              Std. error                                             0.515
      Govt/GDP                                                -14.068                                           Govt/GDP                                                 -4.910
        Std. error                                            12.733                                              Std. error                                             7.734
      Private Credit                                           1.264                                            Private Credit                                           1.774
        Std. error                                             1.829                                              Std. error                                             3.091
      Turnover                                                 0.258                                            Turnover                                                 -0.335
        Std. error                                             1.291                                              Std. error                                             2.327
      Log(# of dom companies)                                  -0.360                                           Log(# of dom companies)                                  -0.145
        Std. error                                             0.451                                              Std. error                                             0.429

      I and III refers to samples of 95 and 50 countries detailed in appendix table A1. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the 1, 2, or 3-year average of either equity markets turnover, log number of
      companies, or private credit to GDP ratio. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors are robust,
      accounting for the overlapping nature of the data. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the official liberalization indicator. A cross-sectional Probit model is estimated for 1987, 1990, 1993, 1996
      using Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Methods (BHHH algorithm), with QMLE-adjusted robust standard errors. In this case, each right-hand side variables is the preceding 5-year average of the
      relevant quantities.
      Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the
      growth rate of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; PrivCredit/GDP is private credit divided by GDP; log(# of stocks) is the log of the number of
      domestic companies; Turnover is the ratio of equity market value traded to the MCAP; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero
      otherwise.
Table 8: The Sources of the Liberalization Effect
Liberalization and the Components of GDP
Panel A: Annual Average Investment/GDP Ratio (k=5)                                                  Panel B: Annual Average Consumption/GDP Ratio (k=5)

                                       Sample I        II           III         IV                                                        Sample I         II          III          IV
Constant                               -0.3370      -0.3165      -0.4205     0.1725                 Constant                               1.7627       0.9759      0.5343       0.6856
 Std. error                             0.0287      0.0326       0.0632      0.1188                  Std. error                            0.0429       0.0642      0.0811       0.1171
Log(GDP)                               -0.0157      -0.0130      -0.0148     -0.0109                Log(GDP)                              -0.0418       -0.0270     -0.0206      -0.0093
 Std. error                             0.0011      0.0010       0.0015      0.0020                  Std. error                            0.0017       0.0020      0.0021       0.0017
Govt/GDP                               -0.0147      -0.0285      0.0023      -0.1097                Govt/GDP                              -0.4817       -0.4814     -0.4089      -0.8128
 Std. error                             0.0149      0.0152       0.0207      0.0315                  Std. error                            0.0269       0.0292      0.0259       0.0283
Enrollment                              0.7288      0.6498       0.7024      0.7951                 Enrollment                            -0.2665       -0.5038     -0.4503      -0.7622
 Std. error                             0.0156      0.0187       0.0232      0.0303                  Std. error                            0.0227       0.0266      0.0276       0.0376
Population Growth                       0.2270      0.2899       0.0554      -0.8799                Population Growth                     -2.5579       -1.8045     0.4181       0.0178
 Std. error                             0.0796      0.0759       0.1637      0.2153                  Std. error                            0.1410       0.1917      0.1986       0.2088
Log(Life Expectancy)                    0.1230      0.1175       0.1428      -0.0029                Log(Life Expectancy)                  -0.1442       0.0247      0.1006       0.0692
 Std. error                             0.0083      0.0092       0.0166      0.0302                  Std. error                            0.0118       0.0168      0.0208       0.0292
Official Liberalization Indicator       0.0141      0.0116       0.0079      0.0127                 Official Liberalization Indicator      0.0082       -0.0246     -0.0085      0.0123
 Std. error                             0.0025      0.0026       0.0034      0.0053                  Std. error                            0.0043       0.0046      0.0049       0.0071

Panel C: Annual Average Government/GDP Ratio (k=5)                                                  Panel D: Annual Average (Export-Imports)/GDP Ratio (k=5)

                                       Sample I        II           III         IV                                                        Sample I         II          III          IV
Constant                                0.0275      0.0123       0.0911      0.2702                 Constant                              -0.1833       0.4063      1.0657       0.1080
 Std. error                             0.0109      0.0130       0.0204      0.0292                  Std. error                            0.0192       0.0350      0.0652       0.0565
Log(GDP)                                0.0069      0.0055       0.0014      0.0040                 Log(GDP)                               0.0433       0.0326      0.0354       0.0196
 Std. error                             0.0006      0.0007       0.0004      0.0005                  Std. error                            0.0007       0.0008      0.0009       0.0008
Govt/GDP                                0.8426      0.8756       0.9187      0.9701                 Govt/GDP                              -0.2353       -0.1624     -0.3058      -0.0580
 Std. error                             0.0113      0.0111       0.0072      0.0099                  Std. error                            0.0074       0.0173      0.0261       0.0119
Enrollment                              0.0377      0.0258       0.0169      0.0330                 Enrollment                            -0.3607       0.0080      -0.1525      -0.0222
 Std. error                             0.0046      0.0052       0.0076      0.0100                  Std. error                            0.0102       0.0104      0.0179       0.0146
Population Growth                       0.2806      0.2772       -0.0861     0.1707                 Population Growth                      0.4565       -0.0973     -0.4199      0.6206
 Std. error                             0.0853      0.1075       0.0309      0.0558                  Std. error                            0.1452       0.0991      0.1428       0.1112
Log(Life Expectancy)                   -0.0168      -0.0117      -0.0228     -0.0733                Log(Life Expectancy)                  -0.0179       -0.1557     -0.3016      -0.0582
 Std. error                             0.0025      0.0032       0.0054      0.0074                  Std. error                            0.0045       0.0090      0.0157       0.0152
Official Liberalization Indicator      -0.0027      0.0006       0.0053      0.0041                 Official Liberalization Indicator     -0.0211       -0.0107     -0.0061      -0.0231
 Std. error                             0.0006      0.0009       0.0013      0.0019                  Std. error                            0.0017       0.0013      0.0029       0.0024

I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is either the 5-year average investment/GDP, consumption/GDP,
government/GDP, or trade balance/GDP ratios. Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the
secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth rate of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; and the official
liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for
cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 9: The Cost of Capital and the Liberalization Effect

Panel A: Growth, Liberalization and the Cost of Capital (Credit Rating)                                     Panel B: Growth, Liberalization and the Cost of Capital (Dividend Yield)

                                                     Sample II         III           IV                                                                 Sample IV
Constant                                              -0.2877       -0.1304       -0.2026                   Constant                                     -0.2025
  Std. error                                          0.0145        0.0247        0.0671                      Std. error                                 0.0671
Log(GDP)                                              -0.0104       -0.0121       -0.0160                   Log(GDP)                                     -0.0159
  Std. error                                          0.0005        0.0005        0.0011                      Std. error                                 0.0010
Govt/GDP                                              -0.0263       -0.0271       -0.0304                   Govt/GDP                                     -0.0355
  Std. error                                          0.0082        0.0083        0.0120                      Std. error                                 0.0122
Enrollment                                            -0.0306       0.0173        0.0547                    Enrollment                                   0.0499
  Std. error                                          0.0067        0.0093        0.0163                      Std. error                                 0.0181
Population Growth                                     -0.4485       -0.8004       -1.0901                   Population Growth                            -1.1259
  Std. error                                          0.1027        0.1013        0.0860                      Std. error                                 0.0884
Log(Life Expectancy)                                  0.0871        0.0551        0.0831                    Log(Life Expectancy)                         0.0842
  Std. error                                          0.0035        0.0066        0.0174                      Std. error                                 0.0175
Official Liberalization Indicator                     0.0010        0.0105        0.0127                    Official Liberalization Indicator            0.0163
  Std. error                                          0.0013        0.0017        0.0047                      Std. error                                 0.0049
Log(Credit Rating)                                    0.0102        0.0054        0.0014                    Dividend Yield                               0.0376
  Std. error                                          0.0010        0.0013        0.0032                      Std. error                                 0.0412
                                                                                                            Div Yield*Lib Indicator                      -0.0682
                                                                                                              Std. error                                 0.0440

Panel C: Investment, Liberalization and the Cost of Capital (Credit Rating)                                 Panel D: Investment, Liberalization and the Cost of Capital (Dividend Yield)

                                                     Sample II         III           IV                                                                   Sample IV
Constant                                              -0.3678       -0.4247       0.2109                        Constant                                   0.2246
  Std. error                                          0.0264        0.0571        0.1139                           Std. error                              0.0992
Log(GDP)                                              -0.0142       -0.0157       -0.0123                       Log(GDP)                                   -0.0107
  Std. error                                          0.0008        0.0011        0.0024                           Std. error                              0.0021
Govt/GDP                                              -0.0305       0.0035        -0.1002                       Govt/GDP                                   -0.1305
  Std. error                                          0.0109        0.0177        0.0316                           Std. error                              0.0283
Enrollment                                            0.6134        0.6876        0.8051                        Enrollment                                 0.7497
  Std. error                                          0.0203        0.0259        0.0336                           Std. error                              0.0329
Population Growth                                     0.2600        0.1188        -0.8640                       Population Growth                          -0.9631
  Std. error                                          0.0406        0.1831        0.1715                           Std. error                              0.1638
Log(Life Expectancy)                                  0.1342        0.1374        -0.0193                       Log(Life Expectancy)                       -0.0112
  Std. error                                          0.0079        0.0154        0.0293                           Std. error                              0.0262
Official Liberalization Indicator                     0.0098        0.0051        0.0132                        Official Liberalization Indicator          0.0213
  Std. error                                          0.0020        0.0032        0.0066                           Std. error                              0.0071
Log(Credit Rating)                                    0.0003        0.0097        0.0095                        Dividend Yield                             -0.0719
  Std. error                                          0.0014        0.0024        0.0069                           Std. error                              0.0403
                                                                                                                Div Yield*Lib Indicator                    -0.2209
                                                                                                                   Std. error                              0.0538
I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable in panels A and B is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross
domestic product. In panels C and D, the dependent variable is the Investment to GDP ratio. Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption
to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth rate of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; Log(Credit
Rating) is the log of the Institutional Investor country credit rating; and Dividend yield is the equity market dividend yield. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a
correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 10: Insider Trading and the Liberalization Effect
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)


Panel A: Liberalization and Insider Trading Law                                                              Panel B: Liberalization and Insider Trading Prosecution

                                         Sample I          II            III           IV                                                                 Sample I          II           III         IV
Constant                                 -0.2340        -0.2465       -0.1616       -0.2138                  Constant                                     -0.2319        -0.2413      -0.1584     -0.1971
  Std. error                              0.0190        0.0237        0.0238        0.0689                   Std. error                                    0.0181        0.0228       0.0226      0.0680
Log(GDP)                                 -0.0093        -0.0086       -0.0114       -0.0157                  Log(GDP)                                     -0.0096        -0.0090      -0.0119     -0.0158
  Std. error                              0.0005        0.0006        0.0006        0.0010                   Std. error                                    0.0005        0.0006       0.0005      0.0010
Govt/GDP                                 -0.0009        -0.0149       -0.0191       -0.0306                  Govt/GDP                                     -0.0011        -0.0143      -0.0178     -0.0314
  Std. error                              0.0074        0.0095        0.0080        0.0128                   Std. error                                    0.0075        0.0100       0.0079      0.0124
Enrollment                                0.0301        0.0104        0.0241        0.0584                   Enrollment                                    0.0315        0.0135       0.0292      0.0564
  Std. error                              0.0061        0.0080        0.0102        0.0183                   Std. error                                    0.0058        0.0077       0.0095      0.0164
Population Growth                        -0.5312        -0.5340       -0.7517       -1.0438                  Population Growth                            -0.5544        -0.5710      -0.8047     -1.0766
  Std. error                              0.1329        0.1593        0.1036        0.0949                   Std. error                                    0.1378        0.1722       0.1011      0.0864
Log(Life Expectancy)                      0.0765        0.0796        0.0654        0.0861                   Log(Life Expectancy)                          0.0765        0.0791       0.0653      0.0824
  Std. error                              0.0043        0.0053        0.0061        0.0181                   Std. error                                    0.0040        0.0049       0.0057      0.0179
Official Liberalization Indicator         0.0093        0.0079        0.0117        0.0129                   Official Liberalization Indicator             0.0092        0.0080       0.0116      0.0138
  Std. error                              0.0016        0.0019        0.0018        0.0046                   Std. error                                    0.0016        0.0019       0.0017      0.0044
Insider Trading Law                       0.0001        0.0004        -0.0005       -0.0004                  Insider Trading Prosecution                   0.0036        0.0031       0.0037      0.0015
  Std. error                              0.0006        0.0006        0.0008        0.0009                   Std. error                                    0.0008        0.0009       0.0010      0.0012

I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product.
Log(GDP) is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth
rate of total population; Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; Insider Trading Law and Insider Trading Prosecution are indicators representing either the introduction of
laws prohibiting insider trading or actual prosecutions, respectively; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. The weighting
matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 11: Financial Liberalization and Preconditions
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)

Panel A: Financial Liberalization and Education                                                Panel B: Financial Liberalization and Government Size

                                                      Sample I      II        III       IV                                                             Sample I      II        III       IV
Constant                                              -0.2453    -0.2619   -0.1624   -0.3074   Constant                                                -0.2312    -0.2454   -0.1505   -0.3059
 Std. error                                            0.0181    0.0216    0.0296    0.0617     Std. error                                              0.0180    0.0215    0.0295    0.0618
Log(GDP)                                              -0.0094    -0.0087   -0.0111   -0.0161   Log(GDP)                                                -0.0089    -0.0081   -0.0108   -0.0163
 Std. error                                            0.0007    0.0007    0.0008    0.0012     Std. error                                              0.0007    0.0007    0.0008    0.0012
Govt/GDP                                               0.0051    -0.0064   -0.0170   -0.0214   Govt/GDP                                                -0.0012    -0.0134   -0.0202   -0.0261
 Std. error                                            0.0088    0.0098    0.0106    0.0179     Std. error                                              0.0088    0.0100    0.0109    0.0182
Enrollment                                             0.0216    -0.0029   -0.0029   0.0410    Enrollment                                               0.0294    0.0087    0.0173    0.0584
 Std. error                                            0.0081    0.0102    0.0121    0.0181     Std. error                                              0.0078    0.0099    0.0118    0.0178
Population Growth                                     -0.5288    -0.5281   -0.8576   -1.1904   Population Growth                                       -0.5696    -0.5821   -0.9180   -1.2250
 Std. error                                            0.0607    0.0673    0.0792    0.1129     Std. error                                              0.0624    0.0697    0.0819    0.1141
Log(Life Expectancy)                                   0.0798    0.0840    0.0672    0.1115    Log(Life Expectancy)                                     0.0755    0.0790    0.0631    0.1111
 Std. error                                            0.0050    0.0057    0.0080    0.0157     Std. error                                              0.0049    0.0057    0.0079    0.0158
Official Liberalization Indicator*Fully Liberalized    0.0085    0.0066    0.0081    0.0037    Official Liberalization Indicator*Fully Liberalized      0.0072    0.0053    0.0072    0.0038
 Std. error                                            0.0017    0.0018    0.0017    0.0022     Std. error                                              0.0017    0.0019    0.0018    0.0023
Official Liberalization Indicator*High Enrollment      0.0165    0.0157    0.0150    0.0103    Official Liberalization Indicator*Big Government         0.0039    0.0028    0.0017    -0.0027
 Std. error                                            0.0029    0.0030    0.0028    0.0043     Std. error                                              0.0024    0.0026    0.0024    0.0036
Official Liberalization Indicator*Low Enrollment      -0.0019    -0.0030   -0.0034   -0.0061   Official Liberalization Indicator*Small Government       0.0103    0.0090    0.0086    0.0049
 Std. error                                            0.0021    0.0022    0.0024    0.0036     Std. error                                              0.0026    0.0026    0.0027    0.0045

Wald Test: High Enrollment = Low Enrollment           97.475     93.284    66.317    14.643    Wald Test: Big Government = Small Government             5.397     3.892     4.308     4.796
p-value                                                0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000    p-value                                                  0.020     0.049     0.038     0.029




Panel C: Financial Liberalization and Democracy                                                Panel D: Financial Liberalization and Legal Origin

                                                      Sample I      II        III       IV                                                             Sample I      II       III       IV
Constant                                              -0.2327    -0.2445   -0.1625   -0.2639   Constant                                                 -0.2320   -0.2475   -0.1638   -0.2960
 Std. error                                            0.0179    0.0214    0.0283    0.0606     Std. error                                              0.0206    0.0261    0.0249    0.0696
Log(GDP)                                              -0.0091    -0.0084   -0.0116   -0.0162   Log(GDP)                                                 -0.0089   -0.0081   -0.0107   -0.0148
 Std. error                                            0.0007    0.0007    0.0008    0.0012     Std. error                                              0.0005    0.0006    0.0006    0.0009
Govt/GDP                                              -0.0058    -0.0193   -0.0191   -0.0267   Govt/GDP                                                 -0.0095   -0.0269   -0.0296   -0.0525
 Std. error                                            0.0087    0.0097    0.0105    0.0165     Std. error                                              0.0080    0.0109    0.0080    0.0152
Enrollment                                             0.0305    0.0108    0.0250    0.0621    Enrollment                                                0.0280    0.0037    0.0131    0.0342
 Std. error                                            0.0078    0.0098    0.0118    0.0173     Std. error                                              0.0063    0.0087    0.0105    0.0223
Population Growth                                     -0.5818    -0.5941   -0.8692   -1.1447   Population Growth                                        -0.5742   -0.5793   -0.8941   -1.3499
 Std. error                                            0.0614    0.0681    0.0825    0.1146     Std. error                                              0.1528    0.1897    0.1183    0.1016
Log(Life Expectancy)                                   0.0765    0.0795    0.0666    0.0996    Log(Life Expectancy)                                      0.0761    0.0803    0.0666    0.1087
 Std. error                                            0.0049    0.0057    0.0076    0.0154     Std. error                                              0.0045    0.0057    0.0062    0.0180
Official Liberalization Indicator*Democracy            0.0079    0.0063    0.0099    0.0087    Official Liberalization Indicator*French Law              0.0050    0.0031    0.0029   -0.0057
 Std. error                                            0.0017    0.0018    0.0020    0.0033     Std. error                                              0.0018    0.0021    0.0020    0.0052
                                                                                               Official Liberalization Indicator*English Law             0.0091    0.0077    0.0098    0.0046
                                                                                                Std. error                                              0.0015    0.0018    0.0018    0.0048
                                                                                               Official Liberalization Indicator*Law (Other)             0.0081    0.0072    0.0079    0.0000
                                                                                                Std. error                                              0.0022    0.0028    0.0022    0.0052

                                                                                               Wald Test: French Law = English Law = Law (Other)       28.356     37.564    36.985    29.073
                                                                                               p-value                                                  0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
Table 11: Financial Liberalization and Preconditions (continued)
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)

Panel E: Financial Liberalization and U.S. Holdings/GDP                                                        Panel F: Financial Liberalization and U.S. Holdings/MCAP

                                                          Sample I      II        III       IV                                                                                Sample I      II        III       IV
Constant                                                  -0.2333    -0.2543   -0.1583   -0.3505               Constant                                                       -0.2320    -0.2487   -0.1487   -0.3031
 Std. error                                                0.0181    0.0218    0.0298    0.0582                 Std. error                                                     0.0180    0.0216    0.0295    0.0578
Log(GDP)                                                  -0.0075    -0.0071   -0.0097   -0.0157               Log(GDP)                                                       -0.0082    -0.0077   -0.0099   -0.0152
 Std. error                                                0.0006    0.0006    0.0008    0.0012                 Std. error                                                     0.0006    0.0006    0.0007    0.0011
Govt/GDP                                                  -0.0047    -0.0182   -0.0196   -0.0142               Govt/GDP                                                       -0.0037    -0.0184   -0.0192   -0.0140
 Std. error                                                0.0088    0.0099    0.0110    0.0177                 Std. error                                                     0.0088    0.0099    0.0108    0.0166
Enrollment                                                 0.0297    0.0077    0.0215    0.0663                Enrollment                                                      0.0283    0.0064    0.0195    0.0667
 Std. error                                                0.0079    0.0099    0.0121    0.0187                 Std. error                                                     0.0078    0.0098    0.0119    0.0180
Population Growth                                         -0.6007    -0.6061   -0.9259   -1.1828               Population Growth                                              -0.5741    -0.5780   -0.8795   -1.1750
 Std. error                                                0.0587    0.0650    0.0813    0.1196                 Std. error                                                     0.0600    0.0664    0.0825    0.1148
Log(Life Expectancy)                                       0.0742    0.0799    0.0633    0.1197                Log(Life Expectancy)                                            0.0747    0.0795    0.0609    0.1071
 Std. error                                                0.0049    0.0057    0.0080    0.0151                 Std. error                                                     0.0049    0.0057    0.0079    0.0151
Official Liberalization Indicator*(U.S. Holdings/GDP)      0.0118    0.0051    0.0103    0.0021                Official Liberalization Indicator*(U.S. Holdings/MCAP)          0.0352    0.0325    0.0291    0.0173
 Std. error                                                0.0075    0.0074    0.0073    0.0065                 Std. error                                                     0.0067    0.0067    0.0067    0.0073


Panel G: Financial Liberalization and Equity Market Correlation

                                                                                           Sample IV
Constant                                                                                    -0.3418
  Std. error                                                                                 0.0549
Log(GDP)                                                                                    -0.0155
  Std. error                                                                                 0.0011
Govt/GDP                                                                                    -0.0168
  Std. error                                                                                 0.0174
Enrollment                                                                                   0.0612
  Std. error                                                                                 0.0185
Population Growth                                                                           -1.1952
  Std. error                                                                                 0.1241
Log(Life Expectancy)                                                                         0.1177
  Std. error                                                                                 0.0142
Official Liberalization Indicator*(market correlation with world)                            0.0010
  Std. error                                                                                 0.0051
I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product. Log(GDP) is the
log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth rate of total population;
Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. Fully Liberalized
takes the value of one for countries that are liberalized throughout the sample. Of those countries that liberalize in sample, Big Government takes the value of one for the country has a larger than median
gov/GDP ratio and High Enrollment takes the value of one for the country has a larger than median secondary school enrollment ratio. Democracy is a [0,1] indicator reflecting the degree of institutional
democracy.

French and English Law take the value of one if the legal tradition of the country is either French civil or common law, respectively; whereas Other takes the value of one with the legal tradition is German,
Scandinavian or any others. U.S. Holdings/MCAP and U.S. Holdings/GDP are the amount of 1997 U.S. holdings of local equities as a percentage of either local market capitalization or local GDP. For the U.S,
we take the total amount of foreign holding of equities divided by either U.S. MCAP or GDP. Market correlations is the scaled ln(rho-2)/ln(3) correlation between the local equity market and world returns; for
liberalizing countries this is computed in the five years before liberalization and for fully liberalized this is computed in the first five years of the sample. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM
estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 12: Convergence
Summary of λ Parameter
                                                                Sample I     II            III            IV
Max λ                                                             0.0104          0.0099         0.0133     0.0193
Mean λ                                                            0.0091          0.0086         0.0114     0.0163
Min λ                                                             0.0071          0.0069         0.0093     0.0148

Classic Growth Regression                                          0.0071         0.0069         0.0093     0.0156
Classic Growth Regression with Liberalization Indicator            0.0094         0.0088         0.0115     0.0158
Inflation                                                          0.0094         0.0088         0.0120     0.0167
Inflation High-Low Spread                                          0.0095         0.0089         0.0120     0.0170

Sensitivity to Alternative Liberalization Dates                    0.0093         0.0088         0.0105     0.0150
Sensitivity to Regional Influences                                 0.0096         0.0090         0.0117     0.0158

Banking Sector Development                                         0.0104         0.0099         0.0133     0.0186
Banking Sector and Equity Market Development                                                     0.0126     0.0180

Liberalization and the Cost of Capital (Credit Rating)                            0.0093         0.0128     0.0160
Liberalization and the Cost of Capital (Dividend Yield)                                                     0.0159

Liberalization and Insider Trading Law                             0.0093         0.0086         0.0114     0.0157
Liberalization and Insider Trading Prosecution                     0.0096         0.0090         0.0119     0.0158

Financial Liberalization and Education                             0.0094         0.0087         0.0111     0.0161
Financial Liberalization and Government Size                       0.0089         0.0081         0.0108     0.0163
Financial Liberalization and Democracy                             0.0091         0.0084         0.0116     0.0162
Financial Liberalization and Legal Origin                          0.0089         0.0081         0.0107     0.0148
Financial Liberalization and U.S. Holdings/GDP                     0.0075         0.0071         0.0097     0.0157
Financial Liberalization and U.S. Holdings/MCAP                    0.0082         0.0077         0.0099     0.0152
Financial Liberalization and Equity Market Correlation                                                      0.0155

log(GDP) --- 1980 or 1990                                             0.0096    0.0093      0.0118       0.0179
log(GDP) --- 1980 or liberaliation year                               0.0096    0.0094      0.0125       0.0193
This Table presents our estimates for the degree of convergence in each experiment we consider throughout the
paper as measured by the estimated coefficients on log initial (1980) GDP.
Table 13: Liberalization and Convergence
Annual Average Real GDP Growth Rate (k=5)

Panel A: Log(GDP) Interaction                                                                                                Panel B: Log(GDP) --- 1980 or 1990
                                               Sample I     II             III          IV                                                                           Sample I         II           III          IV
Constant                                         -0.2270         -0.2418      -0.1575     -0.1936                            Constant                                -0.2276       -0.2400      -0.1547      -0.2915
 Std. error                                      0.0199          0.0247       0.0246      0.0647                              Std. error                              0.0170       0.0210       0.0256       0.0685
Log(GDP)                                         -0.0086         -0.0077      -0.0118     -0.0170                            Log(GDP) - time adjusted                -0.0096       -0.0093      -0.0118      -0.0179
 Std. error                                      0.0006          0.0006       0.0007      0.0013                              Std. error                              0.0005       0.0006       0.0007       0.0010
Govt/GDP                                         -0.0010         -0.0137      -0.0186     -0.0314                            Govt/GDP                                 0.0005       -0.0120      -0.0128      -0.0097
 Std. error                                      0.0075          0.0101       0.0076      0.0117                              Std. error                              0.0064       0.0078       0.0068       0.0106
Enrollment                                       0.0320          0.0121        0.0244     0.0606                             Enrollment                               0.0342       0.0137       0.0215       0.0440
 Std. error                                      0.0061          0.0080       0.0095      0.0164                              Std. error                              0.0058       0.0071       0.0087       0.0146
Population Growth                                -0.5434         -0.5520      -0.7758     -1.0977                            Population Growth                       -0.4196       -0.4312      -0.5619      -0.6653
 Std. error                                      0.1392          0.1717       0.1051      0.0884                              Std. error                              0.0992       0.1131       0.0852       0.0908
Log(Life Expectancy)                             0.0737          0.0770        0.0651     0.0836                             Log(Life Expectancy)                     0.0746       0.0785       0.0634       0.1070
 Std. error                                      0.0046          0.0056       0.0064      0.0171                              Std. error                              0.0041       0.0050       0.0068       0.0181
Official Liberalization Indicator                0.0233          0.0284        0.0021     -0.0011                            Official Liberalization Indicator        0.0096       0.0090       0.0119       0.0133
 Std. error                                      0.0068          0.0073       0.0077      0.0157                              Std. error                              0.0014       0.0015       0.0018       0.0038
Official Liberalization Indicator*Log(GDP)       -0.0016         -0.0023       0.0011     0.0017
 Std. error                                      0.0008          0.0009       0.0009      0.0017
                                                                                                                             Panel D: Dispersion of Log GDP Across Countries
Panel C: Log(GDP) --- 1980 or liberalization year                                                                            Dependent Variable: Cross-Sectional Variance of Log(GDP) at t
                                                 Sample I           II          III         IV                                                    across all 95 countries
Constant                                         -0.2263         -0.2346     -0.1374     -0.2213
 Std. error                                       0.0158         0.0196      0.0269      0.0715                              Constant                       2.3115               Constant                       3.5118
Log(GDP) - liberalization adjusted               -0.0096         -0.0094     -0.0125     -0.0193                              Std. error                   0.1092                 Std. error                   0.6573
 Std. error                                       0.0005         0.0006      0.0008      0.0013                              TIME                           0.0939               TIME                           0.0991
Govt/GDP                                          0.0055         -0.0073     -0.0033     -0.0084                              Std. error                   0.0101                 Std. error                   0.0137
 Std. error                                       0.0059         0.0074      0.0075      0.0111                              CUMLIB                        -0.0197               LOG(CUMLIB)                   -0.5436
Enrollment                                        0.0323         0.0124      0.0173      0.0466                               Std. error                   0.0077                 Std. error                   0.2417
 Std. error                                       0.0058         0.0072      0.0097      0.0165
Population Growth                                -0.4157         -0.4309     -0.6115     -0.8642
 Std. error                                       0.0938         0.1103      0.0952      0.0901
Log(Life Expectancy)                              0.0742         0.0773      0.0605      0.0928
 Std. error                                       0.0039         0.0047      0.0071      0.0190
Official Liberalization Indicator                 0.0088         0.0082      0.0116      0.0158
 Std. error                                       0.0013         0.0014      0.0017      0.0045


I, II, III, and IV refer to samples of 95, 75, 50 and 28 countries detailed in appendix table A1. The dependent variable is the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product. Log(GDP) is the
log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Log(GDP)-time adjusted is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980, then reset at 1990. Log(GDP)-time adjusted is the log real per capita GDP level in 1980, then resets for
each country at liberalization date. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Enrollment is the secondary school enrollment ratio; Population growth is the growth rate of total population;
Log(Life Expectancy) is the log life expectancy of the total population; and the official liberalization variable takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. In Panel D, cumlib is
the total number of liberalized countries. The dependent variable is the purely cross-sectional variance for each year of either 5-year average GDP growth or log(GDP). The weighting matrix we employ in our
GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors account for the overlapping nature of the data.
