                               $ !               




                                              


                                           
                                           
                                             


                                        ! " #%&'(
                                #)**+++,-, "*##*+%&'(



                       . $//          
                               0('( 1 21
                                 -3"4  (&05%
                                      #




                 
!"         # $  %  &# '#
( #


)*+#  '  !,    '#      # !
 !# "  "' *- !"#" ' "  # 
 # ) #  #
" 6   #7
 4   3   
$ ! " #  , %&'(
# &((0
.  , 89


                                            $%#%


       :1; <0==5>    7 6 + 3   3-1  -3  1 3
1""  " 3 3-1  + + #    3 #      3 6  3-1 , 
 " 3 3-1    "7  ? 61  6  137"   4  
3 7  7,  2  6 - 611    #,   2
1#  137"  7  1 - 63 +  7 -3  62?7
   ?7  , 1  7 73  " 3 3-1  + 9&@ 6
    #   " 74 -1  #  "3  4 31" +   A17 1
,   7 " 3 6  3 #  "3    -1  1; 2  
 2 -  1# 3 3 +   3 24 -1   1   "   " 74
7 7 2 ,     +   3  +  1   " #  1
7     2  + 61 #         7, 6  1   6 
 ; #4  611 7 - 1 -"  + 13 - #33 -3 
# B" 6 +3      ,




                                                     
.1 &(9                        .1 &(9                            .1 &(9
C# 6                 C# 6                     C# 6   
23 /27                  23 /27                      23 /27
-3"4  (&05%                 -3"4  (&05%                     -3"4  (&05%
3 $                             D +,6,23,31          3 $
D6,23,31                                                     BE D23,31
1. Introduction

This paper revisits the transition matrix analysis of world-income distribution dy-

namics, and argues that the data are consistent with a model in which countries

search among policies until they reach an income level at which further experi-

mentation is too costly.

   Quah (1993a) classifies countries into groups by relative income, and estimates

a transition matrix giving the probability that countries move between groups. He

finds that rich countries typically stay rich, and that poor countries typically stay

poor, but that middle income countries are likely to transit to wealth or poverty.

The estimated ergodic income distribution associated with these transition prob-

abilities has twin peaks, with many rich countries, many poor countries, and

relatively few middle income countries. This twin peaks result has motivated the-

oretical work on growth models with multiple steady states, in which countries

above a cutoﬀ level of income converge to a high income level, while those below

the cutoﬀ fall into a poverty trap.

   We start by updating Quah’s analysis to include more recent data and then

testing hypotheses about the ergodic distribution using techniques developed in

Onatski (2000). We find that the point estimate of the ergodic distribution has



                                         3
twin peaks, although the rich peak is much larger than the poor peak. However,

the ergodic distribution is estimated very imprecisely. When we follow Quah in

using annual data to estimate the transition matrix, we cannot reject the hypothe-

ses that the ergodic distribution has a single peak at the rich end of the income

range or is equal to the distribution as of the end of the sample.     The ergodic

distribution is estimated suﬃciently imprecisely that beliefs about the long-run

distribution of world income must be heavily influenced by priors.

   Nonetheless, a slightly modified Markovian analysis can yield more precise es-

timates of the short- and medium-run evolution of the world relative income dis-

tribution. More important, it can shed light on a possible mechanism generating

the data. The assumption of a first-order Markov process is much better satis-

fied with five-year data than with annual data, and we therefore modify Quah’s

analysis by estimating transition probabilities over five-year intervals rather than

annual intervals. The implied ergodic distribution has a much larger rich than

poor peak, with 72% of countries in the richest income category.

   However, transition to this steady state is very slow. Though estimates of the

ergodic distribution are extremely noisy, the distribution over the next hundred

years can be estimated more precisely, because uncertainty in estimates of the

transition matrix taken to a relatively small power is much smaller than uncer-


                                         4
tainty in estimates of the transition matrix taken to an infinite power. We find

that under the maintained Markovian assumptions, the coeﬃcient of polarization

and the standard deviation of log income will rise for hundreds of years.

   The driving force behind the rosy long-run forecast and the prolonged tran-

sition is that countries’ incomes move both up and down at moderate income

levels, but there are very few transitions downwards once countries have reached

the richest income category. Prosperity is almost an absorbing state.

   The data are consistent with a simple model in which countries search for

policies which enhance their long-run income, and optimally stop searching once

their income reaches a certain level. The model encompasses two possible cases.

In the first case, the eﬀect of policies depends heavily on countries’ particular

characteristics, so attempts to imitate prosperous countries’ policies are likely to

be unsuccessful. In the second, “End of History” case, capitalism and democracy

are a universal recipe for prosperity, but this has only recently become evident to

policy makers with the fall of the Soviet Union and the introduction of market-

oriented reforms around the world. In this case, the future may be much brighter

than suggested by projecting forward a Markovian matrix based on the 1960-2000

period.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the


                                         5
transition matrix approach and our data. Section 3 argues that the ergodic dis-

tribution is estimated extremely imprecisely.   Section 4 argues that Markovian

assumptions are better satisfied by estimating the transition matrix using five-

year data, and that the associated ergodic distribution has most of its mass in the

top income category. Section 5 shows that transition to the ergodic distribution

is very slow, and is more precisely estimated. Section 6 argues that a model in

which countries search over policies can explain the data.



2. Transition matrix framework

The transition matrix approach to analyzing growth, pioneered by Quah (1993a),

allows for a more flexible relationship between the level of income and the growth

rate of income than the standard convergence approach in which countries’ growth

rates are assumed to be a linear (or sometimes quadratic) function of their (log)

income levels.

   We follow Quah [1993a] in assuming that each country’s relative income follows

a first-order Markov process with time-invariant transition probabilities. That is,

a country’s (uncertain) income tomorrow depends only on its income today. In

the discrete version of this approach, one assumes that all countries could be

divided into several relative income groups. Quah (1993a) divides countries into

                                        6
five groups: those with less than 1/4 of the world average per capita income; those

between 1/4 and 1/2 of world average income; those between 1/2 world average

income and world average income; those between 1 and 2 times world average

income, and those with income greater than twice the world average.2

       Quah (1993a) estimated a transition matrix using annual data on GDP per

capita for 118 countries from 1962 to 1984, summarized in Table 1. All proba-

bilities on the main diagonal of the transition matrix are higher than 0.9. The

only nonzero transition probabilities are those on the three main diagonals of the

matrix. The estimated ergodic distribution has two approximately equal peaks

at the two ends of the income range. Taken together, the peaks constitute about

half of the mass of the ergodic distribution.

       In this paper we use Kraay’s [1999] data on real GDP per capita computed

using a chain index as described in Summers and Heston (1991) for 140 countries

from 1960 to 1996 extended from version 5.6 of the Penn World Tables (1991).

We have 22 more countries than Quah did, but our results are fairly similar when

we restrict ourselves to the 118 countries chosen by Quah.3

   2
      Note that Quah’s procedure can potentially generate what we will term a “Lake Wobegon
long-run distribution” of world income, in which all countries have above average income. Clas-
sifying countries’ income relative to that of the leading countries rather than relative to world
income eliminates this anomaly.
    3
      We use the series for real GDP per capita in constant dollars using a chain index instead of
that for real GDP per capita (Laspeyres Index) that was used by Quah.


                                                7
       To extend the Penn World Tables chain index of GDP to additional years,

Kraay uses growth rates of expenditure components reported by the World Bank.

The expenditure components were weighted by their constant-price local currency

shares. Summers and Heston weight the expenditures components by their PPP-

adjusted shares. However, the diﬀerence matters only if PPP and non-PPP shares

are diﬀerent and growth rates of expenditure components diﬀer. Although PPP-

adjusted investment shares are typically lower than the unadjusted ones for de-

veloping countries, there is not much diﬀerence in growth rates of the expenditure

components.

       Kraay also extends the Penn World Tables to cover new countries, but we use

only the time extension described above, because data for the countries in the

original Penn World Tables sample is much better.

       We exclude countries from the sample if extraction of oil or other non-renewable

natural resources accounts for more than 15% of GDP, leaving 128 countries in

the sample.4 Revenues from extraction of non-renewable resources are treated

as income in national accounts, but should be considered as asset sales and not

   4
    We use data on mining and quarrying from the United Nation’s National Accounts Statistics:
Main Aggregates and Detailed Tables (1999). The countries thus excluded are Angola, Bahrain,
Botswana, Congo, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Namibia, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Syria, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, United Arab Emirates, and Zambia. We do
not have figures on mining and quarrying for Algeria. However, this country is classified by
World Bank as an “oil” country, so we exclude it from our sample too.


                                              8
counted as income. Moreover, it seems likely that income dynamics for countries

extracting non-renewable resources are governed by somewhat diﬀerent dynamics

than those for other countries. For example, GDP in oil countries moves around

a lot with the price of oil. Under the plausible hypothesis that income dynamics

are diﬀerent for resource extracting countries and other countries, including re-

source extracting countries in the analysis will yield a biased estimate of income

dynamics for countries without these resources. On the other hand, under the

hypothesis that resource extracting countries are governed by the same dynamics

as other countries, excluding countries with substantial natural resources will not

bias estimation of the transition matrix, but will merely reduce precision of the

estimates.

   The maximum likelihood estimates of the transition probabilities using annual

data and the corresponding ergodic distribution are reported in Table 2. The point

estimate of the ergodic distribution has twin peaks at the polar ends of the income

distribution, in accordance with Quah’s (1993a) results. However, our estimates

have a much greater peak at the rich end of the income range and a much smaller

one at the poor end of the income range. This is not because we included more

countries than Quah did, and not because our sample is longer. When we estimate

the transition matrix using Quah’s choice of countries and time period, we get


                                        9
similar results to those we get with the full sample and longer time period. One

possible reason for the discrepancy is that the data in Penn World Tables release

5.6 may diﬀer from the data in the version of the tables circulating at 1993.5

       As one can see, the only non-zero estimated transition probabilities are those

between adjacent groups. We will assume therefore that the true transition proba-

bilities satisfy this condition, which we will call the triple diagonal condition. This

assumption is in accord with logic, as per capita income does not halve or double

in a single year. As discussed below, this assumption considerably simplifies the

analysis.

       Assuming this triple diagonal condition is satisfied, the ergodic probabilities,

denoted π, bear a simple relation to the probability of transition between groups

   5
     As discussed below, the ergodic distribution is extremely sensitive to the underlying transi-
tion matrix. Therefore, even small revisions in the data may change the shape of the estimated
ergodic distribution substantially. Thus, for example, the data from release 4 of the tables im-
plies that there is a large peak at the poor end of the ergodic distribution and a small peak at
the rich end which is exactly opposite to what the data from the current tables (release 5.6)
suggest.
   One factor that causes the diﬀerence is as follows. Both old and new versions of the tables show
that Saudi Arabia’s income relative to the world average started around the threshold between
groups 4 and 5, then rose, and then fell again to near the threshold. However, according to the
older version, Saudi Arabia started above the threshold and ended below it, whereas according to
the newer version, Saudia Arabia started below and ended above the threshold. This diﬀerence
has a large eﬀect on the size of the rich peak because very few countries transited to and from
group 5.




                                                10
i and j, denoted pij :


                        π1   p21     π2   p32          π3   p43     π4   p54
                           =     ,      =     ,           =     ,      =     .   (2.1)
                        π2   p12     π3   p23          π4   p34     π5   p45


To see this, note that after one transition, the probability of being in the first

group equals the probability of initially being in the first group and remaining

there, plus the probability of initially being in group 2 and transiting to group 1.

Thus, in the ergodic distribution, π1 = π 1 (1 − p12 ) + π 2 p21 . Simplifying yields

π1       p21
π2
     =   p12
             ,   and the remaining equalities in (1) follow by induction.

     Formula (2.1) radically simplifies the calculation of the ergodic probabilities

given the transition matrix. More important, it simplifies hypothesis tests on the

shape of the ergodic distribution, to which we turn in the next section.



3. Tests on the shape of the ergodic distribution: annual

     data

The estimated ergodic probabilities are very sensitive to changes in estimated tran-

sition probabilities. These in turn are sensitive to small counterfactual changes

in the data. One illustration of this is provided by the fact that there were 40

transitions from group 1 to group 2, and 56 transitions from group 2 to group 1,

                                                  11
whereas the number of states 1 and 2 ever observed were approximately equal (916

vs. 976). Had there been only seven more transitions from group 1 to group 2

and seven fewer transitions from group 2 to group 1, the estimated p̂12 would have

        47                                                  49
been   916
           ,   and thus larger than the estimated p̂21 of   976
                                                                ,   so the estimated ergodic

distribution would not have had a peak at the lowest end of the distribution.

   A simple calculation shows that the above counterfactual changes are indeed

small in the following sense. If the number of countries is large then the joint
                             √
distribution of the set       Ni (p̂ij − pij ) is approximately normal with means 0,

variances pij (1 −pij ), and covariances −δ ig pij pgh , where Ni is the number of states

i ever observed and δ ig equals one if i = g and zero otherwise (Anderson and

Goodman, 1957). Therefore the standard deviations of p̂12 and p̂21 given N1 and

N2 are approximately 0.007. Thus if the Markov model of transitions were true it

would be not unusual to get 7 more or less transitions out of a state observed 1000

times in total (recall that we have 916 observations of state 1 and 976 observations

of state 2).

   In this section we push the above analysis of sensitivity further and formally

test shape restrictions on the ergodic distribution. With annual data, we cannot

reject either the hypothesis that the ergodic distribution is equal to the distribu-

tion as of 1996, the last year of our sample; or the hypothesis that the ergodic


                                            12
distribution has a single peak at the rich end of the income range.

   Let π denote the vector of the ergodic probabilities. A quite general form of a

shape restriction hypothesis is as follows.



                                H : f1 (π) = 0, f2 (π) ≥ 0,                            (3.1)



where f1 and f2 are some, possibly nonlinear, vector functions. The following

examples illustrate the usefulness of the type of hypothesis above.

   One might want to know if the ergodic distribution is identical to some par-

ticular distribution π ∗ . The π∗ distribution might be the distribution at the

end of the sample period, or flat, or degenerate. Obviously, such a hypothe-

sis would correspond to f1 (π) ≡ π − π ∗ and f2 (π) ≡ 0. Another interesting

hypothesis about the ergodic distribution is that on the number and impor-

tance of the peaks. If one wants to test the hypothesis that the ergodic dis-

tribution has a single peak at, say, group 3, one could consider f1 (π) ≡ 0 and

f2 (π) ≡ (π2 − π 1 , π 3 − π 2 , π 3 − π 4 , π 4 − π 5 )0 . Of course, such a hypothesis does

not distinguish between a steep peak in the distribution, with π 3 much greater

than π 2 or π4 , and a “bump” in the distribution with π3 only slightly greater

than π 2 or π 4 . However, the somewhat more complicated hypothesis f1 (π) ≡ 0



                                             13
and f2 (π) ≡ (π2 − δπ 1 , π 3 − δπ 2 , π 3 − δπ 4 , π 4 − δπ 5 )0 where δ is a positive number

greater than 1, does distinguish between peaks and bumps.

   Below we formulate and test several hypothesis about the ergodic distribution

having form (3.1) with linear f1 and f2 . Given the triple diagonal assumption,

linear restrictions on the ergodic probabilities, π can be reformulated as linear

restrictions on the transition probabilities. A theory of likelihood ratio tests for

the linear inequality restrictions on the transition probabilities was developed in

Onatski (2000). The equality restrictions could be tested using fairly standard

likelihood ratio tests. (Note that because the distribution of estimates of the

transition probabilities can be well approximated by the normal distribution, one

expects good finite sample properties of the asymptotic likelihood ratio test of

the linear restrictions on the transition probabilities. Without the triple diagonal

assumption, simple linear restrictions on π would be equivalent to complex non-

linear restrictions on the transition probabilities, so that one would expect very

bad finite sample properties of the asymptotic test.)

   We start with the hypothesis that the ergodic distribution is identical to the

income distribution in 1996, the last year of our sample. In 1996, 28% of countries

were in the poorest income category, 22% of countries were in Group 2, and 18%,

10%, and 22% of countries were in Groups 3, 4, and 5 respectively. Therefore, in


                                             14
terms of the transition probabilities, the hypothesis has the following form


                    p12  22 p23  18 p34  10     p45  22
                        = ,     = ,     = , and     = .
                    p21  28 p32  22 p43  18     p54  10

                                                          √
       As was mentioned before, the distribution of        Ni (p̂ij − pij ) can be approxi-

mated by a normal distribution with means 0, variances pij (1 − pij ), and covari-

ances −δ ig pij pgh . Hence, the distribution of p̂ij is approximately the same as if

pij were probabilities from the multinomial distribution and we observed Ni tri-

als for each i = 1, ..., 5. To test the above hypothesis we therefore can apply the

asymptotic likelihood ratio test as we would apply it to test the restrictions on the

multinomial transition probabilities. The likelihood ratio statistic is 7.54, smaller

than the 95% critical value of the chi-squared distribution with 8-4=4 degrees of

freedom, 9.49.6

       Another interesting hypothesis that we test is that of a single peak at the

richest end of the income range. It can be formulated in the following form.



                              pk,k+1 ≥ δpk+1,k , k = 1, ..., 4.

   6
    We also compare the steady-state distribution with the distribution as of 1989, because in
1996 we have 12 missing observations and in 1989 there are only 2 such observations. The result
does not change much. The likelihood ratio statistics in this case is 7.97.




                                              15
statistics for the rich peak hypothesis. The finite sample distribution is simulated

for the true transition probabilities, p0ij = 0.01 for |i−j| = 1. The restriction set is

the null set of the rich peak hypothesis. The importance of the peak, δ, is taken to

be equal to one. Three thousand Markov chains with initial distribution coinciding

with the initial distribution in the data are drawn. The figure demonstrates that

the finite sample distribution of the likelihood ratio statistics for the true transition

probabilities chosen is very close to the theoretical one.

   Even the procedure used in this paper may substantially underestimate uncer-

tainty in the ergodic distribution of world income. Transitions for single countries

may be correlated with transitions of neighbors. Belgium and the Netherlands,

or Liberia and Sierra Leone, may be subject to correlated shocks. Treating each

country as a separate data point may lead to underestimation of the standard

errors.

   As Quah (1993b) notes, the transition matrix approach might be misspecified

due to the arbitrary division of countries into income groups. Results on the

number and positions of peaks might not be robust to the choice of the income

groups. For example, Chad Jones (1997) groups countries by output per worker in

a somewhat diﬀerent manner and finds that the ergodic distribution has a single

peak in the middle income state.


                                           17
   This problem has led Quah (1997) to suggest the continuous stochastic kernel

approach. We use the transition matrix approach as the first step to analyze the

statistical significance of inferences about the shape of the steady-state distribu-

tion, but extending the present analysis to the stochastic kernel approach is an

interesting topic for future research. We expect that the ergodic distribution will

be no more precisely estimated with this technique, given that kernel estimation

is generally noisy with small samples.

   The non-informativeness of the data suggest that people’s beliefs about the

long-run world income distribution are likely to be influenced primarily by their

prior beliefs, rather than updated based on the data. However, before abandoning

empirical work along these lines, it is worth taking another look at the data.



4. Five-year Transition Period

It seems natural to consider transition periods longer than 1 year. The assumption

of a one-period Markov process is likely to be violated. A group 3 country that

experiences a recession in a particular year and falls just over the borderline into

group 2 is less likely than other group 2 countries to fall into group 1 the next year,

and more likely than most group 2 countries to transit to group 3 in the following

year.   Considering transition periods longer than one year reduces the impact

                                          18
on the estimated transition matrix of high frequency fluctuations in income of

countries that happened to be close to the threshold between diﬀerent groups at

the beginning of the period.

    One way to see why moving to longer periods is desirable is to note that the

predicted 5-year mobility based on the one-year transition matrix is much greater

than the actual 5-year mobility in the data.7              The one-year transition matrix

implies that the probability of transiting from group 5 to group 4 in a single year

is 0.004. Neglecting some second order terms, this implies that the probability

of transiting over a 5 year period should be approximately 5*0.004, or 0.02. In

fact, the actual 5-year transition probability is only 0.007, or less than half of that

implied by the one-year data. (See Table 3.) This suggests that using 5-year data

may provide a more accurate picture of long-run dynamics than using annual

data. Note that the 10-year mobility implied by the 5-year Markov transition

   7
     This result is similar to what others find in social mobility studies. For a review of these
studies, see Bartholomew (1973). Two reasons might lie behind this result. First, the countries
might have diﬀerent transition probabilities. If, similar to a popular stayer-mover model setting,
half of the countries transit between groups extremely slowly, and half of the countries transit
fast, then the estimated one-year transition matrix is in fact a weighted sum of two diﬀerent
transition matrices. Under reasonable conditions, stated for example in Shorrocks (1976), this
would imply the result we observed. Second, some mobility in one-year transition matrix is due
to short-run fluctuation of countries around a threshold separating two adjusent groups. For
example, for 1-year data, there were four 1 → 2 transitions and five 2 → 1 transitions corre-
sponding to The Gambia. These transitions reflect The Gambia’s balancing on the boundary
between the poorest and the second poorest groups. When we consider 5-year transitions, only
one 1 → 2 transitions and two 2 → 1 transitions remain.



                                               19
assumption is only in fact a little less than actual 10-year mobility. (See Table

4.)

       The estimated ergodic distribution with five-year data has more than half its

mass at the top group. (See Table 3.) As discussed below, this is because countries

rarely exit group 5. Spain accounts for the sole transition out of the top group,

and it is worth noting that Spain rejoined the top group shortly thereafter.8

       Note that had we calculated the transition matrix using 10-year data (or 35-

year data), the associated long-run distribution would be degenerate, with all

its mass in the top income category. A working paper version of Quah [1993a]

estimated the ergodic distribution for a 23 year transition period. He found 57%

of countries in the rich peak and only 16% of countries in the poor peak, which

is somewhat similar to our estimates.

       The scarcity of transitions from Group 5 to Group 4 makes the estimated er-

godic distribution extremely sensitive to counterfactuals. Had Spain never tran-

   8
     Our sample does not include the formely communist countries of Czechoslovakia, East Ger-
many, USSR, and Yugoslavia. However, this does not influence the estimated transition rate
from Group 5 to Group 4. All these countries, with the exception of East Germany belonged to
Groups 3 and 4. East Germany moved up once from group 4 to group 5.
   The exclusion of oil countries does aﬀect p54 . If the oil countries are included in the sample,
Gabon, Iraq, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Trinidad and Tobago, and Venezuela would have transited
from 5 to 4. Moreover, Argentina and Puerto Rico would have been included in Group 5 but
would have transited to Group 4 at some point.
   In the Quah sample, the transitions from 5 to 4 are due to Gabon, Iraq, Spain, and Venezuela.
Gabon, Iraq, and Venezuela are excluded from our sample.



                                                20
sited from Group 5 to Group 4, the estimated ergodic distribution would have

been degenerate, with all the mass in the highest income category. We would

have an estimated steady state in which all countries are above average.

       Of course, this “Lake Wobegon” distribution in which most countries have

more than twice world average income is impossible.9 However, it is possible to

redefine the groups so as to avoid this paradoxical result.10 Jones [1997] estimates

a Markov transition matrix in which countries’ income is measured relative to

the income of the leading country. In the rest of this paper, we measure income

relative to the average income of the five leading countries.11

       Table 5 shows the transition matrix and associated ergodic distribution when

countries are classified by their income relative to the average population-weighted

income of the five richest countries. The groups consist of those with less than

one-sixteenth of this income, between one-sixteenth and one-eighth, between one-

eighth and one-fourth, between one-fourth and one-half, and more than one-half

   9
      Lake Wobegon is a fictional community in which all the children are above average.
  10
      In independent work, Pearlman [2000] also notes the possibility that a transition matrix
estimated with Quah’s income groupings can lead to a logically impossible ergodic distribution
of income. His approach to resolving this problem involves categorizing countries relative to
the geometric mean of income among countries of the world. Note that when Pearlman moves
to this type of analysis, he finds a large peak of the ergodic distribution at the bottom of the
distribution. This is exactly the opposite of our results. The diﬀerence is presumably due to
our focus on five-year data and to the exclusion of non-renewable natural resource producers
from our analysis.
   11
      Measuring income relative to the average income of the five leading countries is somewhat
less sensitive to the behavior of a single country than Jones’ procedure.


                                              21
the average population-weighted income of the five richest countries. In the esti-

mated ergodic distribution, 75% of countries are in the richest income category.

As before, Spain accounts for the sole transition out of the top group, and it

rejoins the top group shortly thereafter.12

    The estimated ergodic distribution is fairly noisy. Formal hypothesis tests

using the likelihood ratio test suggest that we cannot reject the hypotheses that

the steady state has as much as 95%, or as little as 34% of the mass in the rich

peak. We estimated the critical value of the test from below as follows. First,

we found those transition probabilities that maximize the likelihood under the

restriction that π 5 ≥ 0.95 or π 5 ≤ 0.34. We took these transition probabilities

as a set of pseudo-true transition probabilities and simulated 1000 corresponding

Markov chains starting from the distribution of countries between the groups ac-

tually observed in 1960. The length of simulated chains was chosen to be equal

to the length of our data interval, (1995-1960)/5=7. For each simulation we com-

puted the likelihood ratio statistic, thus obtaining an empirical distribution of

the likelihood ratio statistic corresponding to the pseudo-true transition proba-

bilities chosen. The 95% quantile of the empirical distribution is an estimate of

  12
     Spain slipped out of the top group in 1980, when its per capita GDP fell to 1.99 times the
world average. By 1985 it had fallen to only 1.93 times the world average, but by 1987 it had
returned to the top group.



                                              22
the critical value of the global test of the restriction π 5 ≥ 0.95 or π 5 ≤ 0.34. The

estimate is from below so that we are rejecting the null too often, which makes

non-rejection safe.



5. Transition path analysis

Note that the structure of the implied transition matrix suggests that it may take

quite a while to get close to the steady state. Although countries tend to remain

in Group 5 once they get there, they bounce around a lot on their way. There are

currently many countries in Group 1, and it is likely to take them a long time to

reach Group 5, under current trends.

   A useful criterion of speed of convergence to the ergodic distribution is the

asymptotic half-life of convergence, h. It indicates how many periods it takes

for the norm of the diﬀerence between the current distribution and the ergodic

distribution to decrease by half. The formula for the half life is as follows:


                                           log 2
                                   h=−              ,
                                          log |λ2 |


where λ2 is the second largest eigenvalue (after 1) of the transition probability

matrix. For the five-year transition matrix, h is equal to 58.9. That is, it would


                                         23
take 58.9*5≈295 years to reduce the distance between the ergodic and current

distribution by half.

    The measure h is an asymptotic measure, so the influence of the initial distri-

bution on convergence is not taken into account. Initial convergence to the ergodic

distribution might be faster if the initial distribution turns out to be favorable. We

simulated evolution of the countries’ income distribution as of 1989, according to

our estimated 5-year transition matrix. We found that the square root quadratic

diﬀerence between the 1996 distribution and the ergodic distribution was 0.54.

After 57 periods (285 years) it becomes 0.27, and after 115 periods (575 years) it

becomes 0.14. This is in accordance to the theoretical half life calculations.

    We simulated the evolution of the Gini coeﬃcient13 of expected countries’

income distribution for the next 2500 years.            The estimates and corresponding

95% confidence bands are given in Figure 3. One can see that it is likely that the

Gini coeﬃcient will decrease begin decreasing immediately.

    In contrast, the standard deviation of log income and the coeﬃcient of polar-

ization are likely to rise for hundreds of years, even though they may currently be

greater than their values in the ergodic distribution. Figure 4 shows the transition

  13
     Each country was assumed to have the average relative income of its relative income category
in 1989.




                                               24
6. Explaining the Results: A Robust Fact and a Potential

   Model

In this section, we argue that the high proportion of countries in the top-income

group in the estimated ergodic distribution and the prolonged transition both

arise because countries often transit to lower income groups at moderate income

levels, but rarely transit down once in the top group. This section argues that

the scarcity of exits from the top group is reasonably robust empirically, and is

consistent with a simple model of search among alternative policies.

   The high proportion of countries in the top income group in the ergodic dis-

                                                                      π5       p54
tribution is due to the scarcity of exits from Group 5. Recall that   π4
                                                                           =   p45
                                                                                   .   With

only one transition from Group 5 to Group 4, this ratio is more than ten.

   The scarcity of transitions out of Group 5 and hence the large peak at the

rich end of the ergodic distribution seem reasonably robust to alternative model

speculations, including varying the income cutoﬀs, weighting by population, or

examining longer time periods. By playing around with the boundary between

the second-highest group and the highest group, it is possible to attain point

estimates of the steady state with somewhat less mass in the top group. However,

this tends to be due to regions or countries such as Puerto Rico or Israel which



                                        26
bounce a bit around the threshold.15 The most legitimate case of a country falling

out of the top group is Argentina, which does not count as rich with the cutoﬀ of

50% of GDP of the five largest countries, but would show up with a 45% cutoﬀ.

We conjecture that as long as a reasonable kernel is used, the continuous stochastic

kernel approach would also suggest that transitions out of wealth are rare.

       In Table 6, transition probabilities are weighted by the population of the coun-

try. Under this specification, 83% of the mass in the estimated ergodic distribution

is in the highest income category, and the low peak of the distribution disappears.

This reflects the fact that many of the countries which move from the second-

lowest category to the lowest category are small African countries. Note, however,

that there is still a peak in the second lowest category.

       If anything, transitions out of the group of rich countries seem even rarer when

transition matrices are constructed using longer periods. The ten year transition

matrix and the 35-year transition matrix show no transitions out of the richest

group.

       The infrequency of transitions also seems to hold up over even longer periods.

DeLong [1988] identifies 23 countries which were rich in 1870. The only countries

  15
    It is unclear whether Puerto Rico should be in the data set, since its economy is so inter-
twined with that of the United States.




                                              27
on this list which were not rich 130 years later are Argentina and Chile, both of

which are currently in the second highest income group.

       The transition matrix estimated with five-year data in the post-1960 period

seems a fairly good guide to behavior of income over the 1870-2000 period. Using

the estimated five-year matrix to project the year 2000 incomes of 23 rich countries

that were rich in 1870 suggests that in expectation, 20.87 of the countries would

be in the richest group at the end of the period, 1.11 would be in group 4, and

1.12 would be in lower income groups. If anything, mobility out of the top group

is slightly lower than would have been predicted based on 5-year data since 1960,

since none of the 23 rich countries in 1870 fell below the second-highest group by

2000, and since Chile’s classification as rich in 1870 is suspect.16

       The example of Argentina shows that countries can exit the top income group.

But Argentina is an anomaly. To say that countries rarely exit out of the richest

group is not to say such exits are impossible.

       What model can explain the tendency of countries to move both up and down

at lower income levels, but to stay rich once they become rich? Chari, Kehoe,

  16
    DeLong [1988, p. 1149] explains that the Argentine 1870 data “should not under any circum-
stances be cited for any purposes dealing with Argentinean development alone. The estimate is
suﬃciently shaky to be unacceptable for such purposes, although it is barely acceptable as an
estimate for a comparative project like this one.” He then goes on to explain that the Chilean
1870 estimate is “perhaps the shakiest of all, and places Chile close to the cutoﬀ for inclusion
in the sample.”


                                              28
and McGrattan [1996] consider a model in which countries change policies, and

these policies determine the countries’ quasi-steady-state incomes. (We use the

qualifier “quasi” because countries are subject to further changes in policy.) They

note that there seems to be less mobility in the tails of the distribution than in the

center, but they do not model why this is the case. Ideally, a model of endogenous

policy determination would generate this eﬀect.

   Most of the political economy literature has, perhaps appropriately, focused

on models in which the pursuit of self-interest by individuals or groups within the

political system leads to sub-optimal outcomes for society as a whole. However, as

emphasized by Piketty [1995], diﬀerences of belief about appropriate policy given

a common objective function may also play a role. Nyerere may have saddled

Tanzania with African Socialism to preserve his political power, but it is also

possible that he made an honest mistake.

   A theory in which bad policies are chosen because of bargaining failure among

rent-extracting interest groups and individuals does not seem to predict that

downward income movements should be frequent in the middle income groups

but rare in the top groups. Politicians, lobbyists, and unions are presumably

equally grasping in India, Costa Rica, France, and the U.S.

   In contrast, a theory in which politicians search for good policies but do not


                                         29
know what policies are best suggests a reason why countries would cease experi-

menting with policy changes once they become rich enough.

   Suppose that each country’s quasi-steady-state income is a function of its poli-

cies, and countries search over policies until they find policies which make them

rich. Countries may need to search either because the same policies work for all

countries, but political leaders do not know which policies work, or because the

eﬀect of policies is extremely sensitive to a country’s historic, geographic, and

cultural circumstances, so it is diﬃcult to learn from other countries’ experience.

For example, some have interpreted the disastrous output performance in tran-

sition economies as the eﬀect of attempting to impose western institutions in an

inappropriate environment.

   Suppose that countries can periodically draw new policies, and the associated

quasi-steady-state relative incomes, from an urn. Technological progress increases

the absolute income of all countries over time, but does not aﬀect their relative

income. Countries’ convergence towards their quasi-steady-state relative incomes

can be approximated by the standard neo-classical growth model.         (Actually,

capital accumulation would be aﬀected by the prospect that quasi-steady-state

relative income will evetually change, but we assume those changes are rare.)

Income may also be subject to measurement error, and short-run fluctuations


                                        30
examples are salient, there is a lot of history out there, and the exit rate per

century is low.   It would be straightforward to extend the model to allow for

political economy factors or exogenous changes in the appropriate set of policies

that lead to occasional exits from the top income category.

   The idea that countries stop searching once they are rich enough seems reason-

able. Countries seem more willing to take risks when they have little left to lose.

Hugo Chavez was overwhelmingly elected president of Venezuela [Barrionuevo,

1998], whereas Ross Perot got only 19% of the vote in the United States.

   Radical policy changes are often, albeit not always, associated with extra-

legal changes of government, and such changes of government are very rare in rich

countries.   Based on Banks’ [1997] data over the 1960-1996 period, there were

no coups out of the 764 country-year observations in countries with more than

twice world average income. Of the 508 country-year observations in countries

with incomes between 1 and 2 times world average income, there were 10 coups

(5 of which took place in Argentina).     Poorer countries had 128 coups out of

approximately 2600 country-year observations.      This provides some additional

support for the view that rich countries are unlikely to risk radical changes in

policy.

   A model in which poor countries search for policies to make them more wealthy


                                        32
may sound odd at this moment in history when there is broad consensus on the

policies that lead to wealth. However, historically, it seems plausible that when

India adopted socialist planning, China adopted communism, and much of Latin

America adopted import-substituting industrialization, they did so in the belief

that these policies would more rapidly make them rich and powerful.

   If countries could quickly recognize and correct policy mistakes, they might

be able to rapidly converge on a set of policies that would lead to prosperity. In

practice, however, opportunities to correct policy mistakes may be rare. Given

that countries are subject to many shocks, and that some policies may create

good long-run outcomes but bad short-run outcomes, it may be diﬃcult to iden-

tify the eﬀects of policies quickly. Moreover, once adopted, policies create their

own constituents and their own ideological adherents. Nehru may not have in-

tended to enrich corrupt bureaucrats when he adopted licensing requirements, but

subsequent governments wishing to liberalize have to reckon with the political in-

fluence of these bureaucrats. Once governments have publicly adopted a policy,

and educated party activists and the population to believe in it, it may be hard

to abandon.

   A search model should also fit some other facts. It should allow for conver-

gence among rich countries, as found, for example, by Mankiw, Romer, and Weil


                                       33
(1992) among OECD countries. Under a model in which countries draw their

quasi-steady-state relative income from a distribution, there will be a threshold

above which countries cease experimenting, and thus their quasi-steady-state rel-

ative income stays constant. This is nonetheless consistent with convergence in

relative incomes, since some of the countries observed with income just over the

threshold will be in the process of transiting to their steady-state relative income.

All those countries will be transiting from below, and the further they are below

their steady-state relative income, the faster they will grow, so each country will

grow more quickly as it passes the threshold level of income than as it approaches

its steady-state income.

   A search model should also be consistent with the finding that growth rates

among low income countries are no higher than among middle income countries,

and that, as Quah argues, there may even be a peak at the bottom of the dis-

tribution. This fact can be matched if few policies lead to good outcomes and

many lead to bad outcomes. All happy countries are alike, but there are many

ways to be unhappy.

   It is plausible that f (x) has a lot of mass at low income levels if good policies

are complements. Privatizing electricity may do limited good unless there are

adequate steps to ensure that the new privatized firm will not simply be subsi-


                                         34
dized by the state; there are strong enough banking regulations to ensure that

commercial banks will not be politically pressured into bailing out the privatized

firm in the expectation that they in turn will be bailed out by the central bank;

there is adequate corporate governance to ensure that the managers and control-

ling shareholders of the privatized firm do not devote all their energies to stealing

from, rather than managing the firm; and there is adequate regulation to ensure

that the firm has appropriate incentives to invest and does not charge monopoly

prices. Getting all these policies right is not easy.

   The poor performance of countries at the bottom of the income distribution

relative to middle income countries is consistent with the hypothesis that there are

a great many potential policies which lead to quasi-steady-state relative income

of less than 1/16 the average income of the five richest countries of the world; and

that the odds of choosing policies associated with moderate incomes are not too

great relative to the odds of choosing policies associated with high incomes.

   Suppose that all countries initially start with bad policies. Suppose that the

threshold below which countries search coincides with the boundary between the

richest income category and the second richest income category. Most countries

with relative incomes in the bottom relative income group will have quasi-steady-

state relative incomes in this group.     In contrast, a greater proportion of the


                                          35
countries observed in the second highest income category will not be in a quasi-

steady-state associated with this income, but instead will be transiting through

this state on the way to a quasi-steady-state income in the top category. Hence,

growth need not be lower among countries observed in the second highest income

category than in the lowest income category, even though regression to the mean

in i.i.d draws of quasi-steady-state relative income implies that growth of quasi-

steady-state relative income will be greater at low levels of quasi-steady-state

relative income than at high levels.

      It is worth noting that two key aspects of our empirical strategy are appropri-

ate under the search model. Excluding producers of natural resources makes sense

in estimating the threshold under a search model, since countries with natural re-

sources may have incomes above the quasi-steady-state relative income associated

with their policies. Countries with a quasi-steady-state relative income below the

threshold will optimally search for new policies, even if their incomes including

natural resources, are above the threshold. This may help explain why Argentina

fell out of the top group, since much of its wealth was based on natural resources.

It also explains why other natural resource producers moved from Group 5 to

Group 4.17

 17
      Moreover, if each economy behaves as a closed neo-classical economy, producers of non-


                                             36
    The fact that the only countries to exit the top income group are producers

of natural resources is thus consistent with the model. Many multiple equilibria

models, in contrast, would suggest that a lucky discovery of oil could permanently

move a country into a better equilibrium.

    The search model implies that once incomes of non-resource producers cross a

threshold, they do not fall back. This generates a strong non-linearity in income

dynamics, justifying the use of a discrete Markovian transition matrix analysis.

    An obvious question that arises with a search model is why countries do not

simply imitate other successful countries. Why didn’t Tanzania simply adopt

U.S. or British institutions?        There are at least two possibilities.         First, it is

possible that the institutions which work in some settings will not do so in other

settings. If the appropriate policies are very sensitive to the existing institutions,

culture, and economic and political conditions in a country, imitation would not

be successful.

    Alternatively, the same basic policies may be appropriate everywhere, but

renewable natural resources will be particularly subject to downward transitions, because they
will optimally accumulate more than the quasi-steady-state level of capital given their policies
and then run down this stock later. If, as seems to be the case empirically, natural resource
prices do not systematically increase over time, it will be optimal to extract natural resources
and sell them, investing in physical and human capital beyond the point at which the rate of
return on these assets declines to the discount rate. Later, after the natural resources are
exhausted (or the flow diminishes), it will be optimal to draw down this capital stock, and
growth will be negative.


                                              37
policy makers may not have understood this, or may not have recognized what

characteristics of prosperous countries were best to imitate. It is not clear on a

priori grounds that imitating success is the best strategy. Communism promised

faster transition than capitalism, along with more equal distribution, so the ex-

perience of looking at capitalist countries was not enough to convince people to

adopt capitalism. Dependency theory implies that those countries lucky enough

to industrialize first can use their initial advantages to exploit developing countries

that participate in the world system, and that the best strategy for latecomers

may be separation. Many of those who argue for the East Asian model disagree

over its content, making imitation diﬃcult.

   Francis Fukuyama [1992] has suggested that the collapse of the Soviet Union

heralded the end of history: everyone now accepts that liberal democracy, com-

bined with a market-oriented economy, is the best form of organizing society. If

Fukuyama is correct, both about the superiority of market economics combined

with liberal democracy, and about the worldwide consensus on this superiority,

then in the future there may be many more upward transitions and many fewer

downward transitions. In fact, there is evidence that many countries are adopting

much more market-oriented policies than in the past (see Easterly, 2000), although

there is much less evidence that growth has accelerated in poor countries. We


                                          38
are either at the end of history or at the start of a new fad.



7. Conclusion


This paper first argues that beliefs about the very long-run evolution of the world

income distribution must rely heavily on our priors, since empirical estimates

of the ergodic distribution are noisy. With annual data, we cannot reject the

hypotheses that the ergodic distribution is equal to the distribution as of 1996,

the last year of our sample, or that the ergodic distribution has a single peak at

the rich end of the income range.

   Nonetheless, when the Markovian analysis is conducted using five-year data,

it comes closer to satisfying the maintained assumptions and yields more pre-

cise estimates of what would happen to the world income distribution over the

foreseeable future if previous trends continue. With five-year data, the estimated

transition matrix yields an ergodic distribution in which most countries are in

the richest income category. However, the transition path to the steady state is

extremely long. According to our estimates, the half life of convergence is likely

to be 303 years. The Gini coeﬃcient may decrease immediately, but the standard

deviation of countries’ log income and the coeﬃcient of polarization are likely to



                                        39
increase for hundreds of years.   Estimates over this period involve raising the

transition matrix to lower powers, and hence are much less noisy.

   More important, the transition matrix analysis can shed light on possible

processes generating the data. In particular, the rosy ergodic distribution and

prolonged transition arise because countries frequently transit down from middle

income states, but rarely transit out of wealth. This is consistent with a model

in which countries search among policies and cease experimenting once income

exceeds a certain cutoﬀ. If countries learn about optimal policy from each others’

experience, the transition matrix may become more favorable in the future.



8. References

Anderson, T.W. and Leo A. Goodman. 1957. “Statistical Inference about Markov

Chains”, Ann. Math. Stat., Vol. 28, pp.89-110.

Banks, A.S. September 1979. “Cross-National Time Series Data Archive”, Center

for Social Analysis, State University of New York at Binghampton, updated.

Barrionuevo, Alexei. 1998. ”Some See Venezuela Election as ’Revolution.”’ USA

Today (Final edition): A12, December 8.

Baumol, William. 1986. ”Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare.”

American Economic Review 76(5): 1072-1085, December.

                                       40
Bianchi, M. 1997. “Testing Fort Convergence: Evidence from Non-Parametric

Multimodality Tests,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 12, pp.393-409.

Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 1996. ”The Poverty of

Nations: A Quantitative Exploration.” National Bureau of Economic Research

Working Paper 5414, January.

DeLong, J. Bradford. 1988. ”Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare:

Comment.” American Economic Review 78(5): 1138-1154, December.

Desdoigts, A. 1994. “Changes in the World Income Distribution: A Non-Parametric

Approach to Challenge the Neo-Classical Convergence Argument,” Université

Paris Dauphine, manuscript.

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos. 1970. ”Essays on the Economic History of the Argentine

Republic.” New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Easterly, William. 2000.   “The Lost Decades...and the Coming Boom?       Poli-

cies, Shocks, and Developing Countries’ Stagnation,” World Bank working paper,

Washington, DC.

Fukuyama, Francis. 1992. “The End of History and the Last Man.” New York:

Free Press.

Jones, Charles I. 1997. “On the Evolution of the World Income Distribution,”

Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, Number 3, pp.19-36.


                                      41
Mankiw, N.G., Romer, D. Weil, D.N. 1992. “A Contribution to the Empirics of

Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107 (2). p 407-37.

Onatski, A. 2000. “Testing Shape Restrictions on a Steady-State Distribution of

a Finite Markov Chain,” Harvard University, manuscript.

Paap, R. and Herman K. van Dijk. 1998 “Distribution and Mobility of Wealth of

Nations,” European Economic Review, Vol. 42 (7). p 1269-93.

Pearlman, Joseph G. 2000. “Twin Peaks — A Reassessment,” Economics Depart-

ment, London Guildhall University, manuscript.

Piketty, Thomas. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly

Journal of Economics, Vol. 110 (3). p 551-84.

Quah, Danny. 1993a. “Empirical Cross-Section Dynamics in Economic Growth,”

European Economic Review, 37, pp.426-34.

Quah, Danny. 1993b. “Galton’s Fallacy and Tests of the Convergence Hypothe-

sis,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 95, pp.427-443.

Quah, Danny. 1997. “Empirics for Growth and Distribution: Stratification, Po-

larization, and Convergence Clubs,” Journal of Economic Growth, 2, pp.27-59.

Shorrocks, A. F. 1976. “Income mobility and the Markov assumption,” Economic

Journal, 86, pp.566-578.

Summers, R., and A. Heston. 1991. “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An


                                      42
Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950-1988,” Quarterly Journal of

Economics, 106, pp.327-368.

United Nations. 1999. National Accounts Statistics: Main Aggregates and De-

tailed Tables, 1995, New York, NY, United Nations.




                                     43
Table 1. Quah’s estimates of transition matrix and ergodic distribution, 1962 to 1984, 1-year transitions.


            Upper endpoint:
(Number)              0.25                 0.5                1                2               Inf.
      456             0.97                0.03
      643             0.05                0.92              0.04
      639                                 0.04              0.92             0.04
      468                                                   0.04             0.94             0.02
      508                                                                    0.01             0.99
Ergodic                 0.24              0.18              0.16             0.16             0.27




Table 2. Our estimates of transition matrix and ergodic distribution, 1960 to 1996, 1-year transitions.


            Upper endpoint:
(Number)              0.25                 0.5                1                2               Inf.
    916         0.956             0.044
    976         0.057             0.902             0.041
   1024                           0.042             0.929            0.029
    582                                             0.031            0.945            0.024
    803                                                              0.004            0.996
  Ergodic        0.13              0.10             0.10             0.09             0.59




Table 3. Estimates of transition matrix and ergodic distribution, 1960 to 1996, 5-year transitions

            Upper endpoint:
(Number)              0.25                 0.5                1                2               Inf.
    178         0.942             0.058
    201         0.145             0.757             0.098
    194                           0.094             0.792            0.114
    108                                             0.097            0.823            0.080
    148                                                              0.007            0.993
  Ergodic        0.12              0.05             0.05             0.06             0.72
                       Table 4. Squared 5-year transition matrix vs. estimated 10-year transition matrix

Squared 5-year transition matrix                                       Estimated 10-year transition matrix
    0.25        0.5          1             2         Inf.                   0.25      0.5          1         2    Inf.
    0.90      0.10        0.01                                              0.89     0.11
    0.25      0.59        0.15        0.01                                  0.25     0.61      0.15
    0.01      0.15        0.65        0.18          0.01                             0.13      0.66       0.20
              0.01        0.16        0.69          0.14                                       0.14       0.71   0.14
                          0.00        0.01          0.99                                                         1.00




Table 5. Estimates of transition matrix and ergodic distribution: 1960 to 1996; 5-year transitions
(Division into groups relative to 5 richest countries)

            Upper endpoint:
(Number)        1/16      1/4         1/2      1                Inf.
   178       0.933    0.067
   201       0.144    0.756        0.100
   194                0.088        0.799       0.113
   108                             0.093       0.824        0.083
   148                                         0.007        0.993
 Ergodic      0.09       0.04       0.05       0.06         0.75




Table 6. Estimates of transition matrix and ergodic distribution: 1960 to 1996; 5-year transitions
(Division into groups relative to 5 richest countries. Population weighted transitions.)

            Upper endpoint:
(Number i       1/16      1/8         1/4           0.50        Inf.
    5.99       0.722     0.278
    8.92       0.079     0.897       0.025
    2.14                 0.073       0.771         0.156
    1.95                             0.108         0.760      0.132
    4.35                                           0.008      0.992
Ergodic         0.03        0.10      0.03          0.05       0.79
                 Fig. 1 Values of the LR statistic. Rich peak hypothesis
 9

 8

 7

 6

 5

 4

 3

 2
      1   1.05                  1.1                 1.15                   1.2   1.25


                       p-values of the test. Rich peak hypothesis
0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


 0
      1   1.05                 1.1                1.15                     1.2   1.25
                             Importance of the peak, delta
              Figure 2. Simulated finite sample and theoretical distribution of the LR statistic
 1


0.9


0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


 0
      0   1          2            3          4          5         6         7          8           9   10
                   Solid line- theoretical distribution, Dashed line- simulated distribution
                Figure 3. Transition Path for Gini Coefficient
0.7




0.6




0.5




0.4




0.3




0.2




0.1




 0
      0   100      500                               1000        1500
                              Years from 2000
                Figure 4. Transition Path for Standard Deviation
1.4


1.3


1.2


1.1


 1


0.9


0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4
      0   100        500                              1000         1500
                               Years from 2000
                 Figure 5. Transition Path for Polarization Coefficient
 0.6


0.55


 0.5


0.45


 0.4


0.35


 0.3


0.25


 0.2


0.15


 0.1
       0   100          500                               1000            1500
                                   Years from 2000
