                                  ""               " " 




                                               


                                              
                                           


                                           !#$%&
                                  ''!())***+)!!,)*#$%&



                       - "     "  ".
                                /0%0 ,,1,'',21
                                  +34 0$/5#
                                       !




           
  !"!#$%!&$ '!" (!)*!
+!&  !#,  %  "
-   *% %%./  %   .
, *%         /  
0".


1 2 .3'.   .&     !  
 *% %! 4 *  % %%     ! 1
 !    .
 36 ,
  3
 " !#$%&
!$00/
7 7%/4 $848/


                                            $%#%


       -,!!!!,!!,621'9+9'','13961,,*''
1, * :; ' !,' 3,1'3 *, 6 1' +, * + 3,!3 
21'9!''+91,*'3'*!,''*'6,'2
-,,1,',''1,*',''1'1+932',''*3,'
3'+,<*33,92,'232'-3,,1,',''
31,',*''1266,*2*1;'',43'''9+
=1+1*'1;'3>236,3'*'*1;'3
,'>236,-,!3',,+39,,''*''3'




                                                          
.23 2,'9                                                     .23 2,'9
 !''6 ,                                                
''1'$0&                                                    +34 0$/5#
+34 0$/5#                                                    +?6,2331
?6,2331
   We compare a model of unions based on principles from biology with an economic model in
which unions maximize the present discounted value of rents obtained by members. Biological
models suggest that selection pressure often works against organisms that are too harmful to their
hosts. For example, a disease such as the Ebola virus, which kills its hosts in days, has little
opportunity to spread from one host to another. In contrast, the viruses that cause the common
cold are widespread. Mitochondria, which were probably originally parasites, evolved to become
essential to their hosts and are now universal.
   This paper applies this basic biological concept to the interaction between unions and Þrms. We
argue that unions that demand the level of wages optimal for their members will be displaced in
competition with more moderate unions. In our model, the dynamics of union coverage depend on
both the rate at which unions spread to non-union Þrms and the rate at which unionized Þrms die.
Greater rent extraction by a union can increase the spread rate of the union by making the union
more attractive to workers in non-unionized Þrms. On the other hand, greater rent extraction by
unions can also lead to increases in the death rates of unionized Þrms. The evolutionarily stable
level of rent extraction therefore involves a tradeoﬀ between attractiveness to workers and the eﬀect
on Þrm death rates.
   In the model, reducing the level of rent extraction slightly from the level that maximizes the
present discounted value of rents to union members causes a second-order reduction in members’
welfare, and hence in the spread of unions, but a Þrst-order reduction in the death rate of unionized
Þrms. Selection pressure therefore favors unions with lower levels of rent extraction than would be
optimal for workers.
   If a union is controlled by its rank and Þle, however, its members will vote for the policies
that maximize their welfare rather than the policies that would survive evolutionary competition.
Selection pressure may therefore also favor unions with constitutional incumbency advantages that
allow leaders to pursue more moderate wage demands than those preferred by the rank and Þle.
   There is evidence for these implications. Most existing unions do, in fact, have constitutions
that create strong advantages for incumbents. Furthermore, rank and Þle dissident movements are
almost always more radical than union leadership, suggesting that the policies of unions tend to be



                                                  2
more moderate than would be optimal for workers. In several cases in which incumbency advantages
have been weakened due to plausibly exogenous factors, dissident movements have become powerful,
wage demands have escalated, and industries have declined. The model also suggests that if multiple
unions compete for the same workers within Þrms, as in several European countries, incumbency
advantages will be weaker and unions will have to adopt more militant policies.
   The model also suggests that exogenous increases in Þrm turnover will reduce unionization.
If the typical unionized Þrm exits before dues from union members at that Þrm have Þnanced
unionization of another Þrm, then unionization rates will decline. In fact, industries with high
Þrm turnover, such as restaurants, have lower unionization rates than industries with lower Þrm
turnover, such as hotels. We demonstrate empirically that this is the case even after controlling for
capital intensity, concentration, and establishment size, and argue that the relationship may help
explain higher unionization rates in the public sector, as well as the relatively weaker incumbency
advantages found in public sector unions.
   Although unionized Þrms are more likely to exit, in general equilibrium high unionization can
reduce Þrm turnover. Since unions extract more in absolute terms from newer, more productive
Þrms than from unproductive Þrms near the exit margin, unions may deter entry by new, high-
productivity Þrms without extracting so much from older low-productivity Þrms that they exit.
(See Moene and Wallerstein [1993] and Caballero and Hammour [1998].) Combining this Þnding
with this paper’s result that higher Þrm turnover reduces unionization suggests that there may be
multiple steady states, one with high unionization, low turnover of Þrms, and low productivity and
another with low unionization, high turnover of Þrms, and high productivity. This may correspond
to some diﬀerences between the U.S. and Europe.
   This paper builds on earlier work. Dickens and Leonard [1985] and Freeman [1983] show that
unions must continually organize new enterprises in order to oﬀset the natural decline in membership
due to turnover among Þrms. Freeman [1998] documents sudden spurts in unionization followed
by gradual declines. He accounts for this in a model in which as unionization levels increase, it
becomes Þrst easier and then more diﬃcult to unionize new Þrms. This means that there will be
one steady-state level of unionization at zero, and one positive steady state. Hannan and Freeman



                                                 3
[1987, 1988] use a sociological model of organizational ecology to examine how birth and death
rates of unions depend on the existing number of unions. This paper diﬀers in explicitly examining
the predator-prey population dynamics involving unions and Þrms and in deriving the implications
for union politics. Dutta and Radner [1999] apply related evolutionary techniques to a diﬀerent
question, arguing that Þrms that retain more earnings than would be optimal for their shareholders
will survive longer and eventually outnumber Þrms that retain the optimal amount. This paper
diﬀers in methodology from Dutta and Radner, however, by explicitly modelling the spread of
unions within a population of Þrms and by considering competition among unions in determining
which unions will survive.
    Section 1 provides background on relevant U.S. collective bargaining institutions. Section 2
presents the model and solves for the steady-state level of unionization with a single union and an
exogenously given level of rent extraction. Section 3 contrasts economic and evolutionary models of
the determination of levels of rent extraction, and Þnds that the evolutionarily stable level of rent
extraction is less than that which maximizes the welfare of the workers. Section 4 discusses the
model’s implications for union institutions. Section 5 empirically tests the model’s prediction that
unionization levels will be lower in industries with greater Þrm turnover. Section 6 discusses two
extensions of the model, one showing that evolutionarily stable unions may devote more resources
to organizing eﬀorts than would be optimal for their members and one showing that there can be
multiple equilibria in unionization levels and turnover among Þrms. Section 7 concludes by arguing
that the welfare eﬀects of unions, and of union moderation, are ambiguous under the model, and
by discussing the applicability of this biological approach to other institutions.



1    Background on U.S. Collective Bargaining Institutions

Before introducing the model, it is useful to review a few features of U.S. collective bargaining
institutions. Outside of construction, music, and a few other industries, most new Þrms begin life
without unions. Under the Federal law covering most industries, if thirty percent of workers sign a
petition calling for an election, a certiÞcation election supervised by the National Labor Relations



                                                  4
Board (NLRB) is held. A union is recognized if more than half the workers vote for it in such an
election.
   Support from existing unions plays an important role in unionizing new Þrms. Not only are
workers more likely to support unions if they have friends or relatives who are union members, but
hired union organizers, paid for through dues of existing union members, also play an important
role. These paid organizers are often critical in obtaining the signatures required to have an election
and in campaigning for union certiÞcation, because unlike activists within Þrms, paid organizers
are not susceptible to threats from management. Workers at a plant are theoretically protected
from retaliation for supporting a union, but penalties for dismissing union supporters are weak,
and union activists are often dismissed. In fact, one in twenty workers who vote for a union in an
organizing election are later found to have a valid claim for unfair dismissal by the NLRB [Weiler,
1984]. The percentage among union activists is likely to be even higher, making it dangerous for
workers in a Þrm to openly campaign for a union in an NLRB election. In addition to making
organizing activities hazardous for employees, Þrms also use legal tactics to delay unionization
votes, such as challenging deÞnitions of the bargaining unit and thus the set of workers who are
eligible to vote in the NLRB election. Responding to these challenges requires lawyers and money,
which existing unions can help provide.
   Once a Þrm unionizes, workers can theoretically deunionize through a decertiÞcation election,
or vote to change their aﬃliation from one union to another. In practice, however, decertiÞcations
are infrequent, and switching union aﬃliations rarely happens, given the organizing costs involved
and the reluctance of unions to poach each others’ territory. In fact, the AFL-CIO constitution
explicitly prohibits member unions from attempting to organize a Þrm currently organized by a
diﬀerent AFL-CIO member union. When unions decline, it is therefore not primarily because of
decertiÞcation elections, but rather because the Þrms covered by the union reduce employment or
close down a unionized location altogether.
   The model in this paper is designed to apply to those U.S. industries covered by the standard
NLRB rules: new Þrms start as non-union; paid union organizers play an important role in union-
izing new Þrms; and once employees at a Þrm vote in a particular union, the Þrm stays unionized



                                                  5
for the remainder of its life.1 The resulting dynamics of unionization levels bear a similarity to
those under the Susceptible-Infected (SI) model of epidemiological dynamics (see Anderson and
May [1991]). In that model, new potential hosts are born uninfected; the chance that they become
infected increases with the number of hosts already infected; and once hosts are infected, they stay
infected until they die. (As discussed in the conclusion, this comparison is purely positive, not
normative.)



2        The Model with a Single Union

This section describes the basic model for the spread of a single union with an exogenously given
level of rent extraction. Section 2.1 begins by outlining the entry, investment, and exit behavior of
Þrms taking union behavior as given. Section 2.2 then describes how unions spread and characterizes
the steady-state level of unionization.


2.1       Firms

We assume that Þrms produce one of a continuum of measure F possible products, and that there
is a downward-sloping demand curve for each product.2 Entry into a sector requires start-up costs,
described below, but once these costs have been paid, output is linear in labor and requires no
other inputs, i.e. q (L) = βL. Once there is a Þrm in a market, if a second Þrm were to enter, the
two Þrms would engage in Bertrand competition and earn zero proÞts. Knowing this, only one Þrm
enters each market, and the measure of the number of Þrms is equal to F . For simplicity, we will
assume that all Þrms face identical production functions, and so behave identically.
        In addition, there is a competitive, constant returns to scale home-production sector in which
workers can earn some Þxed eﬀective wage, w. We assume that there is a suﬃcient quantity of
workers such that some are always employed in the home-production sector, i.e. N > L∗ F , where
N is the quantity of workers and L∗ is the optimum quantity of workers each Þrm employs at wage
    1
     As discussed above, in a few industries, such as construction, textiles, and music, institutions diﬀer, and new
Þrms often start out unionized. The model is not intended to apply to these industries.
   2
     One could instead assume that the number of products in the world was growing at a constant rate, which would
induce steady-states of constant growth rates, but that change does not aﬀect the basic intuition of the model.




                                                         6
w.
         Given that each Þrm is a monopoly, each Þrm charges the proÞt maximizing price and earns
pre-union proÞts denoted by π. By ”pre-union proÞts,” we mean the surplus of revenues over the
wages paid in the absence of a union. (We assume that there is some demand for each product at a
                 w
price above      β,   so that each Þrm produces a positive amount, and that the proÞts are maximized at
some Þnite price.3 ) If the Þrm is unionized, the union extracts a Þxed proportion α of these proÞts.
Later, we will endogenize α, but from the perspective of the Þrm, α is an exogenous parameter.
         Suppose that Þrms are subject to large negative productivity shocks that cause them to exit with
hazard rate δ, where δ depends in part on unobservable investment, I, such as avoiding negligence
that could lead to lawsuits.4 For now, we will assume that the negative shocks are so large that
any Þrm receiving such a shock exits; Section 6.2 considers smaller negative shocks that reduce
productivity but are not necessarily fatal to Þrms. We also assume that δ I < 0 and δII > 0.
         The optimal investment for a unionized Þrm depends on the share of proÞts it can keep if it
stays alive. Given the discount rate, r, the Þrm chooses I to maximize its present discounted value
given α:5
                                                              (1 − α)π − I
                                         I(α) = argmax                     .                                     (1)
                                                      I          r + δ(I)

Investment is decreasing in rent extraction by unions, α, since

                                         dI            πδ I
                                            =                      < 0.                                          (2)
                                         dα   δ II [(1 − α) π − I]

It is therefore possible to write δ = δ(I(α)), or more concisely, δ = δ(α), where δ α > 0.
         So far, we have said that there will be only one Þrm in each industry, but have not yet speciÞed
how a given capitalist gets to own that Þrm. We model the process by which a given capitalist
                                                                                                  ³R       ´1
                                                                                                     F       ρ
     For example, suppose that all consumers had an identical CES utility function equal to U = 0 xρi di , where
     3

xi represents demand for good i. As long as ρ > 0, so that the elasticity of substitution is greater than 1, all Þrms
will charge a Þnite price.
   4
     The hazard rate could also depend on observable investment, but since unions and Þrms can contract on the
eﬃcient level of observable investment, it would not vary with rent extraction, and hence we abstract from observable
investment in this paper.
   5
     Note that equation (1) assumes that the owner of the Þrm receives a continuation payoﬀ of 0 in the event the
Þrm dies. This is because if the Þrm dies, the owner will need to start a new Þrm, and as will be shown below, the
ex-ante proÞts of starting a new Þrm will be 0.



                                                          7
obtains the monopoly on a particular product as an auction or, equivalently, as a lottery. This
can be thought of either literally, such as a government auction for a cell-phone license, or as a
metaphor for advertising, research and development, or other up-front expenditures that result in
some probability of being successful in an industry, as is widespread among Internet Þrms today.
Assuming that there is competition among a large number of risk-neutral capitalists, the cost of
entering an industry will be equal to the expected value of owning a Þrm. The ex ante proÞts from
opening a Þrm will therefore always be zero. Whenever a Þrm dies, an auction is held and a new
Þrm enters. The number of Þrms therefore remains equal to F .


2.2   Steady-State Unionization Levels

Under the model, new Þrms are established without unions. Firms diﬀer in how easy they are to
unionize, depending on factors ranging from the layout of the factory ßoor to the personalities of
managers. (In order to keep the model tractable, we consider a simple model in which Þrms, plants,
and union bargaining units are coterminous.) Each Þrm is born with a certain diﬃculty of being
organized, which we denote by c (for cost), and retains that same level of diﬃculty until it dies. For
simplicity, we will assume that for newborn Þrms c is distributed uniformly on the interval [0,1].
   In each unit of time, the union has an organizing budget that it uses to organize new Þrms.
We assume that unions are credit constrained, so that the amount they can spend on organizing
eﬀorts depends on their current level of dues collection. The union’s budget is therefore equal to
BU, where B represents the amount that unionized workers in each Þrm contribute toward the
overall union’s organizing budget and U is the number of unionized Þrms. (We abstract from size
diﬀerences among Þrms.)
   The attractiveness of a particular union to workers depends on α, the proportion of the Þrm’s
total proÞts it extracts for the workers. The union’s eﬀective organizing budget is A(α)BU , where
A (α) indicates the union’s attractiveness as a function of α. Workers recognize that Þrms will die
oﬀ quickly if unions extract high levels of rents, so A(α) will not necessarily be monotonic in α.
   The analysis in this section will focus on identifying steady states. The transition dynamics
outside of the steady state are somewhat more complex, and are discussed in Appendix A.2. There



                                                  8
are two criteria that must be satisÞed in the steady state. First, in the steady state, the total
number of unionized Þrms, denoted U , must remain constant. Next, note that when a Þrm dies,
the Þrm that replaces it has a new diﬃculty of unionization c, distributed according to the initial
Uniform[0,1] distribution. This leads to the second criteria for the steady state, that the distribution
of organizing diﬃculties of union and non-union Þrms must also remain constant.
       To identify the steady state, in this section we Þrst consider the case in which there is only
one union, with an exogenously given level of α. (Section 3 endogenizes α.) We assume that the
union can observe the diﬃculty of organizing a Þrm before it starts an organizing eﬀort. Therefore,
the union will target those Þrms that are the easiest to organize Þrst.6 Suppose that at a given
moment all Þrms with organizing diﬃculty below some cutoﬀ point p are unionized and all Þrms
with diﬃculty above p are non-unionized. This will be the case so long as there is only one union
and the size of the union is increasing or in the steady-state, since unions always target the easiest to
organize Þrms Þrst.7 In a given instant, there will be two segments of non-unionized Þrms, a ”thin”
segment of Þrms that have just been created with diﬃcultly distributed according to the initial
distribution and a ”thick” segment of pre-existing Þrms with diﬃculties greater than p. Unions will
optimally spend their organizing budget Þrst to organize newly emerged Þrms in the thin segment
with organizing diﬃculty below p. Once the union has organized those Þrms, it will spend what
remains of its budget on the remaining previously existing Þrms in the thick segment with marginal
diﬃculty of organizing p.8
   6
      One key diﬀerence between a model of unions and standard epidemiological models of disease, such as the SI
model, is that as disease prevalence increases in an epidemiological model, the eﬃciency with which infected hosts
pass on the disease declines. This occurs because standard epidemiological models assume random matching between
hosts in the population. When the disease becomes very prevalent, many of these matches occur between two infected
hosts, so those matches do not contribute to the spread of the disease. To the extent that unions spread through
random word of mouth connections, similar dynamics would arise.
   In this model, however, we assume that unions will not waste resources attempting to unionize Þrms which have
already been unionized. Rather, they will explicitly target Þrms that are not yet unionized. An interior solution for
union coverage arises because of heterogeneity among Þrms in the diﬃculty of union organizing.
    7
      During transitions that involve the decline of a union—for example, in response to some kind of shock that reduces
the union’s eﬀective organizing budget—there will actually be a range of costs where there will be both unionized and
non-unionized Þrms. This will be discussed in more detail in the Appendix. In the steady state, however, there will
be some p below which all Þrms are organized and above which no Þrms are organized.
    8
      Strictly speaking, this suggests that in the steady state, the percentage of unionized Þrms will be higher among
newly-created Þrms than among older Þrms. In practice, factors outside the model will obscure this relationship.
For example, if Þrms diﬀer in intrinsic proÞtability, more proÞtable Þrms will be more attractive to unions and
longer-lived. To take another example, if Þrms take time to grow and initially face a high death rate, unions may
not organize early in the Þrm’s life.



                                                           9
                                     Figure 1: Steady-State Unionization

                # firms




                              Pre-Existing Union Firms        Pre-Existing Non-
                                                                Union Firms



                          0                              p*                         1        Difficulty of
                                                                                             unionization
                                               Newly Created Firms




   A graphical depiction of the steady-state is given in Figure 1. Note that the density of unionized
Þrms is lower than the density of non-unionized Þrms in steady-state, because although the cost
distribution for newborn Þrms is uniform, unionized Þrms have a higher death rate, and therefore
do not live as long as non-union Þrms.
   Normalize the number of Þrms, F , to 1, so that U becomes the fraction of Þrms that are
unionized. At an instant of time dt, [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dt Þrms will have just exited due to a
negative productivity shock. As those Þrms die, new Þrms will be born with diﬃculties of being
unionized distributed according to the initial distribution. For a union to organize all newborn
Þrms with diﬃculty level below p, the union will have to spend

                                                                      Z     p
                                    [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dt               c dG (c) ,                   (3)
                                                                        0


which, since G (c) is Uniform[0,1], is just

                                                                                 p2
                                          [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dt             .                        (4)
                                                                                 2

In order for p, the threshold below which all Þrms are organized, to remain constant, the union’s
eﬀective organizing budget must exactly correspond to the total cost of organizing all newly created



                                                              10
Þrms with cost less than or equal to p, i.e.:

                                                                          p2
                                A(α)BU = [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )]          .                      (5)
                                                                          2

This condition, that p must not change, is one of the two conditions that must be satisÞed in the
                                                                                          2
steady-state. If the union had a surplus, i.e. if A(α)BU > [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] p2 , then it would
spend that surplus organizing non-union Þrms in the ”thick” segment with diﬃculty greater than
p, and p would increase. Conversely, if the union’s budget was not suﬃcient to organize all of
the newly born Þrms with diﬃculty below p, then p would decrease. (See Appendix A.2 for more
details.)
   The other condition that must be satisÞed in the steady-state is that the number of unionized
Þrms, U , must also not change. This means that the number of newly born Þrms the union organizes
must exactly equal the number of Þrms the union loses to attrition. This yields the condition


                                  [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] p = δ (α) U.                           (6)


   These two conditions, that the diﬃculty distribution of unionized and non-unionized Þrms does
not change and that the number of unionized Þrms does not change, lead us to the following
characterization of the steady-state:

Proposition 1 With a single union, there can be two steady-states, the trivial steady-state with no
unionization (U = p = 0) and the steady-state with
                            
                            
                                      2δ(0)A(α)B
                                δ(α)2 −2A(α)B[δ(α)−δ(0)]
                                                                if 2A (α) B ≤ δ (α)
                     U∗ =                                                             ;             (7)
                            
                                          1                         otherwise


                            
                            
                               2A(α)B
                                 δ(α)          if 2A (α) B ≤ δ (α)
                     p∗ =                                             .                             (8)
                            
                                 1                 otherwise


   Proof. Equations (7) and (8) can be obtained by combining equation (5) and equation (6).


                                                     11
The derivation for the condition that guarantees an interior solution,


                                                2A (α) B ≤ δ (α) ,                                              (9)


can be seen by setting the algebraic expressions for U ∗ and p∗ equal to 1, the maximum value they
can take, given that the maximum proportion of Þrms that can be unionized is 1 and that the
diﬃculties of unionization are distributed on the interval [0,1].
      Note that when 2A (α) B > δ (α), the union’s organizing budget is substantial enough to over-
come the attrition of member unions, so the model would be at a corner solution with steady state
unionization levels of either 0 or 1. For the remainder of the paper we will assume that condition
(9) holds unless otherwise stated, so that we are in the more interesting interior case with only
partial unionization in the non-trivial steady-state.
      As shown in Appendix A.3, the trivial steady-state with U ∗ = 0 is unstable, and the non-
trivial steady state with partial unionization is stable. The intuition behind these results is that
the total resources available for union organizing rise linearly with the number of unionized Þrms,
while the cost of replacing Þrms lost to attrition rises faster than linearly given that the easiest
Þrms to unionize are unionized Þrst. Given our assumption of a uniform distribution of diﬃculty of
unionization, the cost of replacing Þrms lost to attrition is quadratic in the level of unionization. The
cost of replacing unionized Þrms lost to attrition is less than the resources available for unionization
at all unionization levels between 0 and the non-trivial steady-state, and greater than the available
resources curve at higher levels of unionization. With a non-uniform cost distribution, there could
be multiple stable non-trivial equilibria, but we focus on a simple case here.
      Since the distribution of unionization diﬃculties is uniform on [0, 1], p∗ , the diﬃculty level
below which all newborn Þrms are unionized, is also the percentage of newborn Þrms that are
unionized. Combining condition (9) with the fact that δ (α) ≥ δ (0) implies that U ∗ ≤ p∗ (to
see this, compare the equations for U ∗ (Equation (7)) and p∗ (Equation (8)). Intuitively, U ∗ , the
steady-state proportion of Þrms that are unionized, is less than p∗ , the proportion of newborn Þrms
unionized, because unionized Þrms die at a faster rate than non-union Þrms.9 As can be seen in
  9
      Of course, in the real world, factors outside the model may obscure this relationship. In particular, Þrms may



                                                         12
equation (7), the greater the diﬀerence between δ (α) and δ (0), the more of the union’s organizing
budget it has to spend to make up for Þrms lost to attrition, and therefore the lower the steady-state
value of U ∗ . On the other hand, when δ (α) = δ (0), U ∗ and p∗ are identical.
    Exogenous increases in the death rate of Þrms that increase δ(α) and δ(0) by the same proportion
will reduce steady-state unionization. The intuition is that with higher attrition rates, at every
level of membership the union must devote a greater share of its resources to replacing Þrms lost
to attrition and less to expanding the size of the union. This result is stated more formally in the
following proposition and tested empirically in Section 5.


Proposition 2 Increasing the death rate of all union and non-union Þrms by the same proportion
reduces the steady-state level of unionization U ∗ .

                                        δ(α)
    Proof. Suppose that the ratio       δ(0)   is Þxed at λ (α). Then equation 7 can be rewritten as

                                                    2A (α) B
                                 U∗ =          2                           .                                  (10)
                                        λ (α) δ (0) − 2A (α) B [λ (α) − 1]

Taking the derivative with respect to δ (0) yields

                                dU ∗                  U ∗ λ (α)2
                                      =−                                     .                                (11)
                               dδ (0)    λ (α)2 δ (0) − 2A (α) B [λ (α) − 1]

                                                                                                    dU ∗
Condition (9) guarantees that 2A (α) B ≤ λ (α) δ (0), which in turn guarantees that                 dδ(0)   will be
less than zero.



3    Rent Extraction Under Optimizing and Evolutionary Models

This section contrasts economic and evolutionary analyses of the determination of the level of rent
extraction, α. Under a standard economic approach, unions choose α to maximize the present
discounted value of rents to union members, taking into account the dependence of Þrm investment
on α. Under the evolutionary approach, unions are endowed with diﬀerent values of α, and only
diﬀer in intrinsic proÞtability, and more proÞtable Þrms are more likely to attract attention from unions and less
likely to exit.



                                                       13
those unions with evolutionarily stable values of α survive. In many circumstances, the economic
and evolutionary approaches yield the same steady-state predictions, albeit with diﬀerent dynamics
(as in Nelson and Winter, 1982). In this model, however, the evolutionarily stable value of α will
be less than the value of α that maximizes the present discounted value of rents to current union
members.
   The remainder of this section is organized as follows. Subsection 3.1 derives the conditions for
the optimal level of α for the workers. Subsection 3.2 then shows that the evolutionarily stable
level of rent extraction is less than this welfare maximizing level.


3.1      Welfare-Maximizing Level of Rent Extraction

We Þrst consider a fairly conventional model in which unions choose α to maximize the present
discounted value of rents accruing to current union members.
   We assume that unions cannot commit to a path of rent extraction over time. Otherwise, the
optimal contract would involve a one-time payment from the Þrm in exchange for an agreement
to never again extract any rents. This would avoid distorting the Þrms’s investments in staying
alive. In fact, it is diﬃcult to contract on rent extraction, since Þrms may not be able to specify in
advance the exact tasks needed later and unions may have diﬃculty committing never to extract
rents.
   Given this, the union chooses how much it will extract each year. Since Þrms’ pre-union proÞts
are constant, there is no diﬀerence between extracting a lump sum each year and a share of proÞts
each year. We will consider the case in which unions have all the bargaining power in negotiations
with Þrms, in the sense that they can present Þrms with take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers. This assumption
may be reasonable if a single union bargains with many Þrms and has incentives to acquire a
reputation for toughness. Although unions cannot commit to a time-path of future rent extraction,
bargaining is statically eﬃcient, so that all Þrms employ the eﬃcient number of workers.
   Suppose workers face a Poisson hazard rate φ of separation from the Þrm, for example through




                                                  14
death or retirement. The present discounted value of rents accruing to current union members is

                                                       απ
                                                               .                                                (12)
                                                  r + φ + δ(α)

Since δ (α) increases with α, the optimal level of rent extraction for the worker involves a trade-oﬀ
between the ßow of rents and the hazard rate that the Þrm will chose, which would cause workers
to cease to obtain any rents.10
       The Þrst order condition for the level of α that maximizes the present discounted value of rents
for workers, denoted αW , is
                                       r + φ + δ(αW ) − αW δ 0 (αW ) = 0.                                       (13)

For the remainder of the paper, we assume that the parameter values are such that we have an
interior solution for αW .


3.2      Evolutionarily Stable Rent Extraction

An alternative approach to understanding how α is determined is to assume that α, the level of
rents a union extracts, is Þxed for a given union, but that there are many unions with diﬀering
levels of α. One can then ask which union will survive in evolutionary competition.
       We assume that the function A (α), which indexes how attractive a union is to potential new
members, is continuously increasing in the present discounted value of rents obtained by workers
(i.e., equation (12)). The assumption that A(α) is increasing in the present discounted value of
rents extracted by workers implies that a union that maximizes the welfare of its members, i.e. a
union that extracts αW , has the easiest time organizing unorganized Þrms.11
  10
      Note that this expression assumes implicitly that workers receive no union rents if they leave the Þrm. This
will be true if the labor supply, N , is large enough, so that the probability the worker obtains a second job in the
potentially unionizable sector, and therefore has a chance of getting a unionized job, approaches 0.
   11
      In fact, while we assume that A (α) is maximized at αW , it is plausible that it is maximized at some value
less than αW . Firms can employ a wide variety of anti-unionization tactics, including requiring workers to attend
anti-union meetings on company time, challenging the proposed deÞnition of the bargaining unit, and illegally Þring
union activists, and the more they expect unions to extract, the more vociferously they will oppose unions. Given the
response of Þrms’ unobservable investment to α, as α approaches αW , increases in α hurt Þrms much more than they
help workers. Firms’ opposition to unionization might therefore increase more rapidly with α than workers’ support
for unionization. Firms may even ease the entry of more moderate unions to forestall more radical alternatives. Such
eﬀects, however, would only make showing that αS < αW easier, so we ignore any eﬀects of this sort in the model.




                                                         15
       The assumption that A is continuous in α is important for the result that αS < αW . If there
were simple Bertrand competition among unions for potential members at unorganized Þrms, in
which workers joined whichever union delivered greater discounted rents, then the evolutionarily
stable level of rent extraction would equal the optimal amount of rent extraction for current workers.
However, if workers decide which union to join based not only on the present discounted value of
rent extraction but also on other idiosyncratic factors, such as the match between the personality
of union organizers and the workers at the Þrm, then workers may join a union other than the one
that maximizes the present discounted value of rents. Union recruitment will therefore increase
continuously rather than discretely in the present discounted value of rents delivered to members.
       If there are multiple unions, each would like to spend its organizing budget trying to organize
the easiest Þrms. Rather than assume that unions waste resources on battles to organize the
same unorganized Þrms, we will assume that they divide them so that at every level of diﬃculty,
c, unions organize Þrms in proportion to their eﬀective organizing budgets. Since the eﬀective
organizing budget is the actual organizing budget (BU ) multiplied by how attractive the union is
to workers (indexed by the function A (α)), unions that are more attractive to workers can organize
disproportionately more Þrms.12 For example, suppose that there are two unions, a moderate
union with M member Þrms and extraction rate αM and a radical union with R member Þrms
                                                                   A(αM )BM
and extraction rate αR . The moderate union targets            A(αM )BM +A(αR )BR    of the non-unionized Þrms
with diﬃculty less than p and the radical union targets the remainder.
       We can now identify the evolutionarily stable level of rent extraction and show that it will be
smaller than the welfare-maximizing level of rent extraction. First, we specify how the deÞnition
of evolutionary stability applies in our context.


DeÞnition 1 A union that extracts a rent level α is evolutionarily stable if and only if, starting
from the steady state containing only the α union, there exists an γ > 0 such that if any other
union with size ε < γ invades, the invading union will disappear.
  12
     We thus allow for unions that extract more for their members to be more successful in attracting members,
but rather than having a completely general function for union recruiting as a function of the union’s level of rent
extraction and that of each of its competitors, we consider the case in which each union’s recruiting is proportional
to its attractiveness to workers and its organizing budget.




                                                         16
                                                                                                      2A(α)B
Proposition 3 The union that extracts the level of rent α that maximizes the ratio                     δ(α)    will be
evolutionarily stable.

                                                                    2A(α)B
     Proof. Denote by αS the level of α that maximizes               δ(α) .   Let S represent the number of
unionized Þrms in the union that extracts αS . Consider a steady-state containing only the αS
union, and introduce into this steady-state a small union of size ε > 0 that extracts αε 6= αS .
In order to show that αS is evolutionarily stable, we need to show that for each αε , there exists
a minimum size γ such that if the size of the invading union ε is less than γ, then the invader
will have negative growth and die oﬀ. To see that this will be the case, consider how the ε union
spends its eﬀective organizing budget of A (αε ) Bε. With such a budget, it can aﬀord to organize
the newborn Þrms up to some level pε , determined by setting the eﬀective organizing budget equal
to the number of newborn Þrms times the proportion organized by the invading union times the
average cost of unionization for Þrms with cost less than pε :

                                                                                           Z     pε
                                                                      A (αε ) Bε
      A (αε ) Bε = [δ (αS ) S + δ (αε ) ε + δ (0) (1 − S − ε)]                                        c dc,      (14)
                                                               A (αS ) BS + A (αε ) Bε       0


which yields                        s
                                              2 [A (αS ) BS + A (αε ) Bε]
                             pε =                                                 .                              (15)
                                        δ (αS ) S + δ (αε ) ε + δ (0) (1 − S − ε)

Recall from the single-union case (equations (5) and (8)) that in the steady state,

                                                    s
                                     2A (αS ) B                2A (αS ) BS
                             p∗S   =            =                                 .                              (16)
                                      δ (αS )           δ (αS ) S + δ (0) (1 − S)

Note that when ε is close to 0, pε is approximately equal to p∗S . Since in the steady state before the
invasion all Þrms with diﬃculty level less than p∗S are unionized, when ε is close to 0 the invading
union will exhaust its budget organizing Þrms up to pε . The growth rate of the invading union will
be
                                                                     A (αε ) Bε
           εú = [δ (αS ) S + δ (αε ) ε + δ (0) (1 − S − ε)]                           pε − δ (αε ) ε.            (17)
                                                              A (αS ) BS + A (αε ) Bε




                                                        17
Rearranging terms, we Þnd that the growth rate of the invading union εú will be less than 0 if
                                         s
                        2A (αε ) B                 2 [A (αS ) BS + A (αε ) Bε]
                                   <                                                   .                   (18)
                         δ (αε )             δ (αS ) S + δ (αε ) ε + δ (0) (1 − S − ε)

Since the RHS equals pε and pε can be made arbitrarily close to p∗S by setting ε small enough, we
can re-write this inequality as
                                          2A (αε ) B   2A (αS ) B
                                                     <            .                                        (19)
                                           δ (αε )      δ (αS )
                      2A(α)B
    Since the ratio    δ(α)    is precisely what αS maximizes, we know that this inequality will hold
and that the αS union will be evolutionarily stable.
                                               2A(α)B
   The key idea of the proof is that            δ(α)    is the steady-state level of p∗ , the proportion of
newborn Þrms that are unionized in steady-state. This determines the average cost level the union
can sustain in steady-state. A union that can bear a higher average cost level than the incumbent
will be able to unionize disproportionately more Þrms, and will be able to invade; a union unable to
bear as much will experience negative growth and disappear. Therefore, no union can successfully
invade a steady-state containing the union with the highest possible average cost level. The union
                                2A(α)B
with the maximum value of        δ(α)    is therefore evolutionarily stable.
                                                                          2A(α)B
   It is worth noting that while the level of α that maximizes             δ(α)    will be unique under most
normal parameterizations of A (α) and δ (α), this need not hold in general. It is possible to construct
                                                                                    2A(α)B
functions A (α) and δ (α) satisfying all of the conditions above such that           δ(α)    has multiple global
maxima. In this case, there will be several possible levels of rent extraction αS that, together or
independently, would be evolutionarily stable. However, Þnding examples of functions A (α) and
                                                               2A(α)B
δ (α) satisfying all of the conditions above and where          δ(α)    has multiple global maxima requires
careful construction, so it seems likely that this will not occur empirically.
   Proposition 3 guarantees that, starting from a steady state occupied by only the αS union,
no other union can invade. We now show that facing a steady state containing any other union
or combination of unions, the αS union can successfully invade. Furthermore, if the system then
converges to a steady state, that steady state will contain only the αS union. To show this, it will
be useful to Þrst state the following lemma.


                                                        18
Lemma 1 If multiple unions co-exist in the steady-state, then they must have the same ratio of
                                                                    2A(αM )B       2A(αR )B
eﬀective organizing budget to Þrm death rate, i.e.                   δ(αM )    =    δ(αR ) .   Furthermore, this ratio
will be equal to the organizing cost of the most diﬃcult to organize Þrm that is unionized in the
                             2A(αM )B
steady-state, i.e. p∗M =      δ(αM ) .


       The proof is given in Appendix A.1. The intuition behind the Lemma is that for two unions to
exist in the steady-state, one must be a more moderate union that is less attractive to workers but
loses fewer of its member Þrms due to attrition, while the other must be a more militant union that
is better able to unionize new Þrms but also loses more of its member Þrms to attrition. Lemma 1
speciÞes how precisely to balance this trade-oﬀ.13
       With this lemma characterizing the steady-state in mind, we can show that an evolutionarily
stable union will be able to invade any other union.


Proposition 4 The αS union can successfully invade any steady-state other than the one contain-
ing another αS union.


       The proof is essentially similar to the proof of Proposition 3, and is given in Appendix A.1.
       We have so far shown that, starting from a steady-state containing the αS union, no union can
invade, and starting from a steady-state with any other union, the αS union can invade and grow.
We have not ruled out a limit cycle, but we do know that if there is a steady-state, it must be
the steady-state containing only the evolutionarily stable union. To see this, suppose that there
are two unions, the stable union S and an incumbent union I. By Lemma 1, the eventual steady
                                                                                                                   2A(α)B
state cannot contain both the S union and the I union, since they have diﬀerent ratios                              δ(α) .

We have already shown that as the world approaches the steady-state with the I union, whatever
tiny amount ε of the S union that remains will grow, so the ε union can not be eliminated entirely.
Therefore, we have shown that the αS union cannot be displaced by any other union and that,
assuming that there is no cycling, the αS union can invade and displace any other union.
  13                                 2A(α)B
       Note that when the function    δ(α)
                                              is strictly concave, which it will be for many (but not all) concave functions
A (α) and increasing functions δ (α), there can be at most two unions in equilibrium. When 2A(α)B
                                                                                               δ(α)  is not strictly
concave, on the other hand, there can be three or more unions in equilibrium. Even in this case, however, the same
argument in Lemma 1 goes through.



                                                              19
           Figure 2: Evolutionarily stable and welfare-maximizing levels of rent extraction.

                                             2 A (α ) B
                                               δ (α )                δ(α)




                                                                     Α(α)




                                        αs           αw



   Now that we know which union will be evolutionarily stable, we can show our key result: that
it is less radical than the welfare-maximizing union.

Proposition 5 The evolutionarily stable level of rent extraction, αS , is smaller than the level of
rent extraction that maximizes the present discounted value of wages of current members, αW .

   Proof. As shown above, the evolutionarily stable level of rent extraction, αS , maximizes the
        2A(α)B
ratio    δ(α) .   Since αW , the level of rent extraction that maximizes the present discounted value
of wages of current union members, maximizes A (α), and since δ monotonically increases in α,
2A(α)B                                                                                  2A(α)B
 δ(α)    is decreasing in α at αW and at all greater values of α. Since αS maximizes     δ(α) ,   it must
be less than αW .

                                                                            2A(α)B
   Figure 2 presents the proof graphically, showing A (α), δ(α), and         δ(α)    as functions of α.
δ increases monotonically with α, and A (α) increases with α up to αW , the level of output that
maximizes the welfare of current workers, and then declines. This implies that αS , the evolutionarily
stable level of rent extraction, is less than αW . If one starts at the level of rent extraction that
is optimal for members, a small reduction in α causes a second-order reduction in attractiveness
of the union to potential members, and thus a second-order reduction in the spread rate of the


                                                      20
union. However, it causes a Þrst-order decrease in the exit rate of unionized Þrms. Therefore, the
evolutionarily stable level of α must be less than the welfare-maximizing level of α. This result
holds as long as the spread rate of unions is continuous in the present discounted value of wages
extracted.
       Note that the relative shapes of the A (α) and δ (α) functions determines how far αS will be from
αW . If A (α) declines gradually as one moves away from αW , then αS is likely to be considerably
less than αW . On the other hand, if A (α) declines steeply as one moves away from the welfare
maximizing level of output, then αS will be very close to αW . Moreover, if δ(α) is steep, so that
Þrm survival is sensitive to rent extraction, then αS will be far below αW , whereas if δ(α) is fairly
ßat, then αS will be close to αW .
       The steady-state number of unionized Þrms in society is higher if unions extract αS than if they
extract αW . Furthermore, the level of rent extraction that maximizes the number of unionized Þrms
will be less than or equal to the evolutionarily stable level αS , and therefore, by Proposition 5, less
than αW . The intuition for this result is that, under any union more radical than the αS union,
a smaller percentage of newly created Þrms are unionized (since αS maximizes p∗ ) and the death
rate of those Þrms is higher (since δ (α) increases monotonically with α). The following proposition
shows these results formally.

Proposition 6 For any level of rent extraction α greater than the evolutionarily stable level of
rent extraction αS , the steady-state level of unionization, U ∗ (α), will be lower than the steady-state
level of unionization under the evolutionarily stable union, U ∗ (αS ). This implies that the level of
α that maximizes the steady-state level of unionization will be less than or equal to the level that
maximizes αS .

       The proof is given in the Appendix.14

Corollary 6.1 The steady-state level of unionization under the evolutionarily stable level of rent
extraction, U ∗ (αS ), will be greater than that under the welfare-maximizing level of rent-extraction,
U ∗ (αW ).
  14
    Note that technically, if the function 2A(α)B
                                             δ(α)   has multiple global maxima, so that the evolutionarily stable level
{αS } is not unique, then this result holds for the highest αS belonging to that set.



                                                          21
    Proof. This follows directly from Proposition 6 and from the fact that αS < αW , which was
shown in Proposition 5.
    It is worth noting, however, that it is ambiguous whether the total ßow of rent extracted by the
union in steady-state, U ∗ απ, would be higher or lower with the evolutionarily stable union than
with the welfare-maximizing union.15 The reason is that decreasing α from αW to αS increases the
number of unionized Þrms, but decreases the amount extracted from each Þrm. It is theoretically
ambiguous which of these two eﬀects dominates.



4     Implications for Union Institutions

Much as the characteristics of an organism are determined by its DNA, union behavior is inßuenced
by its constitutional provisions. The model predicts that unions pursuing the wage policies that
would be preferred by members could be displaced in evolutionary competition with unions that
moderate these policies. But in the absence of incumbency advantages, union oﬃcials pursuing such
moderate policies would lose oﬃce. The model thus suggests that unions with constitutional in-
cumbency advantages may potentially be able to displace other unions in evolutionary competition.
Section 4.1 provides examples of how union institutions are structured to give incumbency advan-
tages to union leaders. Section 4.2 then provides evidence that when these incumbency advantages
are weaker, union wage demands tend to become less moderate.


4.1    Incumbency Advantages

Incumbents have a substantial advantage over their potential challengers in union elections. Table
1 shows the turnover of union presidents for the ten largest U.S. unions since each union’s found-
ing. We focus on the chance an incumbent was defeated each year as a measure of incumbency
advantages, since this captures both the advantages incumbents have through infrequent elections
  15
     To see this, consider the following simple example. Suppose for simplicity that the discount rate r is equal to 0,
and normalize the ßow of proÞts π to 1. Suppose that the function A (α) = 1 − (α − b)2 , where b√∈ (0, 1). Suppose
                                                                                              1+2b−   3−(1−b)2
that the function δ (I) = 1I . This implies that δ (α) = (1−α)
                                                           2
                                                               , that αW = b, and that αS =       3
                                                                                                          . In this
case, when b is less than approximately .62, αS U (αS ) > αW U ∗ (αW ), whereas when b is larger, the inequality is
                                                    ∗

reversed.




                                                          22
              Table 1: Turnover of union presidents for 10 largest American unions.
                                                                                        Chance
                                                         Total     Average Number of Incumbent
                                                Year   Number of Tenure of Defeated Defeated
 Union                                         Founded Presidents Presidents Incumbents Per Year

 1. National Education Association (NEA)           1934           12        5.5              3   4.5%
 2. Teamsters (IBT)                                1903            6         16            2*    2.1%
 3. Food & Commercial Workers (UFCW)               1912           14          6              0   0.0%
 4. State, County Employees (AFSCME)               1932            3         22              0   0.0%
 5. Teachers (AFT)                                 1916           15        6.5              2   2.4%
 6. Auto Workers (UAW)                             1947            8        6.5              1   1.9%
 7. Electrical Workers (IBEW)                      1890           16          7              2   1.8%
 8. Communication Workers (CWA)                    1938            3        21               1   1.6%
 9. Machinists (IAM)                               1888           13          9           N/A     N/A
 10. Steelworkers (USW)                            1894            6        18               0   0.0%
 Average:      All Unions                                        9.6       11.8            1.2   1.3%
               Private Sector Unions**                           8.6       13.2            0.9   1.0%
               Public Sector Unions**                           10.0       11.3            1.7   2.3%
 Comparison:
 Presidents of the United States (1900-2000)                      18         5.6          5***   5.0%
 Source: National union offices.

 * Both of the defeated Teamsters presidents were defeated after the Federal government
 takeover of the union and the imposition of direct elections for the union president.
 ** The NEA, AFT, and AFSCME are classified as public sector unions; the remainder
 are classified as private sector unions.
 *** General election defeats.


and the electoral advantages gained once an election is held. Over the history of the nine unions for
which data is available, an incumbent union president had only a 1.3% chance of being defeated in
an election each year. This Þgure would be even lower if one excludes two defeats in the Teamsters
union, which both came after the Federal government took over the union and imposed changes in
election procedures that decreased incumbency advantages. To put these numbers in perspective,
during roughly the same period, a President of the United States had a 5% annualized chance of
being defeated in an election.
   This data seems generally consistent with the model. In general, the relatively low chance of
an incumbent being defeated is consistent with the high levels of incumbency advantages necessary
to sustain more moderate wage policies.



                                                   23
    Furthermore, note that the two unions with the greatest chance of an incumbent being defeated
each year were the National Education Association and the American Federation of Teachers,
both public sector unions. More broadly, incumbents in public sector unions had a 2.3% chance
of defeat, while those in the private sector had a 1% chance of defeat (0.8% excluding the two
Teamster defeats.) The model suggests that incumbency advantages are less important in public
sector Þrms. To see this, note that there is essentially zero chance that a public employer will be
forced out of business. The function δ (α) is therefore much ßatter than for private sector Þrms.16
As a result, αS will be very close to αW , and weak incumbency advantages will not lead to much
selective pressure against a union. The fact that the chance of a union president being defeated in
public sector unions is almost twice that of private sector unions is consistent with this prediction,
though there are other possible explanations as well.
    One reason why incumbents are so often reelected is that most existing unions have constitu-
tional features creating substantial incumbency advantages for leaders.17 For example, most unions
have indirect leadership elections, in which the president of the union is elected by delegates to a
national convention, rather than by the membership at large. At these conventions, the delegates,
often local union leaders, face strong pressure to support incumbents in national oﬃce if they think
that the incumbents will win, because local union leaders need several types of services from na-
tional unions. For example, the union leadership often controls access to national strike funds and
has the power to put local branches in trusteeship. [Geoghegan, 1992; Benson, 1986]. Furthermore,
since incumbency advantages are much weaker in some union locals than at the national level, local
leaders face the threat of not being re-elected and having to return to the shop ßoor. Local leaders’
insurance against this threat is the possibility of obtaining a job with the national union staﬀ,
which will be much more likely to occur if they have reliably supported the national leadership. All
of these factors encourage the delegates to the national conventions to support the incumbents.
    Union incumbents have other direct advantages over challengers as well. Union staﬀ are often
  16
     The function δ (α) is probably not completely ßat, as militant actions on the part of unions can provoke a
government to de-unionize. One classic example of this is President Reagan’s confrontation with the air traﬃc
controllers. Such situations are, however, relatively rare.
  17
     Lipset, Trow, and Coleman [1956] examine the special case of the International Typographical Union, which
had a functioning two-party system within the union, and conclude that outside of this special case, there was little
prospect for true worker control of unions.



                                                         24
not restricted from donating money to support campaigns of current leadership, and laws restricting
union staﬀ from campaigning on union time are extremely weak. To take another example, union
oﬃcers are not often required to give membership lists or even lists of local chapters to opposition
candidates. Since unions often represent diverse sets of workers (for example, the United Auto
Workers represents graduate students at NYU), this makes it diﬃcult for challengers to campaign
against incumbent leaders. On the other hand, incumbents can use oﬃcial union communications,
such as union newsletters, to promote their own candidacies. Even if there is a viable challenger,
local union oﬃcers, rather than neutral third parties, are typically in charge of vote counting in
union elections [Geoghegan, 1992], so there are few safeguards against fraud. In fact, there is
anecdotal evidence of a signiÞcant amount of outright vote-stealing in union elections. Moreover,
prior to mandated periodic elections under federal law, unions could go for decades without even
holding elections. For example, the Laborers’ union had no conventions between 1920 and 1941
[Benson, 1986].
    While insulating union leaders from their membership through incumbency advantages allows
leaders to use their power to moderate workers’ wage demands, it does not guarantee that they will
do so. There are, however, several reasons why union leaders may prefer lower wage demands. First,
just as Þrm managers are often assumed to be empire builders, with a preference for increasing
Þrm size, union leaders may prefer to be in charge of larger unions, as leaders of larger unions have
more prestige and political power. As was shown in Proposition 6, increasing the steady-state size
of the union requires extracting less than the welfare-maximizing level of rent. Therefore, union
leaders that care about prestige will extract less rent than would be preferred by their members.
    Moreover, in return for favors from Þrms, union leaders may collude with managers to moderate
the union’s wage demands. In fact, Ross [1950] argues that unions are often prepared to sacriÞce
worker-oriented provisions, such as wages, for union-oriented provisions, such as union security,
automatic checkoﬀ of union dues, the right of the union to participate in all grievance negotiations,
and preferential seniority for union oﬃcials. Union leaders can thereby improve their own position
by moderating workers’ wage demands.18 If the surplus from collusions is split between union
  18
     One possible objection is that, incumbency advantages notwithstanding, union leaders are constrained by the
requirement that most contracts must be approved by a majority of the rank-and-Þle. However, because the union



                                                      25
leaders and Þrms, then this collusion will allow Þrms to live longer. Of course, if incumbency
advantages are too strong, union leaders wind up taking enough that workers will not want to join
the union in the Þrst place.
    Finally, note that in an evolutionary model, there need be no presumption that all union
constitutions that create incumbency advantages also create incentives for moderation. If some
union constitutions create incumbency advantages but have provisions that encourage leaders to
be more radical than members would prefer, these unions will die out. Meanwhile, if other union
constitutions create incumbency advantages and also encourage leaders to moderate members’ wage
demands, these unions will grow.


4.2    Comparative Statistics of Wage Demands and Incumbency Advantages

If union leaders are protected by incumbency advantages and use that protection to moderate
workers’ wage demands, as the model predicts, then incumbents should favor more moderate wage
demands than outsiders, and in those cases where incumbency advantages are weaker, unions should
have stronger wage demands.
    There is evidence for both predictions. Evidence that union leaders typically favor more mod-
erate policies than would be preferred by members comes from the asymmetry of challenges to
established leaders. Union dissidents typically accuse union leaders of being too moderate in their
negotiations with the Þrms, not of threatening members’ jobs by being too radical. If union leaders
sought to represent the typical worker, one would expect challenges to come as often from either
direction.
    There is also evidence that stronger incumbency advantages are associated with more moderate
wage policy. While incumbency advantages are strong at the national or international level, union
locals vary in the degree of control of incumbency advantages, and in some union locals, there
is regular turnover of leadership. We would therefore expect that the weaker the incumbency
leadership controls agenda setting, proposing contracts which rank-and-Þle can only approve or reject, union leaders
have considerably more bargaining power than the rank-and-Þle. A simple model of such a bargaining game suggests
that the union leadership has full bargaining power and obtains their most preferred outcome. (See Appendix A.4
for a proof.) In practice, when contract proposals are rejected by the rank-and-Þle, union leadership often simply
repackages the contract in new language rather than fundamentally altering the contract oﬀer.




                                                        26
advantages in the local, the more militant that local will be. Kleiner and Pilarski [2001] Þnd
exactly such an eﬀect in a comparison of two similarly-sized locals of the UAW. One local, comprised
of many plants spread out over the Los Angeles area, was organized by the UAW with indirect
elections, whereas the second local, comprised primarily of a single large plant, was organized with
direct elections of union oﬃcials. Kleiner and Pilarski found that the geographically concentrated
local with direct elections had a much more vigorous union democracy and much more aggressive
wage demands.
       If locals have weaker incumbency advantages than national unions, we should also expect that
local unions should advocate stronger wage demands than national unions. In fact, this is generally
the case, and there are a number of examples of local unions conducting strikes against the wishes
of the national union. For example, the P9 Hormel strike was conducted by the local union without
the support of the national union, as was the recent Caterpillar strike.19
       The model also suggests that if incumbency advantages decline exogenously, wages will rise and
Þrms will be more likely to fail. It is instructive to examine a case study of two unions that for
plausibly exogenous reasons were subject to shocks that reduced incumbency advantages. In the
late 1930’s, John L. Lewis, the president of the United Mine Workers (UMW) and founder of the
CIO, feuded with Roosevelt, going so far as to endorse Wendell Willkie, Roosevelt’s Republican
opponent. As part of an eﬀort to enhance his national political stature, Lewis, who faced no serious
opposition within the UMW, instituted direct leadership elections. The Steelworkers, which were
created by the UMW, adopted a similar constitutional provision.
       By the 1970’s, leadership of the UMW had passed to the corrupt Tony Boyle. Just after the
1969 leadership election, Boyle arranged for the murder of his opponent, ”Jock” Yablonski, and of
Yablonski’s family. This over-reaching led to intense federal scrutiny of the 1972 UMW election
and the victory of the challenger, Arnold Miller. Miller’s victory was followed by much increased
militancy on the part of the union, the decline of the Eastern coal industry, and a dramatic decline
in union membership.
  19
     It is not clear what other models would predict about the relative militancy of the national union and locals. On
the one hand, the national has to provide resources to support the local union in strikes, for example through the
strike fund. On the other hand, a national union might wish to demonstrate its willingness to strike against other
employers by striking against one employer.



                                                         27
   Following the election defeat of the incumbent UMW leadership, in 1977 a major challenge
was also launched to the Steelworkers’ leadership, which was similarly vulnerable due to its con-
stitutional provision for direct leadership elections. Before the election, the heir apparent, Lloyd
McBride, had promised to make a number of concessions to management in the hopes of saving
jobs in the ailing steel industry. Ed Sadlowski, McBride’s opponent, challenged McBride as being
too close to management, and was explicit about his willingness to sacriÞce union membership for
higher wages. Sadlowski said that he did not mind if the Steelworkers’ membership dropped from
400,000 to 100,000 or even 60,000, and that it should be a goal of labor to have the steel industry
pay high wages that would allow its workers to Þnance education so that they or their children
could obtain better jobs. It is hard to imagine typical incumbent union leadership adopting policies
that would cut membership to a quarter of its initial level. Though Sadlowski lost the election, as a
result of his challenge McBride was forced to drop his concessions to management and adopt much
more aggressive wage demands. With several years, the steel industry had begun a precipitous
decline, shedding 56 percent of its workforce in the period from 1979 to 1986, a decline from which
it has yet to recover [Tornell, 1997]. Of course, the decline of the Eastern coal industry and the
U.S. steel industry was probably the result of a number of other factors as well, but the model is
at least consistent with the data.
   Finally, unions in the U.S., where labor laws greatly favor incumbent unions, seem to be more
moderate than many of their European counterparts, where the threat of entry by competing
unions may prevent incumbent leaders from departing too far from the workers’ preferred policies.
(Of course, this does not apply to the same extent in countries with encompassing unions on the
Scandinavian model, where unions may have other incentives to moderate wages.)
   Relative to labor law in most of Europe, U.S. labor law enhances incumbency advantages for
existing unions. In the US, once a particular union has won a union certiÞcation election, it is
oﬃcially recognized as the sole collective bargaining partner representing the covered workers, and
it can only be replaced if the majority of workers vote to decertify it and then certify another
union. DecertiÞcation, however, is relatively rare. In some European countries, such as France,
Italy, and the Netherlands, several diﬀerent unions may compete for workers within the same Þrm



                                                 28
on an ongoing basis. The threat of entry makes it more diﬃcult for incumbents to depart from
members’ preferred policies.20 Reducing rent extraction from the level that maximizes the present
discounted value of rents for current union members may increase the lifespan of Þrms, but it will
lead to the loss of workers within the Þrm to rival unions.
    As a result, individual-level selection is likely to be a much more potent force in European
countries with multiple unions inside a single Þrm than in a U.S.-style system in which a single
union is certiÞed to collectively bargain on behalf of a deÞned set of workers. Even in countries such
as Britain, where a single union typically represents a given set of workers, the weakness of barriers
to entry for competing unions relative to the U.S. means that the implicit threat of competition is
likely to constrain unions to represent their members relatively well.
    Evolutionary and standard maximizing models diﬀer most sharply in their predictions of relative
militancy of unions under the U.S. system of multiple craft unions representing diﬀerent types of
workers within the Þrm and European systems in which diﬀerent unions can potentially compete for
the same potential members. In the U.S. craft union system, for example, airline pilots, machinists,
and ßight attendants are all represented by separate unions, and hence under standard maximizing
models, if there are many unions each union has no incentive to internalize the eﬀect of its own
rent extraction on the Þrm’s investment. Standard maximizing models therefore imply that rent
extraction should therefore be greater in this craft union environment than under a European
environment in which multiple unions compete within a single Þrm but wage concessions to one
union apply to all employees. In an evolutionary model, however, the ongoing competition for
members among unions in the European system could lead to more rent extraction than under a
system of U.S.-style craft unions. The model is consistent with the widespread view that European
unions are more militant than their U.S. counterparts.21
   20
      Ongoing within-Þrm competition for members among unions will produce lower long-run rent extraction than
restricting competition to the initial choice of union. This is because if unions only compete at some initial stage,
unions that initially extract the level of rents which maximizes the present discounted welfare of members, and then
gradually lower rent extraction, will be able to attract members with a policy which approaches the evolutionarily
stable policy in the long run. Note that this policy does not require a commitment technology for unions, because
it does not involve promises to undertake time-inconsistent policies. Extra beneÞts to workers joining a union are
provided in the short run, not the long run. For example, unions could make an up-front payment in the form of
support for organizers and support for an initial strike if necessary. In contrast, unions must maintain a high level
of rent extraction in the long run to retain members in the face of ongoing competition.
   21
      More systematic evidence on relative rent extraction is hard to come by. Wage premia for union members as



                                                         29
    A similar comparison can also be made within the U.S. Prior to the merger of the AFL and
the CIO, unions aﬃliated with each of the two umbrella organizations often continually competed
to organize a given set of workers. This higher level of competition seems to have coincided with
more militant behavior on the part of unions, as the model would predict.
    The analysis of how rent extraction diﬀers depending on whether or not unions compete within
Þrms is analogous to the analysis of the evolution of virulence in biology. The strength of selec-
tive pressures for organisms to become more benign or even symbiotic depends on the mode of
transmission of the organism [Ewald, 1994] . For example, if several diﬀerent HIV strains are com-
peting within the human body, one that reproduces more rapidly within the human body may be
more likely to kill its host, but will also be more likely to be transmitted to another host. Thus
individual-level selection within the host favors rapid reproduction while group-level selection fa-
vors more benign forms of the disease that are less likely to kill the host. In contrast, mitochondria
reproduce only through cell division, so selection among mitochondria favors those that help their
cells survive. Similarly, the system of incumbency advantages built into U.S. labor law produces an
advantage for unions that help their Þrms survive. The greater ongoing competition for members
among several diﬀerent unions, the more this eﬀect is counterbalanced by the need to extract more
rent to attract members.



5    Firm Turnover and Unionization

Proposition 2 implies that exogenous increases in Þrm turnover reduces steady-state unionization
levels. Recall from equation (11) that

                              dU ∗                  U ∗ λ (α)2
                                    =−                                     < 0,                               (20)
                             dδ (0)    λ (α)2 δ (0) − 2A (α) B [λ (α) − 1]
conventionally measured are higher in the U.S. However, the lower union coverage in the U.S. means that wage premia
may not be a good measure of rent extraction. In the U.S., unions may only be present in industries and Þrms with
large amounts of rents to extract, whereas in Europe, unions are widespread.




                                                        30
so increases in the turnover of Þrms reduce steady-state unionization rates. The model thus suggests
that unions should be more prevalent in industries with low Þrm turnover.22                         23   This section
empirically tests this implication using data for U.S. manufacturing industries.
       We test whether industries with a high turnover of Þrms have low unionization rates. We use
data on exit rates across U.S. manufacturing industries taken from Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson’s
[1988] analysis of the Census of Manufacturing. Their data set covers all Þrms producing in each
four-digit SIC manufacturing industry in the census years of 1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, and 1982.
They measured exit rates between the census years for two groups of Þrms—one group with all Þrms
present in the years of interest, and a second group that excludes the smallest Þrms from each
industry. The excluded Þrms in the second group are chosen such that the Þrms excluded produced
less than 1% of their respective industry output. EXIT and EXIT99 are respectively the average
yearly exit rates over the period for all Þrms and for the Þrms accounting for 99% of output. We
focus on the latter measure, but results are similar for the former.2425
       Data on union membership and coverage rates by industry are taken from Hirsch and Macpher-
son’s [1993] analysis of the Current Population Survey (CPS). Their data set includes average union
membership and coverage for 231 three-digit Census of Population industries over the 1983 to 1991
period. The number of observations from the CPS for each industry ranged from 5 to 21,950, with
  22
     Susan Dynarski has pointed out that a similar process may operate on a micro-level as part of organizing a
particular Þrm. Union supporters within a Þrm inßuence their friends to become union supporters. If there is a high
turnover rate among workers, it is very hard to organize the Þrm.
  23
     The equation for U ∗ only literally applies at an industry-by-industry level if unions organize only within their
own industry. However, we expect that similar results would arise if unions were disproportionately likely to unionize
within their own industry, as is the case empirically. Current union members will gain more by unionizing within
their own industry, since this reduces pressure on their own wages. Moreover, unions probably have specialized
knowledge of how to appeal to and negotiate on behalf of workers in particular industries. Moreover, even if unions
randomly tried to unionize Þrms from any industry, industries with longer-lived Þrms would have a larger proportion
of unionized Þrms.
  24
     Note that if a Þrm that was producing in more than one four-digit industry stopped producing in one of these
industries, that would be counted as an exit for that particular industry (even though the Þrm might continue
producing in the other industries).
  25
     The raw data gives 5-year exit rates, but we converted these to annual rates as follows. First, we calculated the
average survival rate by multiplying the survival rates between pairs of census years (deÞned as one minus the exit
                                                           1
rate between the two years) and raising it to the power 19    (since the data covers a 19 year interval). Once we had
constructed the average survival rate, the average exit rate was deÞned as the diﬀerence between one and the average
survival rate. The formula for the exit rate is thus
                                                                                               1
                     ext = [1 − (1 − ext6367) ∗ (1 − ext6772) ∗ (1 − ext7277) ∗ (1 − ext7782)] 19

where extxxyy is the exit between census years xx and yy.



                                                         31
                    Table 2: Means and Standard Deviations of the Variables
                      Variable                       Mean      Std. Dev.
                       UMEM (%)                           26       12
                       UCOV (%)                           28       12
                       EXIT                               10.9     1.9
                       EXIT99                             7.6      2.1
                       HHI                                .07      .04
                       SIZE (employees/establishment)     98       143
                       K (US$1,000/worker)                42       50




a mean of 3,857 and a standard deviation of 4,319. Given the implied variation in the accuracy
of the union membership estimates, we weight each industry by the square root of the number of
observations from which the union membership average was constructed.
   We control for several industry characteristics from the 1992 Census of Manufactures. Data was
obtained for employment, number of establishments, capital, and the HerÞndahl-Hirschmann index
of concentration (HHI). The data covered four-digit SIC manufacturing industries. We deÞned
average plant size (SIZE) as employment divided by the number of establishments, and capital
intensity (K) as the ratio of total assets to total employment (measured in US$1,000 per worker).
   To merge the data sets so the four-digit SIC codes would match the three-digit Census of
Population industry codes, it was often necessary to combine several four-digit industries into one.
When combining the four-digit SIC industries, the HerÞndahl-Hirschmann index and the exit rates
were weighted by the employment in that four-digit SIC industry. After combining the diﬀerent
data sets, we have data for union membership and coverage, exit rates, average plant size, a measure
of capital intensity and the HerÞndahl-Hirschmann index for 66 Census of Population industries.
Table 2 shows summary statistics for this sample.
   Across a variety of speciÞcations, higher Þrm exit rates are associated with lower unionization
rates. (See Table 3.) In our preferred speciÞcation, shown in column (5) of Table 3, a 1 percentage
point increase in the exit rate is associated with a 3.4 percentage point decrease in the unionization
rate. The results are fairly comparable, whether union membership (UMEM), or union coverage


                                                 32
Table 3: Union Membership and Coverage regressed on exit rates and other industry characteristics,
with industries being weighted by the square root of the number of observations from the CPS.
                       (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)     (5)     (6)        (7)
        Variable UMEM UMEM                  UMEM UMEM UMEM           UMEM       UCOV
        EXIT99 -3.54** -3.06**              -3.94** -3.53** -3.44**             -3.38**
                               (.66)        (.75)     (.78)  (.87)              (.88)
        EXIT                                                         -1.45*
                                                                     (.856)
        HHI                    60.65**                       92.44** 145.68** 102.49**
                               (29.85)                       (33.01) (38.46)    (33.23)
        SIZE                                -.010            -.022** -.009      -.021*
                                            (.010)           (.011)  (.011)     (.011)
        K                                             .001   .019    .070**     .019
                                                      (.032) (.031)  (.030)     (.031)
        Intercept 52.66** 44.93**           56.71** 52.54** 47.15**  30.11**    47.93**
                   (4.95)      (6.15)       (6.50)    (6.91) (8.55)  (9.42)     (8.61)
        R-sq       .33         .37          .34       .33    .42     .30        .42
        Note: Standard errors in parentheses
                (*) indicates significance at the 10% level.
                (**) indicates significance at the 5% level.


(UCOV) is the dependent variable.
       The weaker coeﬃcients on EXIT than EXIT99 are consistent with the hypothesis that behav-
ior of a fringe of small Þrms accounting for 1% of employment is not particularly important for
unionization, so EXIT is essentially a noisy version of EXIT99 that is subject to attenuation bias.
The coeﬃcients on HHI and K have the expected sign, since concentrated and capital-intensive
industries have more quasi-rents, and thus pose more attractive targets for unions.
       These results are of similar magnitude to those predicted by the model when equation (11)
is evaluated using mean values for UMEM and EXIT99 and a range of potential values of λ and
2A (α) B.26
       Of course, other models might also suggest a link between unionization and Þrm lifespan, even
after controlling for other variables. For example, unions may have less incentive to invest in
organizing short-lived Þrms. Nevertheless, these results are certainly not inconsistent with this
model.
  26
    Assuming U ∗ = 0.26, λ = 1.5, δ (0) = .076, and 2A (α) B = δ(0)
                                                                2
                                                                    yields a predicted value (from equation (11) of
the coeﬃcient on EXIT99 of 3.8. Changing any of these assumptions by 25% yields predicted coeﬃcients between
2.8 and 5.2.




                                                        33
    The link between Þrm lifespan and unionization may also help explain some other correlates of
unionization. Large Þrms have typically been around longer than small Þrms, and this may help
explain why large Þrms have higher unionization. (Note that we Þnd no direct eﬀect of Þrm size
on unionization at the industry level, controlling for exit rates, but that we do Þnd a positive,
albeit insigniÞcant, eﬀect if we do not control for exit rates, suggesting that the positive correlation
between Þrm size and unionization may be due to lower large Þrms’ exit rates.) The model also
suggests that the long lives of public sector institutions may help explain why unionization rates
are so high in the public sector and why unions resist privatization. Anecdotal evidence suggests
that there is less turnover of Þrms in Europe. It is conceivable that this could help account for the
greater power of unions in Europe than in the United States.
    Some observers claim that business is becoming more competitive. This model suggests that
if this is the case, and if this is interpreted as in increase in turnover among Þrms, then it may
exacerbate the decline in unionization.



6     Extensions

This section presents two extensions to the model. First, we show that a simple extension of the
model suggests that unions that devote more resources to organizing than would be preferred by
members will have an evolutionary advantage over others. Next, we show that under a variant of
the model, there may be multiple equilibria in unionization and Þrm turnover. In one equilibrium,
unionization is low and turnover among Þrms is rapid, with only high productivity Þrms staying
in business. In the other equilibrium, unionization is high and turnover among Þrms is low, with
low productivity Þrms staying in business, rather than being driven out of business by higher
productivity new entrants.


6.1   Endogenizing Organizing Eﬀort

We have so far taken B, the amount unions spend per unionized Þrm on organizing, as exogenous.
In fact, unions may also diﬀer in the amount they spend on organizing eﬀorts. As with the



                                                  34
determination of α, there are several ways to endogenize the determination of B. The traditional
maximizing approach assumes that increased union density increases the union’s bargaining power,
and asks what level of B would be optimal for members (see Wallerstein [1989]). However, there are
certain phenomena that this approach has diﬃculty explaining. In particular, many unions devote
substantial resources to organizing outside their core industries. For example, the Steelworkers
organize employees at Chock Full O’Nuts, the Teamsters represent casino workers in Las Vegas,
and as discussed above, the UAW organizes graduate students at NYU. While it is possible to see
how a steel worker or auto worker might beneÞt from organizing other workers in their industry,
it is harder to see why they would prefer to spend their union dues organizing outside their core
industries.
    By contrast, our approach takes a worker’s preferences over the determination of B as given,
and ask what level of B is evolutionarily stable. As in the determination of rent extraction, we
argue that there may be a selective advantage to unions that encourage leaders to spend more on
organizing eﬀorts than would be optimal for members. As a result, unions controlled by leaders
may not only have lower δ but also higher B than would be preferred by members.
    A natural way to extend the model to include this case is to include B in the function that
indexes how attractive a particular union is to workers, so that A (α) becomes A (α, B). While in
many cases the welfare maximizing level of B may be equal to 0, it is conceivable that workers may
prefer some organizing expenditure to none.             27   When the relative attractiveness of diﬀerent levels
of α and B are multiplicatively separable, it is easy to show that the evolutionarily stable union
has both a lower level of α and a higher level of B than the welfare-maximizing union. When they
are not separable, it is possible that the evolutionarily stable union could have either a lower level
of α or a higher level of B than the welfare-maximizing union, but not both.


Proposition 7 Suppose that A (α, B) is multiplicatively separable, i.e. A (α, B) = A1 (α) A2(B).
Then the evolutionarily stable level of α will be less than the welfare maximizing level and the
  27
     Note that the workers’ preferences over B are only over the ”warm glow” the workers receive from contributing
to organizing eﬀorts, rather than, as in Wallerstein [1989], the indirect return from increases in the overall size of the
union caused by increased levels of B. The fact that the evolutionary competition will select for higher levels of B
that increase union size is an endogenous result of the model, rather than an assumption.




                                                             35
evolutionarily stable level of B will be greater than the welfare maximizing level.


    Proof. As in Proposition 3, the evolutionarily stable union is the union with α and B that
                       2A(α,B)B                                                        2A(α,B)B
maximize the ratio       δ(α)   .   Since A (α, B) = A1 (α) A2(B), maximizing            δ(α)     is equivalent to
separately solving two maximization problems:

                                                         2A1 (α)
                                                   max           ,                                             (21)
                                                     α    δ (α)
                                                   max A2 (B) B.                                               (22)
                                                     B



Since αW maximizes A1 (α), the proof that αS < αW is identical to the proof of Proposition 5.
To see that BW < BS , note that A2 (B) is maximized at BW . Since A2 (B) < A2 (BW ) for all
B < BW , A2 (B) B < A2 (BW ) BW for all B < BW . Moreover, by the envelope theorem the
derivative of A2 (B) B at BW is positive. The value of B that maximizes A2 (B) B therefore must
be greater than BW .


6.2    Multiple Equilibria

As has been demonstrated by Caballero and Hammour [1998] and Moene and Wallerstein [1993],
turnover can be lower in a unionized environment. This is because unions will extract a smaller
absolute amount from less productive Þrms that are closer to the exit margin. Unions may thus
deter costly entry by new high-productivity entrants without extracting so much from older low-
productivity Þrms that the Þrms exit. In general equilibrium, therefore, unionization can increase
the lifespan of Þrms. Freeman and Kleiner [1999] provide evidence that unions share rents with
Þrms, extracting less from Þrms that are in worse economic shape, so that they do not drive the
Þrms into bankruptcy.28 As discussed in Section 2, a longer Þrm lifespan encourages the spread of
unions. This section uses a variation on the model to show that since high unionization increases
Þrm lifespan, and high Þrm lifespan increases unionization, there may be one equilibrium with low
  28
     Taken literally, these results would imply that union Þrms do not have a higher death rate than non-union Þrms,
contrary to the assumption in this model. However, Freeman and Kleiner also Þnd that union Þrms expand less
rapidly than non-union Þrms, and if the unionization rate depends on the existing number of union members, this
will have similar eﬀects to the process modeled in this paper. Moreover, it seems possible that Freeman and Kleiner
simply cannot detect the eﬀects of unions on the death rates of Þrms.



                                                         36
unionization and only high productivity Þrms, and another equilibrium with high unionization in
which Þrms do not exit when productivity falls.
   Consider a variant of the model in which there are two productivity levels, H and L, in which
output is Y = H (Q) and Y = L (Q) respectively, where Q is employment and H(Q) > L(Q) for
all Q. Suppose that H 0 , L0 > 0 and H 00 , L00 < 0. All new Þrms have productivity H, but face a
Poisson probability δ of switching to productivity L. Whereas in previous sections, we assumed
Þrms exited when they received a negative shock, which can be taken as the case in which L0 (0)
is suﬃciently low, this section considers the case in which L0 (0) is suﬃciently great that Þrms may
stay in business after a negative shock. Moreover, whereas previous sections examined the case in
which δ, the hazard rate of a negative shock, was a function of investment, this section examines
the simple case in which δ is exogenous, and hence investment, I, is always zero. Given this, unions
set α = 1 and extract all rent. (Note, however, that the qualitative results do not depend on these
simpliÞcations.) As in Section 2, we continue to assume that 2AB < δ, so that if Þrms exit with
any positive hazard rate δ, the unionization rate will be between 0 and 1.
   Whereas before we considered a case in which workers had an alternative home production
technology, and this tied down the wage, in this section we consider the case in which there is no
alternative home production technology (or demand for workers is high enough that all workers are
pulled out of the home sector), so that workers are paid their marginal product rather than the
reservation wage. Denote the total number of workers as N. We continue to assume that bargaining
over employment is statically eﬃcient, so that Þrms hire workers until the pre-union wage equals
the marginal product. (For example, a union contract could allow the Þrm to hire temporary,
non-union workers to raise employment to an eﬃcient level, but then extract the surplus on behalf
of members.)
   Finally, whereas in the previous section we assumed that there was only one Þrm for a given
product and entry was limited by the need for a license sold at an auction, now we consider the
case in which there is a single good produced by multiple Þrms, and entry is limited by a Þxed
startup cost. (Think of building a factory, rather than bidding for a cellular telephone license.)




                                                  37
Since there is a single good in the economy, we can normalize the price of this good to 1.29 Denote
the amount of these Þxed start-up costs by θ. Free entry ensures that Þrms enter as long as


                                                          θ ≤ EV                                                    (23)


Note that since N is Þxed, when the number of Þrms F increases, the number of employees per
        N
Þrm,    F,   decreases, and because of diminishing returns the marginal product of each employee, and
therefore the wage, increases. Since Þrms’ expected proÞts decline as the pre-union wage increases,
Þrms will enter until θ = EV . Note that F is therefore no longer Þxed, but depends the value of
EV , which in turn depends on the chance of being unionized. Denote by FH the number of Þrms
that will enter in the presence of a union extracting α = 1 if all Þrms are of high productivity.
(The precise determination of FH will be discussed in more detail below.) Note that Þrms earn zero
proÞts on the marginal worker but earn positive proÞts on all inframarginal workers, so there is
still a ßow of annual proÞts from which they can pay startup costs.

                              ¡ δ−2AB ¢ [H( FNH )− FNH H 0 ( FNH )]
Proposition 8 If θ <               δ                δ+r               and L0 (0) < H 0 ( FNH ), then there can be two
steady-state equilibria: one with partial unionization and only H type Þrms, and one with complete
                                                                          H(n)−nL0 (0)
unionization and only L type Þrms. Furthermore, if θ <                        δ+r      ,   where n = H 0−1 (L0 (0)), then
multiple equilibria will only occur in the presence of unions.


  Proof. Suppose there are F Þrms, and all have productivity H, so employment in each is N
                                                                                         F.
                           ¡ ¢                                         ¡N ¢ N 0 ¡N ¢
Wages will therefore be H 0 N
                            F , and pre-union proÞts will be π (F ) = H F − F H   F . Free

entry implies that in steady state, entry costs will equal the probability that the Þrm remains non-
union times the proÞts of a non-union Þrm. Assuming that Þrms that receive the negative shock
exit, and that these shocks hit both union and non-union Þrms with hazard rate δ,

                                                           U∗    2AB
                                                   p∗ =      ∗
                                                               =     .                                              (24)
                                                           F      δ

Recall that we have assumed that 2AB < δ, so we know that the union prevalence will be strictly
 29
      The results of the model would still go through if there were a downward-sloping demand curve for the good.



                                                              38
between 0 and 1.
   Thus, free entry implies that

                                     µ             ¶Ã       ¡N ¢            ¡N ¢!
                                         δ − 2AB        H    F     −NFH
                                                                        0
                                                                             F
                                θ=                                                  ,                           (25)
                                             δ                     δ+r

where r is the (exogenous) interest rate. There will be a unique equilibrium FH satisfying this free
entry condition, since the assumptions imply that for suﬃciently small F , the present discounted
value of proÞts will be greater than θ, and for suﬃciently great F , the present discounted value of
Þrms will be less than θ. As discussed above, proÞts decline monotonically in F , since the greater
F , the fewer the workers per Þrm and the higher wages.
   For there to be an equilibrium with only H Þrms, L Þrms must not want to produce given
         ³ ´
wages H 0 FNH . This will be the case if L0 (0) < H 0 ( FNH ). If this condition is satisÞed, Þrms that
receive the negative shock will exit and be replaced by new high-productivity entrants.
   In the second steady-state equilibrium, all Þrms are of type L and unionized. Now, pre-union
                   £ ¡ ¢ N 0 ¡ N ¢¤
proÞts are π (F ) = L N
                      F − FL F          and, since α = 1, post-union proÞts are 0. Since the death
                                                                                        U∗
rate of L type Þrms is 0, it is clear from the model in Section 2 that                  F∗   = 1 and the probability
that a new Þrm will be unionized, p∗ , is also 1. Since potential entrants know that unions would
extract all proÞts, no new Þrms enter. Since no Þrms enter, F is Þxed at its initial value, so there
can be multiple values of F for which this condition holds.
                        H(n)−nL0 (0)
   To see that if θ <       δ+r      ,   where n = H 0−1 (L0 (0)), multiple equilibria will only occur in the
presence of unions, note that the discounted proÞts earned by high-type Þrms exceed startup-costs,
no matter how many low-type Þrms there are. In the absence of a union, high-type Þrms will
therefore always enter if there are only low-type Þrms present. Therefore, under these conditions,
the equilibrium with low productivity Þrms can only be sustained in the presence of a union.
   Note that while this exposition has been based on the simplifying assumption that δ is exoge-
nous, it is possible to construct a more general version of the same argument with δ endogenous
as in the rest of the paper. The results from such an exercise are essentially similar, though the
algebra is substantially more complicated. The main diﬀerence in such a model is that α is not



                                                        39
necessarily 1. As a result, in the steady-state with low-productivity Þrms and full unionization, a
potential entrant still earns some proÞts. The condition for there to be a steady-state with lower
productivity Þrms and no entry is that the discounted post-union proÞts earned by an entrant are
lower than the start-up costs, so that entry remains unproÞtable.
    One could speculate that the U.S. is currently in a low unionization, high Þrm turnover, high
productivity equilibrium, and that Europe has spent much of the last two decades in a high union-
ization, low turnover, and low productivity equilibrium.



7     Conclusion

This paper has applied techniques from biology to model unions. A key implication of the model is
that the unions we observe today are likely to extract less rent than would be optimal for current
members, because unions that do so will have a selective advantage over unions that better represent
their members’ interests. For union leaders to moderate workers’ wage demands, however, they
must be insulated from workers by incumbency advantages. In fact, these incumbency advantages
are widespread among today’s unions.
    In addition, the model implies that industries with high turnover of Þrms will have low union-
ization. Empirical evidence was presented that supports this prediction. Finally, the model also
implies that there may be multiple equilibria in unionization levels.
    In the conclusion, we discuss the relationship between our model and other theories of incum-
bency advantages in unions, the normative implications of the analysis, and the applicability of the
evolutionary analysis here to other institutions, such as Þrms.


7.1   Relationship to Other Theories of Incumbency Advantages

The model outlined in this paper is complementary with other, more traditional explanations of
incumbency advantages in unions. Sociological explanations, such as Michel’s [1949 (1915)] ”Iron
Law of Oligarchy,” suggest that leaders will inevitably seize control of their organizations and work
to preserve the organization itself rather than to advance the original goals of the organization. In



                                                 40
contrast, the argument here is not that all union leaders will wrest control away from their members
due to internal sociological factors and then work to maximize the membership of the union, but
rather that those unions that create structures in which this occurs will grow at the expense of
unions that narrowly serve their current members’ interests. If Michel’s process occurs even in a
few unions, we will empirically observe these unions much more frequently than unions that are
more responsive to their membership.
      Another way to explain the typically more moderate position of union leadership is through
models in which union leaders are agents whose interests diﬀer from those of their principals, the
rank and Þle.30 As discussed above, union leaders may plausibly prefer more moderate policies than
their members, for example if they are motivated by the empire-building motives often assumed
in corporate Þnance. They may also collude with Þrm management to moderate wage demands in
exchange for contract provisions beneÞting the union and its leaders. These considerations may
well be the proximate cause of moderation of wage policy by union leaders. However, standard
agency theory implies that principals should design optimal mechanisms for agents. It thus begs the
question of why so many unions have constitutional institutions that exacerbate agency problems in
controlling leaders, such as indirect elections, secret lists of locals and members, and no prohibitions
on campaign donations from union staﬀ. In contrast, this biological model suggests that unions
with constitutional procedures that exacerbate agency problems will outcompete others that do
not.


7.2      Normative Implications

The normative implications of the analysis are ambiguous. Rent extraction by unions reduces Þrms’
expenditure on startup costs and lowers the level of investment chosen by unionized Þrms. This
increases the death rate of unionized Þrms, which means that the startup costs, though lower than
without unions, are paid more frequently.
      The welfare implications of these changes depend on the interpretation of investment and start-
up costs. Investment and start-up costs may be productive, such as investment in research and
 30
      We thank Jean Tirole for pointing this out.




                                                    41
development of improved products, or unproductive, such as advertising designed to establish mar-
ket leadership for a dot.com seeking Þrst-mover advantage. If up-front investments are productive,
as with research and development, having more Þrms perform this investment may be socially ben-
eÞcial. If expenditures are unproductive, rent extraction by unions, and therefore lower start-up
costs, may potentially represent a beneÞt to society.
   As shown above, the evolutionarily stable level of rent extraction will lead to more unionization
in the steady-state than the welfare-maximizing level of rent extraction, but the overall eﬀect
on total rent extracted by unions is ambiguous. Because the level of rent extracted from each
Þrm is lower, there will be more ongoing investment by unionized Þrms than under the welfare-
maximizing rent extraction level. The eﬀect on startup-cost expenditure, however, is ambiguous.
On the one hand, since the steady-state chance of a new Þrm being unionized, p∗ , is maximized by
the evolutionarily stable union, the chance of a new Þrm being unionized is higher, reducing the
expenditure on start-up costs. However, the cost of being unionized, απ, is lower, increasing the ex
ante value of the Þrm. Furthermore, the death rate of Þrms will be lower, so startup costs will be
paid less frequently. The total eﬀect on startup costs is unclear. The general-equilibrium welfare
eﬀects of having a lower level of rent extraction are thus ambiguous.
   Regardless of these general equilibrium eﬀects, however, the model implies that unions are
not extracting the optimal level of rent for their workers. Changing union constitutions to reduce
incumbency advantages will likely lead to increased welfare for the union’s current members, though
it will also reduce long-term unionization.


7.3   Applicability to Other Organizations

Similar evolutionary arguments could be made about organizations other than unions. For example,
those religions that grow may be those that are most successful at retaining members, rather than
those that maximize members’ welfare. Universities whose boards accumulate large endowments
may be more likely to survive than universities that pay out from the endowment less conservatively,
whether or not this contributes to the universities’ educational and research mission. As Dutta and
Radner (1999) suggest, Þrms that maximize their stockholders’ interests by paying out dividends


                                                42
may eventually be outnumbered by Þrms that retain earnings as a safety net, because paying out
dividends makes Þrms more vulnerable to negative shocks.
   Reality is likely to lie between the predictions of models in which institutions maximize their
owners’ welfare and biological models in which organizational characteristics are Þxed. The more
that members have opportunities to control their organizations, the closer reality is likely to lie
to the welfare-maximizing model. For example, the model presented in this paper suggests that if
some unions are taken over by their leaders, these unions will displace member-controlled unions.
One could consider a more complicated model in which member-controlled unions face a hazard
rate of capture by leaders and leader-controlled unions face a hazard rate of reverting to the control
of members. In this case, there will be a mixture of leader- and member-controlled unions in
steady state. The proportion of each type of union will depend on the hazard rates of transition
of control and also on the speed with which member-controlled unions are displaced by unions
with incumbency advantages in the evolutionary competition emphasized in this model. If control
transitions are rare relative to this speed of displacement, the biological model will be a fairly good
predictor of union behavior. If unions with incumbency advantages take a long time to displace
those that serve their members perfectly, the economic model of welfare-maximizing unions will
describe a greater proportion of unions.
   This suggests that Þrms may be closer to the welfare-maximizing end of the spectrum than
unions, since control of unions by members is likely to be weaker than control of Þrms by share-
holders. There is a substantial free-rider problem for workers in controlling union management,
just as there is an important free-rider problem for shareholders in controlling Þrm management.
However, in many cases, Þrms will have one large shareholder with a substantial stake in Þrm
governance. In contrast, no single union member has a substantial stake in reforming the union
leadership. Moreover, whereas there is a large Þnancial incentive for outsiders to take over Þrms
managed against shareholders’ interests, there is much less incentive for outsiders to challenge
existing unions for the right to represent workers.




                                                  43
A      Appendix

The Þrst part of the appendix gives some of the proofs omitted from the main text. The sec-
ond part discusses the behavior of the model outside of the steady-state. The third part shows
the instability of the trivial steady state with U ∗ = 0 and the stability of the steady-state with
              2δ(0)A(α)B
U∗ =   δ(α)2 −2A(α)B[δ(α)−δ(0)]
                                .   The Þnal part of the appendix presents a simple proof that in the bar-
gaining game between union leaders and the rank-and-Þle, union leaders obtain their most preferred
outcome.


A.1      Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1. For clarity of exposition, this proof will consider the case of a steady-state
with two unions. However, the same arguments go through in the cases when there are more than
two unions in the steady-state. As will be shown, however, there can be more than two unions in
the steady state only if there is some value q such that there are more than two distinct levels α
            2A(α)B
such that    δ(α)    = q, which will only occur under parameterizations of A (α) and δ (α) such that
2A(α)B
 δ(α)    has more than 1 critical point.
    Recall that in the steady-state in which a single union has organized all Þrms with diﬃculty
levels less than or equal to p, equation (5) stated that a union must spend its entire organizing
budget organizing new Þrms with diﬃculty levels less than or equal to p. Adapting this condition
to the case of two unions yields

                                                                       A (αM ) BM       p2M
       A(αM )BM = [δ (αM ) M + δ (αR ) R + δ (0) (1 − U )]                                  .        (26)
                                                                 A (αM ) BM + A (αR ) BR 2

If pM and pR were diﬀerent, then this equation would apply only to the union with the smaller p.
Supposing for the moment that M had the lower p (though in practice it could be either M or R),
then the union R would be able to organize all unions in the interval [pM , pR ] instead of just the




                                                       44
                A(αR )BR
fraction   A(αM )BM +A(αR )BR   of them. However, rewriting equation (26) shows that

                                  s
                                               2 [A (αM ) B + A (αR ) B]
                         pM =                                                   .                 (27)
                                      δ (αM ) M + δ (αR ) R + δ (0) (1 − M − R)

Inspection of equation (27) shows that pM and pR must be the same for both unions in the steady-
state since the equation for pR would be exactly the same. Therefore we know that in the steady
state the set of Þrms being organized each period by both unions have the same diﬃculty proÞle.
This, in turn, is a consequence of allocating Þrms in proportion to the unions’ eﬀective organizing
budget.
   The second condition for the steady state is that Uú = 0, so that the size of the union remains
the same. Since the union’s entire budget is exhausted in organizing newly created Þrms, in the
steady state we know that, for Uú = 0,

                                                                         A (αM ) BM
    δ (αM ) M = [δ (αM ) M + δ (αR ) R + δ (0) (1 − M − R)]                                pM     (28)
                                                                   A (αM ) BM + A (αR ) BR

and the equivalent equation for R. This equation states that the number of member Þrms lost due
to negative shocks must be exactly replaced by the number of Þrms organized during the same
period. There are [δ (αM ) M + δ (αR ) R + δ (0) (1 − M − R)] Þrms created each period, of which
                                            A(αM )BM
the M union targets the fraction        A(αM )BM +A(αR )BR   and from which it organizes all Þrms with
diﬃculty levels below pM . Substituting equation (27) for pM yields the steady-state condition

                                    s
                     A (αM ) B                     A (αM ) BM + A (αR ) BR
                               =                                                      .           (29)
                       δ (α)            2 [δ (αM ) M + δ (αR ) R + δ (0) (1 − M − R)]

By substituting equation (29) into equation (27), we can see that

                                  2A (αM ) B             2A (αR ) B
                                             = pM = pR =            .                             (30)
                                   δ (αM )                δ (αR )

The algebra would have been essentially similar if there had been more than two types of union.
   Proof of Proposition 4.            Suppose that the steady state contains an incumbent union, αI .



                                                      45
Lemma 1 guarantees that if there are additional unions in the steady state with diﬀerent α, those
unions will have the same value of p∗ = p∗I . Therefore, in the steady-state, all Þrms with diﬃculty
level less than p∗I will be unionized and all Þrms with higher diﬃculty levels will not be unionized.
For simplicity, the remainder of the proof focuses on the case where there is only one union in the
                                        2A(α)B
steady state, but because the ratio      δ(α)     is the same for all incumbent unions in a steady state,
the same arguments go through when there are multiple incumbent unions.
   Consider an invasion by a union that extracts αS with size S < ε, where ε is very close to 0.
Using a similar argument to the one in Proposition 3, we can see that pS ≈ p∗I . Therefore, the
initial growth of the union will be approximately

                                                                     A (αS ) BS
         Sú ≈ [δ (αI ) I + δ (αS) S + δ (0) (1 − I − S)]                             p∗ − δ (αS ) S.   (31)
                                                              A (αI ) BI + A (αS ) BS I

To see that this growth is positive, observe that S is approximately equal to 0 and recall that in
                                    q
the steady state, p∗I = 2A(α I )B
                         δ(αI )   =       2A(αI )BI
                                      δ(αI )I+δ(0)(1−I) . This allows us to simplify this expression and

write
                                           Sú   2A (αS ) B
                                              ≈            − δ (αS )                                   (32)
                                           S        p∗I
                                2A(αS )B       2A(αI )B
which is greater than 0 since    δ(αS )    >    δ(αI ) .   This means that the invading union will grow.
   Proof of Proposition 6.           Recall from equation (6) that in the steady state, the number
of unionized Þrms that die each instant must exactly match the number of newly created forms
unionized in that instant. Rearranging equation (6) yields the condition

                                          µ                              ¶
                       2A (α) Bδ (0)    ∗        2A (α) B
                                     = U δ (α) −          [δ (α) − δ (0)] .                            (33)
                           δ (α)                  δ (α)

Consider a change from α to αS . Denote by ∆P the diﬀerence in the fraction of Þrms unionized
                         2A(αS )B       2A(α)B
each period, i.e. ∆P =    δ(αS )    −    δ(α) ,   and denote by ∆δ the same change in δ (α), i.e. ∆δ =
                                                    2A(α)B
δ (αS ) − δ (α). Since αS maximizes the ratio        δ(α) ,   ∆P will be greater than 0, and since αS < α
by assumption, ∆δ will be less than 0.
   Since the left hand side of equation (33) is higher under αS than under α, U ∗ will be higher



                                                       46
under αS than under α if the right hand side is lower. The change in the right hand side between
α and αS will be
                               ·             ¸
                                    2A (α) B
                             ∆δ 1 −            − [δ (αS ) − δ (0)] ∆P.                            (34)
                                     δ (α)
                                     2A(α)B
>From condition (9), we know that     δ(α)    < 1 for all α, and since δ (α) ≥ δ (0) for all α, we know
that δ (αS ) − δ (0) ≥ 0. Therefore the expression for the change in the right hand side, equation
(34), will be less than 0. We can therefore conclude that U ∗ (αS ) > U ∗ (α).


A.2    Dynamics

Outside of the steady-state, the state-space can be characterized by the number of union Þrms,
U , and the diﬃculty distribution of all unorganized Þrms. As discussed above, in the steady-state
the distribution of non-unionized Þrms’ diﬃculties is simply uniform from the threshold p to 1,
but in certain kinds of transitions—for example, those in which the diﬃculty level below which all
Þrms are unionized, p, is shrinking—the distribution can be non-uniform. To track the dynamics,
then, one needs keep track not only of the transition equations for U and p, but also the transition
equation for the entire diﬃculty distribution. These transition equations are used in Section 3 to
characterize the evolutionarily stable steady-state.
   At any instant, assuming that there is no discontinuous increase in the number of Þrms, there
are two diﬀerent sets of Þrms that the union may chose to organize: the ”thick” set of Þrms that
are non-unionized and the ”thin” set of Þrms that were created that instant to replace Þrms that
exited due to a negative shock. The number of non-unionized Þrms is in the thick set is 1 − U and
the number of Þrms in the thin segment is


                                     [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dt                                (35)


   Facing this proÞle of non-unionized Þrms, the union will organize the easiest Þrms it can. These
will be all of the Þrms in the thin segment with cost less than p and then as many Þrms in the
thick segment as it can with whatever remains of its organizing budget at that moment. Note
that p represents the lower bound of the ”thick” set of non-unionized Þrms—it will be possible in


                                                  47
certain transitions that there are unionized Þrms whose diﬃculties are greater than p. Since the
distribution of Þrms in the thin segment is uniform, the cost of organizing all Þrms in the thin
segment with cost less than p will be

                                                                    p2
                                    [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dt                              (36)
                                                                    2

so that the budget surplus or eﬀective deÞcit becomes

                                                                         p2
                             A (α) BU − [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dt                          (37)
                                                                         2

   If the budget has a surplus, then the growth of the union will be the number of Þrms in the
thin segment with diﬃculty levels less than or equal to p plus however many older Þrms the union
can aﬀord to organize at marginal cost p with whatever remains of its budget, minus the number
of its member Þrms it lost due to negative shocks:

                                                                                2

         ú                                  A(α)BU − [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] p2
         U = [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] p +                                        − δ (α) U   (38)
                                                             p

On the other hand, if the union’s budget is not suﬃcient to organize all Þrms in the thin segment
with costs less than or equal to p, the union will organize as many of those Þrms as it can. This
will be all newly created Þrms with diﬃculty levels less than or equal to some cutoﬀ level l such
that the total budget exactly equals the cost of organizing the Þrms, i.e.

                                                                           l2
                            [A(α)BU ] dt = [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dt                       (39)
                                                                           2

This implies that                       s
                                                    2A(α)BU
                                   l=                                                          (40)
                                            [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )]

The change in the number of unionized Þrms in this case will therefore be the fraction l of thin
Þrms unionized, multiplied by the total number of thin Þrms, less the number of unionized Þrms




                                                    48
that exit:
                                 p
                          Uú =    2A(α)BU [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] − δ (α) U                         (41)

   Keeping track of changes in the distribution of the non-unionized Þrms is somewhat trickier.
Suppose that the density of non-union Þrms in the thick segment at some diﬃculty level c is f (c).
To Þnd fú (c) for those levels c that remain non-unionized (which will be all c ≥ p) it will be
instructive to consider the discrete case and take limits, so suppose that the density is the same
over some small segment dz and small amount of time dt. Denote by f0 (c) the density of Þrms
in the segment dz before the time starts and f1 (c) the density after the unit of time has passed.
DeÞne the density so that the total number of Þrms in the segment dz before the change will be
                                               ³             ´
(1 − U ) f0 (c) dz and after the change will be 1 − U − Uú dt f1 (c) dz. The number of Þrms after
the change will be equal to the number of Þrms in the segment before the change plus the number
of Þrms that are born with costs in the segment minus the number of Þrms in the segment that
exit due to the shock:

  ³             ´
   1 − U − Uú dt f1 (c) dz = f0 (c) (1 − U ) dz+

                                           [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dtdz − δ (0) (1 − U ) f0 (c) dtdz (42)


The change in f will therefore be


   ú = [f1 (c) dz − f0 (c) dz] dt
  fdt
          f0 (c) (1 − U ) dz + [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] dtdz − δ (0) f0 (c) (1 − U ) dtdz
      =                                  ³                ´                                 − f0 (c) dz (43)
                                           1 − U − Uú dt

                                                       ú
Simplifying and taking limits yields the equation for f:
                                                            h                   i
                                [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] − δ (0) (1 − U ) − Uú f0 (c)
                     fú (c) =                                                                          (44)
                                                       (1 − U )

Note that substituting in the steady-state value of U and setting fú (c) and Uú equal to 0 yields a



                                                      49
                                     1
steady-state value for f0 (c) of   1−p∗ ,   which means that the distribution of costs of non-unionized
Þrms in the steady-state is uniform over the range [p, 1], as expected.
   We also need to keep track of changes to p, the lower bound of the support set of the thick
segment. If the union has a budget surplus (i.e. equation (37) is positive), the union has organizing
funds remaining after unionizing all Þrms in the thin segment with costs less than or equal to p.
The change in p will therefore be equal to the number of new Þrms unionized at cost p divided by
the density of Þrms at that cost level, i.e.

                                                                         2
                           A(α)BU − [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )] p2       1
                      pú =                                                       .                          (45)
                                            p                     (1 − U ) f (c)

On the other hand, when the union’s organizing budget is not suﬃcient to unionize all newly created
Þrms with costs less than or equal to p, the new value of p will be the highest-cost Þrm that the
union is able to unionize, i.e.             s
                                                        2A(α)BU
                                     p=                                    .                                (46)
                                                [δ (α) U + δ (0) (1 − U )]

Together, the transition equations Uú , fú (c), and pú completely characterize the dynamics of the
system.


A.3    Stability

As discussed in Section 2.2, the model has two steady-states, the trivial steady-state where U ∗ = 0
                                                             2δ(0)A(α)B
and the non-trivial steady state where U ∗ =          δ(α)2 −2A(α)B[δ(α)−δ(0)]
                                                                               .   This section gives proofs that
the Þrst steady state is locally unstable and the second is locally stable.


Proposition 9 The steady-state with U ∗ = 0 is locally unstable.


   Proof. Consider starting out from the steady-state of U = 0 and introducing a union of size
ε > 0. Assume that this union consists of the least-costly ε Þrms, so that the remaining non-
unionized Þrms have costs uniformly distributed on the interval [ε, 1]. This assumption makes it
the hardest to show instability, because the cost distribution facing the union is the highest possible.




                                                        50
Recall from equation (37) that the budget surplus or deÞcit will be given by

                                                                          ε2
                                A (α) Bε − [δ (α) ε + δ (0) (1 − ε)] dt                             (47)
                                                                          2

since p will be equal to ε. Note that the average organizing costs faced by the union will be less
than ε since it will be organizing some newly created Þrms in the thin segment [0, ε] and some in
the thick segment at ε. The growth rate of the union will therefore be greater than it would be if
it spent its entire budget organizing Þrms with cost ε, i.e.

                                             A (α) Bε
                                        Uú >          − δ (α) ε                                     (48)
                                                 ε

which will be clearly positive for ε small enough.

                                                        2δ(0)A(α)B
Proposition 10 The steady-state with U ∗ =       δ(α)2 −2A(α)B[δ(α)−δ(0)]
                                                                               is locally stable.

   Proof. Consider Þrst a union in the steady state where ε of the Þrms in the union revert back
to non-union status. The union’s organizing budget will therefore be A (α) B (U − ε). Denote by
f the highest cost level Þrm in the thin segment the union could organize with such a budget, and
by p0 the lowest cost value of Þrms in the thick segment. We know that p0 ≤ p, but the precise
value will depend on the cost level of the ε Þrms that switched from being unionized to being
non-unionized. If f > p0 , the union will spend the remaining budget surplus organizing the thick
segment of Þrms with cost p0 ; otherwise it will organize as many Þrms in the thin segment as it
can. The growth of the union will therefore be greater than or equal to the growth if it spend its
entire organizing budget on Þrms with costs less than or equal to f, i.e.

                             p
                      Uú ≥    2A(α)BU ∗ [δ (α) U ∗ + δ (0) (1 − U ∗ )] − δ (α) U ∗                  (49)


Substituting in U ∗ − ε for U and rearranging terms, we can see that, for ε > 0, the growth will be
positive (and therefore the steady-state will be stable) if


                   2A(α)B [δ (α) (U ∗ − ε) + δ (0) (1 − U ∗ + ε)] > δ 2 (α) (U ∗ − ε)               (50)


                                                   51
Since Uú = 0 at U ∗ , the U ∗ terms in this expression cancel, and we are left with the condition


                                    2A(α)B [δ (α) ε − δ (0) ε] < δ 2 (α) ε                          (51)


Since condition (9) guarantees that 2A (α) B ≤ δ (α), this condition will be satisÞed and the union
will return to the steady-state.
   Next, consider a union in the steady state where ε of the non-union Þrms spontaneously unionize.
To make it hardest to show stability, assume that these Þrms are the costliest to unionize, i.e. the
                                 h                 i
Þrms with costs from the interval 1 − ε(1−p)
                                        (1−U ) , 1  . This is the most diﬃcult assumption for showing
stability since we have removed the Þrms that are costliest to organize. The Þrst thing to check
is whether the union will have suﬃcient organizing funds left over to begin organizing the thick
segment, i.e. whether or not equation (37) is positive. The budget surplus will be

                                                                                      p2
                        A (α) B (U ∗ + ε) − [δ (α) (U ∗ + ε) + δ (0) (1 − U ∗ − ε)]                 (52)
                                                                                      2

Since Uú ∗ = 0 at the steady state, the terms from equation (5) cancel, so the surplus will be greater
than or equal to 0 if
                                                                     p2
                                    A (α) Bε − [δ (α) ε − δ (0) ε]      ≥0                          (53)
                                                                     2
                      2A(α)B
Since p is equal to    δ(α)    in the steady-state, we know that this condition will hold if


                                    δ (α)2 ≥ 2A (α) Bε [δ (α) ε − δ (0) ε]                          (54)


which is exactly the same as inequality (51), and holds by the same logic.
   Given that there is a budget surplus, the change in U will be given by


  Uú = [δ (α) (U ∗ + ε) + δ (0) (1 − U ∗ − ε)] p+
                                                                                  2
                      A(α)B (U ∗ + ε) − [δ (α) (U ∗ + ε) + δ (0) (1 − U ∗ − ε)] p2
                                                                                   − δ (α) (U ∗ + ε) (55)
                                                   p




                                                     52
Once again, since Uú ∗ = 0 at the steady state, canceling out the terms from equation (5) and (6)
yields
                                                                               2

                    ú                            A(α)Bε − [δ (α) ε − δ (0) ε)] p2
                    U = [δ (α) ε − δ (0) ε)] p +                                  − δ (α) ε     (56)
                                                               p

Substituting in for p and rearranging terms yields inequality (51) as the condition for Uú < 0. Since
we have already shown that this inequality holds, the growth rate of the union will be negative and
it will return to the steady-state.


A.4       Approval of Union Contracts31

The need for the rank-and-Þle to approve a contract is similar to a repeated bargaining game,
where the union leaders (the ”proposer”) make take-it-or-leave it oﬀers to the rank-and-Þle (the
”acceptor”). Each time the rank-and-Þle reject the proposal, both sides lose a percentage γ of
the total amount they are bargaining over due to costs of delay. To show that the proposer has
complete bargaining power in such a game, we will consider a game involving bargaining over a
dollar. This is analogous to bargaining over diﬀerent levels of utility received from diﬀerent levels
of α. The following proposition shows that the unique Subgame-Perfect Nash Equilibrium of this
game is that the union leaders receive their ideal level of α, even though the rank-and-Þle must
approve all contracts.


Proposition 11 In the repeated take-it-or-leave it bargaining game over a Þxed amount with γ < 1,
the unique Subgame-Perfect Nash Equilibrium is for the proposer to obtain the full amount being
bargained over.


      Proof. Suppose that the two parties are bargaining over how to split one dollar. Let M be
the supremum of the set of expected payoﬀs that the acceptor can get in any Sub-Game Perfect
Equilibrium of the game beginning with an oﬀer. Note that since every subgame that begins with
an oﬀer has the proposer making an oﬀer, all such subgames admit the same equilibrium.
      In any subgame, the acceptor must accept any oﬀer greater than or equal to γM, since if the
oﬀer is rejected the most that the acceptor can hope to receive is γM. But this means that M is
 31
      We thank Keith Chen for this proof.



                                                      53
weakly less than γM. This can only be the case if M = 0. Thus, M = 0 and the proposer obtains
the full amount.




                                             54
References

[1] Anderson, Roy M., and May, Robert M., Infectious Diseases of Humans: Dynamics and Con-
   trol. Oxford University Press [1991].

[2] Benson, Herman, [1986]. ”The Fight for Union Democracy,” in Unions in Transition: Entering
   the Second Century, Seymour Martin Lipset, ed. San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary
   Studies, pp. 323-373.

[3] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Hammour, Mohamad L, ”The Macroeconomics of SpeciÞcity,” Jour-
   nal of Political Economy 106(4), [August, 724-767, 1998].

[4] Dickens, William T. and Jonathan S. Leonard, ”Accounting for the Decline in Union Mem-
   bership, [1950-1980],” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38(3), [April, 323-334, 1985].

[5] Dunne, Timothy; Roberts, Mark J; Samuelson, Larry, ”Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit in
   U.S. Manufacturing Industries,” Rand Journal of Economics 19 (4), [Winter, 495-515, 1988].

[6] Dutta, Prajit and Radner, Roy, ”ProÞt Maximization and the Market Selection Hypothesis,”
   Review of Economic Studies 66, [October, 769-798, 1999].

[7] Ewald, Paul W. Evolution of Infectious Disease. Oxford and New York: Oxford University
   Press, 1994.

[8] Moene, Karl Ove, Wallerstein, Michael, and Michael Hoel. ”Bargaining Structure and Eco-
   nomic Performance. In eds. Flanagan, R. J., Moene, K. O., and M. Wallerstein, Trade Union
   Behavior, Pay-Bargaining, and Economic Performance. FIEF Studies in Labour Markets and
   Economic Policy. Oxford; New York; Toronto and Melbourne: Oxford University Press, Claren-
   don Press, 1993.

[9] Freeman, Richard B., ”Spurts In Union Growth: DeÞning Moments And Social Processes.”
   In eds. Bordo, Michael D; Goldin, Claudia; and Eugene N. White, The DeÞning Moment:
   The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century. NBER Project
   Report Series. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1998.


                                              55
[10] Clark, Kim and Richard B. Freeman, ”How Elastic is the Demand for Labor?          A Reply.”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 65(4) [November, 694, 1983].

[11] Freeman, Richard B. and Morris M. Kleiner, ”Do Unions Make Enterprises Insolvent?” In-
    dustrial and Labor Relations Review 52 (4) [July, 510-27, 1999].

[12] Geoghegan, Thomas, [1992]. Which side are you on? Trying To be For Labor When It’s Flat
    On Its Back. New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux.

[13] Hannan, M.T., and J. Freeman. ”The Ecology of Organizational Founding: American Labor
    Unions, [1836-1985].” American Journal of Sociology 92: 910-43 [1987].

[14] Hannan, M. T., and J. Freeman, The Ecology of Organizational Mortality: American Labor
    Unions, 1836-1985. American Journal of Sociology 94: 22-52 [1988].

[15] Hirsch, Barry T; MacPherson, David A. ”Union Membership and Coverage Files from the
    Current Population Surveys: Note.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review 46 (3), [April, 574-
    78, 1993].

[16] Kleiner, Morris M., and Pilarski, Adam M. ”Does Internal Union Political Competition En-
    hance Its Eﬀectiveness?” In Samuel Estreicher, Harry Katz, and Bruce Kaufman, eds., Internal
    Governance and Organizational Eﬀectiveness of Labor Unions, New York: Kluwer Publishing,
    forthcoming.

[17] Lipset, Seymour Martin, Martin Trow, and James S. Coleman, Unions Democracy. NY: Free
    Press [1956].

[18] Michels, Robert. 1949. Political Parties. Translated by Edward Cedar Paul. Glencoe, IL: Free
    Press [1915].

[19] Nelson, R.P., and S.G. Winter, An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge,
    MA: Harvard University Press [1982].

[20] Ross, Arthur M., Trade Union Wage Policy. University of California Press. Berkeley and LA
    [1950].


                                               56
[21] Tornell, Aaron, ”Rational Atrophy: the U.S. Steel Industry.” NBER Working Paper Series
    #6804 [1997].

[22] Wallerstein, Michael, ”Union Organization in Advanced Industrial Democracies.” American
    Political Science Review 83 (2), [June, 481-501, 1989].

[23] Weiler, Paul. ”Striking a New Balance: Freedom of Contract and the Prospects for Union
    Organization.” Harvard Law Review 98(351), [December, 1984].




                                               57
