#$



 

   
 
 ! "%&'(
)**+++,!*"*+%&'(

 

#- -     
.(/(""01 1
"2,3!4 (&.5%


 
           
  !""   ! #  
   $%  & 
%"    "  " ' ! ' '   #(   )'    
     !  %  *   +!" !&  !#

,%-  ' #.    
"% /   )' ! ' "  '
! #

# !  ) )! ''
 !  !  , !   

 "02"3 333 660
 
# ! "%&'(
&((.
 &&4'(
$%#%
"7"26606"1,"389,",1:6+64"660

+";"333+ ;660- ""333+ 66013+0601
66061,"380112:2"14""":<+68",1:
3,6"3"61,"389,3"0237"2
="3!=1"3912""!0 -! " 13:602:"204
2"=3"02660"613"!+"!"3=3"02660
2!6+8366,::63"02>"0!2"
":66?4,:31366062"+"0@13"02
"3346130"+2"!1361,"38+"!4"
0"!32>A(8%(8? "3":,:1,"38=3"02"!
!=10"+68",1:"0016&/B61,"3802

 
< 06 1,0 0:"3""!2
"!-:
C%((, 1
,1!4 ./&.5
"3#
2D02131

1. Introduction

Numerous economic studies over the past decade have detailed the negative earnings e ects
of a job displacement (See the surveys by Hamermesh 1989 and Fallick 1996). Displaced
workers su er annual earnings losses in the year of displacement which range from 25%
to 40% (Topel 1990, Stevens 1997). Instantaneous hourly and weekly wages losses are
only 12% and 17%, respectively, with much of the initial lost earnings due to unemployment (Stevens 1997, Topel 1990, Ruhm 1991). More importantly, displaced workers face
substantial permanent earnings losses. Although Ruhm (1991) nds that the increase in
unemployment disappears within four years of displacement, hourly wages are still 10%
below expected levels six years after the job loss (Stevens 1997).
While much continues to be written about the earnings and unemployment e ects of
job loss at the individual level, much less is known about the e ects of displacement at the
household level. Models of family utility maximization suggest that reduced family income
due to the earnings losses of one family member may be o set by increases in the labor
supply of others. Due to the large permanent earnings shock, a job loss presents a situation
where such a response is likely to occur. Given that a majority of displaced workers are
married (Seitchik 1989), increased labor supply of spouses may be an important household
consumption smoothing response to displacement. This paper analyzes married women's
labor supply responses to their husbands' job displacements.
Dating back to Woytinsky (1942), economists have been interested in understanding
the \added worker e ect" which is an increase in married women's labor supply in response
to their husbands' unemployment spells. The studies in this literature use individual-level
data to examine the contemporaneous e ect of a husband's unemployment spell on his
wife's labor supply.1 While some studies nd no evidence of an e ect (e.g., Layard, Barton,
and Zabalza 1980; Maloney 1987, 1991), the studies which do uncover some evidence
nd only small magnitudes for the added worker e ect (e.g., Mincer 1962; Bowen and
1 Earlier studies which rely primarily on city-level or Statistical Metropolitan Area level Census data

nd that higher levels of area male unemployment reduce the labor force participation of wives (Long
1958; Mincer 1962; Bowen and Finegan 1965, 1968; Cain 1966). The results are taken as evidence of a
\discouraged worker e ect" whereby poor labor market conditions for husbands either are correlated with
poor conditions for wives or discourage wives from entering the labor force.

1

Finegan 1968; Heckman and MaCurdy 1980, 1982; Lundberg 1985; Spletzer 1992; Gruber
and Cullen 1996). Under the assumption that unemployment is a transitory reduction
in earnings, the literature generally concludes that such small responses are an optimal
response within a life-cycle framework.
Due to the methodological approach used in the the added worker e ect literature,
however, these results are not directly applicable to understanding how married women
adjust their labor supply in response to their husbands' job displacements. First, not every
unemployed worker is a displaced worker. As mentioned above, the earnings losses during
a spell of unemployment are quite substantial for displaced workers. However, those who
become unemployed due to quits or seasonal employment may not have their earnings
adversely a ected. Thus, while the former type of unemployment may call for changes in
the spouse's labor supply, the latter may not require any adjustments. Estimates of the
added worker e ect which treat all of the unemployed the same will likely underestimate
the magnitude of the true e ect for involuntary job losers.
Second, not every job loser su ers a spell of unemployment. Workers who learn about
an upcoming displacement, possibly due to advance notice given by the rm, may be able
to nd new employment prior to termination.2 Even with an advance notice, the earnings
losses su ered by these workers may still be substantial. In the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics sample used in this study, only 60% of the married men who say they have been
displaced within the past year report any unemployment during the same period. Thus,
a substantial portion of job losers may be excluded from previous added worker estimates
since these studies focus on unemployment alone.
Finally, by examining the wife's labor supply response to her husband's current unemployment, the previous literature ignores any response before or after the job loss occurs.
If a family perceives an increase in the likelihood the husband will become displaced, the
wife's work e ort should also increase prior to the displacement. Once a displacement
occurs, the reduction in permanent family earnings should increase the wife's labor supply in subsequent years. Furthermore, there may be post-displacement learning about
2 E.g., see Addison and Portugal (1992) for evidence of the e ects of advance notice on reducing unem-

ployment spells.

2

the long-run impact on the husband's earnings which may also in uence work decisions.
The increased income earned by the wife both before and after a displacement may be an
important aspect of the consumption smoothing families undertake. Therefore, an understanding of the labor supply adjustment dynamics needs to be included in an analysis of
the added worker e ect.
The purpose of this paper is to examine the added worker e ect as a response to
a permanent earnings loss caused by a displacement rather than as an adjustment to a
temporary earnings loss caused by a spell of unemployment. The theoretical analysis
highlights the implications of displacements on spousal labor supply in a household lifecycle model. In this framework, a husband's job loss will result in a permanent increase in
his wife's work e ort following his displacement. New information about increases in the
job loss probability prior to a displacement will increase the wife's labor supply before a job
loss occurs. Furthermore, the magnitude of the response will depend upon the household's
belief about the probability of job loss as well as the magnitude of the husband's wage loss.
This paper uses the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to test these implications
of the added worker e ect in a life-cycle model. Large and persistent post-displacement
increases in the wives' labor supply are found. The analysis also nds an increase in predisplacement labor supply, which is consistent with families learning about an increased
likelihood of a job loss before one occurs and optimally adjusting their labor supply.
The importance of information concerning the husband's job loss probability is also
examined. The impact of new information on pre-displacement work e ort is analyzed by
examining the di erences in responses for plant closings and permanent layo s. Stevens
(1997) nds signi cant wage losses for workers prior to plant closings but not in the case of
layo s. To the extent that these wage losses indicate increases in the job loss probability to
the household, there are di erences in the pre-displacement information available between
the two types of job loss. The empirical analysis nds a larger pre-displacement increase
in the work e ort of wives for plant closings relative to layo s although the di erence is
not signi cant. In addition, the prediction that the magnitude of the post-displacement
response depends upon the husband's job loss probability is examined. Finally, extensions
which analyze the di erence in the added worker response by the the magnitude of the
3

husband's wage loss, by the husband's pre-displacement earnings level, and by the time
period of the job loss (1970s vs. 1980s) are also reported.
The paper is set out as follows. The theoretical model in the next section brie y
motivates examining the added worker e ect within a life-cycle model. The model also
indicates how di erences in information that households have before a displacement occurs
may a ect the timing and the magnitude of the added worker response. The empirical
speci cation and methodology is then discussed followed by a description of the dataset
used in the analysis, the 1968-1992 waves of the PSID. The results are then presented
followed by a summary of the paper. A simple calculation shows that in the long-run, the
increased work e ort of wives helps o set over 25% of their husbands' lost earnings. The
added worker response is important in terms of long-term household consumption smoothing since income maintenance programs designed to help job losers, e.g. unemployment
insurance, only provide short-run support to families of displaced workers.
2. A Family Life-Cycle Labor Supply Model

The family life-cycle labor supply model with uncertainty which is examined here is an
extension of the single worker model studied by MaCurdy (1985). The model assumes
that the household jointly maximizes utility which depends on the leisure of the husband
and the wife, Mt and Ft , respectively, and total household consumption, Ct , over a T + 1
period household lifetime. The price of consumption goods is normalized to 1 for all periods
while wages for the husband, WMt , and the wife, WF t , follow an exogenous process. The
household's utility function is assumed to be strictly concave and intertemporally separable,
Mt , Ft , and Ct are assumed to be normal goods, and capital markets are assumed to be
perfect.
In an uncertain world, the household updates its expectations with any new information
it has received since the prior period and maximizes utility over the remainder of its
lifetime. The family's optimization problem in period t is
Max Ut = Et

( T 
X


k =t

1
1+

k t

)

U (Ck ; Mk ; Fk )

(1)


s:t: At+1 = (1 + r) At + WMt (L Mt ) + WF t (L Ft ) Ct ;

4

(2)

and AT +1 = 0
where At is the household's stock of assets in period t,  is the household's subjective
discount rate, r is a constant real interest rate, and L is the constraint on the total time
each household member can divide between work and leisure. The conditions for optimality
are
UC (Ct ; Mt ; Ft ) = t

(3)

UM (Ct ; Mt ; Ft )  t WMt

(4)

UF (Ct ; Mt ; Ft )  t WF t

(5)





1 + r E f g
t =
1 +  t t+1

(6)

Strict concavity of the utility function implies the wife's leisure demand equation can be
written as
(
F (t ; WMt ; WF t ) if UF (Ct ; Mt ; Ft ) = t WF t
Ft =
(7)
L
if UF (Ct ; Mt; Ft) > t WF t
The inequality in the wife's leisure demand equation (7) re ects the constraint on total
available leisure time.
With uncertainty, the family forms beliefs over the distribution of future variables,
including the wage o ers the husband and wife may receive. The decisions a family makes
in each period will re ect both the expectations of future variables and the amount of
uncertainty surrounding these variables. As time progresses, the family may update their
priors about the moments of these distributions given past realizations of the variables.
Both the realizations of past variables, e.g., a job loss, and the changes in beliefs about
future distributions, e.g. the probability of a job loss, will enter a family's decisions as
shocks to the marginal utility of wealth, t . The familiar Euler Equation (6) describes the
evolution of t over the life cycle.

5

Wife's Response to Her Husband's Displacement

To examine the impact of a displacement, assume that a displacement can be represented
as a low wage realization which occurs in one period, t , and a spread-preserving reduction
in the mean of all future wage o ers.3 In terms of the wife's labor supply function, two
arguments, WMt and t , will be a ected by the displacement. The cross-wage e ect (i.e.
the change in the wife's labor supply due to a change in the husband's wage holding t
constant) in uences the wife's labor supply only in the period of displacement t . The
impact of the husband's displacement on the wife's labor supply through the cross-wage
e ect is ambiguous since it depends upon whether the couple's leisure times are substitutes,
complements, or strongly separable.
The main e ect of a displacement on the wife's labor supply comes from the decline
in the mean of future wage o er distributions which reduces expected lifetime wealth. In
terms of the model, the loss in lifetime wealth increases t in all periods once the family
learns of the job loss and causes the wife to work more in every future period. Thus, holding
constant the husband's wage, an increase in t will lead to an increase in the wife's labor
supply. Since the cross-wage e ect only a ects labor supply decisions in period t, the
theoretical predictions for the impact of displacement on the wife's labor supply can best
be conveyed by understanding the time path of the change in t .
The wife's labor supply response will depend upon both how far in advance that the
family learns of an impending job loss and the magnitude of the resulting wealth loss. If a
displacement \surprises" the family in period t , t will increase 8 t  t . The permanent
earnings loss due to a displacement will permanently increase the wife's desired labor
supply. However, if the family learns of the displacement before it occurs, the wife will
increase her hours not only once the displacement occurs, but even before her husband's
job loss. In addition, the wife's response will depend upon the magnitude of the impact
on t . The wife's labor supply should increase the most in families that su er the largest
permanent wealth losses due to displacement.
3 This theoretical interpretation of a displacement in the life-cycle model is consistent with evidence on
the time path of wages following displacement in Stevens (1997). Analogous comparative dynamics for a
single worker life-cycle model with uncertainty are discussed in Killingsworth (1983).

6

Since families form expectations over future variables, the perceived probability of a
displacement is an important determinant of the magnitude of a wife's response when
her husband is displaced.4 When the displacement occurs, the magnitude of the shock
to t , and thus the magnitude of the wife's response, will depend upon how likely the
family believed that a displacement would occur. If the family believed it was highly likely
the husband would be displaced, then the wife's labor supply will change only slightly.
However, if a family believed that it was very unlikely a displacement would occur then
the change in the wife's labor supply will be much larger. Intuitively, when a husband is
employed in an industry subject to many layo s, his wife will have adjusted to this high
probability of displacement long before a job loss occurs. On the other hand, in families
where the husband's job is thought to be very secure, a displacement is more likely to
cause signi cant adjustments.
Changes in the probability of a job loss can a ect both the magnitude and the timing of
the response. Bad news about the husband's job, such as rumors of a possible downsizing
by his company or a poor local economy, may increase the perceived probability of a future
displacement. This change will lower future expected earnings and increase t in the period
when the family's expectations change.5 In these households, we would expect the wife to
increase her work e ort prior to a job loss. For a family in which the husband subsequently
su ers a displacement, any additional adjustments at the time of displacement will again
depend upon how likely the family perceived the displacement to occur.
To quickly summarize the theoretical implications, the added worker response can vary
greatly across families depending upon the timing of the information arrival, the magnitude of the wealth loss, and what information families already possess. The subsequent
4 A variable for the probability of a job loss can be explicitly incorporated into the model. The resulting
analysis is similar, although as discussed below, the results are not always the same without additional
restrictions on the impact on the variance of the future earnings distributions.
5 This response will be generated by a decrease in the expected value of the wage distribution, holding the

spread constant. Increases in the variance of future wages, holding the mean constant, have an ambiguous
e ect on the model without the addition of more assumptions (see Killingsworth 1983). Presumably,
assumptions about the precautionary motives of families could be invoked to sign the direction of the
e ect (Kimball 1990), but there currently do not exist (to my knowledge) precautionary savings results
for utility functions with multiple commodities. However, if the model includes an explicit variable for the
probability of a displacement, an increase in such a probability will unambiguously lower expected future
earnings.

7

regression analysis will average these responses across heterogeneous households. Still, unless job losses are perfectly forecast by households, there should be a permanent increase
in the wife's labor supply following the husband's job loss. In addition, if some families
learn of or begin to anticipate impending job losses, there will be evidence of increased
labor supply in the years prior to the displacement.
3. Empirical Methodology

In order to derive an estimable leisure demand function, assumptions must be added to the
general theoretical model presented in the previous section. The empirical model presented
here imposes the assumption of intratemporal separability between consumption and the
leisure goods as is standard in the life-cycle labor supply literature (e.g., Heckman and
MaCurdy 1980; MaCurdy 1981, 1985; Altonji 1986; Jakubson 1988). In addition, the
model assumes intratemporal separability between the husband's and wife's leisure times.
The latter assumption does not allow the response to be delineated between wealth and
cross-wage e ects.6 With these assumptions, the objective function becomes
( T 
X

)



k t

1
Max Ut = Et
ACk [Ck ] + AMk [Mk ] + AF k [Fk ]!
(8)
1+
k=t
where Ajt for j = C; M; F , are taste modi ers of their respective goods. These taste
modi ers are typically written as functions of observable respondent characteristics. Taking
logs of the rst order condition for the wife's leisure demand and rearranging terms yields

ln Ft = F t ÆF ln WF t + ÆF ln AF t;

(9)

where ÆF = [1=(1 !)] and F t = ÆF (ln ! ln t ).7
Estimation of (9) requires some substitutions be made to yield an empirical speci cation. The log of the marginal utility of wealth, ln it , varies across time for each individual
6 This assumption is discussed in more detail below.
7 Although strong separability of the utility function implies that the demand functions do not depend

directly on the prices of the other goods, they indirectly depend on these prices because these prices a ect

t .

8

due to the continual updating a family makes as new information arrives. Using an approach similar to MaCurdy (1985), ln it can be written as
ln it = ln i0 + t +
where
t

=

t
X
k=0

t
X
k=0

"ik

[( r) ln [Et 1fexp("it )g]]

(10)

(11)

and "it represents the shock to the log of marginal utility with E ["it ] = 0.8 Thus, it is a
function of the initial marginal utility of wealth i0 as well as the subsequent forecast errors.
As the number of periods increases, the average of these forecast errors will approach zero.9
As discussed in the theoretical section, the husband's displacement can change ln it
not only in the period of displacement, but also in periods before and after the displacement occurs.10 Changes in ln t re ect both realizations of past variables and changes in
expectations of future variables. To capture the portion of these changes which is correlated with a displacement, a set of dummy variables Ditk , k = kl ; : : : ; ku are included in
the regressions. Dik receives a value of 1 if the worker is displaced k periods before the
current period  . k can also take on negative values in order to capture the e ects in the
pre-displacement years.
In all empirical speci cations, these dummy variables will capture the average change
in the labor supply of wives due to the shocks to ln t caused by their husbands' displacements. It is important to note that these coeÆcients represent the cumulative e ect of
8 This speci cation assumes that  and ln[Et 1fexp("it )g] are constant across families and years, while
r is allowed to vary by year. If r is also assumed to be constant, then the terms on the right-hand side of
(11) would be a time invariant constant and we could instead write t = t.
9 However, as Jakubson notes, there is no reason to believe that in short panels the forecast errors should

sum to zero. An excellent discussion of estimating labor supply models with uncertainty can be found in
MaCurdy (1985).

10 The theoretical discussion referred to t . However, since t is strictly positive, ln t will always change

in the same direction as t .

9

the displacement and not the incremental e ect. E.g., three years after a displacement,
it is possible that no new information related to the displacement is gained by families.
However, the coeÆcient on Dit3 may be non-zero because past shocks related to the displacement will have e ects on the wife's current labor supply.
The above empirical speci cations can be inserted into the wife's labor supply equation
(9) to yield
ln Fit = F i0 + t +

ku
X
k=kl

k Ditk ÆF ln WF it + ÆF ln AF it + it

(12)

where F i0 = ÆF (ln ! ln i0 ) is a household speci c e ect, t = ÆF t is a year speci c
e ect, and it is an an individual and year speci c error term. Finally, the remaining
components of the wife's leisure demand equation are given empirical counterparts. Following the past literature on female life-cycle labor supply, the wife's wage is assumed to
be a function of her potential experience and its square, while the leisure modi ers are a
function of the total number of kids in the household and the number of kids younger than
six.
This paper does not di erentiate between the wealth e ect and the cross-wage e ect
when estimating the added worker response. Since the earnings losses of displacement vary
across families, the observed wage change in the husband's wage may be correlated with
the wealth shock across families. Including the husband's wage in the regression may pick
up the heterogeneity in these wealth losses and lead to biased estimates of the cross-wage
e ect. In addition, the speci cation which allows for non-separable leisure requires the
husband have a positive wage observation. This requirement results in the loss of some
observations and will tend to underestimate the wife's response since presumably those
workers with a zero annual wage are those who are hardest hit by a job loss. Finally,
since the theoretical model assumes that utility is intertemporally separable, the impact
of the husband's job loss on the wife's labor supply after the initial year of displacement
is due only to the wealth e ect. Estimating the cross-wage e ect will not provide much
additional insight into understanding the added worker e ect.
Before preceding, it should be made clear that while this study remains faithful to the
female life-cycle labor supply literature along many dimensions, the estimates presented
10

here only represent structural parameters under the very strong assumptions laid out
above. The results should be regarded as reduced form estimates of the model with the
measured e ect of a displacement on spousal labor supply incorporating both the wealth
and cross-wage e ects.
Econometric Methods

Since the term F i0 in the leisure demand equation is a function of ln i0 which is in
turn a function of initial assets, the interest rate, and wages in all periods, F i0 cannot
be considered orthogonal to the other independent variables. Estimation of (12) requires
using a xed e ects speci cation to handle this source of heterogeneity. Baseline estimates
are generated using a linear xed e ects (or within) estimator. The coeÆcients from OLS
regressions using a censored dependent variable are asymptotically equivalent to the true
Tobit coeÆcients times the proportion of non-limit observations in the population (Greene
1981).11 In the Tobit model, the marginal e ect of a change in an independent variable
on the unconditional mean of the censored dependent variable is also computed as the
Tobit coeÆcient times the non-limit proportion in the sample. Thus, inferences about the
marginal e ect of displacement on the wife's hours of work can be made directly from
the linear regression coeÆcients. Results from the linear regressions will be used in the
majority of the analysis to derive the e ects of displacement on the wife's labor supply. The
standard errors for the linear xed e ects regressions are generated using a generalization
of Huber (1967) and White (1980) which allows the error terms for a given household to
be arbitrarily correlated across time periods.12
Honore's (1992) trimmed least squares censored regression estimator for panel data is
also implemented since it allows for an unbalanced panel and is robust to heteroskedasticity
11 This result relies on the assumption of joint normality between the regressors and the dependent
variable. Greene reports that Monte Carlo evidence for non-normal regressors nds that the results appear
to be robust to some forms of non-normality.
12 Although methods have been developed for panel data sets for these speci c issues (e.g., Kiefer 1980,

Chamberlain 1980), these methods require balanced panels.

11

across families and non-normality of the error terms.13 To eliminate the xed e ect from
estimation, each observation is di erenced with other observations for the same household.
Assuming that the errors for the latent dependent variable are i.i.d. for each household,
the di erence of two latent error terms will be symmetrically distributed with an expected
value of zero. Although the di erence of the observed error terms will not be symmetrically
distributed, Honore develops a method by which the di erence of the observed errors can
be trimmed to create new symmetrically distributed di erenced errors which have an
expected value of zero.14 These trimmed di erenced error terms are used to form moment
conditions which are in turn used as the rst order conditions in building this estimator.
Because the xed e ect has been eliminated from estimation, consistency of this estimator
is obtained as N ! 1, rather than as T ! 1 as in the maximum likelihood case. The
results from implementing this estimator will serve as a useful test of the robustness of the
inferences based on the linear regressions. Since consistency of Honore's estimator relies
on the assumption of no serial correlation, results using both estimators will be presented
below.
4. The Data

This study uses the rst 25 waves (1968-1992) of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID). For this analysis, the sample is restricted to families where both the husband
and the wife are between the ages of 25 and 65. The sample is created by following
a couple from their rst usable observation until they either leave the sample or have
an unusable observation.15 Split-o s of original sample households, where a child from
13 Past studies in the life-cycle female labor supply literature have either used a xed e ects Tobit

maximum likelihood estimator or a correlated random e ects Tobit estimator. The maximum likelihood
estimator is subject to multiple sources of inconsistency due to short panels (Heckman and MaCurdy
1980), heteroskedastic errors (Brown and MoÆtt 1983), and non-normal errors (Arabmazar and Schmidt
1982). The correlated random e ects estimator requires a balanced panel. Assessing the long-term e ects
of displacement before and after it occurs requires following workers for long periods of time. Balancing
the data with a suÆcient time frame results in a severe reduction in sample size, and a very small number
of displacements.

14 This approach is the panel data analog to Powell's (1986) symmetrically trimmed least squares esti-

mator for the cross-sectional Tobit model.

15 A usable observation simply means that the observation does not have missing data for any of the
variables used in the analysis. The list of these variables as well as a description of how variables are
created from the PSID data les can be found in the Appendix.

12

an original household moves out and forms their own household, are also used in the
analysis. The resulting unbalanced sample of couples with at least three usable observations
contains 57,180 observations on 5422 couples, with 1665 of these couples experiencing
a displacement. Since marital break-up and sample attrition are possible results of a
displacement, limiting the sample to families with long data histories may fail to capture
some of the interesting dynamics due to displacement.16
Displacements are determined from a question which asks \What happened to that
employer (job)?" The two categories of responses used to identify displacements are plant
closed/employer moved and laid o / red. The latter category does encompass workers
who are not generally considered displaced, those workers who report that they have been
red. Boisjoly, Duncan, and Smeeding (1994) report that only 16% of the PSID workers
in the laid o / red category have indeed been red. To the extent that a ring is also
a shock to family income that would require adjustments in labor supply, including this
small set of red workers is likely not a problem.
The year of displacement is measured with some error. The earnings and employment
questions are designed to elicit information for the previous calendar year. However, questions about job loss are not speci c to calendar years. For the rst sixteen waves of the
PSID, the survey asks what happened to the last job for those reporting job tenure which
is less than one year. Subsequent surveys ask what happened to the previous job if the
current job started since January 1 of the previous calendar year. Since the PSID surveys nearly all of its respondents between March and May, job displacements may have
occurred either during the previous calendar year or during the rst few months of the
current calendar year. For this study, a recorded displacement is assumed to have occurred
during the previous calendar year to match the earnings and employment data given in
the same survey. It is important to note for interpreting the results in this study that the
PSID survey design will result in reported displacements which on average occur in the
latter part of the previous calendar year.
16 Imposing multiple forms of panel balancing as well as eliminating the poverty subsample has minor

e ects on the qualitative results.

13

The empirical analysis focuses on the wife's response to the husband's rst displacement
since the couple has been together. Displacements recorded in the 1968 ( rst) survey are
counted as rst displacements, but these couples are not used in the analysis because
these displacements may have occurred anytime in the ten years prior to the survey. For
families which rst appear in the 1968 survey, the displacement is either the husband's
rst displacement since the household was formed, or his rst one in at least ten years.
For families which are split-o s of the original sample, the recorded displacement will be
the rst one since the household was formed.
5. Results
Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 compares the characteristics of displaced families in the year of the husband's job
loss with the average characteristics of families which never experience a displacement.
Displaced families have slightly more children at home, including more children under six.
The remaining demographics are comparable to the results found in previous displaced
worker studies. The displaced men are less educated and earn less than never displaced
men. In addition, they are more likely to be blue collar workers and work in the manufacturing sector.
Figure 1 presents the e ect of a displacement on the husband's earnings in the sample
used here. These results are derived from a regression of the log of the husband's earnings
on a quartic in the husband's experience, year e ects, and a series of dummy variables
which represent the number of years before or after the husband's displacement. Since the
use of log earnings requires observations with zero earnings to be dropped, it is likely that
these results understate the true impact of a displacement on earnings. The gure plots
the percentage e ect of a displacement on the husband's earnings using the coeÆcients for
the displacement dummy variables.17
The husband's earnings begin to decline the year prior to displacement and then drop
dramatically in the year of displacement. Notice, however, that the husband's earnings
17 Percentage changes are determined as e

1 where

14

is the regression coeÆcient.

decline the most in the year immediately following the job loss. The reason for this
delayed trough can be traced to the design of the PSID as mentioned in the Data section.
On average, a reported displacement will have occurred in the latter half of the previous
calendar year while earnings data refer to that entire prior calendar year. Thus, earnings
in the year immediately following displacement is more likely to be impacted by both the
unemployment su ered by the head as well as lower wages on subsequent jobs.18 Earnings
recover somewhat in later years, but remain permanently reduced relative to expected
levels.
A descriptive analysis of the wives' work e ort before and after displacement provides
evidence about the timing of the added worker response to a job loss. Figure 2 examines
the time series movements in the wives' employment rates and annual hours of work. Since
displacements occur in di erent calendar years across families, the year of displacement
for each husband is denoted as year t. The time series movements are scaled such that all
values are relative to their level four years before the husbands' displacements occurred.
The long-dashed line representing the wives' employment rates shows that the employment
rate increases in the years leading up to and including the year of displacement.19 The
employment rate is fairly constant across the post-displacement period. This pattern is
consistent with the response patterns presented in theoretical sections, where some families
adjust before displacement occurs while others respond at the time of the job loss.20
The changes in the wives' annual work hours are similar to the movements in employment rates. The short-dashed line for hours worked in Figure 2 shows that hours
increase through the year of job loss and remain above their pre-displacement levels. One
noticeable di erence between movements in employment rates and annual hours is that
the former increases until the year of job loss while the latter continues to increase for
18 This result di ers from Stevens (1997) who nds the largest decline occurs in the year of displacement.

However, examining the unemployment experience of displaced workers in Figure 2 suggests that assigning
the displacements to the previous calendar year rather than the survey year is the correct assignment.

19 Employment rates are determined as whether or not the wife's reported hours of work are positive.
20 The sample size varies across years due to sample attrition, family dissolution, and displacements

which occur near the either end of the sample period. As previously mentioned, controlling for any one or
all of these issues results in similar patterns.

15

one additional year. This di erence is likely due to the survey design which generates
displacements which on average occurred in the latter part of the previous calendar. This
timing of displacements leaves fewer months for annual hours of work to adjust in the year
of displacement. Thus, it is not surprising that annual hours of work continue to increase
during the year following displacement.
Comparing these measures of wives' labor supply with the unemployment experience
of the husbands during the same time frame reveals the problem inherent in analyzing
the added worker e ect by using the husband's current unemployment to measure job
loss. This comparison is illustrated in Figure 2 which also includes the time series for
the husbands' unemployment rate as the solid line.21 In the years prior to displacement,
increasing work e ort by wives occurs with only modest changes in the fraction of husbands
experiencing some unemployment. In the year of displacement, unemployment more than
doubles, but the change in the wives' labor supply is smaller than the total change found in
the years leading up to displacement. As the unemployment rate of husbands immediately
falls after the year of displacement, wives' work e ort continues to increase. These results
further illustrate why past added worker e ect studies, especially those which use within
individual variation, have found little evidence of a response.
Regression Analysis

Regressions of the wife's leisure demand equation (12) are presented in Table 2.22 Both
the linear xed e ect and Honore's Tobit estimators are presented.23 The coeÆcients at
the top of the Table are consistent with results found in prior studies. Higher levels of
21 A husband is considered unemployed if he reported any hours of unemployment. Using the actual

hours of unemployment results in the same pattern in terms of the timing and relative magnitudes of
increases and decreases.

22 Annual leisure hours are generated by subtracting hours of work from 8760, which is the maximum

number of hours available in a year. Using 4000, 5000, 6000, and 7000 as the annual hours maximum gives
similar results.

23 Since Honore's estimator is designed for dependent variables censored below at zero, the dependent

 ) where L is the wife's observed hours of leisure and L

variable for the Tobit estimation is (ln L ln L

is the maximum leisure available (L = 8760). The resulting coeÆcients are opposite in sign from the
coeÆcients for using an upper censored Tobit for ln L. For consistency with the linear regressions, the
reported coeÆcients have been multiplied by -1.

16

experience increase the wife's labor supply. Increases in the number of children in the
household as well as increases in the number of young children reduces the wife's labor
supply.24
The patterns exhibited by the displacement dummies shown at the bottom of Table 2
are consistent with the patterns predicted by the theoretical model. To better illustrate
the magnitude and signi cance of the changes in the wives' labor supply before and after
the job loss, the implied e ects on the wife's hours of work using the OLS estimator, along
with the 95% con dence bands, are graphed in Figure 3.25 Beginning three years before
the job loss occurs in year t, the wives' hours of work increase slightly but insigni cantly.
In the year of displacement, there is no additional increase in work hours. As previously
discussed, the lack of an immediate change is likely due to the survey timing in addition to
any labor market constraints which may exist. In the year immediately following displacement, hours of work increase signi cantly. The estimated e ects are signi cant for all the
post-displacement years. Evaluated at the sample average, the average post-displacement
increase in annual hours of work is 108 hours, which is an 11% increase in work e ort.
This estimate incorporates changes at both the intensive and extensive margins of work
and thus is not directly comparable to the income e ects estimated in the prior female
labor supply literature summarized in Killingsworth and Heckman (1986). In their survey,
Killingsworth and Heckman report income elasticities which range from -0.5 to 0. Using
the long-run decline in earnings of nearly 20% illustrated in Figure 1, the results here
would be consistent with an income elasticity on the larger (in absolute terms) end of that
range.
Although a direct comparison with past added worker e ect studies is diÆcult due
to di erences in the methodological approaches, there is some indication that the results
here are larger than the previous literature would suggest. Evaluating the Heckman and
24 Note that the coeÆcients display the e ect on leisure hours and not on hours of work. The estimated
e ects of both child variables on leisure hours evaluated at the sample average lie between the e ects
estimated by Heckman and MaCurdy (1980) and Jakubson (1988).
25 If is the marginal e ect of a regressor X on log leisure (ln L), the marginal e ect on the level of

hours H is determined by @ ln L=@X =
is 7780.

! @L=@X = L = @H=@X . Mean leisure hours in the sample

17

MaCurdy (1982) estimates at their sample averages indicates that women increase their
work e ort by 7 hours for every 100 hours of their husbands' unemployment. The average of
the husbands' hours of unemployment in the current sample peaks at 354 hours in the year
of job loss. Thus, the Heckman and MaCurdy estimates would suggest hours of work should
initially increase by 25 annual hours in the year of displacement and much less in subsequent
years. Gruber and Cullen (1996) nd that wives' employment rates and average hours of
work are insigni cantly reduced during their husbands' spells of unemployment. However,
they do nd a signi cant 5.5% increase in work hours conditional on working during the
unemployment spells. Thus, applying past results to displaced workers by using their
unemployment experience will understate the added worker response to a displacement.
The Tobit coeÆcients and marginal e ects are also presented in Table 2. These estimates show the same general pattern as the OLS estimates. Since the Tobit estimator is
dependent upon the assumption of no serial correlation in the errors, the similarity across
the two sets of estimates is encouraging.
To examine di erences in the wives' response by reason for displacement, the e ects
are divided between layo s and plant closings in Table 3. When examined separately,
the results indicate that the responses do indeed di er.26 The layo e ects are displayed
in Figure 4, again with the 95% con dence bands. The e ects on the wives' hours are
insigni cant through the year of displacement. Hours of work increase beginning in the
year following displacement, although the estimated e ect is only marginally signi cant
in this year. Hours of work peak two years following displacement and decline in all
subsequent years, but remain marginally signi cant in these years. The estimated pattern
is the same when examining the Tobit estimates, but the estimated magnitude of the e ects
is slightly smaller as can be seen by examining the average post-layo e ects shown near
the bottom of Table 3. However, the hypothesis that the post-displacement e ects are
jointly zero can be rejected at the 6% level for the OLS estimator and at the 1% level for
the Tobit estimator.
26 A Wald test of the hypothesis that the layo and plant closing coeÆcients are the same rejects this

hypothesis at the 5% level for the linear xed e ects estimator and at the 1% level for the Tobit estimator.
The assumption of no serial correlation in the error terms is responsible for the higher level of signi cance
for the Tobit test statistic.

18

As previously mentioned, the delayed increase in the hours of work following a layo
may be due to labor market frictions such as search costs. Another possibility is that
the discouraged worker e ect, under which poor labor market conditions for husbands are
correlated with poor conditions for wives, may have a countervailing e ect in the shortrun. An additional explanation may be the short-run crowding out of work e ort found
by Gruber and Cullen (1996) due to unemployment insurance (UI) bene ts. However,
as Figure 4 shows, there is still an increase in labor supply beyond the periods of high
unemployment shown in Figure 2.
It is interesting to note that the post-displacement pattern for layo s is somewhat
consistent with the presence liquidity, or borrowing, constraints. If liquidity constraints
were introduced into the model, wives would no longer smooth their labor supply response
over all post-displacement periods. Rather, they would increase their labor supply the most
in the periods in which the husbands earnings losses are the greatest.27 In fact, the results
for layo s show exactly this pattern. However, the unavailability of measures which can
speci cally delineate between constrained and unconstrained families signi cantly reduces
the plausibility of testing for the impact of these constraints.28
The response pattern generated by plant closings in Table 3 di ers in an interesting way
from the layo results. As shown in Figure 5, there is a much larger but still insigni cant
pre-displacement increase in wives' work e ort. Hours increase (marginally) signi cantly
in the year following displacement. Quite surprisingly, hours of work take a substantial
27 In terms of the model, the presence of a liquidity constraint makes families unable to smooth con-

sumption according to the traditional Euler Equation. The Euler Equation between two periods where
there exists a binding liquidity constraint can be written as UCt = [(1 + r)=(1 + )] UCt+1 + t , where t
is the non-negative Kuhn-Tucker multiplier for the borrowing constraint. Thus, the marginal utility of an
additional dollar in period t is increased due to the presence of the constraint. See Zeldes (1989) for a
more detailed discussion of liquidity constraints in the presence of uncertainty.

28 One possible approach would be to split the sample between low asset and high asset households as
done by Zeldes (1989). Sample splitting by Zeldes is based on the assumption that low asset households
are far more likely to be constrained households. These households should show a sharper increase in
labor supply due to displacement. However, the di erence here is that these low asset households are
also more likely to face higher displacement risks. The theoretical model predicts that families facing
a higher risk of displacement should have smaller adjustments in labor supply when the displacement
occurs. Thus, testing between low asset and high asset households does not generate an a priori clean
prediction for the di erence in the response between these two groups. However, since asset levels are
highly correlated with earnings levels, the estimates presented below for di erences in the response by the
husband's pre-displacement earnings are likely a good guide for di erences by asset levels.

19

dip between years t + 1 and t + 2. Hours remain insigni cantly a ected in years t + 2 and
t + 3, but then signi cantly rise beginning in four years after displacement, and remain
(marginally) signi cantly higher in all subsequent years. The Tobit estimator reveals a
similar pattern with the exception that the marginal e ects are larger than with the OLS
estimator. In addition, the average post-plant closing e ect is only marginally signi cant
for the OLS estimator but is signi cant at the 5% level for the Tobit estimator. For
both estimators the Wald test statistic shows that the post-plant closing e ects are jointly
signi cant at the 5% level.
Several potential explanations for the post-plant closing \dip" are examined by expanding the empirical speci cation for the wives' leisure demand. The discouraged worker e ect
suggests that increases in local unemployment rates may reduce the wives' labor supply.
If these local employment conditions are poor enough, it may induce families to relocate
which could temporarily reduce wives' annual work hours. Also, displacements may cause
changes in the husband's employment status, such as causing early retirement in addition
to increasing unemployment. However, the inclusion of these variables has no e ect on
the estimated displacement e ects even though these variables enter signi cantly into the
regressions.29 Crowding out due to transfer payments is another possibility. However, in
unreported tables, both the dollar amount and the fraction of families receiving transfer
payments peak in years t and t + 1 and then decrease in the years when the dip in labor
supply occurs. Sample attrition is also ruled out since the dip also appears in a gure (not
shown here) analogous to Figure 2 that is restricted to couples who appear in all years of
the gure. One nal possibility is that this dip is simply due to sampling variation.
E ect of Heterogeneity in the Husband's Wage Loss

While Figure 1 shows that the average earnings loss following a job displacement is rather
substantial, the literature on displaced workers has found much heterogeneity across households in the magnitude of the wage and earnings losses due to displacements (Fallick 1996).
29 These results are available from the author upon request. One other possibility is that wives face

labor market constraints which do not allow them to freely change their hours of work. However, although
the PSID only included questions asking if the wife was constrained from increasing her hours of work
from 1971-1976 and 1985. Examining these data do not suggest that such constraints are important in
explaining the dip in work e ort.

20

In the sample used in this paper, comparing the wages of displaced workers one year before
their job loss with their wages one year after indicates that more than one-third su er wage
losses of 25% or more while roughly 40% of job losers have zero or even positive wages
changes.30 This wage loss heterogeneity should be re ected in the labor supply responses
of the wives. The larger the husband's wage loss, the more his wife should increase her
work e ort.31
The di erences in the labor supply responses to the heterogeneity in the wage losses
is reported in Table 4. The regression reported in column (1) uses the change in wages
between t 1 and t + 1 to separate the responses between households where the husband
su ers a negative wage change and those households with a zero or positive wage change.32
The results for negative wage changes in the top of the table show a time pattern of response
similar to that found in the baseline results reported in Table 2. The estimated response
in each of the post-displacement periods is at least 50% larger than the previous estimates.
The post-displacement results for those households with positive wages changes at the
bottom of the table show no signi cant e ect on labor supply. Thus, as expected, in
households with larger wage losses there is a larger labor supply response by the wives.
The regression in column (2) of Table 4 exploits the heterogeneity in the magnitude
of the wage losses. For each displaced worker, the absolute value of the percentage wage
change is interacted with the displacement variables from column (1). The resulting coeÆcients can be interpreted as the impact of the e ect on the wife's labor supply if the
husband's wage changes by 100% between years t 1 and t + 1. A comparison between
the results in column (2) and those in column (1) is suggestive of a positive relationship
between the magnitude of the wage loss and the amount of the increase in the wife's work
30 Displaced workers who do not work at all during the year after displacement are considered to a have

a 100% wage loss. The pattern for earnings losses is similar.

31 Of course, there may be some endogeneity between the husband's earnings losses and the wife's work

e ort. If the wife is able to nd adequate employment quickly, it may e ect the husband's job search
behavior and therefore his earnings. The use of wage losses rather than earnings losses may mitigate this
bias to some extent although it is likely still present in the results presented in this section.

32 Dividing the sample by earnings changes rather than wage changes gives does not a ect the results
in Table 4. Also, using di erent years before and after the job loss to measure the change in wage yields
comparable results.

21

e ort. For the households where the husband su ers a wage loss, the magnitude of the
post-displacement e ects in column (2) is larger than the results in column (1). Thus, the
mean e ect on work e ort for these households (column (1)) is smaller than the e ect for
households in which the husband su ers a 100% wage loss. Also, the results for the positive
wage changes in column (2) are less negative (i.e., less work e ort) than those shown in
the rst column although the magnitude of these di erences is quite small. Thus, there
does appear to be some suggestive evidence that there is a larger labor supply response
for larger wage losses.33
Impact of Pre-Displacement Information

The di erence in the pre-displacement responses across the types of displacement is consistent with the prediction that households respond when they receive new information
regarding the probability of a job loss. The information di erences can be seen in the
changes in pre-displacement wages reported by Stevens (1997, Table 5). Stevens nds that
wages of workers displaced in plant closings begin to decline in the pre-displacement years
while the wages of laid o workers do not. These pre-plant closing wage decreases may
be due to wage freezes or even wage cuts at troubled rms. No matter the exact reason,
these wage changes convey information which wives may use to adjust their labor supply
decisions prior to the plant closings. On the other hand, the fact that wages are relatively
unchanged in the pre-displacement years for those who experience layo s indicate that it is
likely that far less new information is available to these families prior to the displacement.
Consistent with the prediction that an increase in the job loss probability will increase the
wife's work e ort, the results in Table 3 indicate that there is a larger pre-displacement
response for a plant closing relative to a layo although this di erence is not signi cant.
Additional analyses were undertaken to examine the impact of the household's predisplacement job loss probability on the magnitude of the wife's post-displacement response. First, the job loss probability is predicted for each displaced household in the year
33 A true test of this hypothesis would be to include the indicator terms from both columns - the level

e ects and the interaction with the wage loss e ects - into one regression. Performing this test leads to
results which are of the right sign to support the theory but are not statistically signi cant due to the
large number of parameters that are estimated.

22

immediately preceeding job loss by regressing a variable for job loss next year on the husband's experience, tenure, occupation and industry in addition to the non-displacement
variables in the wife's leisure demand equation.34 The added worker response is then
allowed to di er for households below the median predicted probability and households
above the median predicted probability. The estimated average long-run response is the
same for both groups.35 However, the estimated probability of a job loss is correlated
with the type of displacement, with plant closing households more likely to be in the lower
probability group and laid o households disproportionately in the higher group. Thus,
the time paths of the responses resembles the plant closing and layo responses.
As a further test, the sample of displaced workers is restricted to those at the 25th percentile and below of the job loss probability (low probability group) and those at the 75th
percentile and above (high probability group). Again, the groups are disproportionately
represented by plant closings and layo s, respectively. When using a linear probability
model to predict the job loss probability, the low probability group exhibits a large and
signi cant post-displacement response while the high probability group shows a small and
insigni cant response. However, when a probit model is used to predict the job loss probability, the response for the high probability group becomes much larger in magnitude
although the point estimates are still insigni cant. Thus, while the results are favorable
to the hypothesis that pre-displacement job loss probabilities a ect the post-displacement
added worker response, it appears the sample of displaced workers is not large enough to
provide any conclusive support of this prediction.
Further Heterogeneity in the Response to Displacement

As seen above, the wife's response to displacement di ers signi cantly depending upon the
magnitude of the wage loss and the type of job loss. In this section the wife's response is
examined by year of the displacement and the husband's pre-displacement earnings level.
34 The estimating sample includes all observations of never displaced households as well as all predisplacement observations of displaced households.
35 Results are available upon request from the author.

23

In both cases the a priori expected response is theoretically ambiguous which leaves the
resolution to each question as an empirical matter.
Throughout the duration of the PSID there have been substantial increases in the labor
force participation of women (Juhn and Murphy 1997). How this trend in labor supply
should a ect the measured added worker e ect is unclear. On the one hand, increased
participation may increase the measured response since women may be more knowledgeable
of job opportunities, have more employable skills, or simply be more able to adjust hours
on a job at which they are currently employed. On the other hand, increased participation
may mean that more women are likely to be employed full-time and unable to adjust hours
without nding a new job. In addition, the women who remain out of the labor force will
have the highest reservation wages and may be less likely to be induced into working by
their husband's job loss.36
To examine the changes in response over time, column (1) of Table 5 divides the
responses between job losses occurring in 1969-1980 and those which occur in 1981-1992.
The middle section of the column reveals that the e ects for the earlier period are all
insigni cant and have no discernible pattern. The results for the latter period are consistent
with the predicted life-cycle response. There is an insigni cant pre-displacement e ect
followed by a large and highly signi cant e ect in the post-displacement period. However,
these di erences do not appear to be caused by changes in the costs of job loss. In
regressions not shown here, there does not appear to be signi cant di erences in the
earnings losses across the two periods, especially not large enough to account for the
observed di erences across the time periods in column (1).
The di erences in the response due to the husband's pre-displacement earnings level are
also of interest. If income is a reasonable proxy for wealth, then low income households
should be more likely to respond because they are less able to smooth their earnings
losses. But these same low earning households may be more susceptible to negative labor
market events and, knowing this fact ex ante, should be less likely to respond. Rather,
this information should be incorporated into the level of hours wives choose to work. In
36 I thank David Lam for making this last point.

24

addition, the magnitude of the earnings losses faced by low earning households is smaller
which will reduce the response to a job loss.
The response to a job loss depending upon whether the husband's pre-displacement
earnings are above or below the sample average are shown in column (2) of Table 5.37
There is no evidence of a response by low income households to a job loss. The response
in the high income households is large and signi cant throughout the post-displacement
period. These results are consistent with both the hypothesis that high income households
have large losses which require a larger response and the hypothesis that job loss for these
high income households is more likely to be a surprise.
Do Wives' Earnings Help Families Smooth Income Shocks?

Although wives increase their labor supply in response to their husbands' displacements,
the estimated hours responses do not directly indicate how much family income uctuates in response to a displacement or what fraction of the husbands' lost earnings are
compensated for by increases in the wives' work e ort. Examining the movements in
wives' earnings can uncover the economic signi cance of the estimated added worker effect. Given the persistent e ects of displacement on the husband's earnings, the long-run
increased earnings of wives' can potentially play an important role in smoothing family
income.
Dynarski and Gruber (1997) nd that while transfer payments and taxes help families
smooth earnings shocks, wives' earnings do not respond to changes in their husbands' earnings.38 In their analysis, they regress rst di erences of the variable of interest (transfers,
taxes, and wife's earnings) on rst di erences of the husband's earnings. Although this
approach can help us understand immediate responses to an earnings shock, it is not useful
for understanding the long-run adjustments families must make in response to a permanent
earnings loss such as a job displacement. Also, short-run changes in the wife's earnings
37 Displaced households which do not have an observation for the pre-displacement year are deleted from
this regression. The deletions result in the loss of 2715 observations from 318 couples.
38 This result appears in their Table 9, p.265. When instrumenting for the husband's earnings with
\unexpected" unemployment (Table 10, p.267), they nd no evidence of a response in wife's earnings in
the PSID, but they nd some evidence of a response in the Consumer Expenditure Survey.

25

will understate the true magnitude of the response if wives either anticipate earnings losses
or they do not immediately adjust their work e ort. While transfers may be an important
source of short-run smoothing, the limited duration of unemployment insurance bene ts
and other government programs renders these payments incapable of smoothing persistent
earnings losses.
To roughly gauge the magnitude of the additional income gained by the increased work
e ort of wives, Table 6 determines the percentage of lost earnings which are compensated
by increased work during the rst ve years after a displacement. The lost earnings of displaced husbands are determined by multiplying the e ect of displacement on the husband's
earnings found in Stevens (1997) by the average earnings of displaced workers two years
prior to displacement.39 The increased earnings of wives are determined by multiplying
the estimated e ects on hours found in Table 2 by the average wage of working wives. As
shown in Table 6, wives' earnings initially cover less than 10% of the lost earnings. Gradually, increases in wives' work e ort compensate for over 25% of lost earnings. Although
the recovery of the husband's earnings after displacement help increase this percentage,
wives earnings do provide a source of long-run income smoothing for displaced families.
6. Summary

This paper examines the added worker e ect by focusing on the long-run response of a wife's
labor supply to her husband's job loss. The use of displacement rather than unemployment
is appropriate for analyzing the added worker e ect due to the persistent earnings losses
found in the displacement literature. Theoretical predictions for the response are generated
examining the added worker e ect in the context of a family life-cycle labor supply model.
In this model, wives adjust to a displacement by permanently increasing their desired labor
supply once news of a displacement arrives.
The empirical analysis nds that wives respond to their husbands' displacements with
small increases in their labor supply prior to displacement and much larger increases once
the displacement occurs. These patterns are consistent with the theoretical predictions
39 Since earnings begin to decline prior to displacement, this pre-displacement gure is used.

26

generated by the life-cycle model. Examining the responses by the type of displacement
yields di erent labor supply patterns. The results for layo s are consistent with the liquidity constrained model although no direct tests of this model are attempted here. For plant
closings, pre-displacement and the long-run post-displacement e ects are consistent with
the predictions of the model. The di erences in the responses by type of displacement are
consistent with the di erent pre-displacement information which wives may learn through
their husband's wage changes. The analysis also nds that the added worker e ect varies
by the magnitude of the husband's wage loss, has increased over time, and that wives of
high earning men are more likely to generate an added worker response. Increases in wives'
earnings are a long-run source of income which can help families smooth consumption in
response to permanent earnings losses caused by husbands' job losses. However, even with
the increase in spousal labor supply, the loss of family income due to displacement remains
quite substantial.

27

Appendix: Data Description

The data used is this study is from the rst twenty- ve waves (1968-1992) of the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The sample of couples used in this study has been
created in three steps. First, every individual who is ever a head or a wife/\wife" and not
in the Latino subsample is extracted from the PSID's individual le. For each year the
individual is a head or a wife/\wife" and between the ages of 25 and 65 inclusive, information from the respective PSID family le is merged to the individual dataset. Couples
are created by merging together individuals with the same family identi cation number in
each year. This results in a sample of 64,268 couple-year observations.
The nal data set is created by rst deleting observations with missing data. Starting
with the rst non-missing data observation for a couple, all consecutive observations for
the couple are kept until either a missing data observation is encountered or the couple
leaves the samples. Couples with at least three consecutive observations are used in the
nal data set. The reasons for deleting observations are as follows along with the marginal
number of deleted observations:
1) Wife's hours of work are a major assignment. (A major assignment means that the
value has been imputed, likely using a value from an assignment table.) For 1985-1992,
delete if wife's main job hours are a major assignment. (529 deleted observations)
2) Head's education is missing. (307)
3) Head's wage is missing. (26)
4) Wife's experience is missing. (225)
5) Delete observations which are not consecutive with the rst observations for each couple.
(3557)
6) Delete observations from couples which do not have at least three observations. (2444)
The resulting sample contains 57,180 observations on 5422 couples. This sample is used
in the majority of the analysis.
While many of the variables used in the analysis are taken directly from the PSID les,
some variables must be created from the available data. Years of education may change
during the sample period. However, it is forced to be constant for this study. Education
28

of heads and wives appears on the family le from 1975 to 1984 and on the individual les
in 1968, 1972, and from 1975 to 1992. Years of education is created by taking the most
recent, non-missing observations from the family le. If years of education are still missing,
then the most recent, non-missing observation from the individual le is used. Since for
a majority of the survey years of education is top-coded at 16 years, the nal education
variable used in the analysis is top-coded at 16 years. Potential experience is then created
as Age-Education-6. However, if an individual has less than 12 years of education, then
experience is created as Age-18. By this method, individuals with very little schooling are
not assigned large amounts of labor market experience.
The number of children, number of young children, and age of youngest child are
created from the individual le by examining every individual within a given household
each year. Cross-tabulations of these child variables for the 1968 and 1969 surveys found
major inconsistencies with these generated PSID variables. To be consistent throughout
the analysis, these variables were recreated from the individual data le.

29

Bibliography

Addison, John T. and Pedro Portugal (1992) \Advance Notice and Unemployment: New
Evidence from the 1988 Displaced Worker Survey," Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 45, 4, 645{664.
Altonji, Joseph G. (1986) \Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from
Micro Data," Journal of Political Economy, 94, 3, S176{S215.
Arabmazar, Abbas and Peter Schmidt (1982) \An Investigation of the Robustness of the
Tobit Estimator to Non-Normality," Econometrica, 50, 4, 1055{62.
Boisjoly, Johanne, Greg J. Duncan and Timothy Smeeding (1994) \Have Highly-Skilled
Workers Fallen From Grace? The Shifting Burdens of Involuntary Job Losses from
1968 to 1992," University of Michigan Mimeo.
Bowen, William G. and T. Aldrich Finegan (1965) \Labor Force Participation and Unemployment," in Employment Policy and the Labor Market, ed. Arthur M. Ross. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Bowen, William G. and T. Aldrich Finegan (1968) The Economics of Labor Force Participation. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Brown, Charles C. and Robert MoÆtt (1983) \The E ect of Ignoring Heteroscedasticity
on Estimates of the Tobit Model," National Bureau of Economic Research Technical
Working Paper #27.
Cain, Glen G. (1966) Married Women in the Labor Force; An Economic Analysis. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Chamberlain, Gary (1980) \Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data," Review of
Economic Studies, 47, 1, 225{38.
Dynarski, Susan and Jonathan Gruber (1997) \Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1997, , 229{84.
Fallick, Bruce C. (1996) \A Review of the Recent Empirical Literature on Displaced Workers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 50, 1, 5{16.
30

Greene, William H. (1981) \On the Asymptotic Bias of the Ordinary Least Squares Estimator of the Tobit Model," Econometrica, 49, 2, 505{13.
Gruber, Jonathan and Julie Berry Cullen (1996) \Spousal Labor Supply as Insurance: Does
Unemployment Insurance Crowd Out the Added Worker E ect?," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper #5608.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. (1989) \What Do We Know About Worker Displacement in the
U.S.?," Industrial Relations, 28, 1, 51{59.
Heckman, James J. and Thomas E. MaCurdy (1980) \A Life Cycle Model of Female Labour
Supply," Review of Economic Studies, 47, 1, 47{74.
Heckman, James J. and Thomas E. MaCurdy (1982) \Corrigendum on A Life Cycle Model
of Female Labour Supply," Review of Economic Studies, 49, 659{660.
Honore, Bo E. (1992) \Trimmed LAD and Least Squares Estimation of Truncated and
Censored Regression Models with Fixed E ects," Econometrica, 60, 3, 533{565.
Huber, Peter J. (1967) \The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates Under Non Standard Conditions," in Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium in Mathematical
Statistics and Probability. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1, 221-233.
Kiefer, Nicholas M. (1980) \Estimation of Fixed E ect Models for Time Series of CrossSections with Arbitrary Intertemporal Covariance," Journal of Econometrics, 14, 2,
195{202.
Killingsworth, Mark R. (1983) Labor Supply. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Killingsworth, Mark R. and James J. Heckman (1986) \Female Labor Supply: A Survey,"
in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume I, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers BV.
Kimball, Miles S. (1990) \Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large," Econometrica, 58, 1, 53{73.
Jakubson, George (1988) \The Sensitivity of Labor-Supply Parameter Estimates to Unobserved Individual E ects: Fixed- and Random-E ects Estimates in a Nonlinear Model
31

Using Panel Data," Journal of Labor Economics, 6, 3, 302{29.
Juhn, Chinhui and Kevin M. Murphy (1997) \Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply,"
Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 1, 72{97.
Layard, R., M. Barton, and A. Zabalza, (1980) \Married Women's Participation and
Hours," Economica, 47, 51{72.
Long, Clarence D. (1958) The Labor Force Under Changing Income and Employment.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lundberg, Shelly (1985) \The Added Worker E ect," Journal of Labor Economics, 3, 1,
11{37.
MaCurdy, Thomas E. (1981) \An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life Cycle Setting," Journal of Political Economy, 89, 6, 1059{1085.
MaCurdy, Thomas E. (1985) \Interpreting Empirical Models of Labor Supply in an Intertemporal Framework with Uncertainty," Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market
Data, eds. James J. Heckman and Burton Singer. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Maloney, Tim (1987) \Employment Constraints and the Labor Supply of Married Women:
A Reexamination of the Added Worker E ect," Journal of Human Resources, 22, 1,
51{61.
Maloney, Tim (1991) \Unobserved Variables and the Elusive Added Worker E ect," Economica, 58, 173{187.
Mincer, Jacob (1962) \Labor Force Participation of Married Women," in Aspects of Labor
Economics, ed. H.G. Lewis. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Powell, James L. (1986) \Symmetrically Trimmed Least Squares Estimation for Tobit
Models," Econometrica, 54, 6, 1435{1460.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (1991) \Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements,"
American Economic Review, 81, 1, 319{324.
32

Seitchik, Adam (1991) \Who are Displaced Workers?," in Job Displacement, ed. John T.
Addison. Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Spletzer, James R. (1992) \Reexamining the Added Worker E ect," Bureau of Labor
Statistics Working Paper #237.
Stevens, Ann H. (1997) \Persistent E ects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job Losses," Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 1, 165{88.
Topel, Robert H. (1990) \Speci c Capital and Unemployment: Measuring the Costs and
Consequences of Job Loss," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
33, 2, 181{214.
White, Halbert (1980) \A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and
a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica, 48, 4, 817{38.
Woytinsky, W.S. (1942) Three Aspects of Labor Dynamics. Washington, D.C.: Committee
on Social Security, Social Science Research Council.
Zeldes, Stephen P. (1989) \Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation," Journal of Political Economy, 97, 2, 305{46.

33

Table 1: Comparison of Never Displaced and Displaced Families

Husband's Age
Husband's Education
Wife's Age
Wife's Education
% White
Number of Children
Number of Young Kids
Husband's Annual Earnings ($)
Husband's Hourly Wages ($)
Husband's Occupationd
% White Collar
% Blue Collar
Husband's Industrye
% Manufacturing
% Non-Manufacturing

Never Displaced

41.9
12.2
39.1
12.3
74.2
1.53
0.46
35,100
16.22

b

Displaced

36.9
11.7
34.6
12.0
64.8
1.72
0.63
28,800
13.91

44.8
49.4

34.5
64.0

25.2
68.1

31.1
66.2

a Unweighted tabulations using the 1968-1992 PSID surveys. Only using the worker's rst
displacement from the 1969-1992 surveys. Dollar gures are in 1992 dollars using the CPI-UX1.
b Averages include all observations for every never displaced man.
c Averages are for year of displacement. Pre-displacement industry, occupation, wages, and
earnings are taken from the survey year prior to the reported displacement. Couples not in
the sample prior to the displacement year are excluded from these calculations.
d Missing values are included in the determination of percentages.
e Industry information was not asked until 1971. Averages here are based on years when
the information is observed. Missing values for these years are included in the determination
of percentages.

c

a

Table 2: Estimates of Wife's Leisure Demand
Displacements Combined

OLS

Ind. Variable
Wife's Experience
Wife's Experience2 /100
Number of Kids
Number of Kids Age<6
Displacement Variables
Four Years Before
Three Years Before
Two Years Before
One Year Before
Year of Displacement
One Year After
Two Years After
Three Years After
Four Years After
Five Years After
6+ Years After
Average of
post-displacement e ects
Wald test statistics (p-value):
All displacement e ects
Post-displacement e ectsd
a All regressions also include
b To use Honor
e's estimator

a

Tobitb

Marginal
E ectsc
{.0050
.0105
.0131
.0261

Coe
Std Err
{.0052 .00098
.0099
.0010
.0112
.0010
.0240
.0012

Coe
Std Err
{.0075 .0018
.0157
.0017
.0196
.0017
.0390
.0019

{.0007
{.0068
{.0076
{.0068
{.0073
{.0122
{.0152
{.0125
{.0143
{.0143
{.0155

.0040
.0045
.0045
.0047
.0047
.0050
.0053
.0054
.0057
.0061
.0062

{.0021
{.0096
{.0092
{.0132
{.0106
{.0207
{.0223
{.0174
{.0207
{.0228
{.0190

.0058
.0067
.0067
.0071
.0070
.0077
.0079
.0081
.0084
.0090
.0093

{.0014
{.0064
{.0062
{.0088
{.0071
{.0139
{.0149
{.0116
{.0139
{.0152
{.0127

{.0140

.0052

{.0205

.0078

{.0137

14.2 (.2245)
12.1 (.0974)

17.8 (.0859)
15.3 (.0322)

year e ects.
designed for lower censoring at zero, the dependent variable
in the analysis is (ln L ln L ) where L is the wife's observed hours of leisure and L is the
maximum leisure available (L = 8760). The resulting coeÆcients are opposite in sign from
the coeÆcients for using an upper censored Tobit for ln L. For consistency with the OLS
results, the reported coeÆcients have been multiplied by -1.
c Marginal e ects are derived by multiplying the coeÆcient by the proportion of non-limit
observations, P = .669
d Includes the year of displacement along with the post-displacement years.

Table 3: Estimates of Wife's Leisure Demand
Displacements Separated by Type

OLS

Ind. Variable
Wife's Experience
Wife's Experience2 /100
Number of Kids
Number of Kids Age<6
Layo Variables
Four Years Before
Three Years Before
Two Years Before
One Year Before
Year of Displacement
One Year After
Two Years After
Three Years After
Four Years After
Five Years After
6+ Years After
Plant Closing Variables
Four Years Before
Three Years Before
Two Years Before
One Year Before
Year of Displacement
One Year After
Two Years After
Three Years After
Four Years After
Five Years After
6+ Years After
Average of
post-layo e ects
post-plant closing e ects
Wald test statistics (p-value):
All displacement e ects
All layo e ects
Post-layo e ects
All plant closing e ects
Post-plant closing e ects
Layo s = Plant closings
a See

notes to Table 5.

a

Tobit

Marginal
E ects
{.0050
.0105
.0131
.0261

Coe
Std Err
{.0052 .00099
.0099
.0010
.0112
.0010
.0240
.0012

Coe
Std Err
{.0075 .0018
.0157
.0017
.0196
.0017
.0391
.0019

.0021
{.0047
{.0055
{.0059
{.0083
{.0124
{.0211
{.0180
{.0145
{.0154
{.0157

.0056
.0064
.0063
.0064
.0066
.0070
.0074
.0075
.0078
.0081
.0081

.0051
{.0049
{.0011
{.0085
{.0071
{.0146
{.0264
{.0222
{.0161
{.0209
{.0143

.0082
.0099
.0094
.0095
.0099
.0107
.0109
.0111
.0116
.0119
.0120

.0034
{.0033
{.0007
{.0057
{.0048
{.0098
{.0176
{.0149
{.0108
{.0140
{.0095

{.0042
{.0097
{.0109
{.0089
{.0063
{.0131
{.0059
{.0040
{.0149
{.0134
{.0160

.0056
.0061
.0063
.0066
.0064
.0069
.0071
.0072
.0076
.0083
.0083

{.0094
{.0141
{.0183
{.0182
{.0139
{.0280
{.0141
{.0079
{.0257
{.0237
{.0242

.0080
.0088
.0092
.0104
.0093
.0106
.0107
.0108
.0110
.0122
.0124

{.0063
{.0094
{.0123
{.0122
{.0093
{.0188
{.0094
{.0053
{.0172
{.0159
{.0162

{.0162
{.0112

.0071
.0068

{.0191
{.0206

.0107
.0102

{.0128
{.0139

31.9 (.0803)
16.9 (.1102)
13.9 (.0536)
16.0 (.1433)
14.2 (.0473)
19.5 (.0530)

44.2 (.0034)
20.4 (.0405)
15.0 (.0363)
24.4 (.0112)
22.2 (.0023)
27.8 (.0034)

a

Table 4: Estimates of Wife's Leisure Demand

b

Displacements Separated by Positive and Negative Wage Changes

(1)

Ind. Variable
Wife's Experience
Wife's Experience2 /100
Number of Kids
Number of Kids Age<6
Negative Wage Changes
Four Years Before
Three Years Before
Two Years Before
One Year Before
Year of Displacement
One Year After
Two Years After
Three Years After
Four Years After
Five Years After
6+ Years After
Positive Wage Changes
Four Years Before
Three Years Before
Two Years Before
One Year Before
Year of Displacement
One Year After
Two Years After
Three Years After
Four Years After
Five Years After
6+ Years After
Displacement Variables are:
Zero-One Indicators
Interacted with % Change in Wage
a Only OLS regressions are presented here.
b Wage changes are calculated by comparing

the year after displacement.

(2)

Coe
Std Err
{.0053 .0010
.0098
.0011
.0107
.0010
.0242
.0012

Coe
{.0054
.0099
.0107
.0244

Std Err
.0010
.0010
.0010
.0012

{.0020
{.0072
{.0051
{.0058
{.0104
{.0195
{.0259
{.0211
{.0203
{.0193
{.0217

.0056
.0063
.0065
.0066
.0066
.0069
.0073
.0074
.0077
.0083
.0082

{.0065
{.0134
{.0061
{.0009
{.0146
{.0326
{.0430
{.0453
{.0377
{.0291
{.0315

.0116
.0124
.0126
.0123
.0133
.0132
.0149
.0147
.0150
.0171
.0166

.0029
{.0039
{.0103
{.0082
{.0011
{.0045
{.0017
.0002
{.0039
{.0059
{.0084

.0062
.0072
.0070
.0075
.0073
.0076
.0079
.0082
.0084
.0090
.0087

{.0030
{.0045
{.0062
{.0077
{.0002
{.0015
{.0017
{.0037
{.0030
{.0002
{.0010

.0031
.0036
.0041
.0058
.0045
.0042
.0040
.0048
.0041
.0060
.0053

Yes
No

No
Yes

wages the year before displacement with wages

a

Table 5: Estimates of Wife's Leisure Demand

Displacements Separated by Year and Earnings

Ind. Variable
Wife's Experience
Wife's Experience2 /100
Number of Kids
Number of Kids Age<6
Four Years Before
Three Years Before
Two Years Before
One Year Before
Year of Displacement
One Year After
Two Years After
Three Years After
Four Years After
Five Years After
6+ Years After
Four Years Before
Three Years Before
Two Years Before
One Year Before
Year of Displacement
One Year After
Two Years After
Three Years After
Four Years After
Five Years After
6+ Years After

b

By Year
(1)

By Earningsc
(2)

Coe
Std Err
{.0052 .00098
.0099
.0010
.0112
.0010
.0240
.0012
1969-1980
Displacements
{.0033 .0069
{.0015 .0071
{.0037 .0074
{.0032 .0075
.0063
.0079
{.0002 .0082
.0036
.0084
.0051
.0085
.0050
.0087
.0027
.0091
{.0011 .0088
1981-1992
Displacements
.0033
.0047
{.0061 .0057
{.0067 .0055
{.0056 .0057
{.0127 .0057
{.0167 .0062
{.0259 .0067
{.0226 .0068
{.0267 .0072
{.0247 .0077
{.0289 .0080

Coe
Std Err
{.0050 .0010
.0098
.0010
.0108
.0010
.0242
.0012
Low Earnings
Displacements
.0087
.0059
{.0046 .0069
{.0025 .0067
{.0001 .0068
{.0001 .0068
{.0031 .0073
{.0015 .0076
.0005
.0079
.0007
.0081
{.0025 .0088
{.0022 .0086
High Earnings
Displacements
{.0082 .0052
{.0073 .0058
{.0108 .0058
{.0112 .0061
{.0100 .0063
{.0224 .0068
{.0306 .0072
{.0256 .0074
{.0279 .0077
{.0242 .0082
{.0293 .0082

a Only OLS regressions are presented here.
b Pre-displacement earnings are taken from
c Sample is divided around $28,800.

the year before displacement.

Average earnings of husbands two years before displacement = $30,000
Average wage of working wives = $10.41
Years since
% Husband's
$ Lost
Increased
% of husband's
displacement earnings lost earnings Wife Earnings
lost earnings
0
22%
$6,600
$590
8.9%
1
27%
$8,100
$991
12.2%
2
16%
$4,800
$1234
25.7%
3
14%
$4,200
$1012
24.1%
4
13%
$3,900
$1158
29.7%
5
13%
$3,900
$1160
29.7%

Table 6: Percentage of Lost Earnings Replaced by Increases in Wives' Work

Figure 1 - Effect of Displacement on Husband's Earnings
10%

5%

0%

-5%

-10%

-15%

-20%

-25%

-30%
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

t+5

> t+5

Figure 2 - Relative Movements in Wives' Employment Rates,
Wives' Hours of Work, and Husbands' Unemployment Rates
(t-4=100)

(Wives' Employment and Hours)

Wives' Employment Rate

Wives' Hours Worked

500

Husbands' Unemployment Rate

130

400

120

300

110

200

100

100

90

0
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

t+5

(Husbands' Unemployment)

140

Figure 3 - Effect of Displacement on Wife's Hours of Work
Layoffs and Plant Closings Combined
300

250

200

150

100

50

0

-50

-100
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

t+5

> t+5

Figure 4 - Effect of Displacement on Wife's Hours of Work
Layoffs Only
300

250

200

150

100

50

0

-50

-100
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

t+5

> t+5

Figure 5 - Effect of Displacement on Wife's Hours of Work
Plant Closings Only
300

250

200

150

100

50

0

-50

-100
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

t+5

> t+5

