                                   (




                           
                              


                                            
                                          !
                                            "#$$


                                        #%&')*+,
                                !--'..///010#&.'' ./)*+,



                                       
                                   ,232 "!4 -- 54
                                     16&72*,8)
                                          




         !" 
" "#    $# %#   & ' (   
    ) *+ ,    (-      ( "*.
/0   1 "   ' (23  + ) 45#"    "
   "   )   * / %   ( " (16,% 
/   ( "((#7- !(     
"  1     6" ","#


8) ,  6 " #+  - #%"  !
!" (()9    !( " (  (-   "  "    8
 "  - "#
" 6"  ' ##-!156"$#-! ##%64 -
7 !6"#$$
  #%&' #0)*+,
*22,
9 #0


                                               $%#%


         &6-"#"-61-/4&4 -,:::694*222"#5&8::1##% 7"46&
  /#%  1 -  7"#'4-1 -  766#1##% 7/;'"&1-!-<
-/##1##% -# 0 "##'6"-# -!--!64"-# "!"# - #-!--
-5-#-!'! ""!/#46"4 1#-!'"6'"6 ' #-#$0 5-! '
'#67 / $6 # "!&  -! '" # '" 6 ' #0 #-! '6"-# #$ -! "!
--4 -!--!'" 6'" 6 ' ##$65- 6- #- -!-'4"! 6
'-6 / 1 #/ -! $# 465- 6 # $=4- '4"! 6 - 0 "  "#
"-&# #$1##% ''-#"#$#-#-! '6"-#7/-! /#%  1 -  !5&
-!#/ -'"  $"-##$-!'41 !>  4&& -6'"66#1##% !5&-!
!&! -'" 0- -&7'"6 ' #6# #-"#$#/-!-! '6"-#7''-$#
 # -6-# -# >6" # -#"'-"41##% 0  #/!/#-#1 5
"#5&"'"  1"4  -# !5 4""666$$--&-! 5 5-!#4&!
-! &"##6-'#64"-0#1 56$$--#?#--'-66$$--#@1
 &$"-41#$$ 0




                                               !
  A"!###$41"#"6&-             A"!###$41"#"6&-
&#5 -                              &#5 -
-- 14&!7,3*,8                                    -- 14&!7,3*,8
%"B6/0"4064                                    %*;B6/0"4064

"#$$
(64-"!###$64 -6 --#
&#5 -
-- 14&!7,3*,8
/#$$B6/0"4064
Introduction

          One widely reported prediction is that the availability of low-cost information on

price – specifically the rise of comparison-shopping engines – will lead all Internet

retailers to charge the same price for mass-produced physical goods and that price will be

approximately cost. For instance, in a September 1999 New York Times article, Bob

Tedeschi noted “New shopping search engines are being developed quickly, bringing the

promise of low prices for consumers and thinner margins for Web retailers.”1 An August

1999 Economist article stated “Fierce competition has forced web companies to slash

prices.”2 These statements are based on a Bertrand model of competition and rely on

consumers using comparison-shopping engines to become fully informed about book

prices.

          A second prediction of the search literature is that the prices and price dispersion

of advertised items or items that are purchased repeatedly will be lower than for

unadvertised or infrequently purchased items. The differences in prices and price

dispersion are the result of differences in information. This prediction assumes that

individuals might be better informed about prices for some types of books, such as New

York Times bestsellers, since on and off-line bookstores frequently advertise their

discounts on these books.

          The empirical literature has primarily focused on comparisons of price and price

dispersion in the Internet and physical channels, saying relatively little about changes in

prices or price dispersion over time. Lee (1997) compared pricing of used autos in


1
  http://search.nytimes.com/search/daily/bin/fastweb?getdoc+site+site+89051+0+wAAA+internet%7Eprice
s
2
   The Economist, August 21, 1999.

                                              Page 2
Internet and physical channels and found that prices were higher in the Internet channel.

This may be due to unobserved quality variation. Bailey (1998) using matched sets of

books, compact disks, and software also finds higher prices in the Internet channel for

1996-1997. Brynjolfsson and Smith (1999) on books and compact disks for 1998-99

found that Internet retailers had lower prices, made smaller price adjustments, and had

greater or smaller price dispersion than conventional channels, depending on whether

prices were weighted by proxies for market share.

        Empirical studies testing Stigler’s (1961) prediction that advertising that improves

price information would cause both price and price dispersion to fall confirm this

intuition. Comparisons of the prices of goods such as eyeglasses, optometry services, and

prescription drugs in states that permitted or did not permit advertising showed that

advertising was associated with lower prices and price dispersion.3 More recently Milyo

and Waldfogel (1999) found that increased advertising did lower prices on advertised

products, but not overall. They also found that price dispersion was stable or increasing

in the short run. Sorenson (2000) examined the posted price of drugs across drugstores in

two communities. In line with the predictions of search theory, he finds that average

price-cost margin and price dispersion are lower if the prescription is purchased

repeatedly than if it is purchased only occasionally. It is notable that none of these papers

examines data from the Internet.

        The first prediction that low cost price information on the Internet will force price

and price dispersion to fall is in tension with a third prediction. The third prediction

states that firms will seek to differentiate their products. Firms prefer to be differentiated,


3
 See Benham (1972), Cady (1976), Devine and Marion (1979), Feldman and Begun (1978, 1980), Glazer
(1981) and Kowka (1984).

                                              Page 3
because it mutes price competition. Thus with product differentiation, prices may not

converge in equilibrium and could in fact diverge.

       Several authors have found evidence of product differentiation. In a study of the

online travel industry, Clemons, Hitt, and Hann (1998) found agents responded to

identical requests with different time/price pairs. This evidence suggests that online

ticket agents engaged in significant product differentiation. Clay et al. (1999), using data

from April 1999, find indirect evidence that online booksellers were engaging in product

differentiation through price, selection, and other nonprice attributes. Although it is not a

focus of their paper, Brynjolfsson and Smith (1999) on books and compact disks for

1998-99 also find evidence that is consistent with product differentiation.

       To investigate these three predictions, we use data on pricing in the online book

industry covering the period August 1999 to January 2000. Automated agents collected

data for 399 books from thirty-two online bookstores over twenty-five weeks. The books

included New York Times bestsellers, former New York Times bestsellers, computer

bestsellers, former computer bestsellers, and random books. The stores included well-

established Internet retailers such as Amazon, BarnesandNoble.com, and Borders.com as

well as smaller Internet retailers such as Wordsworth and BCY Bookloft.



Background

       Although book selling over the Internet began in the 1980s, it started to attract

national attention from the press in 1993 (Wilke 1993). The first online stores, not

surprisingly, primarily sold computer books. Incredible rates of growth in the number of

people with access to Internet and the spread of early web browsers in the early 1990s



                                           Page 4
made the book market increasingly attractive to retailers and consumers. The number of

stores and the range of books available increased dramatically. In July 1995 Amazon

entered the market. The two largest bricks and mortar chains – Barnes and Noble and

Borders – began Internet sales in May 1997 and May 1998, respectively.

       Several factors have shaped the structure of this industry. Each version of a book

title has a unique identifier called an International Standard Book Number (ISBN).

ISBN’s are important for two reasons. First, the existence of these unique identifiers

allowed wholesalers to computerize their catalogs in the late 1980s. Computerized

catalogs led to more efficient order processing, benefiting the industry as a whole. The

first Internet bookstores built their systems on top of these catalogs. Second, consumers

can search by ISBN and be assured that they are getting exactly the same product. In

some other commodity markets, firms can hinder comparison shopping by bundling a

few items and issuing the bundle a new SKU (stock keeping unit) number. Bundles in

the book world, in contrast, would be identified by component ISBNs or would have to

be issued a new ISBN by the issuing agency.

         Market penetration of online bookstores was 5.4 percent in 1999, up from 1.9

percent in 1998 (Book Industry Study Group, 2000). This is significantly higher than

overall retail penetration, which finally reached 1 percent in the fourth quarter of 2000

(United States Census, 2001). Consumers can choose among a large number of Internet

bookstores. For instance, Yahoo lists more than one hundred online bookstores. And new

stores are opening all of the time. Some of the new entrants are physical stores that are

migrating to the web, but many others are new internet-only bookstores.




                                           Page 5
           Consumers interested in comparing the price of a particular ISBN across many

stores can use comparison-shopping engines. For instance, Yahoo lists ten comparison-

shopping engines that focus primarily or exclusively on books. Examples include

BestBookBuys, DealTime, and AddAll. In addition, consumers can choose from a

comparison-shopping engines, such as Yahoo Shopping, MySimon, and PriceScan, that

focus on many goods, of which books are only one. Most of the major comparison-

shopping engines cover twenty or more U.S.-based online bookstores. For instance,

DealTime, BestBookBuys, and PriceScan all search between 20 and 30 stores. Their

search set includes major players as well as smaller online booksellers.

         Finally, online bookstores face very similar wholesale prices for books. As a

result of a recent lawsuits in the book industry, all players with even minimal volume

now face very similar wholesale prices for books. Industry sources indicate that very

large stores (Amazon, Barnes and Noble, and Borders) may receive additional discounts

of up to 7 percent of list price for warehousing books, engaging in advertising campaigns,

and waiving the right to returns. Depending on the costs of providing these services, the

largest stores may get slightly larger net discounts. All other stores face the same prices

for books. (Conversation in November 1999 with Y. S. Chi, COO, Ingram Book Group,

Friedman 1999, Bookweb.org 1999, and other industry sources)4.



4
  Other costs that stores face can be divided into infrastructure costs, nonmarginal book specific costs, and
order fulfillment costs. We are intentionally ignoring marketing expenditures, since they are effectively
discretionary. Infrastructure costs include the costs of maintaining warehouse space, most personnel, and
the hardware and software associated with the database, orders, and customer service. Nonmarginal book
specific costs are one time setup costs related to the creation of the entry for the book in the database with a
scanned photo of the cover, establishing linkages with the supplier database, and other efforts that support
creation of the page, placement of the order, and order fulfillment.
  Order fulfillment costs together with the wholesale price of the book determine the marginal cost of the
book. Stores with significant numbers of orders either outsource order fulfillment or maintain large semi or
fully automated warehouses. In discussions with companies, it does not appear that the marginal cost of

                                                    Page 6
Predictions

         Four assumptions about the market underlie the prediction that the availability of

low-cost information on price will lead all Internet retailers to charge the same price for

mass-produced physical goods and that price will be approximately cost. In the Bertrand

model of competition, i) consumers are perfectly informed about firms’ prices, ii) goods

are identical, iii) firms choose price, iv) firms can supply whatever quantity the market

demands at constant marginal cost. (Bertrand, 1883). In such a market, if a firm charges

a higher price than a competitor, it faces zero demand. Conversely, if a firm charges a

marginally lower price than competitors, it will capture demand for the entire market.

Thus, price will fall to the marginal cost of a good, with all firms charging the same price.

         The first assumption – that consumers are perfectly informed about firms’ prices –

is particularly strong. Although comparison-shopping engines are common, their market

penetration is limited, around 2 percent.5 Reasons for the limited penetration include the

fact that comparison-shopping engines tend to be slow and the fact that they are

cumbersome to use for a basket of goods. As a result, the vast majority of consumers are

relatively uninformed about prices. These consumers may, however, be relatively better

informed about prices of certain categories of books. In particular, they may be informed

about the prices of New York Times bestsellers, because on and off-line bookstores

regularly advertise their discounts on these books.




order fulfillment differs much within or between the two options. Industry estimates of order fulfillment
costs, which are traditionally reported as a percentage of the sale price, are 10-15%.
5
  It is important to note that search engines do differ in the amount of information provided and bookstores
covered. Thus, even consumers who use a search engine may not have perfect information.

                                                   Page 7
        In most theoretical models, dispersion is driven by imperfect information.6

Imperfect information can arise in a number of different ways – through ex ante

differences across consumers or ex post differences created by the operation of the

market. The relationship between information and price, however, hinges on the use of

quantity-weighted measures of price. For instance, if more consumers become informed,

this may reallocate consumers among existing stores, but it may or may not cause firms

to change their prices. Hence, unweighted measures of price may not change. In our

empirical work, we work with unweighted measures of price. So even if we believe that

consumers are becoming more informed, we may not find corresponding price decreases.

        The second assumption – that goods are identical – is also fairly strong. Choices

of search engine customers indicate that they are willing to pay 5.0 percent more to

purchase the same book from Amazon rather than from the low price vendor and 3.1

percent more to purchase the same book from Barnes and Noble or Borders (Brynjolffson

and Smith, 2001). Since stores such as Amazon, Barnes and Noble, and Borders have

invested heavily in branding and in features such as one-click, book reviews, and

recommender systems, it is not entirely surprising that some customers would be willing

to pay a premium to purchase from them. The theory literature also predicts that in

competitive markets firms will seek to differentiate their products to soften price

competition, which could result in price dispersion.7

        Two other factors suggest that static theoretical models and empirical results from

stable markets may not translate neatly into dynamic, volatile market such as the Internet.


6
  See Butters (1977), Salop and Stiglitz (1977), Pratt, Wise, and Zeckhauser (1979), Wilde and Schwartz
(1979), Varian (1980), Salop and Stiglitz (1982), Burdett and Judd (1983), Benabou (1993), Burdett and
Coles (1997), Rauh (1997), Kephart and Greenwald (1998) and Arnold (2000).
7
  See Tirole 1988, Chapter 7 for a discussion of the theoretical literature.

                                                 Page 8
First, huge numbers of new consumers are entering the market. If later adopters tend to

be less technologically sophisticated, the effect of their entry may be swamping the

effects of the increase in the number of informed consumers. In particular, even if the

absolute number of informed consumers is increasing, they may represent a declining

fraction of the population. Second, firms are entering and exiting. Burdett and Coles

(1997) model an economy with noisy search and repeat purchases where both firms and

consumers enter and exit. In equilibrium, younger firms offer lower prices to attract

consumers and older firms offer higher prices to existing customers who face switching

costs. Thus, average prices and price dispersion could be falling or rising, depending on

the interaction among changes in information, the number of customers, and the entry

and exit of firms.



Data

Collection

       Automated agents (spiders) were constructed to collect data from two major

comparison-shopping engines and some individual Internet booksellers. The web pages

for each book in the sample were downloaded and parsed to extract information on unit

price, shipping cost, shipping time, and delivery time. The collection process began

around 2 am to minimize the load on the servers and to maximize response rate.

       The collection process does not cover the universe of all online stores, but the

thirty-two stores in our sample cover the largest United States-based stores. For example

it includes Amazon, BarnesandNoble.com, Borders.com, Buy.com, and Booksamillion.8

Stores were included if they were covered in one of two major comparison-shopping



                                          Page 9
engines – DealTime or PriceScan. The focus here on the impact of comparison-shopping

engines and the fact that many stores are represented made it natural to collect data from

comparison-shopping engines. We also sent agents to some individual stores to guarantee

data from important stores and to determine the accuracy of the information from

DealTime and PriceScan.

           The sample includes five categories of books: New York Times bestsellers,

former New York Times bestsellers, computer bestsellers, former computer bestsellers

and a random sample of books in print. New York Times bestsellers were included,

because they are widely carried, represent high aggregate sales, and are a focal point for

discounts. For the New York Times bestsellers, a new panel of approximately 60 titles is

begun each week that includes that week’s bestsellers in each of four categories:

paperback fiction, paperback nonfiction, hardcover fiction and hardcover nonfiction.9

When New York Times bestsellers go off of the list, we continue to track them as former

bestsellers.

           Computer books were included, because they were one of the first categories of

books sold on the Internet and remain an important category. In particular, purchasers of

computer books might also be early adopters of comparison-shopping engines. While,

the New York Times does not maintain a comparable bestseller list for computer books,

Amazon.com does. We chose Amazon’s bestseller list because of Amazon’s high

volume of book sales and the generalist (as opposed to specialist) orientation of the site.10

Thus, the 50 books on the computer bestseller list are likely to be purchased by large

numbers of consumers and offered in a large number of stores. Like the New York

8
    A complete list of the stores is provided in Table 3.
9
    The number is approximate, because there are often ties for the #15 spot.

                                                    Page 10
Times bestsellers, a new panel is begun each week and that panel is followed on an

ongoing basis.

         Random books were included to provide a baseline against which to compare the

prices and price dispersion of bestsellers and former bestsellers and to understand pricing

for the millions of books not covered by the bestseller lists. The random sample was

created by generating random strings of letters of random length and then checking the

result against the online Books in Print database until approximately 200 in-print titles

were found.11 Unlike the two types of bestsellers, we generated only a single panel. This

panel has been followed from August 1999 to November 2000.

         For the purposes of this paper, we focus on the weekly prices of 399 books

between August 1999 and January 2000. Although data collection continued through

November 2000, we decided to cut the sample after approximately six months of data

collection. We constructed new panels of New York Times bestsellers and computer

bestsellers every week. Given computational constraints, however, we chose to focus on

just the first, ninth, and seventeenth weeks’ bestsellers.12 Reported prices are weekly

minimums. Data is nominally collected daily, but unavailable servers, problems with the

information returned, and changes in search engines, resulted in some data loss. Further

problems with disk space forced us to reduce the frequency of collection to every other

day for a period in November and December 1999 until the problems could be resolved.

Because a bookstore changes the price of a book less than twice on average over the

sample period, there is little loss in aggregating to the weekly level.

10
  Use of any store’s bestseller list raises unavoidable issues of endogeneity.
11
  Some, although technically in print, were not available in any bookstores. After eliminating these, the
data set includes 181 random books.



                                                  Page 11
Summary Statistics

        Summary statistics for the data set are presented in Table 1. Our sample includes

181 random books, 136 New York Times bestsellers, and 82 computer bestsellers. If the

bestseller lists in weeks one, nine, and seventeen had not overlapped, the sample would

have had 180 New York Times bestsellers and 150 computer bestsellers. The number of

unique bestsellers was reduced by the fact that bestsellers remained on the lists for 15-16

weeks on average, and thus appear on multiple bestseller lists.

        Different categories had different mixes of hardcover/paperback and

fiction/nonfiction books. New York Times bestsellers are, by construction, an even mix

of hardcover fiction, hardcover nonfiction, paperback fiction, and paperback nonfiction.

Departures from the even split are explained by overlap in the bestseller lists from weeks

one, nine, and seventeen. In contrast to the New York Times bestsellers, computer

bestsellers are predominantly paperback and exclusively nonfiction. Random books are

predominately hardcover nonfiction.

        Across the five categories, prices show substantial differences between average

unit prices and publishers’ recommended prices. To facilitate price comparisons, we use

normalized price, which is retail price divided by the publisher’s recommended price.

Average prices are the lowest for New York Times bestsellers and former New York

Times bestsellers (0.69 and 0.76 of publisher’s recommended price), are higher for

computer bestsellers and former computer bestsellers (0.78 and 0.79), and are the highest

for random books (0.86).




12
 We chose weeks one, nine, and seventeen because they are equally spaced throughout the twenty-five
week period.

                                               Page 12
       Wholesale prices tend on average to be about 50 percent of the publisher’s

recommended price. Random books are the exception – they tend to sell for 60 percent of

the publisher’s recommended price. Average margins are the lowest for New York

Times bestsellers (0.19), are higher for former New York Times bestsellers (0.24) and

random books (0.26), and are the highest for computer bestsellers and former computer

bestsellers (0.29 and 0.29). So despite having higher prices than computer books,

random books have lower margins.

       Measures of price dispersion are inversely related to price. Standard deviation as

a percentage of average price is the highest for New York Times bestsellers (28 percent),

is lower for former New York Times bestsellers and current computer bestsellers (18 and

16 percent), and is the lowest for former computer bestsellers and random books (14 and

13 percent). The difference between the minimum and maximum prices as a percentage

of average price follows this pattern as well.

       The last line of Table 1 presents another, more applied measure of price

dispersion. Many consumers routinely go to Amazon without checking prices at other

stores. Thus, we computed savings that they could have realized by purchasing a book

from the lowest cost vendor instead. The average savings as a percentage of Amazon’s

price ranged from a low of 10 percent for New York Times bestsellers to a high of 25

percent for former New York Times bestsellers. For current New York Times

bestsellers, the savings is likely to be about $1. For computer books, however,

particularly former bestsellers, the amounts can be more significant. For instance, 20

percent savings on a $40 computer book is $8.




                                           Page 13
Prices

         The differences in prices across the five categories of books as well as hardcover

and paperback books and fiction and nonfiction books are explored further in Table 2.

The dependent variables in regressions are price, normalized price, and normalized

margin.13 The second regression is slightly easier to interpret than the first, so we will

focus on the second regression. The results there show substantial average discounts

(17%-9%) relative to paperback, nonfiction, random books for current and former New

York Times and computer bestsellers, small (2%) discounts for hardcover books, and

more substantial (6%) discounts for fiction books. One change is in the pricing of week

nine bestsellers. Relative to weeks one and seventeen, the average price of a week nine

bestseller has increased 1 percent. Prices are also trending up slightly over time, perhaps

because a few stores increased their prices during the holiday season (Christmas is week

twenty).

         Regressions on gross margins indicate that random books and former bestsellers

had gross margins of 25 percent. An average store earned gross margins of 16 percent on

New York Times bestsellers and 22 percent on computer bestsellers. The smaller gross

margins for New York Times bestsellers than for the computer bestsellers may reflect the

relative importance of the two lists and the fact that many stores advertise their discounts

on New York Times bestsellers but they do not advertise their discounts on Amazon’s

computer bestsellers. The slightly larger discount for hardcovers may reflect stores




13
   Using price as the dependent variable presumes that stores set prices in absolute dollar terms. In contrast,
using normalized price as the dependent variable presumes that stores set prices as a percentage of cover
price or equivalently as a percent markup over wholesale price. Wholesale prices are typically quoted as a
fraction of the publisher’s recommended price.

                                                   Page 14
willingness to accept lower gross margins on more expensive books and the price

sensitivity or expectations of the buyers.

         The regression results from Table 2 do not capture the competitive structure of the

book market and differences between Amazon, Barnes and Noble, and Borders (the big

three) and all other bookstores.14 We focus on these three bookstores, because in

discussions with managers of other bookstores, managers identified these three as market

leaders. Book availability by bookstore and category is presented in Table 3. The big

three stores carry nearly all of the books in the data set. Some other stores such as

Booksamillion and Buy.com carry many of the books as well. Most other stores have

limited selection, either across the board like Allbooks4less or in certain categories like

Bookpool and Brian’s Books.

         In Table 4, we explore the effects of market structure on pricing behavior.15 We

define a market as the number of bookstores offering a price for a specific ISBN in a

specific week. To characterize the competitive structure within a market, we track

separately the number of big three bookstores and the number of what we will call, for

lack of better terminology, fringe bookstores that provide a price. Looking at the control

variables, the big three had substantially larger average discounts than fringe bookstores

on both current and former bestsellers. The big three’s discounts on hardcover and fiction

were larger as well. The value of the constant indicates that the two types of stores had

very similar prices on random, paperback nonfiction books. The effect of the week

(time) variable on prices was small and positive but no longer significant for the big three


14
   This represents a natural grouping given that the big three account for the vast majority of online book
sales. Other groupings are clearly possible given the heterogeneity of the other category. We explore this
further in the section on firm strategy.
15
   Market structure is not exogenous, see Mazzeo (2000).

                                                  Page 15
and small, positive, and significant for the fringe bookstores, indicating that prices

changed very little over time. This finding is consistent with the patterns of prices over

time that we observe in Figure 1.16

         Given the baseline differences in prices between the big three and fringe

bookstores, effects of additional competitors are remarkably similar. The way to interpret

the effects of competitors is as follows. Same type and other type are in reference to the

column heading. So, for instance, the same type for a big three firm would be another big

three firm, and the same type for fringe bookstores would be another fringe bookstore.

All effects are holding all other things constant, and changes in the competitive structure

are aggregate. For a big three firm, the effect of adding the first same type competitor

(i.e., another member of the big three) is to lower prices by 6.5 percent and the effect of

adding the first other type competitor is to lower prices by 5.5 percent. For a fringe

bookstore, the effect of the first competitor of the same type is to lower the price 7.8

percent and the effect of the first competitor of the other type is to lower the price 5.3

percent. The effect of the entry of the first and second competitors of the other type is to

lower prices 4.6 percent for the big three and 6.2 percent for fringe bookstores. Note that

the marginal effects of the second competitor of the other type are small, 0.6 percent

increase for the big three and a 0.9 decrease for fringe bookstores. The coefficients on

first and second same type for fringe bookstores and first through nth type for the big

three are much larger – 11.7 and 10.4 percent – because they encompass the effect of

adding on average 15 fringe bookstores.



16
  We had technical problems downloading the computer bestseller list in week nineteen, so we were
unable to determine whether books were still on the bestseller list that week or not. This accounts for the
gaps in Figures 1 and 2.

                                                  Page 16
       The fact that the marginal effect of competitors is similar across the two types of

bookstores is striking, because it suggests that the competitive fringe effectively

disciplines the big three. We believe that this is caused by the aggressive pricing policies

of a relatively small number of stores that carry 90 percent or more of the books in the

sample. In markets where a relatively small number of stores sell a book, it is these

stores that are repeatedly putting competitive pressure on the big three. We explore this

issue in more detail below.



Price Dispersion

       If costs are same across firms, then the standard intuition is that equilibrium price

dispersion will be zero for a monopolist and zero or very small for competitive markets

where most consumers are informed. In particular, we might think that consumers are

likely to be informed about the price of New York Times bestsellers, since most internet

and physical bookstores widely advertise their discounts on these books. Neither

weighted nor unweighted standard deviation fit neatly into this story. Amazon and

BarnesandNoble.com currently represent 80 percent or more of sales. As we will see

below, their pricing strategies are very similar, so standard deviation weighted by sales

would be small for all books. If the distribution of prices in the market is of interest, then

unweighted standard deviation is an important metric.

       Table 5 explores the relationship between unweighted standard deviation of prices

and book characteristics. Standard deviation may depend on unit price, making it hard to

interpret the first equation, so we will focus on the second regression. The baseline is a

paperback, nonfiction, random book, and for that book the standard deviation as a



                                            Page 17
fraction of normalized price is 0.11. Sorenson (2000) found that the price and standard

deviation of prescription drugs was lower for more frequently purchased items, a finding

that is consistent with standard search theory. Thus it is somewhat surprising that New

York Times bestsellers have much higher standard deviations than other books, 0.08

higher than the baseline of 0.11. This effect is driven by some online stores, typically

branches of physical stores, offering bestsellers at full price. The slightly higher standard

deviations for computer bestsellers, former computer bestsellers, and former New York

Times bestsellers are also a result of some stores charging full price.

        In addition to interstore standard deviation, two other measures of standard

deviation are potentially of interest – prices for a given book at a given store across time

(intertemporal price dispersion), and within a category of books at a given bookstore at a

given time (intracategory price dispersion). The average standard deviations for these

measures are reported by category in Table 6. Intertemporal variation is relatively low,

suggesting that bookstores do not change their prices very often. This is consistent with

the fact that the modal bookstore does not change the price of a book, except when the

book goes off of the bestseller list. Intracategory variation is higher, but still relatively

low as well, indicating that stores tend to use similar pricing rules for books in a given

category. One surprise is the variation within New York Times bestsellers. This seems

to be the result of two factors: discounts are often smaller for paperback bestsellers than

for hardcover bestsellers, and some stores only discount the top ten titles, rather than the

top fifteen.

        In Table 7, we explore the effects of market structure on standard deviation.

Holding competitive structure constant, there are striking differences between the two



                                            Page 18
types of stores across the control variables. For the big three, the prediction that widely

advertised books should have lower standard deviation of price seems to hold.

Specifically, random books have the highest standard deviation and New York Times

bestsellers have the lowest standard deviation. For fringe bookstores, advertising (or

more generally greater competition) seems to lead to higher standard deviation. This

result is driven by stores that tend to sell their books at full price or nearly full price offer

bestsellers at high prices, but presumably sell very few copies. The effect of time is

negligible for both types of stores. This finding is consistent with the patterns of prices

over time that we observe in Figure 2.

        Examining the effects of competitors, going from two to more than two

competitors of the same type increases the standard deviation of own type prices. And

adding the first competitor of the other type also increases the standard deviation of own

type prices. The total effect of competitors is declining as we move for the big three from

first to first and second to first through nth of the other type and as we move for fringe

bookstores from first and second to first through nth of the other type. Thus, the marginal

effect of another competitor is to lower the standard deviation. So at some point, as

predicted, more competition does lead to lower standard deviation.



Firm Level Strategies

        Thus far we have restricted discussion to aggregate patterns. In this section we

turn to firm level pricing strategies. One approach would be to compute average prices

for the stores in Table 3 by book category, but as Table 3 indicates, there is huge

variability in what stores carry. To control for this problem, we ran regressions on



                                             Page 19
normalized price by category using both store and book fixed effects. The coefficients on

the store dummies for each category of book are presented in Table 8.17

         Based on selection and prices, we divided the stores in Table 8 into six types.18

The six types are: i) the big three bookstores, ii) other full-line stores that offer low prices

on New York Times bestsellers, iii) full-line stores that offer average prices on New York

Times bestsellers, iv) full-line stores that charge close to full price for most books, v)

stores with limited selection and very low prices, and vi) specialty bookstores. The first

two types of stores are very similar in that they offer wide selection and low prices on

New York Times bestsellers. Given the similarity of the second type’s pricing policy to

the big three’s pricing policy, the second type is probably the part of the competitive

fringe that is disciplining the pricing behavior of the big three. The third type also offers

wide selection but offers less competitive prices on of current and former New York

Times bestsellers. The fourth type is usually a physical store that sells books at full price

and seems to be using the web as a form of advertising. The fifth type is a specialty store

that specializes in remaindered books.19 The sixth type is a store that specializes in one

or more categories of books. Examples include Brian’s Books and Bookpool that

specialize in computer books, Christianbooks that specializes in Christian books, and

Cherry Valley that specializes in children’s books.

         Because of Amazon’s dominant status in the online book industry, its prices tend

to act as a focal point. Table 9 compares each store’s prices with Amazon’s prices to

17
   It is interesting to note that Barnes and Noble and Borders were offering 50 percent off of New York
Times bestsellers in their online channel and at the same time were offering only 40 percent off of New
York Times hardcovers and 30 percent off of New York Times paperbacks. This runs counter to the
interesting thesis proposed by Png et al. (2000) that online stores should offer smaller discounts on
bestsellers than offline stores because buyer switching costs are lower.
18
   This categorization is not unique in the sense that one could have finer or less fine categorization, but it
helps structure the analysis.

                                                    Page 20
determine the frequency with which that store’s prices are above, below, or equal to

Amazon’s.20 Overall, only 14 percent of book prices are the same as Amazon’s, with 43

percent above Amazon’s price and 43 percent below. Expanding the definition of equal

to include prices that are within one percent of Amazon’s expands this number to 21

percent and within $0.10 expands it to 47 percent. Given that roughly two-thirds of the

increase is coming from prices that were lower than Amazon’s prices, it suggests that

firms are marginally undercutting Amazon’s price. This strategy ensures better

placement if prospective customers search for prices either manually or using

comparison-shopping engines.

           The comparison in Table 9 highlights just how similar the strategies are for firms

in the wide selection, low NYT category. The fraction of prices that are within $0.10 of

Amazon’s prices ranges from a low of 70 percent for Buy.com to a high of 100 percent

for Bookbuyer’s Outlet. The results also suggest that despite their more limited discounts

on New York Times bestsellers, some stores in the wide selection, average NYT

category, notably Books.com and to a lesser extent BCY Book Loft, Fatbrain, and

Kingbooks have similar prices to Amazon’s for many titles. Not surprisingly the wide

selection, close to full price group almost always is the same price or more expensive

than Amazon. The limited selection, low prices group carries very few titles but is

usually cheaper than Amazon. The limited selection, average to full prices group is more

of a mixed bag. Most sites have fewer than 1,000 observations, reflecting their specialty

status. For the somewhat broader range of titles they carry, Alldirect and Bookpool are




19
     The sale of remaindered books is discussed in more detail below.
20
     Thanks to Mike Smith for suggesting this measure to us.

                                                   Page 21
cheaper on average than Amazon and Page1book is more expensive than Amazon. The

correlations presented in Table 10 tell a similar story.

       Given the strategies documented in Tables 8-10, the question is how these

strategies play out in the market. Based on their prices, the wide selection, full price

stores seem to be using their websites primarily as a form of advertising. Andy Ross of

Cody’s Books confirmed that his site offered customers a way to check whether books

were in stock at the physical store. If the person can not come to the store, books can be

delivered in the San Francisco Bay Area, usually the next business day, via U.S. Mail.

Computerlibrary, Powells, and Wordsworth are all physical stores that happen to have

websites as well. The two internet-only stores in this group, Booksnow and Classbook

do sell a wide selection of books, but seem to do so as an adjunct to their main line of

business. For Booksnow (now ClickSmart), this is offering “services to magazines and

Internet content web sites that want to outsource the sale of products, targeted to their

readers' interests, that are mentioned in their print or electronic publications.”21 For

Classbook, its main line of business is textbooks.

       The fifth type seems to be attracting traffic through low prices. Unsold books are

eventually returned to the publisher. Publishers can resell these books as remaindered

books. Remaindered books are sold by the pallet in mixed bundles and cannot be

returned. Stores purchasing remaindered books do not typically know specific titles of

books in a pallet. The price is often a function of weight or a fixed-fee per title and

typically equals 10-20% of the publishers recommended price. Given their low

wholesale cost, stores in this category can afford to offer customers discounts of 40-60

percent off of the publisher’s recommended price and still make a profit.



                                           Page 22
           The sixth type represents a mix of strategies, some differentiation, some low

prices, and some advertising. Alldirect and Bookpool are internet-only stores that

specialize in low prices for the books they stock. Books4mom and Cherryvalleybooks are

no longer operational. (Cherryvalleybooks was the website for the physical children’s

bookstore of the same name.) Brian’s books is internet-only and specializes in computer

books. It is a division of Davidson Computer Services and therefore may be an

advertising or promotional tool. Christianbook began as a catalog book and now sells a

wide selection of Christian products. It seems to be an example of successful

differentiation. Hamiltonbook originated as and continues to be affiliated with a book

catalog company of the same name. This too may be a source of differentiation.

Page1book is the website of a physical store and seems to be primarily a means for the

store to advertise.

           The second group offers wide selection at low prices. Booksamillion.com is a

familiar name because of its physical stores. Buy.com and Bookbuyers Outlet are both

parts of larger internet-only stores that specialize in selling a variety of merchandise

including books, music, videos, computer hardware, and computer software at low prices.

In early 1999 Buy.com adopted a model that involved selling at wholesale and make

revenue through advertising. Recent Securities and Exchange Commission filings

indicate that Buy.com has moved away from this business model towards a model in

which it makes positive margins on the merchandise that it sells. Despite having sold

$200 million worth of merchandise in the quarter ended September 2000, Buy.com’s

stock price recently hit an all time low, and it along with many other .coms may be at

risk. Shopping.com has transformed from a bookstore into a shopbot.

21
     http://www.clicksmart.com/csinsert1.html
                                                Page 23
       The puzzle then is how the third type of firms is attracting and retaining

customers. 1Bookstreet is a division of Soda Creek press. Although it does not have

exceptionally low unit prices, it offers free shipping on all orders. In contrast, nearly all

other booksellers charge $3.00-$5.00 to ship the first book and $0.90-$1.00 for each

additional book. Alphacraze, A1 Books, and BCY Book Loft all seem to be following a

strategy of being slightly cheaper than Amazon for most books. They are not, however,

cheaper on average than Buy.com. All three appear to be internet-only stores, and two of

the three explicitly identify their advantage as low prices. For instance A1 Books states,

“We have the best prices, compared to any major online bookstore, on over 500,000

titles.” 22 Alphacraze focuses on “price, selection, and service.”23 BCY Book Loft carries

a wide range of discounted items beyond books. Books.com was purchased by

BarnesandNoble.com in the fall of 1999. Fatbrain is the online site for two physical

stores that specialize in computer books. So although it has prices that are generally

similar to Amazon’s, it primarily serves individuals who are buying computer books or

accessing its information exchange software. Kingbooks appears to have gone out of

business. And Varsitybooks, as the name suggests, specializes in textbooks. So other

than Kingbooks which has already failed, we would predict that the sites most at risk are

those offering marginally lower prices and little else to differentiate their products –

Alphacraze, A1 Books, and BCY Book Loft.




22
  http://www.a1books.com
23
 http://www.alphacraze.com/shop/customercare3.asp?tab=1&acd=6BW5TMLRP3S92KX400J74RCQ8ST
0FSUD&tabnew=1#About us


                                           Page 24
Conclusion

         The level of competition that some observers predicted for mass-produced

physical goods on the Internet does not appear to have become a reality.24 Calculations of

wholesale and order fulfillment costs – by far the largest components of marginal costs –

suggest that average net margins were in the 9-17 percent range.25 Amazon, Barnes and

Noble, and Borders and a number of other bookstores appear to have been selling New

York Times bestsellers at or even below cost. Lower bound estimates of net margins for

Amazon, Barnes and Noble, and Borders for the other four categories are, however, in the

7-18 percent range.26 Unweighted price and standard deviation were stable or rising

between August 1999 and January 2000, suggesting that competition was not increasing.

Sales by Amazon, Barnes and Noble, and Borders represent a very large fraction of all

Internet book sales. For these stores price and standard deviation were stable, and

standard deviation was small but not zero.

         Competitive pressures appear to differ across categories of books in the way

predicted by the search literature. Average unweighted prices were lowest for New York

Times bestsellers and highest for random books, and the prices for bestsellers were lower

than for former bestsellers. Although unweighted standard deviation is the highest – not

the lowest – for New York Times bestsellers, this seems to be driven by some bookstores

charging full price (and presumably selling very few copies). If we restrict our focus to



24
   We would like to also make comparisons between Internet and physical bookstores. Unfortunately,
although we have fairly precise estimates of the prices in Barnes and Noble and Borders physical stores,
large chains only sold 60 percent of the books sold in bookstores (Book Industry Study Group, 2000).
25
   Authors calculations using the gross margins in table 2 and assuming that order fulfillment costs were 15
percent of unit price, which is at the high end of the reported range.
26
   This assumes that any additional discounts these stores receive reflect the actual costs of providing the
services and do not contribute to net margins. Bestseller sales are believed to represent less than 5 percent
of overall sales.

                                                  Page 25
just the big three booksellers, prices and standard deviation are the lowest for New York

Times bestsellers and highest for random books.

       We observe some differentiation in selection and price. A number of branded and

unbranded (or less well-branded) stores offer wide selection and competitive prices.

Some high priced stores do have a web presence, but seem to use the web primarily as a

way to advertise, rather than as a vehicle for sales. A number of other stores specialize in

particular product areas such as computer books, children’s books, or remaindered books.

The puzzle for us is stores that offer wide selection, but neither a brand name nor

exceptionally competitive prices. As of March 2001, a number of these stores have gone

out of business and the remainder appear to be at risk.




                                          Page 26
References

“The real Internet revolution.” The Economist, Aug 21, 1999, pp. 53-54.

Arnold, M. A. “Costly Search, Capacity Constraints, and Bertrand Equilibrium Price
   Dispersion.” International Economic Review, Feb. 2000, 41 (1), pp. 117-131.

Bailey, J “Intermediation and Electronic Markets: Aggregation and Pricing in Internet
   Commerce.” Ph.D Thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
   Science, MIT, May 20, 1998.

Benabou, R. “Search Market Equilibrium, Bilateral Heterogeneity, and Repeat
   Purchases.” Journal of Economic Theory. 1993, 60, pp. 140-158.

Benham, L. “The Effect of Advertising on the Price of Eyeglasses.” Journal of Law and
Economics, October 1972, 15(2), pp. 337-52.

Bertrand, J. Theorie mathematique de la richess sociale. Journal des Savants, 499-508
   (1883)

Book Industry Study Group. Press Release, June 2, 2000. Available at:
   http://www.bisg.org/pressrelease_june2_2000.html

Bookweb.org. “Industry Fair Trade Practices, 1999.”
   http://www.bookweb.org/news/444.html

Brynjolfsson, E and M. Smith. “Frictionless Commerce? A Comparison of Internet and
   Conventional Retailers” Management Science 46(4) (April 2000): 563-585. Available
   at http://ecommerce.mit.edu/papers/friction/friction.pdf

Brynjolfsson, E and M. Smith. “The Great Equalizer? Consumer Choice Behavior at
   Internet Shopbots.” Available at http://ecommerce.mit.edu/papers/tge/tge.pdf

Burdett, K. and M. G. Coles. “Steady State Price Distribution in a Noisy Search
   Equilibrium.” Journal of Economic Theory. 1977, 72, pp. 1-32.

Burdett, K. and K. L. Judd. “Equilibrium Price Dispersion.” Econometrica. July 1983,
   51 (4), pp. 955-970.

Butters, G. R. “Equilibrium Distribution of Sales and Advertising Prices.” Review of
   Economic Studies. Oct. 1977, 44(3), pp. 465-491.

Cady, J. F. “An Estimate of the Price Effects of Restrictions on Drug Price Advertising.”
   Economic Inquiry 14(4) (Dec. 1976): 493-510




                                         Page 27
Clay, K. , R. Krishnan, E. Wolff, and D. Fernandes. “Retail Strategies on the Web: Price
   and Nonprice Competition in the Online Book Industry.” Working paper, 2000.
   Available at: http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/~kclay/retailstrategies.pdf

Devine, D. G. and Marion, B. W. “The Influence of Consumer Price Information on
Retail Pricing and Consumer Behavior.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
May 1979, 61(2), pp. 228-37.

Feldman, R. and J. Begun. “The Effects of Advertising: Lessons from Optometry.”
Journal of Human Resources, 1978, Supp. 13, pp. 247-62.

Feldman, R. and J. Begun. “Does Advertising of Prices Reduce the Mean and Variance
of Prices?” Economic Inquiry, July 1980, 18(3), pp. 487-92.

Friedman, T. “Amazon.you.” New York Times, Feb 26, 1999; p. A21.

Glazer, A. “Advertising, Information, and Prices—A Case Study.” Economic Inquiry,
October 1981, 19(4), pp. 661-71.

Hoynes, M. “The Impact of the Internet on Consumer Purchasing and Implications for
   Independent Booksellers.” Aug 6,1999.
   http://www.bookweb.org/home/news/btw/2244.html

Kaufman, L and S. Hansell. “Holiday Lessons In Online Retailing.” New York Times,
   January 2, 2000, p. A1.

Kephart, J. and A. Greenwald. Shopbot Economics. Technical Report, IBM Institute for
   Advanced Commerce, 1998. Available at:
   www.research.ibm.com/infoecon/researchpapers.html

Kwoka, J. “Advertising and the Price and Quality of Optometric Services.” American
  Economic Review, March 1984, 74(1), pp. 211-16.

Lee, H. G. “Do Electronic Marketplaces Lower the Price of Goods.” Communications of
   the ACM. 1998, 41(1), pp. 73-80.

Mazzeo, M. “Price and Quantity Outcomes in Product Differentiated Oligopoly.”
  Mimeo, Northwestern University, 2000.

Milyo, J. and J. Waldfogel. “The Effect of Price Advertising on Prices: Evidence in the
   Wake of 44 Liquormart.” American Economic Review. December 1999, 89 (5), pp.
   1081-96.

Png, I., Lee, T., and C. Yan. “The Competitiveness of On-Line vis a vis Conventional
   Retailing.” Working paper, 2000. Available at:
   http://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/~ipng/Book.pdf


                                         Page 28
Pratt, J. W., Wise, D. A., and R. Zeckhauser. “Price Differences in Almost Competitive
    Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. May, 1979, 93 (2), pp. 189-211.

Rauh, M. T. “A Model of Temporary Search Market Equilibrium.” Journal of Economic
   Theory, 1977, 77, p. 128-153.

Salop, S. and J. Stiglitz. “Bargains and Ripoffs: A Model of Monopolistically
   Competitive Price Dispersion.” Review of Economic Studies, October 1977, 44 (3),
   pp. 493-510.

Salop, S. and J. E. Stiglitz. “The Theory of Sales: A Simple Model of Equilibrium Price
   Dispersion with Identical Agents.” American Economic Review. Dec. 1982, 72(5),
   pp. 1121-1130.

Sorenson, A. T. “Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription
   Drugs.” Journal of Political Economy. 2000, 108 (4), p. 833-850.

Stigler, G. “The Economics of Information.” Journal of Political Economy. June 1961,
69 (3), pp. 213-225.

Tedeschi, Bob. Online Shopping Better Than the Mall? New York Times on the Web.
   September 21, 1999.
   http://search.nytimes.com/search/daily/bin/fastweb?getdoc+site+site+88429+2+wAA
   A+tedeschi%7Esearch%7Eengines

Unites States Census. Press Release, February 16, 2001. Available at:
   http://www.census.gov/mrts/www/current.html

Varian, H. “A Model of Sales.” American Economic Review. Sept. 1980, 70 (4), pp. 651-
659.

Wilde, L. L. and A. Schwartz. “Equilibrium Comparison Shopping.” Review of
   Economic Studies. July 1979, 46 (3), pp. 543-553.

Wilke, J. “Technology.” Wall Street Journal. Jan 11, 1993; p. B1.




                                        Page 29
                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                    NYT         Former     Computer             Former     Random
                                    Bestseller NYT         Bestseller           Computer Book
                                                Bestseller                      Bestseller
# of observations                   25,681      28,342     26,870               16,661     63,879
Number of books                        136           122              82            69            181
Average weeks on list                   15.0          NA              15.6         NA             NA
Percent hardcover                       52.9%          52.5%          18.3%         20.3%          66.9%
Percent fiction                         56.6%          58.2%           0.0%           0.0%         24.3%
                                                   Prices
Publisher’s rec. price                 $17.28        $17.97         $43.08         $51.55         $37.92
Unit price                             $11.83        $13.48         $33.57         $40.23         $34.39
Normalized price                          0.69          0.76           0.78           0.79           0.86
Wholesale price                         $8.25          $9.43        $21.84         $28.85         $24.66
Normalized wholesale price                0.50          0.52           0.49           0.50           0.60
Normalized margin                         0.19          0.24           0.29           0.29           0.26
                                             Price Dispersion
St. dev. of unit price                  $6.63          $7.31        $17.31         $31.09         $31.08
Diff. min and max price                 $7.62          $6.06        $12.90         $14.12          $8.23
St. dev. as % of avg. price             27.7%          17.8%          15.6%         14.0%          12.9%
Diff. as % of avg. price                65.2%          42.8%          38.6%         35.7%          31.9%
Percent savings from not                  9.8%         24.7%          17.6%         21.2%          22.6%
using Amazon
Notes: The unit of observation is the price of a given book in a given store in a given week. Publisher’s
recommended price is the suggested retail price listed in Books in Print. Unit price is the price offered by a
retailer on either its website or a shopbot that lists prices for several bookstores. Wholesale price is based
on published terms that are quoted to the trade bookstores. Wholesale prices include estimated cost of
shipping and include best possible discounts from publishers including any discounts for returnable books.
Normalized price is unit price divided by the publishers recommended retail price. Normalized wholesale
price is the wholesale price divided by the publisher’s recommended retail price. Normalized margin is
calculated as unit price minus wholesale price divided by publisher’s recommended price. St. dev. is
standard deviation and was computed by book for unit price and as a percentage of the mean price for that
book and then averaged across books. Diff. min and max price is the difference between the minimum and
maximum prices for a book and was computed by book using unit price and as a percentage of the mean
price for that book and then averaged across books. Percent savings from not using Amazon represents the
average percentage difference in unit price between Amazon and the lowest priced seller of a specific book
in a specific week.




                                                   Page 30
          Table 2: Fixed-Effects Regression of Price on Book and Sample Characteristics
                                                 Dependent Variable

Independent Variables               Unit price               Normalized             Normalized
                                                             price                  gross margin
Constant                                 1.71***                  0.88***               0.25***
                                        (0.058)                  (0.001)               (0.001)
Publisher’s rec. price                   0.89***
                                        (0.001)
NYT bestseller                          -4.97***                -0.17***                -0.09***
                                        (0.057)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)
Former NYT bestseller                   -7.10***                -0.11***                 0.01***
                                        (0.058)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)
Computer bestseller                     -3.33***                -0.09***                -0.03***
                                        (0.053)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)
Former computer bestseller              -7.84***                -0.09***                 0.01***
                                        (0.066)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)
Hardcover                               -1.63***                -0.02***                -0.03***
                                        (0.038)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)
Fiction                                 -1.95***                -0.06***                -0.01***
                                        (0.043)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)
Week 9 bestseller                        0.52***                 0.01**                 -0.01***
                                        (0.049)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)
Week 17 bestseller                       0.65***                 0.00                   -0.001
                                        (0.067)                 (0.000)                 (0.002)
Time                                     0.05***                 0.001***                0.001***
                                        (0.003)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
Store fixed effects                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes


Number observations                       161,433                 161,433                 135,257
R-squared                                    0.932                0.221                      0.090
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Unit price is the price offered by a retailer on either its website
or a shopbot that lists prices for several bookstores. Normalized price is unit price divided by the
publishers recommended retail price. Normalized margin is calculated as unit price minus wholesale price
divided by publisher’s recommended price. Weekly observations for unit price, normalized price, and
normalized margin are used. NYT Week 9 bestseller and Week 17 bestseller are dummy variables for
books that enter the sample on the bestseller lists that become available on the 9th and 17th weeks of the
sample, respectively. All regressions were estimated with store fixed effects. The omitted dummy variables
are random books, paperback, and nonfiction. * = coefficient is significant at the 10 percent level, ** =
coefficient is significant at the 5 percent level, *** = coefficient is significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                   Page 31
     Table 3: Percentage Availability of Books by Bookstore and Category of Book
                                         Former                Former
                            NYT          NYT        Computer Computer Random
                            Bestseller Bestseller Bestseller Bestseller Book
           Store                                    Percentage
1000’s of Discount Books          0           0          0          0          1
1Bookstreet                     99           98        97          96         73
A1 Books                        99           97        95          98         75
Allbooks4less                     6           1          0          0          2
Alldirect                       41           38        25          26         29
Alphacraze                      90           89        89          94         64
Amazon                          99           98        98          98         84
BarnesandNoble.com             100          100       100         100         86
BCY Book Loft                   90           90        74          57         39
Bookbuyer’s Outlet              58           40        62          38         52
Bookcloseouts                     5           1          1          0          0
Bookpool                          0           0        87          91         10
Books.com*                      38           21        43          23         43
Books4mom                         1           1          0          0          0
Booksamillion                   92           93        93          96         75
Booksnow                        54           44        61          44         55
Borders.com                     99           98        98          98         87
Brian’s Books                     0           0        34          15          7
Buy.com                         98           94        94          97         75
Cherryvalleybooks                 8           2          0          0          4
Christianbook                     2           2          0          0          1
Classbook                       36           23        60          44         51
Codys books                     92           80        93          91         34
Computerlibrary                 76           73        82          65         33
Fatbrain                        90           97        97          99         79
Hamiltonbook                    11           14          0          2          8
Kingbooks                       99           96        95          97         76
Page1book                       41           38        24          24         30
Powells                         98           98        95          93         45
Shopping.com                    93           88        93          87         74
Varsitybooks                    63           55        59          66         58
Wordsworth                      53           58        54          50         44
Notes: All of the above are .com sites. The .com has been removed unless there is significant potential for
confusion with the physical site such as Borders.com and BarnesandNoble.com or the .com is an integral
part of the name as in Books.com, Buy.com, and Shopping.com. Percentage availability is the number of
sample ISBN’s with prices reported by a bookstore in a week divided by the total possible number of
sample ISBN’s for the same week, averaged across all the weeks in the sample. Books.com was purchased
by BarnesandNoble.com in the fall of 1999, so it dropped out of the sample part way through the period.




                                                 Page 32
            Table 4: Normalized Price Regression for Two Types of Bookstores
          Variable                     Big Three               Fringe bookstores
          Constant                      1.082***                    1.064***
                                       (0.014)                     (0.011)
  Effects of Competitors
       First same type                 -0.065***                   -0.078***
                                       (0.014)                     (0.017)
First and second same type             -0.070***                   -0.117***
                                       (0.014)                     (0.017)
       First other type                -0.055***                   -0.053***
                                       (0.018)                     (0.017)
First and second other type            -0.049**                    -0.062***
                                       (0.019)                     (0.015)
First through nth other type           -0.104***                   -0.060***
                                       (0.014)                     (0.015)
     Control Variables
       NYT bestseller                  -0.362***                   -0.131***
                                       (0.011)                     (0.006)
  Former NYT bestseller                -0.156***                   -0.108***
                                       (0.012)                     (0.007)
    Computer bestseller                -0.137***                   -0.073***
                                       (0.010)                     (0.006)
Former computer bestseller             -0.122***                   -0.097***
                                       (0.013)                     (0.008)
         Hardcover                     -0.028***                   -0.022***
                                       (0.007)                     (0.004)
           Fiction                     -0.084***                   -0.054***
                                       (0.008)                     (0.005)
            Week                        0.001                       0.0005*
                                       (0.004)                     (0.0003)

   Number observations                     1,823                                6,959
      R-squared                                0.581                                0.140
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. The dependent variable is the mean normalized price of a given
book in a given week. Normalized price is unit price divided by the publishers recommended retail price.
Unit price is the price offered by a retailer on either its website or a shopbot that lists prices for several
bookstores. Weekly observations for unit price and normalized price are used. Observations have been
weighted by the number of stores in the market to avoid overweighting observations from competitive
markets. The big three are Amazon, Barnes and Noble, and Borders. Fringe bookstores refers to the other
29 stores in our data set. For a bookstore in the big three, the baseline would be a market with 1 big three
bookstore and 0 fringe bookstores selling a particular book. For the big three, holding the number of fringe
bookstores constant, first same type is the effect of going from 1 to 2 big three bookstores, and second same
type is the effect of going from 1 to 3 big three bookstores. Similarly, for the big three, holding the number
of big three bookstores constant, first other type is the effect of going from 0 to 1 fringe bookstores; second
other type is the effect of going from 0 to 2 fringe bookstores; and additional other type is the effect of
going from 0 to N fringe bookstores. The interpretation is reversed for fringe bookstores. NYT Week 9
bestseller and Week 17 bestseller are dummy variables for books that enter the sample on the bestseller lists
that become available on the 9th and 17th weeks of the sample, respectively. * = coefficient is significant at


                                                   Page 33
the 10 percent level, ** = coefficient is significant at the 5 percent level, *** = coefficient is significant at
the 1 percent level.




                                                     Page 34
                       Table 5: Regression of Standard Deviation of Price on
                             Book and Sample Characteristics
Variable                       SD of unit price             SD of normalized price
Constant                                -0.23***                      0.11***
                                        (0.085)                      (0.001)
Publisher’s rec. price                   0.09***
                                        (0.010)
NYT bestseller                           1.57***                      0.08***
                                        (0.099)                      (0.002)
Former NYT bestseller                    1.21***                      0.01***
                                        (0.101)                      (0.002)
Computer bestseller                      0.62***                      0.02***
                                        (0.085)                      (0.001)
Former computer bestseller               0.90***                      0.01***
                                        (0.107)                      (0.002)
Hardcover                                0.50***                      0.00***
                                        (0.059)                      (0.001)
Fiction                                  0.10                         0.01***
                                        (0.067)                      (0.001)
Week 9 bestseller                       -0.17*                        0.00
                                        (0.087)                      (0.001)
Week 17 bestseller                      -0.10                         0.00
                                        (0.114)                      (0.002)
Time                                     0.009*                      -0.00*
                                        (0.004)                      (0.000)

Number observations                        8,544                               8,544
R-squared                                       0.612                               0.295
Notes: Standard deviations of the estimates are in parentheses. Unit price is the price offered by a retailer
on either its website or a shopbot that lists prices for several bookstores. Normalized price is unit price
divided by the publishers recommended retail price. Standard deviations are calculated for either unit
price or normalized price of a given book in a given week. Observations have been weighted by the number
of stores in the market to avoid overweighting observations from competitive markets. NYT Week 9
bestseller and Week 17 bestseller are dummy variables for books that enter the sample on the bestseller lists
that become available on the 9th and 17th weeks of the sample, respectively. The omitted dummy variables
are random books, paperback, and nonfiction. * = coefficient is significant at the 10 percent level, ** =
coefficient is significant at the 5 percent level, *** = coefficient is significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                   Page 35
                        Table 6: Standard Deviation of Normalized Price
                     as a Fraction of Average Normalized Price by Category
                                         Interstore              Intertemporal             Intracategory
                                     Standard Deviation       Standard Deviation        Standard Deviation
New York Times bestseller                   0.277                     0.025                    0.101
                                           (0.030)                   (0.065)                  (0.073)
Former NYT bestseller                       0.178                     0.045                    0.117
                                           (0.044)                   (0.073)                  (0.035)
Computer bestseller                         0.156                     0.026                    0.093
                                           (0.055)                   (0.045)                  (0.063)
Former computer bestseller                  0.140                     0.019                    0.113
                                           (0.025)                   (0.037)                  (0.031)
Random books                                0.129                     0.027                    0.159
                                           (0.067)                   (0.053)                  (0.084)
 Notes: Normalized price is unit price divided by the publishers recommended retail price. Unit price is
the price offered by a retailer on either its website or a shopbot that lists prices for several bookstores.
Intertemporal standard deviation is the standard deviation of prices across time for a given book in a given
store then averaged across all observations. Intracategory standard deviation is the standard deviation of
prices across a book category (e.g. computer bestsellers) for a given store in a given week then averaged
across all observations. Interstore standard deviations standard deviation of prices across stores for a given
book in a given week then average across all observations. Average normalized prices are computed for
the same groupings used to define intertemporal, intracategory, and interstore standard deviation. Standard
deviations of standard deviations are given in parentheses.




                                                   Page 36
            Table 7: Standard Deviation Regression for Two Types of Bookstores

           Variable                             Big Three                       Fringe Bookstores
           Constant                              0.058***                            0.055***
                                                (0.012)                             (0.007)
   Effects of Competitors
     Second or greater                           0.012***                              0.045***
          same type                             (0.003)                               (0.006)
       First other type                          0.046***                              0.002
                                                (0.018)                               (0.007)
First and second other type                      0.028*                                0.021***
                                                (0.016)                               (0.006)
First through nth other type                    -0.016                                 0.006***
                                                (0.012)                               (0.006)
      Control Variables
       NYT bestseller                           -0.033***                              0.071***
                                                (0.001)                               (0.001)
  Former NYT bestseller                         -0.003                                 0.016***
                                                (0.002)                               (0.001)
    Computer bestseller                         -0.006***                              0.025***
                                                (0.002)                               (0.001)
Former computer bestseller                      -0.014***                              0.007**
                                                (0.002)                               (0.001)
          Hardcover                             -0.005***                              0.007***
                                                (0.002)                               (0.001)
            Fiction                              0.016***                              0.007***
                                                (0.001)                               (0.001)
             Week                               -0.000***                              0.000*
                                                (0.000)                               (0.000)

   Number observations                             8,156                                8,358
      R-squared                                    0.060                                0.290
Notes: The dependent variable is the standard deviation of the normalized price of a given book in a given
week. Normalized price is unit price divided by the publishers recommended retail price. Unit price is the
price offered by a retailer on either its website or a shopbot that lists prices for several bookstores. Weekly
observations for unit price and normalized price are used. See the notes to Table 4 for definitions of same
type, other type, big three, and fringe bookstores. The effects of competitors begins with second or greater
of same type, because you need at least two firms of the same type (the baseline firm and the first of same
type competitor) to calculate a standard deviation. NYT Week 9 bestseller and Week 17 bestseller are
dummy variables for books that enter the sample on the bestseller lists that become available on the 9th and
17th weeks of the sample, respectively. * = coefficient is significant at the 10 percent level, ** = coefficient
is significant at the 5 percent level, *** = coefficient is significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                   Page 37
                     Table 8: Average Normalized Price by Store
                                          Former                  Former
                               NYT         NYT       Computer Computer Random
                             Bestseller Bestseller Bestseller Bestseller        Book
Store                                            Normalized Price
                                                     Big Three
Amazon                         0.50        0.72         0.73       0.78        0.87
BarnesandNoble.com             0.50        0.70         0.79       0.80        0.85
Borders.com                    0.50        0.69         0.77       0.79        0.83
                                         Wide Selection, Low NYT Prices
Bookbuyer’s Outlet             0.50        0.72         0.71       0.76        0.86
Booksamillion                  0.51        0.63         0.76       0.77        0.83
Buy.com                        0.47        0.61         0.71       0.71        0.76
Shopping.com                   0.54        0.66         0.72       0.74        0.82
                                       Wide Selection, Average NYT Prices
1Bookstreet                    0.68        0.82         0.87       0.89        0.94
A1 Books                       0.71        0.71         0.71       0.74        0.81
Alphacraze                     0.64        0.68         0.67       0.69        0.78
BCY Book Loft                  0.73        0.72         0.76       0.77        0.81
Books.com                      0.67        0.72         0.78       0.79        0.85
Fatbrain                       0.67        0.71         0.74       0.76        0.85
Kingbooks                      0.74        0.74         0.73       0.74        0.84
Varsitybooks                   0.74        0.75          0.7       0.72         0.8
                                       Wide Selection, Close to Full Prices
Booksnow                       0.89        0.89         0.88       0.86        0.92
Classbook                      0.97        0.97         0.97       0.93         0.9
Codys books                    1.00        1.01         0.97       0.97        1.07
Computerlibrary                1.00        0.99         0.96       0.99        1.07
Powells                        0.92        0.90         0.91       0.92        0.93
Wordsworth                     0.82        0.85         0.89       0.90        0.95
                                          Limited Selection, Low Prices
1000’s of Discount Books                                                       0.63
Allbooks4less                  0.43        0.55                                0.43
Bookcloseouts                  0.47        0.42         0.47
                                     Limited Selection, Average to Full Prices
Alldirect                      0.62        0.64         0.61       0.64        0.75
Bookpool                                                0.63       0.64        0.71
Books4mom                      0.63        0.64                                0.76
Brian’s Books                                           0.81       0.82        0.82
Cherryvalleybooks              0.89        0.92                                0.89
Christianbook                  0.73        0.74                                0.74
Hamiltonbook                   0.66        0.69                    0.75        0.63
Page1book                      0.99        1.00         0.97       0.96        0.99
Notes: Average prices are the regression coefficients from the regression of normalized prices on store
dummies with book fixed-effects. Normalized price is unit price divided by the publishers recommended
retail price. Unit price is the price offered by a retailer on either its website or a shopbot that lists prices for
several bookstores.


                                                     Page 38
                             Table 9: Price Comparisons with Amazon
                                                    Equal              Within 1%            Within $0.10
                                      Obs.   Equal Above Below Equal Above Below Equal Above Below
                                                                    Big Three
BarnesandNoble.com                   3,907    55%    14% 32% 77% 11% 11% 87%                       7%      6%
Borders.com                          3,953    73%    12% 15% 75% 10% 15% 85%                       6%      9%
                                                       Wide Selection, Low NYT Prices
Bookbuyer’s Outlet                   1,488    95%     3%    2% 95%         3%    2% 100%           0%     0%
Booksamillion                        3,492    54%    10% 36% 65% 10% 25% 76%                       7%    18%
Buy.com                              3,650     3%     7% 90% 13%           7% 80% 70%              4%    26%
Shopping.com                         3,329    41%    12% 47% 52% 12% 36% 74%                       8%    17%
                                                      Wide Selection, Average NYT Prices
1Bookstreet                          3,739     3%    89%    8%      4% 88%        8% 24%         70%      6%
A1Books                              3,833     3%    32% 65%        6% 32% 63% 58%               27%     15%
Alphacraze                           3,397     4%    27% 69%        4% 27% 69% 48%               18%     34%
BCYBookLoft                          2,778     7%    36% 56%        7% 36% 56% 67%               32%      2%
Books.com                            1,005     0%    34% 66% 59% 34%              8% 78%         18%      4%
Fatbrain                             3,667    24%    26% 50% 57% 26% 18% 65%                     23%     12%
Kingbooks                            3,756     0%    52% 48%        1% 52% 47% 64%               29%      7%
Varsitybooks                         2,309     5%    48% 47%        5% 48% 47% 48%               28%     24%
                                                      Wide Selection, Close to Full Prices
Booksnow                             1,398     1%    85% 14%       1% 85% 14%             26%    67%       7%
Classbook                            1,427     0%    71% 29%       1% 71% 28%             22%    69%       8%
Codysbooks                           3,043     4%    96%   1%      4% 96%        1%        5%    95%       0%
Computerlibrary                      2,047     1%    98%   0%      1% 98%        0%        4%    96%       0%
Powells                              3,197     3%    86% 12%       6% 85%        9%       25%    72%       3%
Wordsworth                           1,911    12%    83%   5% 12% 83%            4%       24%    74%       2%
                                                        Limited Selection, Low Prices
1000’sofDiscountBooks                 18       0%     0% 100%        0%     0% 100% 17%            0%    83%
Allbooks4less                         93       0%    11% 89%         0% 11% 89% 27%                5%    68%
Bookcloseouts                         28       0%    50% 50%         0% 50% 50% 57%                4%    39%
                                                    Limited Selection, Average to Full Prices
Alldirect                            1,696        0% 27% 72%            2% 27% 71% 19% 19% 62%
Bookpool                             1,157        0%     8% 92%         2%      8% 90% 24%              0% 76%
Books4mom                              29         0% 48% 52%            0% 48% 52% 59% 17% 24%
Brian’sBooks                          214         0% 49% 51%            2% 49% 49% 57% 34% 10%
Cherryvalleybooks                     129         4% 73% 23%            4% 73% 23% 19% 67% 14%
Christianbook                          25         4% 40% 56% 48% 40% 12% 56% 36%                            8%
Hamiltonbook                          297        21% 32% 47% 44% 32% 24% 49% 28% 22%
Page1book                            1,667        7% 84%          9%    8% 83%           9% 14% 81%         5%
          Average                                14% 43% 43% 21% 43% 36% 47% 34% 20%
Notes: Observations include only the unit prices that Amazon and the competitor list on the same day. Unit
price is the price offered by a retailer on either its website or a shopbot that lists prices for several
bookstores. Price comparisons within 1% are measured as 1% of Amazon’s listed price for a specific ISBN
on a specific day. Price comparisons within $0.10 include those prices within $0.10 of Amazon’s listed
price for a specific ISBN on a specific day.



                                                    Page 39
                Table10: Individual Price Correlations between Amazon
                          and Competing Online Booksellers
                                               Former                Former
                                     NYT        NYT Computer Computer                             Random
          Store         Overall Bestseller Bestseller Bestseller Bestseller                         Book
                                                   Big Three
BarnesandNoble.com        0.88       0.56       0.71       0.55       0.85                          0.88
Borders.com               0.85       0.49       0.57       0.57       0.67                          0.83
                                        Wide Selection, Low NYT Prices
Bookbuyer’sOutlet         0.98       0.79       1.00       0.98       1.00                          1.00
Booksamillion             0.82       0.45       0.33       0.42       0.47                          0.89
Buy.com                   0.81       0.42       0.32       0.55       0.53                          0.85
Shopping.com              0.78       0.12       0.23       0.53       0.62                          0.83
                                      Wide Selection, Average NYT Prices
1Bookstreet               0.78       0.18       0.44       0.50       0.68                          0.80
A1Books                   0.70       0.33       0.45       0.52       0.63                          0.81
Alphacraze                0.65       0.17       0.44       0.33       0.77                          0.74
BCY Book Loft             0.38       0.54       0.52       0.58       0.72                          0.34
Books.com                 0.84       0.38       0.48       0.55       0.86                          0.87
Fatbrain                  0.68       0.18       0.30       0.67       0.68                          0.76
Kingbooks                 0.66       0.62       0.17       0.40       0.75                          0.75
Varsitybooks              0.44       0.47      -0.10       0.20       0.60                          0.58
                                      Wide Selection, Close to Full Prices
Booksnow                  0.24       0.24       0.02       0.14       0.16                          0.30
Classbook                -0.10       0.65       0.42       0.47       0.53                         -0.27
Codysbooks                0.15       0.74       0.21       0.54       0.43                          0.17
Computerlibrary           0.14       0.80       0.14       0.49       0.40                          0.11
Powells                   0.02       0.12       0.27       0.27       0.40                         -0.05
Wordsworth                0.57       0.32       0.41       0.45       0.62                          0.62
                                         Limited Selection, Low Prices
1000’sofDiscountBooks     0.30                                                                      0.20
Allbooks4less            -0.39      -0.42       0.09                                                0.27
Bookcloseouts             0.08       0.73       0.64                                               -0.76
                                   Limited Selection, Average to Full Prices
Alldirect                 0.73       0.38       0.55       0.63       0.91                          0.77
Bookpool                  0.72                             0.57       0.63                          0.35
Books4mom                -0.34       0.50       0.18                                               -0.64
Brian’sBooks              0.73                             0.74       0.87                          0.46
Cherryvalleybooks         0.38      -0.32       0.88                                                0.38
Christianbook            -0.02       0.54      -0.62                                                0.52
Hamiltonbook             -0.05      -0.65      -0.23                                               -0.04
Page1book                 0.12       0.48       0.16       0.67       0.36                          0.14
Notes: Correlations are individual correlations of unit prices between Amazon and a retailer listed for the
identical ISBN’s on the same day. Unit price is the price offered by a retailer on either its website or a
shopbot that lists prices for several bookstores.




                                                  Page 40
                                                                       Figure 1. Average Normalized Price by Book Category

                           0.95



                            0.9



                           0.85
Average Normalized Price




                            0.8



                           0.75



                            0.7



                           0.65



                            0.6
                                  1   2     3      4     5     6   7      8     9    10    11    12        13   14   15    16    17     18    19    20    21    22     23   24   25   26
                                                                                                           Week


                                      New York Times Bestsellers       Former New York Times Bestsellers         Computer Bestsellers        Former Computer Bestsellers     Random Books




                                                                                                    Page 41
                                                                                     Figure 2. Average Standard Deviation of Normalized Prices by Category


                                                 0.25




                                                  0.2
Average Standard Deviation of Normalized Price




                                                 0.15




                                                  0.1




                                                 0.05




                                                   0
                                                        1   2   3      4      5      6        7   8      9      10     11     12       13   14     15     16       17   18     19     20     21       22   23    24       25   26
                                                                                                                                       Wee k


                                                                New York T imes Bestsellers       Former New York T imes Bestsellers        Computer Bestsellers        Former Computer Bestsellers        Random Books



                                                                                                                            Page 42
