                                 




                                                    


                                            !
                                             "##$%&


                                          '!()*+,-
                                   ..)/00111$$'(0))#01*+,-



                         %  
                                2343## #..#5
                                   6&(73+28*
                                       




                  !  "  !#$
#  $ # #$#%  %&  '& %(     )   ) 
   *  +  , ), -+       )$ 
  ( .$         "   #  ) #    -',           ))
    % , "-/ 0 , (     * $  
# '  % ,1-0- 0  !   * ' -
' $    ,   ) )     $ , - $ -2, 2   -  & $ 
3)  ,      ,4    ,(  
! -


5     "-' - %$-#  ,3 
3)  % )  6 3)  )   )$  ,   %5
   % $ -
1))' .' 9(& 96#!).
  !&"##$%&
'!()'$*+,-
+332
" '$887++


                                             $%#%


          6###!).#1  . :6#.')#5&#('('7'
':. 6'#.&::9.&6)'..)'96##. .':59(. ##.#. .#5#'99.9:'
#&&.'#$ 9(#&&.';#'99.9#&&.'&.6. 6'.':. 
&.';##&9671  .::.#. )'.. .6#.6&.'. &.'$
59.' #(9995&.'<. 9.(.''((6'(. ).#7
1  .(5#.'..7&97&&5.'#:'6).#;..96.#$    #))
).#:'1&1))' .'59('99.9. .5'95#. (('9.(.'$
&. #))' 76!.=#&6 #61'9&&.6. 59':'99.9# 
1. .').).. !).1'9& 5##:''6)9(. .#&&.'#
. '5='&='6)#.&$))' 1'9&'#&96)'5. ):'6
':###!).&'9&'#...6)'..96.':)')'#9:'!).
:'6$




  !                                                    "##$%&
  5& 1 ''97                                                   '9. 99 ''9': 1
&                                                           $ $!9
 !>91$ 5&$&                                                :&?>91$!9$&
                           Table of Contents

I. INTRODUCTION                                                       1

II. THE VALUATION                                                      6
P        ……………………………………………….
      A.    Secured Creditors’ Rights Outside And Inside Bankruptcy    7
            1. Rights Outside Bankruptcy                               7
            2. Rights Inside Bankruptcy                                8
               a. The Automatic Stay                                   8
               b. The Secured Creditor’s Rights at the End of the
               c. the
                   . Proceeding                                       10
      B.    The Problem with Valuing Collateral                       11
            1. The Necessity of Valuing Collateral                    11
            2. The Absence of a Verifiable Figure                     12
            3. Comparison to the Problem of Valuing the Debtor as
                a Whole                                               14
            4. The Separate Problem of Delay
            ole…………………………………………………..                                  16

      C.    Existing Methods of Valuing Collateral                    16
            1. The Use of Litigation and Bargaining                   17
            2. The Shortcomings of Litigation and Bargaining          19

      D.    The Valuation Problem Under Market-Based Reforms          21
            1. The Auctions Approach                                  22
            2. The Options Approach                                   23
            3. The Valuation Problem as Impediment to Market-Based
               Reforms                                                25

III. THE PROPOSED APPROACH                                            25

      A. Reconceptualizing the Secured Creditor’s Claim               26

      B. The Mechanism and its Three Stages                           27

      C. First Stage: The Auction of the Nonrecourse Note             30
             1. The Conduct of the Auction                            30
             2. The Value of the Auctioned Note                       31
             3. Bidding by the Secured Creditor                       34
             4. Would any Participant Have a Basis for Complaining?   35
                 a. Complaining that the price is too High            36
                 b. Complaining that the price is too Low             36
                 c. Liquidity Constraints                             37

      D. Second Stage: Completion of the Bankruptcy Proceeding        40




                                    i
     E.   Third Stage: Post-Bankruptcy Resolution of the Nonrecourse
          Note.                                                        41
             1. Resolution of the Note                                 42
                 a. Collateral Has Going Concern Value for Debtor      43
                 b. Collateral Does not Have Going Concern Value
                    for Debtor                                         43
             2. Post-Bankruptcy Liquidity Problems                     44

     F. Incorporating the Mechanism into Bargaining-Based or
        Options-
        Options-Based Bankruptcy                                       45
            1. Bargaining-Based Bankruptcy                             46
            2. Options-Based Bankruptcy                                47

     G. An Alternative Version of The Mechanism                        48

     H. Using the Mechanism to Implement Partial Priority              52

IV.CONCLUSION                                                          54




                                   ii
                               I.      INTRODUCTION

       In any business bankruptcy in which the firm is to be continued as
a going concern, one of the most difficult problems is valuing the
individual assets that serve as collateral for the firm’s secured creditors.
Valuing a secured creditor’s collateral is important because the value of
the collateral determines the amount of the creditor’s secured claim -- and
therefore the amount paid to the creditor at the end of the proceeding.
Such valuation has thus far been believed to require either litigation or
bargaining among the bankruptcy participants. However, litigation and
bargaining, the methods by which collateral is valued today, give rise to
uncertainty, deviations from parties’ bankruptcy entitlements, and
additional transaction costs. This paper puts forward a new market-based
approach to valuing collateral that does not require litigation or
bargaining during the proceeding. The proposed mechanism would
determine secured claims in such a way that no one could have a basis for
complaining that secured creditors are either over- or under-
compensated.       This mechanism could considerably improve the
performance of Chapter 11 as well as any other business bankruptcy
system, including the various market-based systems that have been put
forward as alternatives to Chapter 11.
       Creditors frequently take security interests in their borrowers’
assets.1 If a borrower files for bankruptcy, one of the more important
tasks in the ensuing proceeding is valuing the assets that serve as
collateral for the borrower’s secured loans.2 Identifying the collateral’s

    1   The available data suggest that a substantial amount of U.S. business debt is
secured. See, e.g., John D. Leeth & Jonathan A. Scott, The Incidence of Secured Debt:
Evidence from the Small Business Community, 24 J. FIN. & QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
379, 379 (1989) (reporting that a 1982 Interagency Task Force on Small Business
Finance study found that almost 80% of the dollar volume of large- and small-
business loans was secured and that a 1983 National Federation of Independent
Business study found that 78% of the total volume of small-business loans was
secured). As of January 2001, commercial banks held $1,652,300,000,000 in loans
secured by real estate. See Real Estate Loans at All Commercial Banks Seasonally
Adjusted, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, H.8 Release, available at
http://www.stls.frb.org/fred/data/loans/realln.
     2  See, e.g., RAYMOND T. NIMMER & JAMES J. WHITE, CASES AND MATERIALS ON
BANKRUPTCY 171 (3rd ed. 1996) (noting that valuation of assets in Chapter 11 will be
“critical”); Charles D. Booth, The Cramdown on Secured Creditors: An Impetus Toward
Settlement, 60 AM. BANKR. L.J. 69, 101 (1986) (noting that valuation of collateral is
“one of the most important” issues in Chapter 11); Darrell G. Waas, Letting the
Lender Have It: Satisfaction of Secured Claims By Abandoning a Portion of the Collateral,
62 AM. BANKR. L.J. 97, 106 (1988) (same).


                                             -1-
value is essential because bankruptcy law gives a secured creditor a
“secured claim” equal to the value of its collateral, up to the amount
owed,3 which must be paid in full.4 The creditor also has an “unsecured
claim” for any deficiency, for which the creditor will typically receive
much less than 100 cents on the dollar.5 Thus, the higher the value of the
collateral, the higher the payout to the secured creditor at the end of the
proceeding.6 And because higher payouts to secured creditors mean
lower payouts for unsecured creditors, the valuation of collateral is
important not only for secured creditors but also for unsecured creditors.
        Outside of bankruptcy, or when the borrower’s assets are sold
piecemeal in bankruptcy, the value of each asset serving as collateral can
be objectively and verifiably determined by auctioning the assets
individually.7     However, in a bankruptcy where the business is
reorganized or sold as a going concern to a third party,8 there is no
auction of individual assets that can be used to determine their value.
Another method is needed to value assets that serve as collateral for
secured creditors.
        Currently, the value of collateral is determined either through
litigation or bargaining in the shadow of possible litigation.9 Using

    3   See 11 U.S.C. § 506 (1994).
    4   See infra Part II.A.2.b.
     5  In the United States, payouts for unsecured claims in business bankruptcies
are, on average, less than 50 cents on the dollar. See Lynn M. LoPucki & William C.
Whitford, Bargaining over Equity's Share in the Bankruptcy Reorganization of Large,
Publicly Held Companies, 139 U. PA. L. REV . 125, 142 tbl. 3 (1990) (finding that the
average payout promised -- but not necessarily paid -- to holders of general
unsecured claims in 43 reorganization cases filed after October 1, 1979 and
confirmed by March 31, 1988 was about 32 cents per dollar and that even in
successful Chapter 11 reorganizations of large, publicly traded corporations with
relatively little secured debt, the average payout to holders of general unsecured
claims is less than 50 cents on the dollar).
     6  See DAVID G. EPSTEIN et.al., BANKRUPTCY §§ 10-23 to –27 (1993).
     7  See Douglas G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the
Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms, Chicago Working paper in Law
and Economics 6 (1997).
     8  In bankruptcies of publicly traded firms, approximately 78% of debtors
emerge as going concerns. See LYNN M. L OPUCKI & S ARA D. K ALIN, T HE FAILURE OF
PUBLIC COMPANY BANKRUPTCIES IN DELAWARE AND NEW YORK: EMPIRICAL
EVIDENCE OF A ‘RACE TO THE BOTTOM’ 8 (working paper, 2000).
     9  See EPSTEIN et.al, supra note 6, at §§ 10-1 to –7. There are two types of assets
whose value can be determined without litigation or extensive bargaining. The first
type consists of publicly traded securities and commodities. Publicly traded assets
have an easily ascertainable and undisputable market value. The second type
consists of assets whose highest plausible value is so small that it is not worth the


                                            -2-
litigation and bargaining to value the debtor’s assets may lead to
deviations from the parties’ bankruptcy entitlements either in favor of or
against the secured creditor.10 Litigation and bargaining are also likely to
increase the length of the bankruptcy proceeding and its attendant costs,
including both direct bankruptcy costs and the indirect costs associated
with a business being in bankruptcy.11
        The problem of valuing collateral arises in a business bankruptcy
whenever the debtor firm is sold as a going concern, either in Chapter 7 or
in Chapter 11, as well as whenever the firm is reorganized under Chapter
11.12 This problem would also arise under the two market-based
approaches that have been put forward as alternatives to Chapter 11: the
auctions approach,13 and the options approach.14 In fact, the problem of
valuing collateral has been regarded as a major obstacle to their
effectiveness.15

parties’ time to bargain over their value. The parties should be able to quickly reach
an agreement about the value of these two types of assets. The focus of this paper is
on assets whose values cannot easily and indisputably be established by their
trading prices in a public market and whose plausible values are high enough that
the parties will be willing to invest resources litigating and bargaining over them.
     10 See id. at § 3-27 (b).

     11 See infra Part II.D.2.

     12 See ELIZABETH WARREN, FED. JUDICIAL C TR., BUSINESS BANKRUPTCY, 140-41

(1993).
     13 The auctions approach was put forward in Douglas G. Baird, The Uneasy

Case for Corporate Reorganizations, 15 J. L EGAL STUD. 127, 128 (1986), and THOMAS H.
JACKSON, THE LOGIC AND LIMITS OF BANKRUPTCY LAW 221-24 (1986). It followed an
earlier proposal by Mark Roe to auction 10% of a reorganized company’s securities.
See Mark J. Roe, Bankruptcy and Debt: A New Model for Corporate Reorganization, 83
COLUM. L. REV . 527 (1983). The auctions approach was subsequently advocated in
Michael C. Jensen, Corporate Control and the Politics of Finance, 4 J. A PPLIED CORP. FIN.
31-32 (1991). The auctions approach is discussed in more detail infra Part II.E.
     14    The options approach was put forward in Lucian A. Bebchuk, A New
Approach to Corporate Reorganizations, 101 HARV. L. REV . 775 (1988) [hereinafter
Bebchuk, Options Approach]. This approach was subsequently endorsed and
adopted as the basis for bankruptcy reform in P. Aghion et.al., The Economics of
Bankruptcy Reform, 8 J.L. ECON. & ORG. 523 (1992) and OLIVER HART, FIRMS,
CONTRACTS, AND FINANCIAL STRUCTURE, 156-57, 169-85 (1995). For a recent account
of the options approach, see Lucian A. Bebchuk, Using Options to Divide Value in
Corporate Bankruptcy, 44 EUROPEAN ECON. REV . 829 (2000) [hereinafter Bebchuk,
Using Options]. The options approach is discussed in more detail infra Part II.E. For
a comparison of the options and auctions approaches, see Lucian A. Bebchuk,
Chapter 11, in THE NEW PALGRAVE DICTIONARY OF ECONOMICS AND THE LAW, (Vol. 1
1998), at 219-224 [hereinafter Bebchuk, Chapter 11].
     15 See MARK ROE, C ORPORATE REORGANIZATION AND BANKRUPTCY: LEGAL AND

FINANCIAL MATERIALS 602 (2000).


                                             -3-
       In this paper, we offer a market-based solution to the problem of
valuing collateral. The proposal is based on a new way of thinking about
a secured creditor’s claim. As is well known, a secured creditor’s claim
can be broken into two components: (i) the part that is fully secured (or
the “secured claim”) -- which is the lesser of the amount owed and the
value of the collateral, and (ii) the unsecured part (or the “unsecured
claim”) -- the part of the claim, if any, that is not secured, which is simply
the excess of the amount owed over (i). The insight underlying our
proposal is that the value of component (i) c an be thought of as equivalent
to the value of a nonrecourse loan16 that (a) has a face amount equal to the
secured creditor’s claim and (b) is backed by the secured creditor’s
collateral. Thus, the problem of breaking the claim into a fully secured
claim and an unsecured claim translates into the problem of valuing such
a nonrecourse loan.
       We show how such a nonrecourse loan can be valued before the
end of the bankruptcy proceeding in a way that would not disrupt the
proceeding, reduce the going concern value of the firm’s assets, or give
any party a basis for complaining about being under-compensated.
Under our proposal, there would be an auction of a nonrecourse note
with a face amount equal to the secured creditor’s claim, backed by the
asset serving as the creditor’s collateral. The winner of the auction -- the
“noteholder” -- would have the right to collect the face amount of the note
from the debtor immediately after the bankruptcy proceeding terminates
but with recourse only to the collateral. When the proceeding ends, the
noteholder should be able to use the note to obtain from the debtor the
collateral, up to the amount of the note. The auction of the nonrecourse
note would occur immediately before the end of the bankruptcy
proceeding.
       Since the nonrecourse note would be resolved shortly after the
auction, bidders should be willing to buy the note for the value of the
collateral, up to the amount of the secured creditor’s claim. The price the
note fetches at the auction would thus determine the amount of the
creditor’s secured claim. The proceeds of the auction would be used to
pay that claim in full. The excess of the creditor’s claim over the auction
price would constitute the unsecured claim of the creditor and be pooled
with other unsecured claims.
       We would like to emphasize that our proposal does not involve the
secured creditor or any other party foreclosing on collateral during the

    16 A nonrecourse loan is a secured loan under which the lender’s remedies in
the event of a default are limited to seizing and selling the collateral. For a more
detailed description of nonrecourse loans, see infra Part III.A.


                                          -4-
course of the bankruptcy proceeding. Were there to be such a foreclosure,
the debtor might not have the cash necessary to participate in the
subsequent auction of the collateral. Thus, the problem with foreclosure
during the proceeding is that the going concern value of the asset, if any,
could be destroyed.17 The proposed mechanism avoids this problem by
postponing the possibility of foreclosure until after the end of the
bankruptcy proceeding, when the debtor is solvent. At that time, the
debtor should have the financial ability and incentive to retain any
collateral that has going concern value.
        We show how the mechanism we put forward would -- in addition
to preserving the going concern value of assets -- facilitate the valuation
of collateral in a way that does not involve costly and time-consuming
litigation and bargaining. And we demonstrate how the procedure could
be designed to ensure that secured creditors are neither over- nor under-
compensated. We then show that the procedure could be combined both
with the existing Chapter 11 regime as well as with the two market-based
reform proposals that have been put forward as alternatives to Chapter
11.
        We also offer for consideration an alternative, “auctionless” version
of our mechanism that can be employed whenever the firm is sold for
cash at the end of the proceeding. As under the first version of the
procedure, the secured claim would be converted into a nonrecourse note
due immediately after the end of the bankruptcy proceeding. However,
the note would not be auctioned. Instead, the secured creditor would
keep the note and enforce it immediately after the end of the bankruptcy
proceeding. To the extent that the resolution of the note leaves the
secured creditor with a deficiency claim, that claim would need to be paid
after the bankruptcy proceeding -- at the same rate as similar unsecured
claims were paid at the end of the proceeding. We offer two methods for
ensuring that such deficiency claims would indeed receive the same
treatment as other unsecured claims in the bankruptcy proceeding.
        Finally, the paper considers the possibility of using our mechanism
to implement partial priority. As was noted earlier, bankruptcy law
currently entitles secured creditors to be paid in full for their secured
claim, which is the value of the collateral, up to the amount owed.
However, as we have emphasized in prior work, the case for providing
secured claims with full priority is not compelling, and there are reasons
to consider as alternatives partial priority regimes under which secured




    17   See infra Part II.A.2.a.


                                       -5-
creditors are entitled to less than full priority in their collateral.18 We
show that our mechanism could be modified to provide secured creditors
with their entitlements under partial priority rules just as easily as it could
provide secured creditors with their entitlements under full priority.
       Our paper is part of, and builds on, the literature on market-based
approaches to bankruptcy. In the past two decades, bankruptcy scholars
seeking alternatives to the bargaining approach of Chapter 11 have put
forward market mechanisms based on the use of auctions or options.19
Our work is very much in the spirit of this larger project. However, as we
noted earlier, researchers working on market-based mechanisms have
thus far not been able to develop a market-based mechanism for valuing
secured claims. They have abstracted from this issue, assuming implicitly
or explicitly that the value of the collateral in bankruptcies will be either
known or will be determined, as it is now, by bargaining and litigation.
The contribution of our work is to provide a market-based mechanism for
dealing with this essential element of bankruptcy proceedings. In doing
so we build on ideas from both the auction and options approaches.20
       The analysis is organized as follows. Part II describes the
fundamental challenge posed by the need to value collateral in going
concern bankruptcies. It also discusses the inescapable shortcomings of
the existing methods of valuation, litigation and bargaining. Part III puts
forward our approach to valuing assets serving as collateral. Part IV
concludes.

                          II.     THE VALUATION PROBLEM

       This Part examines the problem of valuing collateral in business
bankruptcy. Section A describes the basic rights of a secured creditor in
and out of bankruptcy. Section B explains the necessity of valuing
collateral, and then discusses the fundamental problem with valuing

    18  See Lucian Arye Bebchuk & Jesse M. Fried, The Uneasy Case for the Priority of
Secured Claims in Bankruptcy, 105 YALE L.J. 857, 862 (1996) [hereinafter, Bebchuk &
Fried, Uneasy Case]; Lucian Arye Bebchuk & Jesse M. Fried, The Uneasy Case for the
Priority of Secured Claims in Bankruptcy: Further Thoughts and a Reply to Critics, 82
CORNELL L. R EV . 1279 (1997) [hereinafter Bebchuk & Fried, Reply to Critics]; Jesse M.
Fried, Taking the Costs of Priority Seriously, 51 Q. REP. 328 (1997).
    19 See infra Part II.D.

    20 As will be made clear by the analysis offered infra Part III, the auctioning of

the nonrecourse loan under our procedure is in the spirit of the auctions approach
and our attempt to ensure that nobody could have a basis for complaining about the
outcome -- by giving participants a number of ways to directly and indirectly
participate in the auction -- is in the spirit of the options approach.


                                            -6-
collateral in any bankruptcy in which the assets are worth more as a going
concern -- the lack of an indisputable, verifiable value for the collateral.
Section C briefly considers how collateral is currently valued in Chapter
11 -- through litigation and bargaining -- and describes the deficiencies of
these methods. Section D shows that the problem of valuing collateral
arises not only in Chapter 11 reorganizations, but also in connection with
the two market-based mechanisms -- options and auctions -- that have
been offered as alternatives to Chapter 11.

         A. The Secured Creditor’s Rights Outside and Inside Bankruptcy

1. Rights Outside Bankruptcy

       Outside bankruptcy, under state debtor-creditor law, a secured
creditor whose borrower (the “debtor”) has defaulted may seize the
collateral, sell it at auction, and keep the proceeds of the sale up to the
amount owed.21 If the proceeds exceed the amount owed, the creditor
must return the excess to the debtor.22 If the proceeds fall short of the
amount owed, the secured creditor may attempt to collect the deficiency
from the debtor using the remedies available to unsecured creditors.23
       For ease of exposition, we will introduce here the term “foreclosure
value.” We define the “foreclosure value” as the proceeds of selling the
asset at an auction. Thus, outside bankruptcy, the secured creditor is
entitled to the foreclosure value of the collateral, up to the amount owed,
and is an unsecured creditor for any deficiency.24
       For example, suppose that Creditor extends a $100 loan to Debtor.
The loan is secured; a machine serves as the collateral. Debtor later
defaults on the loan. Creditor may seize the machine and sell it at

    21  See generally LAWRENCE P. KING & MICHAEL L. COOK , CREDITORS’ RIGHTS,
DEBTORS PROTECTION AND BANKRUPTCY §§ 3.01--3.14 (1997); U.C.C. §§ 9-601 to –
628. To the extent the secured creditor incurs transaction costs in repossessing and
selling the collateral, the creditor generally may use proceeds of the auction to pay
these expenses before applying the remainder of the proceeds to reduce the amount
owed. See, e.g, U.C.C. § 9-615(a). By “proceeds,” we mean the proceeds of the sale
net of these transaction costs. For ease of exposition we will ignore these transaction
costs and assume that the net proceeds of the sale equal the sale price. Adding such
costs would not affect any of our conclusions.
     22 See JAMES J. WHITE & ROBERT S. SUMMERS, U NIFORM C OMMERCIAL C ODE (4th

ed. 1995) § 25-10 (1995) (pp. 919-920).
     23 Id. If the loan were nonrecourse, the secured creditor would have no right to

collect the deficiency. Unless we specify otherwise, all of the loans described in this
paper are recourse loans.
     24 Id.




                                            -7-
auction. The sale price is $X. Creditor may keep the machine’s
foreclosure value -- the sale proceeds of the auction, $X, up to $100, the
amount owed. If $X is less than $100, Debtor is still obligated to pay
Creditor the difference, $100 – $X. Creditor can thus sue Debtor (as an
unsecured creditor) for this deficiency.

2. Rights Inside Bankruptcy

        One of the most important consequences of a bankruptcy filing is
the automatic stay.25 The automatic stay, described in more detail below,
generally prohibits creditors from initiating or continuing collection
efforts against the debtor.26 Thus, when a defaulting borrower files for
bankruptcy, the automatic stay usually prevents a secured creditor from
seizing the collateral, selling it, and keeping the proceeds.27
        However, bankruptcy law accepts as a basic principle that the
secured creditor has the right to receive the value of its collateral (up to
the amount owed).28 Thus, at the end of the bankruptcy proceeding, the
creditor is paid in full for that amount.29 The creditor also receives an
unsecured claim for any deficiency, which is almost never paid in full.30
Before considering in more detail secured creditors’ entitlements at the
end of the bankruptcy proceeding, however, it is important to consider
first the aim and operation of the automatic stay.

    a. The Automatic Stay

   When a debtor files for bankruptcy, the automatic stay stops all
collection activities against the debtor.31 Thus, unlike outside bankruptcy,


     25   See EPSTEIN et. al., supra note 6, at § 3-1.
     26   See 11 U.S.C. § 362 (1994). See generally EPSTEIN et. al., supra note 6, at §§ 3-1
to - 7.
     27 See 11 U.S.C. 362(a) (1994); DOUGLAS G. BAIRD & THOMAS H. JACKSON,
CASES, PROBLEMS, AND MATERIALS ON SECURITY INTERESTS IN PERSONAL PROPERTY
481 (2nd ed. 1987).
     28 See Bebchuk & Fried, Uneasy Case, supra note 18, at 862. Secured claims are

treated similarly in other bankruptcy regimes. For a discussion of the treatment of
secured claims in other bankruptcy systems, see INTERNATIONAL CORPORATE
INSOLVENCY LAW (Dennis Campbell ed., 1992) (surveying insolvency laws of
various countries).
     29 See infra Part II.A.2.b.

     30 See Bebchuk & Fried, Uneasy Case, supra note 18, at 862.

     31 See C OLLIER ON BANKRUPTCY §362.01 (2000); EPSTEIN et. al., supra note 6, at §

3-6.


                                               -8-
the secured creditor may not seize the collateral and sell it at auction.32
Nor may the secured creditor pursue the debtor as an unsecured creditor
for any part of its claim.33
    The economic goal of the automatic stay is to protect assets that have
“going concern value.” For purposes of this paper, assets have going
concern value for a particular firm if they are worth more to that firm as
part of a going concern than they would be worth if sold piecemeal.34 If
there were no automatic stay, the debtor’s secured creditors might seize
these assets, dismembering the debtor and destroying the assets’ going
concern value.35 The assets would be sold for less than their going
concern value, and participants in the bankruptcy would get less than if
the assets remained with the debtor.
    An asset that has going concern value for the debtor would, by
definition, be worth more to the debtor than any other bidder at auction.
As a result, if the secured creditor were to seize the collateral, we might
expect the debtor to be the highest bidder for the asset at auction, or to
prevent the auction altogether by paying the creditor what it expects to
get from the debtor at auction. Thus, the automatic stay might seem
unnecessary for preserving the asset’s going concern value.
    However, the debtor is likely to be cash-constrained for much of the
bankruptcy proceeding. If a secured creditor could seize its collateral, the
debtor might not be able to compete in an auction or to prevent the
auction even when it values the asset more than any other party. As a

    32   There are two exceptions to the automatic stay. First, the stay may be lifted
if (1) the debtor has no equity in the collateral and (2) the collateral is not necessary
for the reorganization of the debtor as a going concern. See 11 U.S.C. §§ 361, 362
(1994). Second, the stay may be lifted if the secured creditor’s interest in the
debtor's property is not "adequately protected." See 11 U.S.C. §§ 361-364 (1994). A
secured creditor’s interest in the collateral is considered adequately protected if the
debtor compensates the secured creditor (with cash or additional collateral) for any
decrease in the amount of its secured claim resulting from a decline in the value of
the creditor’s original collateral. See EPSTEIN et. al., supra note 6, at 146. We assume
throughout that the secured creditor is adequately protected and that the collateral
is necessary for the reorganization of the debtor. Therefore, neither of these
exceptions to the automatic stay applies and the collateral remains with the debtor
during the course of the bankruptcy proceeding.
      33 See C OLLIER ON BANKRUPTCY § 362.01 (2000).

      34 When the assets are sold piecemeal at an auction they are purchased and

used by another going concern. Thus an asset is considered to have going concern
value as part of Firm A if and only if the asset is worth more to Firm A than it is to
any other firm that might purchase the asset at an auction.
      35 MARK S. SCARBERRY et. al., BUSINESS REORGANIZATION IN BANKRUPTCY:

CASES AND MATERIALS 119-23 (1996).


                                             -9-
result, the going concern value of the collateral might be lost if there were
no automatic stay.

   b. The Secured Creditor’s Rights at the End of the Proceeding

    The automatic stay deprives the secured creditor of its right to seize
and sell the collateral during the bankruptcy proceeding.36 However,
bankruptcy law attempts to preserve the other most important right of the
secured creditor: priority in the collateral. It is a fundamental principle of
bankruptcy law that a secured creditor has a right to receive the value of
its collateral, up to the amount owed.37 The principle is implemented by
giving the secured creditor a “secured claim” equal to the value of the
collateral, up to the amount owed, which must be paid in full at the end
of the proceeding.38
    In addition, the secured creditor is given the rights of an unsecured
creditor in bankruptcy to the extent that the value of the asset falls short
of the amount owed.39 Thus, the law gives the creditor an “unsecured
claim” for any deficiency.40 Unsecured claims are generally not paid in
full and are often paid only a small fraction of their face value.
    As was explained in Part II.A.1, outside bankruptcy the secured
creditor has a right to the “foreclosure value” of the collateral (defined as
the proceeds of the sale of the asset at auction), up to the amount owed,
and an unsecured claim for any deficiency. We will assume throughout
that bankruptcy law intends to give a secured creditor that same
entitlement. That is, a creditor has the right to the “foreclosure value” of
the collateral – the price it would fetch at auction, up to the amount owed,
as well as an unsecured claim for any deficiency. It is worth noting here
that as a descriptive matter bankruptcy entitlements tend to reflect
nonbankruptcy entitlements.41 There is also an important line of

    36  See COLLIER ON BANKRUPTCY § 362.01 (2000).
    37  See Bebchuk & Fried, Uneasy Case, supra note 18, at 862. We question in other
work whether secured creditors should have full priority in their collateral. See id;
Bebchuk & Fried, Reply to Critics, supra note 18; Fried, supra note 18. However, for
present purposes we take the principle of full priority as given. As Part III.H.
explains, the procedure we put forward can be used to implement not only full
priority but also a rule of partial priority.
     38 11 U.S.C. § 506 (1994). The secured claim may be paid in full with cash or

with a note whose value is at least the amount of the secured claim.
     39 See C OLLIER ON BANKRUPTCY § 501 (2000).

     40 11 U.S.C. § 506 (1994); WARREN, supra note 12, at 59-60.

     41 See Thomas Jackson, Bankruptcy, Non-Bankruptcy Entitlements, And The

Creditors' Bargain, 91 YALE L.J. 857, 859 (1985). As a matter of positive law, it is not
entirely clear what a secured creditor is entitled to get on account of their secured


                                            - 10 -
bankruptcy scholarship arguing that as a normative matter creditors’
bankruptcy entitlements should mirror as closely as possible their
nonbankruptcy entitlements.42
   Returning to our example, in bankruptcy Creditor would have a
secured claim for the foreclosure value of the machine, $X, up to the
amount owed, $100. Creditor thus would have a secured claim for the
lesser of $X and $100. This claim would be paid in full. If $X is less than
$100, Creditor would be considered an unsecured creditor for the
deficiency, $100-$X, and be given an unsecured claim of $100–$X.43

                    B. The Problem with Valuing Collateral

1. The Necessity of Valuing Collateral

        One of the most important functions of the bankruptcy proceeding
is to distribute to participants the value of the bankruptcy pie -- the value
of the debtor’s assets -- according to the amount of each participant’s
claim and its priority ranking.44 The bankruptcy proceeding cannot be
completed until each participant receives at least the minimum that it is
entitled to under the applicable distribution rules.
        As was explained in section A, a secured creditor is entitled to the
value of its collateral, up to the amount owed, and has a claim for any
deficiency. In Chapter 11, this rule is implemented by the “fair and

claim. The U.S. Supreme Court recently decided that in appraising assets the
standard is the “replacement value” of the asset. See Associates Commercial Corp.
v. Rash, 117 S. Ct. 1879 (1997). However, the Supreme Court has not provided clear
guidance to lower courts as to how “replacement value” should be determined. See
Jean Brauchner, Getting it for You Wholesale: Making Sense of Bankruptcy Valuation of
Collateral After Rash, 102 DICK. L. REV . 763 (1998). As a result, there is still
considerable ambiguity about how collateral should be valued in bankruptcy. See
Gary Klein, Opinion Raises More Questions than it Answers, 16 AM. B ANKR. I NST. J. 18
(1997); Edie Walters, An Ambiguous Answer: The Effect of Associates Commercial
Corporation v. Rash on Chapter 11 and Chapter 13 Collateral Valuations, 35 HOUS. L.
REV . 953 (1998); Kenneth Reich, Continuing the Litigation of Collateral Valuation in
Bankruptcy: Associates Commercial Corp. v. Rash, 26 PEPP. L. R EV . 655 (1999); Chris
Lenhart, Toward a Midpoint Valuation Standard in Cram Down: Ointment for the Rash
Decision, 83 CORNELL L. REV . 1822 (1998).
     42 See BAIRD, supra note 13; JACKSON, supra note 13, at 20-33; Douglas G. Baird,

Bankruptcy’s Uncontested Axioms, 108 YALE L.J. 573 (1998).
     43 If $X exceeds $100, C would also have the right to be paid in full for post

petition interest and certain costs incurred in connection with the loan. See 11 U.S.C.
§ 506(b). For ease of exposition, we will assume throughout that § 506(b) does not
apply. This assumption does not affect any of the analysis.
     44 See JACKSON, supra note 13, at ____.




                                           - 11 -
equitable” standard. That standard requires that a secured creditor be
paid an amount equal to the value of the collateral, up to the amount
owed.45 If a secured creditor challenges the plan and the judge finds it not
to be fair and equitable, the judge will not confirm the plan and allow the
reorganized firm to emerge from bankruptcy.46 Thus, whether a Chapter
11 plan is considered fair and equitable -- and therefore whether the
proceeding can be brought to a conclusion -- will depend on the value of
the secured creditor’s collateral. 47
       To continue our earlier example, suppose that the portion of
Creditor’s $100 claim that is a secured claim will depend on the value of
the machine – $X. If $X is more than $100, then Creditor has a secured
claim of $100. If $X is less than $100, then Creditor has a secured claim of
$X. Thus, if the machine is worth at least $100, the “fair and equitable”
standard requires that Creditor receive $100. If the machine is worth $X
(less than $100), then Debtor must provide Creditor with $X.

2. The Absence of a Verifiable Figure

      As we saw earlier, the value of assets serving as collateral must be
determined by the end of the Chapter 11 proceeding. The problem,
however, is that in the absence of a piecemeal liquidation there is no
indisputable value for an asset serving as collateral.


    45  See 11 U.S.C. § 1129(b)(1), (b)(2)(A). Chapter 7 does not specify what a
secured creditor must receive in the event that its collateral is sold as part of a going
concern. However, it is believed that in such a case the judge would give the
secured creditor the value of the collateral, up to the amount owed.
     46 See C OLLIER ON BANKRUPTCY § 1109.09 (2000).

     47 In Chapter 11, a secured creditor may in certain cases elect to treat its entire

claim as a “secured claim” even if the amount of the claim exceeds the value of the
collateral. See 11 U.S.C. § 1111(b). Since the secured claim is simply the amount
owed the creditor, it might seem that there is no need to value the collateral.
However, when the secured creditor makes the § 1111 (b) election the plan
proponent will decline to pay the secured claim in cash. Instead, the plan
proponent will offer the secured creditor an interest-bearing note, in the amount of
the entire claim, that is secured by the collateral. And, the “fair and equitable”
standard requires that the present value of the payments under the note be at least
the amount of the pre-election secured claim (the lesser of the value of the collateral
and the amount owed). See 11 U.S.C. § 1129(b)(2)(B); EPSTEIN et.al., supra note 6 at
775-779. Thus the value of collateral is an important issue even in those cases where
the amount of the “secured claim” is not in dispute as a result of a 11 U.S.C. §
1111(b) election. We will assume that the § 1111(b) election is not in effect, and that a
secured creditor’s claim must be broken into its “secured” and “unsecured” parts.
This assumption does not affect any of the analysis.


                                            - 12 -
       If the assets could be individually auctioned during the proceeding,
that procedure would yield an objective, verifiable amount for the value
of each asset.48 Each secured creditor would be paid the proceeds of the
sale of its collateral, up to the amount owed. Nobody could complain
about the value of the assets. If unsecured creditors believed that the
auction price was too low, they could bid for the asset and then resell it at
the higher “true” price. And even if for some reason the auction did not
yield the highest possible price for the asset, there would still be no
question of how to convert the secured creditor’s claim into secured and
unsecured claims.
       However, in any business bankruptcy in which the assets are to
remain as a going concern, the automatic stay prevents secured creditors
from seizing and selling their collateral.49 In the absence of such an
auction sale, there is no indisputable, verifiable value for the collateral.
And, inevitably, the lack of such a value leads to disagreement among the
parties.
       There may be both genuine and strategic reasons for the parties to
disagree. Genuine disagreement may arise if there are heterogeneous
estimates about the value of the asset. Returning to our example, Creditor
might truly believe that the machine serving as its collateral is worth $120,
and therefore that Creditor is entitled to be paid $100. Another party
might sincerely believe that the machine is worth $80, and therefore that
Creditor is entitled to be paid $80 for its secured claim. This divergence
could arise because of differences in information or valuation capabilities
among the parties.
       Even if there is no genuine disagreement about the value of the
collateral, the parties may have strategic reasons for advancing different
estimates. The secured creditor whose collateral is being valued would
generally benefit if, for purposes of the plan, the value is considered to be
high. It will thus have an incentive to advance a high estimate of the
value in negotiations or in litigation.50 Unsecured creditors and equity
holders will generally benefit from a low estimate because this reduces

    48  See BAIRD, supra note 7.
    49  As explained in Section A, if there were a sale of an asset during the
bankruptcy, the debtor might not have the cash to purchase the asset even if the
asset were worth more to the debtor as a going concern than to anyone else. Thus,
putting assets up for sale could destroy the asset’s going concern value.
     50 Occasionally, the secured creditor may benefit from having a deficiency

claim that it can use to vote against, and prevent confirmation of, a plan it does not
like. In such situations the secured creditor would benefit from a valuation that is
lower than the amount of the creditor’s claim. In most cases, however, the secured
creditor will prefer a high valuation.


                                           - 13 -
the payout to the secured creditor under the plan, leaving more of the
bankruptcy pie for them.
        The following simple numerical example illustrates this point.
Consider a case in which there is a secured creditor who has a $100 claim
and unsecured creditors who have claims totaling $200. Suppose all of
the assets are sold as a going concern for $150, and suppose that everyone
knows that the collateral backing the secured loan has a value of $75. In
this case, the right division would be based on the secured creditor’s
having a secured claim of $75 and a deficiency claim of $25 to be pooled
with the other $200 in unsecured claims. The deficiency claim and all
other unsecured claims would be paid pro rata with the $75 that remains
after the secured claim is paid; the unsecured creditors thus would get
33% of their claims paid.
        However, the parties have clear incentives to advance valuations
that they know to be higher or lower than the actual value of the
collateral. The secured creditor might assert that the asset is worth $100.
If the asset were thought to be worth $100, the secured creditor would be
paid $100 for its secured claim (leaving no part of its $100 claim
unsecured), and the remaining $50 would be shared by the unsecured
creditors, who would now get only 25% of their claims paid. In contrast,
the unsecured creditors would have an incentive to claim that the
collateral is worth only, say, $50. If the collateral were considered to be
worth $50, the secured creditor would get only $50 for its secured claim,
leaving it with an unsecured claim of $50. In such a case, there would be
$100 remaining after the secured claim is paid and $250 of unsecured
claims. Consequently, the unsecured creditors would get 40% of their
claims paid.
        When we put forward our mechanism in Part III, we will consider
the situation in which the parties do not agree on the value of the
collateral. As we will see, our mechanism works well even when there is
disagreement -- whether the disagreement is genuine or strategic.
Whatever the source of the disagreement, no participant, whatever the
participant’s estimate of the value of the collateral, would have a good
basis for complaining that the collateral is under – or over-valued.

3. Comparison to the Problem of Valuing the Debtor as a Whole

      The problem of valuing assets serving as collateral is similar to the
problem of valuing the debtor as a whole at the end of a Chapter 11
proceeding when the debtor is not sold for cash. Both valuations affect
the division of value among the participants in the bankruptcy




                                     - 14 -
proceeding and in both cases participants have strategic incentives to
advance self-serving valuations.
       If there were an actual cash sale of the debtor to an outsider in
Chapter 11, that sale would place a value on the debtor.51 The liquidation
would result in an exchange of the debtor’s assets for cash. Whether or
not this cash represents the “true” value of the assets sold, there would be
no question as to the total value available for distribution and the proper
payout to each class. The payout to each class would be determined by
priority. Creditors with the highest priority would receive payment until
either no money is left or their claims are paid in full; if the highest
priority creditors are paid in full and there is money left, the next highest
ranking creditors would receive payment until no money is left or their
claims are paid in full, and so on. If all of the creditors were paid in full,
any remaining cash would be distributed to equityholders.
       However, when a debtor in Chapter 11 is not sold for cash, a
fundamental problem of valuation arises.52 At the end of the proceeding
at least some of the participants will receive securities in the reorganized
corporation.53 The value of the securities received by the investors will
depend on the value of the debtor as a whole. But in the absence of a cash
sale to a third party there is no verifiable, objective figure for the value of
the reorganized firm. As a result, it is difficult to achieve agreement over
the reorganization value of the debtor. And there is a clear conflict of
interest among the participants which makes agreement all the more
difficult.
       To illustrate the problem, consider a simple example: Suppose a
firm has two classes of unsecured creditors – “senior creditors” and
“junior creditors” (who are subordinated to the senior creditors) – and the
only other participants in the bankruptcy proceeding are the old
equityholders. Suppose further that post-bankruptcy the firm will have
an all-equity capital structure and that all claims will be paid with equity
in the reorganized firm.
       The senior creditors would have an incentive to argue for a low
valuation of the firm, which would entitle them to a larger fraction of the
equity in the reorganized firm. In contrast, the junior creditors would
have an incentive to advance a higher valuation so that the senior
creditors get a smaller fraction of the equity, leaving more for the junior
creditors. However, they will not advance a value that is so high that


    51 See JACKSON, supra note 13, at 211-12.
    52 See Bebchuk, Options Approach, supra note 14, at 778; Bebchuk, Chapter 11,
supra note 14.
    53 See EPSTEIN et. al., supra note 6, at § 10, at 731-80.




                                        - 15 -
they will be forced to share the equity with the old equityholders. Old
equityholders will advance the highest valuation, a valuation that would
entitle them to some of the equity.

4. The Separate Problem of Delay

       Before proceeding, it should be noted that the absence of a
verifiable and indisputable figure for the value of collateral is not the only
problem currently facing secured creditors in bankruptcy. Chapter 11
proceedings often last two or three years.54 During this time secured
creditors are not always paid interest on their loans.55 In addition, the
value of the collateral may decline and the court may fail to enforce the
adequate protection provisions.56 Thus, even if the problem of valuing
collateral did not exist -- that is, even if the value of the collateral always
could be accurately determined at the end of the proceeding -- there
might still remain the problem of systematic underpayment of secured
claims due to the length of the proceeding.
       Our analysis and proposal do not seek to address the problems of
potential under-compensation of secured creditors caused by the length
of the bankruptcy proceeding.57 Instead, our focus is on the problem of
valuing collateral at the end of the proceedings, when the division of
value must take place. Our proposed mechanism would place the parties
in the same position as if a court had determined the value of collateral
accurately and costlessly at the end of the proceeding. The problem of
delay would still remain and need to be resolved in some other manner.58

                    C. Existing Methods of Valuing Collateral

      This section explains how collateral is currently valued when a firm
is reorganized under Chapter 11 -- namely, through litigation and
bargaining -- and the problems with this approach.
    54  See infra Part II.C.2.
    55  Secured creditors are entitled to post-petition interest only to the extent that
they are over-secured. See 11 U.S.C. § 506.
     56 See Shalom L. Kohn, Recoupment Re-Examined, 73 A M. BANKR. L.J. 353, 367

(1999).
     57 However, to the extent the procedure we offer reduces the length of the

bankruptcy proceeding by shortening the collateral valuation process, it would tend
to reduce the valuation problems of secured creditors that arise from delay.
     58 This could be done only by replacing Chapter 11 with a much faster

bankruptcy procedure, such as one based on the options-based or auctions-based
reform proposals, or by adopting a scheme for compensating secured creditors for
the losses caused to them from delay.


                                            - 16 -
1. The Use of Litigation and Bargaining

       Currently, almost all business bankruptcies in which the firm is
preserved as a going concern take the form of a reorganization under
Chapter 11.59 In such a reorganization, the old debt and equity of the firm
are cancelled and creditors (and sometimes equityholders) are given cash,
debt, and equity in the firm emerging from bankruptcy.60
       The payouts to creditors at the end of Chapter 11 are made
according to a “plan” of reorganization, which divides creditors’ claims
into “classes.” 61 Each class consists of substantially similar claims. A
secured creditor’s secured claim will usually be put in its own class.62 If
the secured creditor also has an unsecured claim, that claim may be
placed in a class with other unsecured claims.63 The payout to the class is
distributed pro rata.64 The proceeding ends when the plan is “confirmed”
by the bankruptcy judge.65
       Before the plan can be confirmed, creditors and equityholders vote
on the plan. If a sufficient number of creditors (or equityholders) in a
class votes in favor of the plan, that class is deemed to accept the plan.66
For the plan to be confirmed, it is not necessary that all of the classes vote
in favor of the plan. As will be explained in more detail shortly, if one or
more classes object the plan can be “crammed down” over their
objection.
       However, an objecting secured creditor -- whose secured claim is in
a class by itself -- can block a cram down by showing that the plan is not
“fair and equitable” with respect to its secured claim.67 As briefly noted
above, a plan does not meet this fair and equitable standard if the payout

    59  Managers interested in preserving the going concern value of the firm prefer
Chapter 11 to Chapter 7 because Chapter 11 allows them to remain in control of the
firm as debtor-in-possession while Chapter 7, by requiring appointment of a trustee,
does not. See 11 U.S.C. §§ 701-04; 11 U.S.C. § 1107. See also Baird, supra note 13, at
139 (observing that there are very few sales of going concerns in Chapter 7).
     60 EPSTEIN et al., supra note 6, at 756.

     61 11 U.S.C. § 1122(a).

     62 See ELIZABETH WARREN, BUSINESS BANKRUPTCY 30, 128 (1993).

     63 Unsecured claims may be grouped together, or separated into different

classes. See 11 U.S.C. § 1123(a)(1).
     64 Id. § 1123(a)(4). A creditor may consent to being treated worse than other

class members. Id.
     65 Id. § 1128.

     66 A class of creditor claims is considered to accept the plan if creditors

constituting more than one half the members of the class and holding at least two
thirds of the claims (by dollar amount) vote in favor of the plan. Id. § 1126(c).
     67 C HARLES JORDAN TABB, THE LAW OF BANKRUPTCY 862 (1997).




                                           - 17 -
to be made on account of the secured claim is less than the amount of the
secured claim.68 Thus, the secured creditor that has voted against the plan
can attempt to block confirmation by arguing that its secured claim is
greater than the value of the payout the creditor is to receive on account
of that claim.
         Resolving this challenge usually will require the court to conduct a
valuation of the collateral.69 Each side will offer one or more experts to
testify about the value of the asset. Each expert will present a view that
favors his client. The judge will consider the testimony and reach her
own conclusion about the value of the collateral.
        However, litigation over the value of an asset is costly and time
consuming for the parties. It is also risky for those who have the most at
stake -- both the secured creditor and the plan proponent -- because the
court could arrive at a valuation that is very low or very high relative to
what they believe is the “true” value. Thus, the parties will almost always
first attempt to reach an agreement on the value of the collateral through
bargaining.70
        The bargaining may be successful. If the secured creditor believes
that it is being offered at least what it would get in litigation (discounted
for time, litigation expense, and risk), it may agree to vote for the plan
rather than challenge the plan under the fair and equitable standard. In
this situation bargaining will, everything else equal, shorten the length of
the reorganization.
        However, the bargaining ultimately may not lead to an agreement.
In such a case, after the bargaining fails, the parties will have to litigate
the value of the collateral. As a result, bargaining may actually prolong
the length of the Chapter 11 proceeding.71

    68   For a plan giving deferred cash payments on account of a secured claim to
be fair and equitable, the holder must also be allowed to retain its lien on the
collateral or an adequate substitute. 11 U.S.C. § 1129(b)(2)(A)(i)(I). A plan may also
be considered fair and equitable for the holder of a secured claim if the holder
receives something of the “indubitable equivalent” value as the secured claim. Id.
§ 1129(b)(2)(A)(iii).
     69 If the parties also disagree on the value of the note the secured creditor is to

receive, then the court will be required to assess the value of the note as well.
     70 It has been argued that the expense of conducting valuations through

litigation is desirable because it encourages negotiation. See Steven L. Schwarcz,
Sovereign Debt Restructuring: A Bankruptcy Reorganization Approach, 85 CORNELL L.
REV . 956, 1007 (2000). But, as will shortly be explained, negotiations are not costless.
In particular, they increase the length of the proceedings, which in turn increases
the direct and indirect costs associated with bankruptcy.
     71 In a recent paper, Barry Adler puts forward an intriguing proposal for

improving the process of bargaining over collateral value in Chapter 11. See Barry


                                            - 18 -
2. The Shortcomings of Litigation and Bargaining

      There are two problems with using litigation and bargaining to
value collateral in bankruptcy. First, they are likely to lead to deviations
from parties’ bankruptcy entitlements.72 If there is litigation to judgment,
the court’s estimate of the value of the collateral is likely to be either too
high or too low. If there is successful bargaining, the outcome may
depend not only on the parties’ entitlements but also on the relative
strengths of their bargaining positions. For example, if the secured


Adler, “A Simple Game-Theoretic Solution to the Tension between Cramdown and Holdup
in Corporate Reorganization” (working paper, 2000). Under Adler’s proposal, the
proponent of a Chapter 11 plan would make simultaneous take-it-or-leave it offers
to all of the secured creditors for their secured claims. The offers could be in cash
and/or securities. If all of the secured creditors whose collateral is necessary for
reorganization accept the offer, the debtor would keep those assets and reorganize.
If one or more of these secured creditors refuses the offer, the debtor would turn all
of the assets over to the secured creditors and liquidate.
      Although Adler’s proposal would reduce the amount of time spent bargaining
over the value of collateral, it is unclear whether it would lead to an overall
improvement in the Chapter 11 bargaining process. One might be concerned that
the faster resolution would come at the expense of a significant amount of
inefficient liquidation in Chapter 11. The inefficient liquidation would result from
parties having different estimates of the value of the collateral. Consider the case in
which continuation would be efficient, and one of the firm’s secured creditors
overestimates the liquidation value of its collateral (or, alternatively, the plan
proponent underestimates the liquidation value of the collateral). In such a case, the
plan proponent might offer a price which the proponent believes is above the
liquidation value of the asset but which the creditor believes is below the
liquidation value. The secured creditor would then reject the offer, forcing the
entire firm to inefficiently liquidate before the end of the Chapter 11 proceeding.
The very finality of the take-it-or-leave-it mechanism that is at the heart of Adler’s
proposal would make it impossible to correct such a mistake. (It is worth noting in
this connection that, as Part III will show, our valuation mechanism does not lead to
inefficient liquidation or the destruction of any value when bankruptcy participants
have heterogeneous valuations for the collateral.) For the purposes of our analysis,
it is not necessary to resolve whether adopting Adler’s proposal would or would
not reduce the costs associated with the Chapter 11 bargaining process. What is
important to observe is only that, even if Adler’s proposal were adopted, there
would still be substantial costs associated with Chapter 11 bargaining.
      72 By “entitlement,” we mean what the secured creditor is entitled to get for its

secured claim at the end of the proceeding, which we assume is the foreclosure
value, up to the amount owed. We abstract from the fact that because of the length
of the proceeding and the time value of money the secured creditor gets less than
what it may have been entitled to at the beginning of the proceeding. See supra Part
II.B.4.


                                           - 19 -
creditor has more to lose from delay, it may be forced to accept a
valuation that is too low.73 Or, if the parties expect that the judge will
overvalue the collateral, the secured creditor can force the other parties to
accept a valuation that is too high.
       Second, litigation and bargaining indirectly give rise to costs by
prolonging the bankruptcy. The reorganization process under the
existing rules takes substantial time.74 Some Chapter 11 reorganizations
last two, three, or even more years.75 Although most of this delay is not
attributable to litigation or bargaining over the value of collateral, both
add to the length of the reorganization proceeding.
       Prolonging the proceeding increases the total direct costs of
bankruptcy. These direct costs include administrative costs, such as the
fees paid to bankruptcy lawyers, accountants, and other professionals.76
For a large public company, such direct costs can reach 1.5% to 6% of total
       firm value.77 As a result, they can run from several million dollars
to hundreds of millions of dollars.78




    73  There is substantial evidence that equityholders are able to use the threat of
delay to extract value from creditors. Even though under the absolute priority rule
equityholders are not to be paid unless the creditors are first paid in full, in many
reorganizations equityholders receive value even though creditors are not paid in
full. See Lawrence A. Weiss, The Bankruptcy Code and Violations of Absolute Priority, 4
J. APPLIED CORP. FIN. 71, 73, 75-76 (1991).
     74 See, e.g., Robert Gertner & David Scharfstein, A Theory of Workouts and the

Effects of Reorganization Law, 46 J. FIN. 1189, 1212-15 (1991); LoPucki & Whitford,
supra note 5; Lawrence. A. Weiss, Bankruptcy Resolution: Direct Costs and Violation of
Priority of Claims, 27 J. FIN. ECON. 285 (1990).
     75 See Lynn M. LoPucki, The Trouble with Chapter 11, 1993 WIS. L. R EV . 729, 740-

44.
     76 When there is litigation over the value of collateral, these administrative

costs are even higher.
     77 See Ferris and Lawless, The Expenses of Financial Distress: The Direct Costs of

Chapter 11, 61 U. P ITT. L. R EV . 629, 662 (2000) (finding median direct costs of 4.7% in
sample of 118 Chapter 11s that were initiated throughout the U.S. during the period
1986-1993); Weiss, supra note 74 (finding mean direct cost in bankruptcy
reorganizations of 37 NYSE and AMEX firms between 11/79 and 12/86 was 2.8% of
total book value of assets); Edward I. Altman, A Further Empirical Investigation of the
Bankruptcy Cost Question, 39 J. FIN. 1067, 1078 (1984) (finding direct costs to be an
average of 6.2% of asset value). Even prepackaged bankruptcies are costly. See
Tashjian et al., Prepacks: An Empirical Analysis of Prepackaged Bankruptcies, 40 J. FIN.
ECON. 135, 144 tbl. 2 (1996) (finding that the mean cost of prepackaged bankruptcy
reorganizations of 49 public companies from 10/86 to 6192 was 1.85% of the total
book value of assets).


                                             - 20 -
       More importantly, the reorganizing company is likely to incur
substantial "indirect" costs from functioning inefficiently during the
reorganization process.79 For example, the incentives of management
during the bankruptcy proceeding are often not well aligned with the
maximization of reorganization value. Thus, management decision-
making during the process is likely to be distorted.80 In addition, because
of the insolvency cloud hovering over the company, potential business
partners may be reluctant to invest in developing a long-term relationship
with the firm. The longer litigation and bargaining make the proceeding,
the higher are these indirect costs, which are believed to be much higher
than the direct costs.81

           D. The Valuation Problem Under Market-Based Reforms

       Because Chapter 11 reorganization proceedings generally produce
deviations from parties’ entitlements and costly delays, two types of
market-based alternatives to Chapter 11 have been suggested: the
auctions approach and the options approach.82 As will be explained, each
of these alternative approaches eliminates the problem of valuing the
debtor as a whole that was described in section B. As a result, each of
these alternatives might be able to shorten the length of bankruptcy
proceedings and to bring the division of value closer to one that reflects
parties’ entitlements. However, as will be discussed below, neither of
these alternatives solves (or was ever intended to solve) the problem of
valuing collateral. Each of these approaches still requires that the amount
of each secured claim be determined. And it has thus far been believed
that even under such market-based reforms, collateral value would
inevitably continue to be determined the way it is now -- through time-
consuming and costly litigation and bargaining. On this score, the
proposals were regarded by their own proponents as no better -- though
also no worse -- than Chapter 11.


    78  See, e.g., Lynn M. LoPucki, Cooperation in International Bankruptcy: A Post-
Universalist Approach, 84 C ORNELL L. REV . 696, 713 n. 87 (1999) (noting fee of $200
million paid to the English liquidators of BCCI).
     79 See David A. Skeel, Jr., Markets, Courts, and the Brave New World of

Bankruptcy Theory, 1993 WISC . L. REV . 465, 472.
     80 See Lynn M. Lopucki & William C. Whitford, Corporate Governance in the

Bankruptcy Reorganization of Large, Publicly Held Companies, 141 U. PA. L. REV . 669
(1993).
     81 See LOPUCKI & KALIN, supra note 8, at 7.

     82 Bebchuk, Chapter 11, supra note 14, at 221-23.




                                          - 21 -
1. The Auctions Approach

       Under the auctions approach, which was put forward by Douglas
Baird and Thomas Jackson,83 the debtor’s assets would always be put on
the block and auctioned off for cash. Currently, in a small number of
Chapter 11 bankruptcies, firms are sold for cash as going concerns rather
than reorganized.84 The auctions approach would eliminate the
possibility of financial reorganization and require that all businesses be
either sold for cash as going concerns or liquidated piecemeal.85 The
auctions approach can thus be regarded as suggesting a drastic change in
the rules of Chapter 11, or as suggesting the elimination of Chapter 11
altogether and effecting sales of bankrupt firms through the rules of
Chapter 7.
       Under the auctions approach, once the cash is paid to the
auctioneer, it would be available for distribution to the participants in
accordance with the ranking of their priorities. In contrast to a
reorganization in which part or all of the payout is in the form of stock, it
will be immediately apparent to all of the participants how much value is
available for distribution to all of the participants and how much value
each creditor is receiving. Thus, in contrast to a non-cash reorganization,
there will be no need to litigate or negotiate the value of the debtor in
order to determine the value of the debtor’s securities.
       However, the auctions approach does require first determining the
composition of the different classes so as to establish the ranking of
priorities according to which the money will be distributed. Under the
principle of full priority, secured creditors are entitled to the value of their
collateral, up to the amount of their claim;86 if there were a deficiency, the
secured creditor would have an unsecured claim that would share pro
rata with other unsecured claims. 87 Thus, as under Chapter 11,


    83  See Baird, supra note 13 (arguing that bankrupt firms should be liquidated or
sold as going concerns to prevent opportunistic behavior by the parties and to avoid
the potential distortions resulting from a fictive valuation of the firm); JACKSON,
supra note 13, at 224. See also Michael C. Jensen, Corporate Control and the Politics of
Finance, 4 J. APPLIED CORP. FIN. 13, 31-32 (Summer 1991) (advocating auctions in
bankruptcy as a more efficient way of determining the value of bankrupt firms as a
going concern and solving the problems of information asymmetry and perverse
incentives of various claimants).
    84 Although in principle Chapter 7 could be used to sell the debtor as a going

concern, it rarely is. See Baird, supra note 13, at 139.
    85 See id. at ___.

    86 See Bebchuk & Fried, supra note 18, at 862.

    87 See 11 U.S.C. § 506 (1994).




                                            - 22 -
implementing the auctions approach requires valuing each secured
creditor’s collateral before the end of the proceeding.
       In the absence of any market-based procedure for valuing
collateral, then, an auctions regime would need to use existing valuation
methods to determine the values of the collateral before the auction
proceeds are divided. In other words, any auctions regime would be
forced to rely on litigation and bargaining to perform this essential
function. Indeed, believing that no market-based approach to valuing
collateral was possible, a prominent proponent of the auctions approach
has viewed the problem of collateral valuation as one of the main
impediments to implementing market-based reforms in bankruptcy.88

2. The Options Approach

        The other market-based alternative to Chapter 11, proposed by one
of us in earlier work, is the "options approach."89 Under the options
approach, the participants in a reorganization would receive options on
securities in the reorganized firm according to their priority rankings.
The class consisting of the highest-ranked claimants initially would be
given 100% of the equity of the reorganized firm. However, the next
highest-ranked claimants would have the right to buy these equity
interests by paying the claims of the highest-ranked claimants in full, and
so on.
        For example, suppose (as in our earlier example) that there are
three types of participants in the bankruptcy proceeding: senior
(unsecured) creditors, junior (unsecured) creditors (who are subordinated
to the senior creditors), and old equityholders. Senior creditors would
initially receive 100% of the equity. However, junior creditors would
have the right to buy the equity by paying in full the senior creditors’
claims. Old equityholders would have the right to buy the equity in the
reorganized firm by paying off both the junior and senior creditors’
claims. The call options distributed to the junior creditors and the
equityholders would be distributed pro rata. Thus, for example, an
equityholder who owned 5% of the pre-bankruptcy equity would have an
option to buy 5% of the post-bankruptcy equity. It would exercise the
option by paying in full 5% of the junior claims and 5% of the senior
claims.

    88  See BAIRD, supra note 7, at 13-14. A similar view was expressed by Mark
Roe, who was an early advocate of making certain use of auctions. See Roe, supra
note 13.
     89 See Lucian A. Bebchuk, Options Approach, supra note 14, and other works

cited supra note 14.


                                        - 23 -
       Because the division of value among the classes, and among
individual creditors, would result from the participants' own decisions
concerning the exercise of the options given to them, nobody could
complain that they were being treated unfairly. For example, if the senior
creditors were to end up with 100% of the equity, a junior creditor could
not argue that the equity was worth more than the senior creditors’ claims
and, consequently, that the senior creditors were overpaid and that the
junior creditors were underpaid. If a junior creditor owning, say, 5% of
the junior debt believed that the equity was worth more than the senior
creditors’ claims, it could buy 5% of the equity by paying in full 5% of the
senior creditors’ claims. The junior creditor would thereby get its
entitlement: namely its pro rata share of the amount by which the
reorganization value exceeds senior claims, up to the amount owed the
junior creditor. As under the auctions approach, there is no need to value
the payout received by each creditor class to ensure that priority is
respected. Thus, there would be no need to value the debtor. However,
in contrast to the auctions approach, the options approach would not
require the existence of a party that could pay in cash for the entire firm.
       Although the options approach obviates the need to value the
debtor as a whole, it does not eliminate the need to value collateral. Like
the auctions approach, the options approach requires that each
participating claim be rank-ordered relative to all other claims.90 A
secured creditor’s claim has priority over all other claims only to the
extent that it is secured; the remainder is an unsecured claim that ranks
equally with other unsecured claims.91 Thus, a secured creditor’s claim
must first be broken into a (fully) secured claim and an unsecured claim.
As a result, the options approach cannot be implemented until the value
of collateral is first determined.
       Earlier accounts of the options proposal noted explicitly that
collateral would need to be valued prior to allocation of the options, and
expressed the belief that this would be done using existing methods.92
That is, the options proposal offered to do no better on this score --
though of course no worse -- than Chapter 11.




    90 See Bebchuk, Options Approach, supra note 14, at 802 (noting that the options
approach requires that secured creditors’ claims first be broken into secured and
unsecured claims); Skeel, supra note 79, at 481.
    91 See supra Part II.A.2.b.

    92 See Bebchuk, Options Approach, supra note 14, at ___ (making such

observations); Aghion et. al., supra note 14, at ___ (same).


                                          - 24 -
3. The Valuation Problem as Impediment to Market-Based Reforms

        Much of the scholarly interest in bankruptcy literature in the last
fifteen years has focused on attempts to devise market-based reforms that
would eliminate the need for litigation and bargaining.93 But as some of
the participants in this enterprise have recognized, these reforms cannot
eliminate litigation and bargaining altogether as long as these methods
are still required to value collateral.94 And because it has been generally
believed that the use of these methods to value collateral is inevitable, it
seemed that market-based reform could not completely eliminate
litigation and bargaining. Thus, if it is possible to value collateral without
resort to litigation and bargaining, as we now turn to show is the case,
that would contribute to attaining the aspirations of the literature seeking
market-based reforms. Indeed, since we will also show that this valuation
mechanism could be combined with either the auctions or options
approaches, this mechanism could become a significant element in any
market-based reform of bankruptcy.

                           III. THE PROPOSED APPROACH

       This Part sets forth our proposed approach to valuing collateral in
bankruptcy. Section A puts forward a reconceptualization of a secured
creditor’s claim which underlies our approach. We explain why the
amount of the creditor’s claim that is (fully) secured -- its secured claim -
- is equal to the value of a nonrecourse note, backed by the collateral, for
the amount of the creditor’s total claim. Section B provides a brief
introduction to the proposed mechanism for valuing the secured claim
and its three basic stages. Section C describes the first stage, which is an
auction of a nonrecourse note that takes place shortly before the end of
the bankruptcy proceeding. That auction determines the value of the
nonrecourse note and therefore the amount of the secured claim. Section
D focuses on the second stage, which is the subsequent division of the
bankruptcy pie that is made on the basis of the information generated at
the first stage. The distribution completes the bankruptcy proceeding.
Section E considers the third and final stage, which is the resolution of the
nonrecourse note immediately after the end of the proceeding.
     We then turn to three sections that present extensions,
generalizations, and an alternative version of the mechanism. In our


    93 See, e.g., Baird, supra note 3, at 128; Bebchuk, supra note 14, at 776; Roe, supra
note 13, at 528.
    94 See, e.g., ROE (2000), supra note 15, at ____.




                                            - 25 -
initial exposition of the mechanism, we assume for simplicity that the
second stage of the mechanism -- the division of the bankruptcy pie --
takes place under an auctions regime in which the debtor is sold for cash.
Section F therefore explains how our mechanism can also be used under
the other two regimes for dividing the bankruptcy pie -- bargaining
(Chapter 11) and options. Section G presents an alternative version of our
mechanism under which there is no auction of the nonrecourse note.
Instead, the secured creditor is given the nonrecourse note in satisfaction
of its secured claim and bargains with the debtor after the bankruptcy
proceeding. Section H shows how our mechanism could be used to
implement partial priority if such a rule were ever adopted.

              A. Reconceptualizing the Secured Creditor’s Claim

        As we saw in section II.A., a secured creditor’s bankruptcy claim is
bifurcated into two components: a secured claim and, if the value of the
collateral is less than the amount owed, an unsecured claim. The secured
claim is an amount equal to the value of the collateral, up to the amount
owed the creditor. It must be paid in full at the end of the bankruptcy
proceeding.95 In our example, in which Creditor has extended a loan for
$100 collateralized by a machine with a foreclosure value of $ X, Creditor
has a secured claim for the lesser of $X and $100. The unsecured claim is
simply the amount owed less the secured claim. Thus if $X is less than
$100, Creditor has both a secured claim of $X and an unsecured claim of
$100 - $X.
        A nonrecourse loan is a secured loan whose terms forbid the lender
from collecting the deficiency from the defaulting debtor when the
amount owed exceeds the value of the collateral.96 It is called a
nonrecourse loan because the lender has no recourse against the debtor
other than seizing the collateral. In our example, the $100 loan extended
by Creditor to Debtor would be nonrecourse if Creditor could satisfy its
$100 claim only by seizing and selling the collateral. If Creditor could
satisfy its $100 claim only in that way, and if $X is less than $100, that
nonrecourse loan (if due immediately) would be valued at $X because
that is the most Creditor c ould get in satisfaction of the loan. If $ X is more

    95  As was explained above, see supra Part II.A.2.b, payment may be in the form
of cash or a note secured by the collateral whose value is at least the amount of the
secured claim.
     96 For a general description of the use of nonrecourse loans, see Gregory M.

Stein, Nonrecourse Loans, 442 PLI REAL ESTATE LAW AND PRACTICE COURSE
HANDBOOK SERIES (1999). See also Steven L. Schwarcz, The Easy Case For The Priority
Of Secured Claims In Bankruptcy, 47 DUKE L. J. 425, 462-463 (1997).


                                          - 26 -
than $100, the nonrecourse loan would be worth $100 because were
Creditor to seize and sell the collateral, it could keep only the first $100 of
the sale proceeds. Thus, the loan would have a value of the lesser of $X
and $100: the value of the collateral, up to the amount owed.97
       Therefore, if Creditor had lent to Debtor on a nonrecourse basis, the
value of the nonrecourse note (if due immediately) would be the same as
the amount of Creditor’s secured claim. Conversely, Creditor’s secured
claim can be thought of as the value of a $100 nonrecourse loan secured
by the machine.
       The equivalence between the amount of a secured claim and the
value of a nonrecourse loan is, of course, not limited to this particular
example. Any secured claim can be thought of as the value of a
nonrecourse note for the amount owed the creditor, backed by the same
collateral.
       And because the unsecured claim of a secured creditor (if any) is
simply the amount owed less the secured claim, this unsecured claim can
be thought of as the amount owed the creditor less the value of the
corresponding nonrecourse loan. In our example, Creditor’s $100 claim is
thus the same as a secured claim equal to the value of a $100 nonrecourse
loan secured by the machine, and an unsecured claim equal to $100 less
the value of that nonrecourse loan.
       The following diagram illustrates our reconceptualization of a $100
claim secured by a machine worth $X.

                        In bankruptcy                  Reconceptualization


  Amount of             Lesser of $X and $100          Value of nonrecourse
  Secured claim                                        note for $100, backed
                                                       by machine worth $X
  Amount of             $100 less amount of            $100 less value of
  Unsecured claim       secured claim                  nonrecourse note

                   B. The Mechanism and its Three Stages

       We wish to start by outlining the three main elements of the
mechanism. While each of these elements will be discussed in more detail
later, it will be useful to first provide an overview of the entire


   97 We assume the loan is due immediately.            If the loan were not due
immediately, its value would be discounted to reflect the time value of money.


                                        - 27 -
mechanism. As section A explained, the amount of a secured claim is
simply the value of a nonrecourse note (for the amount owed the secured
creditor) secured by the collateral. If the debtor firm were solvent we
could determine the value of the nonrecourse note by treating the note as
due immediately and observing how much the debtor firm would be
willing to pay to keep the collateral. Resolution of the nonrecourse note
would not result in a loss of going concern value: if the collateral were
worth more to the debtor than to other parties, the debtor would be able
to afford to “buy” the asset from the noteholder and the asset would
remain in the debtor’s hands.
       During a bankruptcy proceeding, however, the debtor may not
have the financial ability to redeem the collateral. As a result, making the
note payable immediately could force the debtor to relinquish the asset
even if the asset has going concern value for the debtor. This forced
relinquishment, in turn, would give rise to a social cost and reduce the
size of the pie available to all of the debtor’s investors.
       Our mechanism addresses this problem by separating in time the
valuation of the nonrecourse note from the resolution of the note. In
particular, we propose to defer the resolution of the nonrecourse loan
until after the debtor firm has emerged from the bankruptcy proceeding as
a solvent firm. At that time, resolution of the note should lead to an
efficient outcome. However, the valuation of the note would be effected
through an auction of the nonrecourse note before the completion of the
bankruptcy proceeding. As we will explain in more detail, this auction
would provide the information needed to divide a secured creditor’s
claim into a secured claim and an unsecured claim which, in turn, is
needed to distribute the bankruptcy pie and bring the bankruptcy to an
end.98 The timeline would be as follows:

1. Auction                        2. Distribution                      3. Resolution
of nonrecourse                     of bankruptcy                       of nonrecourse
loan                              pie                                  loan




      In the first stage, which would take place shortly before the end of
the bankruptcy proceeding, the nonrecourse note is auctioned. As will be


    98  When we put forward the alternative, non-auction version of the mechanism
in Part III.G., we will explain how, when the firm is sold for cash, both the valuation
of the note and the resolution of the note can be effected simultaneously after the
end of the bankruptcy proceeding.


                                           - 28 -
explained in section C below, anyone -- including both bankruptcy
participants and outsiders -- could participate in the auction. The auction
would establish the value of the nonrecourse note and, therefore,
determine the amount of the creditor’s secured claim (and unsecured
claim). As we will show, the auction price should reflect the foreclosure
value of the collateral, up to the amount of the claim, the amount to which
the secured creditor is entitled. The cash raised would be set aside to pay
the secured claim at the end of the proceeding when all other claims are
paid.
       In the second stage, the bankruptcy pie is divided and distributed,
using the information generated by the auction. Although our solution to
the problem of valuing secured claims could be used under any method
for dividing the bankruptcy pie -- Chapter 11, auctions, or options -- for
purposes of illustration we will describe how the proposal operates when
the bankruptcy pie that is divided and distributed consists of the
proceeds of a cash sale of the debtor as a going concern. Such sales,
which currently take place in Chapter 11, would be mandatory under the
auctions alternative to Chapter 11. As section D will explain, the firm
would be sold subject to the nonrecourse note.99 The cash raised at the
prior auction of the nonrecourse note would be used to pay the secured
creditor’s secured claim. The cash raised from the sale of the debtor firm
would be used to pay the creditor’s unsecured claim, if any.
       The third and last stage is the resolution of the nonrecourse note
immediately after the debtor firm has emerged from bankruptcy. After
bankruptcy, the holder of the nonrecourse note -- the highest bidder at the
auction -- will have the right to seize the asset, sell it at an auction, and
keep the proceeds up to the face amount of the note. As will be explained
in section E, the note will be resolved in one of three ways: (1) if the
foreclosure value exceeds the face amount of the note, the debtor will pay
the noteholder the face amount of the note; (2) if the foreclosure value is
less than the face amount but more than the value of the asset to the
debtor, the debtor will let the noteholder seize the asset, who will then sell
the asset and receive the foreclosure value; or (3) if the foreclosure value is
less than the face amount of the debt and less than the value of the asset
to the debtor, the debtor will pay the noteholder the foreclosure value and
keep the asset. Thus, the noteholder will get the foreclosure value of the
asset, up to the face amount of the note. And the debtor firm will end up
retaining the asset if and only if it is the highest valuing user – in other
words, the resolution of the nonrecourse note will be efficient.

    99 The firm would also be subject to other nonrecourse notes if there are other

assets serving as collateral.


                                         - 29 -
             C. First Stage: The Auction of the Nonrecourse Note

1. The Conduct of the Auction

       The aim of the auction is to establish a value for the nonrecourse
note corresponding to the secured creditor’s secured claim. As explained,
this value will indicate the amount of the secured claim, and therefore
allow the secured creditor’s claim to be divided into its secured and
unsecured components. For each secured creditor whose collateral needs
to be valued, a note would be drafted that gives its holder the right to
receive from the debtor the amount owed the secured creditor. The
noteholder would have recourse only to the secured creditor’s collateral.
The note would be due shortly after the end of the bankruptcy
proceeding.
       The auction of the nonrecourse note would take place just before
the completion of the bankruptcy proceeding. As will be further
discussed in section D, at the end of the bankruptcy proceeding, when all
other claims are paid, the cash generated by the auction would be used to
pay in full the secured creditor’s secured claim. In the very brief period
between the auction of the nonrecourse note and the payment to the
secured creditor, the monies received for the non-recourse note would be
held in a separate (interest-bearing) account.100
       The auction would be open to any claim- or interest-holder (or
group of claim- or interest-holders) in the bankruptcy proceeding. Thus,
for example, the secured creditor, other secured and unsecured creditors,
the unsecured creditors’ committee, and equityholders could participate.
In addition, the debtor itself (through its managers, acting as debtor-in-
possession, or a trustee) would be allowed to bid on the note. Finally, the
auction would be open to all outside parties.
       The winning bidder would be required to make its bid in cash. The
cash would be deposited in an (interest-bearing) escrow account and used
to pay off the corresponding secured claim upon completion of the
bankruptcy proceeding. However, two parties would be exempt from the
cash-only rule: the secured creditor and the debtor. In foreclosure sales of
repossessed collateral outside of bankruptcy, a secured creditor is
generally permitted to “bid-in” without putting up cash because a cash
bid by the secured creditor would be equivalent to moving money from


    100As will be explained later, the interest generated on the funds would be
given to the winning bidder at the end of the proceeding. The interest compensates
the bidder for the time value of its money during the short period between the
auction of the nonrecourse note and the resolution of the note.


                                         - 30 -
one pocket to another.101 Similarly, a secured creditor would be permitted
to participate in the auction of the nonrecourse note simply by specifying
the amount of its bid. As will be explained below, permitting the secured
creditor to bid-in would not distort the outcome of the auction. In
addition, the debtor could bid with a note that is due immediately after
the end of the bankruptcy proceeding. Because the debtor will be solvent
it should have no difficulty paying this note.

2. The Value of the Auctioned Note

       We shall in subsections 3 and 4 explain why providing each
participant in the bankruptcy proceeding -- as well as parties representing
their interests -- with the opportunity to participate in the auction would
largely ensure that the outcome of the auction is consistent with parties’
entitlements -- even if there are very few knowledgeable parties bidding
at the auction.
        However, there is every reason to expect that these auctions would
attract significant participation by liquid and fully-informed bidders.
Because the nonrecourse note will yield the winning bidder either cash or
the collateral shortly after the bankruptcy proceeding, estimating the
value of the note will be no more difficult for a bidder than estimating the
value of the collateral. It tends to be relatively easy for knowledgeable
parties to estimate the value of and liquidate (that is, convert into cash)
the kinds of assets that are commonly used as collateral -- real estate,
vehicles, equipment, accounts receivable.102 Auctions of nonrecourse
notes should therefore attract the same types of bidders that have
sufficient cash and information to participate in auctions of these assets in
and outside bankruptcy. To begin with, the auctions are likely to draw
many of the creditors involved in the bankruptcy proceeding -- such as
banks, finance companies, and suppliers -- that have capital and, since
they lend in the firm’s industry, the ability to value the collateral. When
the collateral is of sufficiently significant value, outside bidders are likely



    102 See Bill B. Caraway, Unwrapping the Wraparound Mortgage Foreclosure Process,
47 WASH. & LEE L. Rev. 1025, 1038 (1990) (noting that non-cash bids are allowed in
foreclosures on mortgages).
    102 For example, real estate investors would bid on nonrecourse notes backed by

land and buildings. Cf. Michael Korybut, Online Auctions of Repossessed Collateral
under Article 9, 31 RUTGERS L.J. 29, 29 (1999) (explaining how the Internet increases
the number of bidders in foreclosure sales outside bankruptcy by allowing remote
bidding).


                                          - 31 -
to be attracted to the auctions of the nonrecourse notes as well.103 Short-
term credit, perhaps secured by the nonrecourse note, should be readily
available to bidders who wish to purchase the notes at auction and
convert them into cash shortly thereafter. This, in turn, should increase
the number of knowledgeable parties that are able to participate in the
bidding.
       When there are a number of well-informed bidders at the auction,
the note that is auctioned can be expected to fetch a price that reflects its
value to a person holding the note. As will be discussed in section E, the
party that becomes the holder of the nonrecourse note can be expected to
get, shortly after the end of the bankruptcy proceeding, the foreclosure
value of the collateral, up to the face amount of the loan (which is, again,
the amount of the secured creditor’s original claim). Because the auction
will be taking place just before the completion of the bankruptcy
proceeding, and thus shortly before the resolution of the nonrecourse
note, the auction price of the note should “reflect” quite well the amount
that the noteholder is expected to get – that is, the foreclosure value of the
collateral, up to the amount owed. 104. Consequently, the auction of the
nonrecourse note will generate a price that is equal to the amount of the
secured creditor’s secured claim. Accordingly, the proceeds to the auction
can be used to pay the secured creditor in full for its secured claim. By
determining the amount of the secured claim, the auction will also

    103  If the value of the collateral exceeds the amount owed, the nonrecourse note
will essentially be equivalent to a no-risk loan that is about to become due.
Auctions of such notes should also attract arbitrageurs hoping to profit from slight
disparities between the auction price and the face amount of the loan.
     104 By “predict,” we do not mean that the auction price will perfectly reflect the

expected value of the note to the noteholder. There will tend to be a slight discount
that provides the bidder with whatever small profit is necessary to compensate the
bidder for the risk of changes in the value of the collateral during the period of time
between the auction and the resolution of the nonrecourse note. But because this
period will be very short, the discount should be quite small.
         One might be concerned that there would be an additional discount because
of the time value of money. In particular, because a period of time will elapse
between the auction and the resolution of the note, the auction price will not equal
the amount that the noteholder expects to get at the end of the proceeding but
rather the present value of that amount. However, as explained earlier, the cash
paid by the winner of the auction would remain in an interest-bearing escrow
account until the end of the proceeding, at which point the interest would be
returned to the bidder. Thus, the winning bidder would be compensated for the
time value of its money and therefore not discount its bid on account of this
consideration. Even if interest were not paid to the bidder, the period of time
between the auction and resolution is likely to be so short that any time-value-of-
money discount would be trivial.


                                           - 32 -
determine the amount of the unsecured claim, if any, that the secured
creditor has (which, as was explained, is simply the difference, if any,
between the secured claim and the amount owed).
       In our example, the auction of the nonrecourse loan backed by the
machine should fetch the lesser of $X and $100. The amount paid by the
winning bidder will be given to Creditor on account of its secured claim
when all claims are paid. Thus, the auction will provide Creditor with the
value of its secured claim. If $X is less than $100, the deficiency $100-$X
will become an unsecured claim, which is paid like any other unsecured
claim. If Creditor wins the auction of the note with a bid $B, then
Creditor will become the holder of the nonrecourse loan and will be
regarded as having received $ B for it. The remainder, if any, $100-$B, will
be an unsecured claim.
       We wish to emphasize that the auction is intended to value the
secured creditor’s secured claim at the time of the auction, which takes
place shortly before the end of the bankruptcy proceeding. As we noted
earlier, secured creditors are often hurt by delays in the bankruptcy
proceeding. Delays tend to erode secured creditors’ entitlements because
secured creditors do not always receive interest on their loans during the
course of the bankruptcy proceeding. In addition, there may be a decline
in the value of a secured creditor’s collateral that the creditor is not
properly compensated for, which in turn might reduce the size of its
secured claim by the end of the proceeding.105
       However, our mechanism is not intended to address the problems
arising from the length of the proceeding. It would not put creditors in
the position they would be in if the bankruptcy proceeding were
concluded quickly. Doing so would require either substantially reducing
the substantial delays that currently arise in bankruptcy proceedings by,
for example, adopting one of the market-based bankruptcy reforms or
developing a method for compensating secured creditors for these delays.
       Rather, our mechanism is intended to address the problems that
arise from difficulties in valuing the collateral at the end of the
proceeding, when the bankruptcy pie is to be distributed according to
participants’ entitlements at that time. Our mechanism would thus put
creditors in the position that they would be in if collateral could be easily
and accurately valued at the end of the proceeding.




    105To be sure, the value of the collateral may be just as likely to increase. But the
value of the secured creditor’s claim is capped at the amount of the debt. As a result,
delay exposes a secured creditor to more downside risk than potential upside gain.


                                            - 33 -
3. Bidding by the Secured Creditor

       It might be argued that allowing the secured creditor to “bid-in”
without paying cash distorts the outcome of the auction because it gives
the secured creditor an unfair advantage.106 According to this argument,
other bidders must bid in dollars whose use in the bidding has
opportunity costs. In contrast, the secured creditor who bids without
dollars does not incur any opportunity cost. Thus the secured creditor
might be able to win the auction even when other bidders place a higher
value on the asset.
       This view, we believe, is mistaken. If another party wins the
auction the secured creditor receives the cash paid by the winning bidder.
The secured creditor who bids in and wins the auction therefore incurs an
opportunity cost by giving up the cash it would have otherwise received.
Thus, the opportunity costs faced by the secured creditor and the cash
bidder are exactly the same.
       Another concern that might be raised relates to the possibility of
informational disparities among the participants. It has been argued that
in a foreclosure auction outside of bankruptcy the secured creditor may
have an informational advantage over other potential bidders. This in
turn may discourage other bidders from entering in the first instance,
depressing the final price.
       However, the secured creditor is unlikely to have a meaningful
informational advantage in the auction of the nonrecourse note. To start
with, under our mechanism the secured creditor has no informational
advantage over other bidders whenever the value of the collateral exceeds
the face amount of the note and even one other bidder knows this,
because in such case the value of the note being auctioned is simply the
face amount of the note.
       Furthermore, in a foreclosure auction outside of bankruptcy the
secured creditor is almost always the only “insider” because the
managers and owners of the dissolving firm usually cannot afford to
participate. However, in the context of a firm emerging from bankruptcy
as a going concern, there are likely to be other insiders and well-informed
buyers besides the secured creditor participating in the auction --
including the debtor itself, and perhaps potential acquirers of the firm --



    106  This claim, which we shall show to be erroneous, has been made with
respect to the ability of secured creditors to bid-in in foreclosure sales outside of
bankruptcy. See, e.g., Erica Crohn Minchella, Bankruptcy and The Real Estate
Practitioner, 85 ILL. B.J. 612, 613 (1997).


                                          - 34 -
and these bidders are likely to know as much about the value of the
collateral as the secured creditor, if not more. 107

4. Would any Participant Have a Basis for Complaining?

       Thus far we have assumed that the participation of liquid and fully
informed buyers ensures that the auction price reflects the value of the
nonrecourse note. In such a case, each participant could rely on the
“market” to establish the correct value for the nonrecourse note, and
therefore the correct amount for the secured creditor’s secured claim. As
explained, there is reason to expect this to often be the case. Let us now
relax this assumption and consider the situation in which a participant
does not believe that the “market” will yield the right price for the
nonrecourse note. Perhaps the participant believes that there will be an
insufficient number of participants entering the auction, or that even
though there are many participants all of them under-estimate the value
of the nonrecourse note and thus the auction price will be too low. Could
such a participant claim that the auction will yield a price for the
nonrecourse note that results in the participant getting less that its
entitlement?
       An important advantage of our proposed mechanism is that none
of the participants in the bankruptcy proceeding would have any basis for
complaining about the value of the secured claim that is generated by the
auction of the nonrecourse note. In particular, no secured or unsecured
creditor would be able to complain that this determination results in the
participant getting less than the participant’s entitlement. 108 Below we
first consider whether any participant could complain that the auction




    107  It is also worth noting that one of the effects of the bankruptcy proceeding is
to generate information about the value of the firm’s assets that would generally not
be available if the firm’s assets were liquidated piecemeal outside of bankruptcy.
Thus even if the secured creditor were the only insider participating in the auction
of the nonrecourse note, the information generated by the proceeding may well
substantially erode the secured creditor’s informational advantage over outsiders.
     108 The determination of the value of the secured claim should not affect the

position of equityholders. Under the principle of absolute priority, equityholders
receive any value that remains if both secured and unsecured creditors are paid in
full. See 11 U.S.C. § 1129(b)(2). The auction price does not determine the extent to
which creditors as a group are paid, but rather how the bankruptcy pie is divided
among secured and unsecured creditors when there is not enough value to pay all
of the creditors in full.


                                            - 35 -
price is too high and then examine the possibility of complaints that the
price is too low.109

          a. Complaining that the price is too high

       Suppose a buyer pays for the nonrecourse note an amount that is
too high in the eyes of a participant. In this case, the participant cannot
complain because the participant will not be getting less, and indeed will
even be getting more, than what the participant believes is its entitlement.
       This outcome is easy to see if the participant is the secured creditor.
The higher the auction price, the more the secured creditor will get for its
secured claim, and the more it will recover. Thus, if the secured creditor
thinks the auction price is too high it will think it is getting more than it
deserves.
       Nor can an unsecured creditor complain that the price is too high.
A larger secured claim for the secured creditor means, by definition, a
smaller unsecured claim for the secured creditor. A smaller unsecured
claim for the secured creditor, in turn, enables unsecured creditors to
capture a greater fraction of the value that is available to pay unsecured
claims. Thus, an unsecured creditor who believes that the auction price is
too high cannot complain that it is getting less than it deserves for its
claim.
        In short, a higher auction price makes both the secured creditor
and unsecured creditors better off. The intuition is that when the buyer
pays a higher price, it increases the size of the pie that is shared among
them.110

          b. Complaining that the price is too low

       Suppose that a participant believes that the auction price is too low.
At first glance, it might appear that a participant who believes the price is

    109  If the participant were also the buyer of the note, it would not have a good
basis for complaining that the auction price is either too high or too low. The
participant-buyer could not reasonably complain that the price was too high,
because if it truly believed that the price was too high it would not have purchased
the note at that price. And the participant-buyer would not complain that the price
is too low, because it benefits by purchasing the note at the lowest possible price.
We will therefore assume in the analysis that follows that the participant is a
secured or unsecured creditor who is not also the buyer of the note.
     110 The increase in the size of pie comes at the expense of the buyer. However,

the buyer cannot complain about the mechanism since nobody is forcing it to bid for
the note.


                                          - 36 -
too low could complain that it is under-compensated as a result. If the
participant is the secured creditor, the claim would be that the
participant’s secured claim is being undervalued and therefore that the
participant will be paid too little for that portion of its claim; although a
smaller secured claim would mean a larger unsecured claim for the
secured creditor, the unsecured claim, unlike the secured claim, would
not be paid in full. Thus, a secured creditor who believes its secured
claim is being undervalued would complain that it is getting less than it is
entitled to.
        On the other hand, if the participant is an unsecured creditor, the
claim would be that because the value of the nonrecourse note is too low,
the amount of the secured creditor’s secured claim is too small and,
therefore, the amount of the secured creditor’s unsecured claim is too
large. A larger unsecured claim for the secured creditor means more
competition for the assets available to pay the pool of unsecured claims,
and therefore a lower payout rate for unsecured claims. Thus, if the
participant is an unsecured creditor, it would also believe that as a result
of the low auction price it is getting too little for its claim. Essentially, if
the nonrecourse note is purchased at a price below what the participant
believes to be the actual value, the buyer would appear to be getting a
“bargain” at the expense of the total pie available for division among the
participants in the bankruptcy. And a smaller total pie makes all those
who share this pie worse off.
        However, it would be inconsistent for any participant -- whether it
is the secured creditor or an unsecured creditor -- to complain in this way.
The auction would be open to everyone. If the participant believes that
the price is too low, the participant can enter the auction, bid a slightly
higher price, and make a profit equal to the difference between the
auction price and the foreclosure value of the collateral, up to the amount
owed. Thus, as long as a participant has sufficient liquidity to make a bid
slightly higher than the winning bid, the participant has no basis for
complaining that the price resulting from the auction was too low. In
short, if the participant really believes the price is too low it should have
put its money where its mouth is.

      c. Liquidity Constraints

      We still must consider the possibility that participants might have
liquidity constraints and that such liquidity-constrained participants
might sometimes have a basis for complaining that the price is too low.
Such constraints, it would be argued, prevent a participant who fears the
auction is going to result in too low a price from engaging in self-help by


                                        - 37 -
bidding. The problem of liquidity-constrained participants cannot be
dismissed completely. As we will see, however, there are reasons to
believe that the magnitude of this problem is likely to be very limited.
        First, note that the problem of liquidity constraints does not apply
to the secured creditor. As was discussed, our mechanism permits the
secured creditor to bid for the nonrecourse note associated with its claim
without cash. Since requiring the secured creditor to bid in cash would
create a situation in which the secured creditor pays the cash back to
itself, the creditor is allowed to participate simply by specifying the
amount of its bid. Accordingly, a secured creditor would never be able to
complain that the auction generated too low a price for the nonrecourse
note.
        Let us now turn to unsecured creditors. Liquidity constraints could
pose a problem for these creditors. Because an unsecured creditor must
bid with cash, liquidity constraints might prevent the unsecured creditor
from bidding even when the creditor believes that the auction price
would otherwise be too low.
        However, there is reason to believe that the problem of liquidity-
constrained unsecured creditors will not be a serious one. To begin, it is
important to emphasize that many unsecured creditors will not face
liquidity constraints. As noted earlier, there will be many unsecured
creditors in bankruptcy -- banks, finance companies, suppliers, and others
-- that have enough of their own funds to bid on the note. These
unsecured creditors obviously cannot complain that the price is too low.
        And, unsecured creditors that do not have enough of their own
funds to bid are unlikely to have difficulty borrowing the funds needed to
bid for the short period of time between the auction of the note, which
takes place at the end of the bankruptcy proceeding, and the resolution of
the nonrecourse note, which occurs immediately after the end of the
proceeding. The loan could even be secured by the nonrecourse note
(and, indirectly, by the asset that secures the note).111 Consider a
nonrecourse note that the “market” values at $80 but which the unsecured
creditor believes to be worth $100. The unsecured creditor should be able
to borrow $80 using the note as collateral. Because no other bidder will be
willing to bid over $80, the unsecured creditor should be able to purchase
the note using only the borrowed funds.
        To be sure, one cannot be certain that unsecured creditors who lack
enough of their own funds to bid will always be able to borrow funds. If

    111 Because the asset that is indirectly the subject of the auction served as
collateral for the secured creditor’s loan, it is likely to be the kind of asset that is
acceptable as collateral for a loan to a bidder at the auction of the note.


                                            - 38 -
one were still concerned that the problem of liquidity-constrained
unsecured creditors could be a serious impediment to the proposed
mechanism, which we are not, then one might be reassured by the fact
that the debtor itself, through its managers acting as “debtor-in
possession” (“DIP”) or the trustee, is free to participate in the auction. The
managers, whether they are attempting to pursue the interests of old
equityholders, unsecured creditors or the new owners, are likely to have
an interest in increasing the value of the debtor. The same is true for the
trustee in the rare cases in which a trustee is managing a debtor that will
emerge as a going-concern.112 By purchasing the nonrecourse note for a
price that is less than the value of the nonrecourse note -- that is, the
amount the noteholder will be able to obtain from the debtor post-
bankruptcy -- the managers or trustee would increase the value of the
debtor.113 As a result, the managers or trustee would, if permitted, have
an incentive to enter the auction whenever they believe that they could
buy the note for a price that is lower than its post-bankruptcy value.
       The debtor purchasing the note for a price lower than its post-
bankruptcy value would, in turn, inure to the benefit of unsecured
creditors. For example, if the debtor is to be sold as a going concern for
cash, the debtor’s purchase of the note at a low price should increase the
price the acquirer is willing to pay for the debtor and, therefore, the pool
of funds available to pay unsecured claims. Thus, the debtor – whose


    112  The trustee has a duty to maximize the value of the estate and the payout for
unsecured claims. See Commodity Futures Trading Comm’n v. Weintraub, 471 U.S.
343, 352-53 (1985); WARREN, supra note 12, at 26. Purchasing the nonrecourse note at
a low price would increase the value of the estate by paying off a post-bankruptcy
debt for less than the cost of extinguishing the debt after bankruptcy. This purchase
would in turn make more money available for unsecured creditors. Thus it would
be consistent with the trustee’s duties to enter the auction if the trustee believed that
it could buy the note at a lower price than the foreclosure value of the asset (up to
the amount owed).
     113 Earlier we noted that one of the indirect costs of bankruptcy is that the

incentives of the debtor’s managers may not be well aligned with value
maximization. One might wonder why, if managers’ incentives might be distorted,
they should be permitted to bid on the nonrecourse note. The answer is that the
bidding does not affect the ultimate disposition of the asset serving as collateral, but
rather only the identity of the person holding the nonrecourse note. The disposition
of the collateral is determined after the end of the bankruptcy proceeding, when the
debtor is solvent. At that point, the managers will have an incentive to keep the
unencumbered asset if and only if the debtor values the asset more than other
parties and to sell it otherwise. This is the same incentive managers would have if
the nonrecourse note were not purchased by the debtor but rather by a third party.
See infra Part III.E.1.


                                            - 39 -
interests are aligned with those of the unsecured creditors – in effect will
act as an agent for these creditors. The debtor’s participation in the
auction should further reduce the likelihood that any participant will
complain that it is getting less than its entitlement because the auction
price is too low.

         D. Second Stage: Completion of the Bankruptcy Proceeding

       The auction of the nonrecourse note would take place, as we noted,
shortly before the division of bankruptcy value and the end of the
proceeding. For purposes of describing the operation of our mechanism,
we assume in this initial exposition that, at the end of the proceeding, the
firm is sold for cash as a going concern (subject to any nonrecourse debt).
Thus, once the auction of the nonrecourse note has broken the secured
creditor’s claim into its secured and unsecured components, the
bankruptcy proceeding could conclude with the selling of the firm. The
firm would be sold for an amount equal to the going concern value of its
assets, less the value of the nonrecourse debt. The price would be
discounted by the value of the nonrecourse debt because the buyer,
through the debtor firm that it will soon own, will be required to satisfy
this debt right after the bankruptcy proceeding. The cash raised from the
sale of the firm as a going concern would be distributed to pay unsecured
claims (including the unsecured claim, if any, of the secured creditor),
and, as explained earlier, the proceeds from the auction would be used to
satisfy the secured claim.
       Now one might argue that a potential acquirer of the debtor firm
may be reluctant to make an offer to buy the firm at the end of the
proceeding without knowing exactly how much it is going to cost to buy
off the noteholder after the end of the proceeding. As a result, the prices
offered for the firm may be too low, reducing the amount available to pay
unsecured claims. However, there are a number of reasons to believe that
the prospect of resolving the nonrecourse debt will not disrupt bidding
for the firm.
       First, the potential acquirer may prefer to give up many of the
assets rather than retain the assets by paying the noteholders in cash.
With respect to those assets there is no need for the potential acquirer to
estimate the cost of paying off the nonrecourse debt: the cost is simply the
assets themselves.
       Second, the potential acquirer can always buy off the noteholder by
paying it the amount of the nonrecourse note. Thus the potential acquirer
can easily determine the maximum cost to it of keeping all of the assets
serving as collateral and bid for the company as a whole accordingly.


                                      - 40 -
       Third, the potential acquirer could negotiate conditional purchase
agreements with key noteholders before bidding for the company as a
whole. Under such an agreement, potential firm acquirer A would
contract with noteholder N to buy N’s note for a price $P if and only if A
wins the bidding for the firm. N could enter into similar agreements with
other bidders if it wished. Bidders with such agreements would thus
know the precise cost of paying off the nonrecourse debt and retaining
the collateral.     Noteholders may be willing to enter into such
arrangements to the extent they wish to reduce ex post uncertainty and
bargaining costs. In a situation in which there is a serious concern that
bids would otherwise be impeded, noteholders would have a strong
incentive to enter into such arrangements. Otherwise, the firm might be
liquidated piecemeal and the noteholders would receive less from the sale
of the collateral than they could get from someone contemplating
purchasing the firm as a going concern.114
       Finally, it is worth noting that outside of bankruptcy acquirers
frequently purchase firms that have at least some of their assets serving as
collateral for secured debt. While the presence of such debt reduces the
price a buyer would be willing to pay for a firm, it does not generally
deter the buyer from acquiring it.

     E. Third Stage: Post-Bankruptcy Resolution of the Nonrecourse Note

    The third stage in the mechanism is the resolution of the nonrecourse
note after bankruptcy. We first describe the various ways in which the
note could be resolved and then consider the possibility that the post-
bankruptcy firm may be liquidity-constrained. As we will see, once the
firm emerges from bankruptcy and functions properly, the nonrecourse
note can be expected to be resolved in a way that provides the noteholder
with the foreclosure value of the asset (up to the face amount of the note).
The note can also be expected to be resolved without the loss of any going
concern value – that is, the resolution should leave the asset with the firm
if and only if the firm is the highest valuing user of the asset.

    114 Our mechanism does not require that the sale of the firm be delayed until
after the auction of the nonrecourse note. The firm could be sold as a whole subject
to a nonrecourse note, with the holder of the note to be determined at a subsequent
auction of the note. If the sale of the firm as a whole were to precede the auction of
the nonrecourse note(s), the buyer of the firm could easily avoid bargaining with
nonrecourse noteholders by buying the nonrecourse notes at the auction. Thus if
one were still concerned that the prospect of bargaining with noteholders would
unduly depress bids for the firm as a whole or scare away all potential bidders, one
could reverse the order of the auctions.


                                           - 41 -
1. Resolution of the Note

       Under our mechanism, the nonrecourse note sold at the auction
would become due shortly after the debtor emerged from the bankruptcy
proceeding. At that time, as is the case with any nonrecourse note that
becomes due, the person who holds the note would have the right to
demand payment of the face amount of the nonrecourse note (which, as
was explained, corresponds to the amount owed the original secured
creditor). If the debtor does not pay that amount, the holder of the note
would have the right to satisfy its claim only with the collateral – that is,
to have the collateral sold at auction and keep the proceeds (the
foreclosure value) up to the amount owed. Returning to our example,
after the bankruptcy proceeding, Debtor would have to pay the
noteholder $100. If Debtor does not pay $100, and if Debtor and the
noteholder do not reach some other accommodation, the noteholder
would have the right to seize the machine, sell it at an auction, and take
the proceeds up to $100 (the face amount of the note).
       As explained in Part II.A., the automatic stay generally stops
creditors from seizing the debtor’s assets during the bankruptcy
proceeding. In the absence of the stay, a liquidity-constrained insolvent
debtor would not be able to prevent creditors from seizing its assets,
including those whose going concern value would be destroyed when
they are taken from the debtor. The automatic stay thus preserves the
going concern value, if any, of the debtor’s assets.
       However, at the end of the proceeding, after the debtor has been
financially reorganized, the debtor should be generally solvent. This
would be the case not only when the debtor is sold to a buyer for cash, as
we are currently assuming to be the case, but also when the bankruptcy
pie is divided through Chapter 11 bargaining or options.115
Consequently, after the end of the proceeding, an efficient resolution of
the nonrecourse note -- that is, one which ensures that the debtor keeps
the collateral if and only if the collateral is more valuable to debtor than to
other parties -- would not be impeded by the insolvency of the debtor.
       To be sure, whether the asset will remain with the debtor, and how
much the note will provide the noteholder, will depend in each case on
the value placed on the asset by the debtor and by other parties. In every
situation, however, the debtor will retain the collateral if and only if the
collateral has going concern value for the debtor, and the noteholder will

    115 In Chapter 11, one of the requirements for plan confirmation is that the plan
be feasible -- meaning that the post-bankruptcy business must be financially viable.
See 11 U.S.C. § 1129 (a)(11) (1994).


                                          - 42 -
receive the foreclosure value of the collateral, up to the amount of the
note. We consider first situations in which the collateral has going
concern value for the debtor and then turn to situations in which this is
not the case.

       a. Collateral Has Going Concern Value for Debtor

       When the debtor is the highest valuing user of the collateral, it
would be the highest bidder at an auction of the asset. Thus, the
foreclosure value when the debtor is the highest valuing user is simply
the amount that the debtor would be required to pay to win the auction.
To win the auction the debtor would need to bid only slightly more than
the highest bid made by other (lower-valuing) bidders. As a result, when
the debtor is the highest-valuing user the foreclosure value is
approximately the value of the asset to the next highest-valuing party.
       The manner in which the nonrecourse note is resolved depends on
the relationship between this foreclosure value and the amount of the
note. Suppose that foreclosure value -- which here is what the debtor
would have to pay for the collateral at auction -- is less than the amount of
the note. Under these circumstances the debtor will refuse to pay the
nonrecourse note in full. Instead, the debtor will pay, and the
nonrecourse noteholder will agree to accept, what the noteholder would
expect to get from the debtor if it took the asset and sold it at an auction.
The noteholder will thus receive foreclosure value, which (in this case) is
less than the amount of the note.
       If the foreclosure value exceeds the amount of the note, the debtor
will pay the note in full and keep the collateral. There would be no
bargaining between the debtor firm and the noteholder because the firm
does not need the noteholder’s consent for this outcome to occur. As a
result, the resolution of the note would be swift and immediate. The
noteholder will get the face amount of the note, which (in this case) is less
than the foreclosure value of the asset.

      b. Collateral Does Not Have Going Concern Value for Debtor

       When the debtor is not the highest valuing user, then the
foreclosure value of the asset is the amount that the highest valuing user
would need to pay to win the auction. Since the debtor will be willing to
bid up to the value it places on the asset, the highest valuing user will
need to bid an even higher amount. Thus when the debtor is not the
highest valuing user the foreclosure value will exceed the value placed by
the debtor on the asset.


                                      - 43 -
       If the foreclosure value exceeds the amount owed, the debtor will
pay the noteholder the face amount of the note, keep the asset, and then
auction the asset off itself, so that it can capture the excess of the
foreclosure value over the amount owed. Thus, the debtor will get rid of
the asset and the noteholder will receive the face amount of the note,
which is less than the foreclosure value.
       If the foreclosure value is less than the amount of the note, the
debtor will surrender the asset to the noteholder in satisfaction of the
nonrecourse note, and the noteholder will then sell the asset at an auction
and receive foreclosure value. Thus, in either case in which the debtor is
not the highest valuing user, the noteholder will get the lesser of the
foreclosure value of the collateral and the amount owed, and the debtor
will give up or sell the asset.

2. Post-Bankruptcy Liquidity Problems

       We will now consider the possibility that the post-bankruptcy
debtor firm might be cash-constrained and therefore unable to redeem the
collateral for cash even when it values the collateral more than other
parties. This scenario is less likely to arise when, as we have assumed for
purposes of this illustration, the debtor firm is sold as a going concern to a
buyer for cash. Any buyer that has sufficient cash to purchase all of the
firm’s assets would have sufficient cash to buy the firm subject to the
nonrecourse notes and then pay off the nonrecourse notes. Nevertheless,
one might be concerned that liquidity problems could arise under the
other two methods of division -- Chapter 11 bargaining and the options
approach -- which will be discussed shortly in section F.
       However, even under those two methods of division, post-
bankruptcy liquidity is unlikely to be a problem. Although the
noteholder has a right to be paid in cash for the note, the payment to the
noteholder need not be in cash. If the noteholder agrees, the debtor could
“pay” the note with equity, an unsecured note, or a new secured note
(recourse or nonrecourse). Thus, if the debtor prefers not to use cash to
pay off the nonrecourse note, it can offer one of these non-cash
alternatives. And if the risk-adjusted value of the non-cash offer is at least
as high as the foreclosure value (up to the amount of the note), which is
what the noteholder would get from seizing the asset and selling it at an
auction, it would be in the interest of the noteholder to accept such non-
cash consideration.
       Under Chapter 11, the debtor may keep assets that had served as
collateral for pre-bankruptcy loans over the objection of secured




                                       - 44 -
creditors.116 The noteholder’s ability under our mechanism to repossess
the collateral if the amount owed is not paid may therefore seem to be a
departure from Chapter 11. However, under the existing Chapter 11
rules, the debtor can keep the collateral only if the debtor pays the
creditor in full for its secured claim with either cash or a note, secured by
the collateral, whose payments have a present value equal to the amount
of the secured claim.117 Our mechanism implements essentially the same
rule: immediately after bankruptcy, a debtor wishing to retain the
collateral is required to give the holder of the nonrecourse note cash or, if
the noteholder agrees, non-cash consideration of equal value. For its
secured claim, the original secured creditor gets either cash before the end
of the proceeding or, if it wins the auction, cash or non-cash consideration
of equal value after the end of the proceeding.
        An important difference between our mechanism and the
treatment of secured claims in Chapter 11 is that in Chapter 11 the
secured creditor could be forced to accept a note that the court decides
has a value equal to the amount of the creditor’s secured claim even when
it in fact does not.118 Under our mechanism, which gives the noteholder
the right to demand cash or the asset, the court cannot force the secured
creditor to accept anything less than the amount of its secured claim.
Thus our approach does better than Chapter 11 in providing secured
creditors with their entitlements under current bankruptcy law.119

             F. Incorporating the Mechanism into Bargaining-Based
                         or Options-Based Bankruptcy

       Until now we have considered our mechanism in the context of a
sale of the debtor firm as a going concern. We now examine how our
proposal would operate in the contexts of the other two basic approaches
to valuing the debtor as a whole: bargaining and options.
       Before proceeding, it is important to emphasize that the first stage
of the mechanism -- the auction of the nonrecourse loan -- and the third
and last stage of the mechanism -- the post-bankruptcy resolution of the

    116  See 11 U.S.C. § 1129(b). See also 11 U.S.C. § 1124 (allowing debtor to reinstate
loan over the objection of lender).
     117 11 U.S.C. § 1129(b)(2)(A)(i).

     118 See JACKSON, supra note 13, at 46-47.

     119 For criticisms of Chapter 11’s failure to give full priority to secured creditors,

see JACKSON, supra note 13, at 211-13. In Section H, we show that the procedure
could also be easily used to implement a rule of partial priority if it were decided
that a secured creditor should not be entitled to the full value of its collateral, up to
the amount of its claim.


                                             - 45 -
nonrecourse loan -- would be identical under all three approaches. The
only relevant difference among the three approaches lies in the second
stage -- the division of the total bankruptcy pie. We thus focus on how
the mechanism would implement the second stage under the bargaining
and options approaches.

1. Bargaining-Based Bankruptcy

       The bargaining approach is currently used in the United States,
where it is implemented through Chapter 11.120 Thus to show how the
proposed mechanism could be combined with the bargaining-based
approach, we will discuss the implementation of our mechanism in the
context of Chapter 11.
       As when the auction of the nonrecourse note takes place in the
context of a sale for cash of the debtor as a going concern, the auction of
the nonrecourse note in a Chapter 11 reorganization would divide the
secured creditor’s claim into secured and unsecured parts. The auction
price would first determine the amount of the creditor’s secured claim.
The secured claim would then be subtracted from the amount owed to the
creditor to yield the unsecured claim (if any).
       That part of a secured creditor’s claim that constitutes a (fully)
secured claim would be paid in full, upon completion of the bankruptcy
proceeding, with the proceeds of the auction of the nonrecourse note
conducted prior the end of the proceeding. Giving the auction proceeds
to the secured creditor would be considered payment in full of the
creditor’s secured claim and thus satisfy the fair and equitable standard.
       The unsecured claim of the secured creditor, if any, would be
treated the same as any other unsecured claim in Chapter 11. It would be
placed in a class with other unsecured claims, be voted in favor of or
against on the plan of reorganization, and, if the plan is confirmed, share
pro rata in whatever consideration is received by its class.121
       As explained in Part II.D.2, currently in Chapter 11 each secured
claim is put in its own class and votes for or against the reorganization
plan. For a plan to be confirmed, each secured claim must therefore either
be voted in favor of the plan or paid an amount that is considered to
satisfy the fair and equitable standard. Thus, under current rules, there
must be bargaining -- and perhaps litigation -- with each secured creditor.


    120 See TABB, supra note 67, at 757-770.
    121 In a Chapter 11 reorganization, the plan may sometimes have more than one
class for unsecured claims, with each class receiving a different amount or type of
consideration. See generally EPSTEIN et. al., supra note 6, at 764-67.


                                         - 46 -
If our mechanism were adopted, however, there would be no need to
bargain or litigate over the amount of each secured claim. Each secured
claim would be considered paid in full with the proceeds of the auction of
the nonrecourse note corresponding to that claim. The addition of our
proposal to a Chapter 11 regime would therefore considerably reduce the
number of classes whose approval would be needed for plan
confirmation, and thereby substantially facilitate bargaining in, and the
resolution of, Chapter 11 cases. 122

2. Options-Based Bankruptcy

       As explained in Part II.E.2, the options approach, one of the two
market-based alternatives to Chapter 11 for dividing the value of the
bankruptcy pie, involves allocating options on the debtor’s value to the
participants in the bankruptcy proceeding. The division of value results
from the participants’ own decisions to exercise the options they receive.
The options are designed in such a way that nobody can complain that
they have ended up with less than what they are entitled to.
       As noted, however, to implement the options approach it is
necessary to rank order all of the participants’ claims. This ranking, in
turn, requires breaking secured creditors’ claims into secured and
unsecured parts. Our mechanism would use the auction of the
nonrecourse note to break apart such claims.
       The auction would take place just prior to the distribution of the
options. The result of the auction would provide the information
necessary to implement the options approach, that is, the ranking and
amount of claims. The secured claim would be paid in full with the
proceeds of the auction. If the secured creditor has an unsecured claim,
that creditor would also receive an option of the type received by holders
of unsecured claims. The participants would know that the firm
emerging from Chapter 11 would have the nonrecourse note outstanding


    122 If it is unknown whether the plan will be confirmed at the time of the
auction -- that is, if it is unknown whether the bankruptcy proceeding is coming to
an end and the nonrecourse loan can be shortly resolved outside of bankruptcy --
then the auction price would be lower to reflect the possibility of delay. This
discount would in turn tend to undermine the auction’s effectiveness as a
mechanism for determining the amount of the secured claim. Under these
conditions, the bid could be made conditional on the plan being confirmed within a
short period of time and payable at the end of the proceeding. This should
eliminate the discount that would otherwise arise from the possibility that
resolution would be delayed.


                                         - 47 -
against it. They would exercise their options in accordance with their
own estimates of the firm’s value, taking into account this liability.

                  G. An Alternative Version of the Mechanism

       Our approach is based on the insight that the amount of a secured
creditor’s secured claim is equivalent to the value of a nonrecourse note in
the amount of the creditor’s claim, backed by the secured creditor’s
collateral. The problem of determining the amount of the secured claim
(and the amount of the unsecured claim) therefore translates into the
problem of valuing such a nonrecourse note. We have suggested that that
the valuation of the nonrecourse note be effected through an auction of
the note shortly before the end of the bankruptcy proceeding. And we
have shown that this method of valuing secured claims could be used
under any of the three basic approaches to allocating the value of the
bankruptcy pie – the sale of the debtor for cash (auctions), bargaining,
and options.
       In this section we put forward an alternative version of the
mechanism that could be used whenever the debtor firm as a whole is to
be sold for cash. This version is also based on recognition of the
equivalence between the amount of a secured creditor’s secured claim
and the value of a corresponding nonrecourse note. Under this
alternative version, however, there would be no auction of the note.
Instead, the secured creditor would simply keep the note and then
capture the value of the note itself after bankruptcy.
       After the completion of the bankruptcy proceeding, the secured
creditor would hold the nonrecourse note. If the debtor buys the note,
whether for its face value or a lower amount, the purchase price would
determine the amount of the creditor’s secured claim and the payment to
the creditor would be considered payment of that claim in full. If the
secured creditor repossesses and sells the collateral at auction, the sale
price again would determine the amount of the secured claim and the
money received by the creditor would be considered payment in full of
the secured claim. The resolution of the note would also determine the
amount of the secured creditor’s unsecured claim.123 As under the
auction version of the mechanism, the secured creditor would get the
foreclosure value of the collateral, up to the amount owed, and the asset



    123  In order for the amount of the unsecured claim to be established, the secured
creditor would be required to pay in cash (rather than with another note or equity)
if it purchases the nonrecourse note.


                                           - 48 -
would remain with the debtor if and only if the debtor is the highest
valuing user.
       The advantage of this alternative version is that there would be no
auction. Although the transaction costs and delay associated with the
auction of the nonrecourse note are likely to be minimal, under the
alternative version there would be no costs or delay during the
proceeding whatsoever.124
       However, under the non-auction version, the secured creditor’s
unsecured claim can be determined only after the resolution of the note,
which occurs after the end of the bankruptcy proceeding. In contrast,
under the auction version the unsecured claim is determined before the
end of the bankruptcy proceeding, and therefore can be treated like any
other unsecured claim that is known before the end of the proceeding.
Thus, under the non-auction version, there must be a means to ensure
that the secured creditor’s unsecured claim is treated like similar claims.
Below, we offer two methods that could be used to ensure that, under the
non-auction version of the mechanism, the secured creditor’s unsecured
claim is treated in the same way as all other general unsecured claims.
       One way for dealing with the secured creditor’s unsecured claim
would be to delay distribution of the proceeds of the sale of the debtor
until after the post-bankruptcy resolution of the nonrecourse note. Recall
that when the auction version of our mechanism is used in the context of
a sale of the firm as a whole for cash, in the second stage the firm is sold
to the highest bidder and the proceeds of the auction of the firm and the
proceeds of the earlier auction of the note are distributed together. The
bankruptcy proceeding is then brought to a close. The third and last stage
of the mechanism is the resolution of the nonrecourse note after the end of
the bankruptcy proceeding.
       Under the non-auction version, in the second stage the firm would
also be auctioned for cash and emerge as a solvent entity, bringing the
bankruptcy proceeding to an end. However, the proceeds of the sale of
the firm would be kept in escrow until the amount of the secured
creditor’s unsecured claim is established by the post-bankruptcy
resolution of the nonrecourse note. At that time the unsecured claim
whose amount is determined by the resolution of the nonrecourse note
would be pooled with other unsecured claims and paid pro rata like any

    124  The alternative version might be appealing to those who are worried that at
auction the secured creditor might buy the nonrecourse note for less than its actual
value, which in turn would give it too large an unsecured claim. The alternative
version might also be appealing to those concerned about the problem of
asymmetric potentials for gain or loss depressing the price of the note, see supra Part
III.C.1, which could arise under the auction-based procedure.


                                           - 49 -
other unsecured claim. This approach would involve moving one
element that was originally in stage two -- distribution of the proceeds of
the sale of the firm -- to the third stage. Delaying the distribution of cash
until after the end of the bankruptcy proceeding is unlikely to give rise to
any significant administrative costs.
       Consider the following example. Suppose that Debtor’s value as a
going concern is $200. Unsecured creditors are owed $150. In addition,
Creditor has lent Debtor $100, secured by a machine with a foreclosure
value of $50. Absent the machine, Debtor’s value as a going concern is
$140. In other words, the machine is worth $60 to the Debtor – more than
to any other party.         Creditor’s secured claim is converted into a
nonrecourse note, with a face amount of $100, backed by the machine
worth $50. Debtor is then sold for cash, subject to the nonrecourse note,
and emerges as a solvent entity. The cash is set aside in an escrow
account pending resolution of the nonrecourse note, which will indicate
the amount of Creditor’s unsecured claim. After the resolution of the
note, the person managing the escrow account makes a pro rata
distribution of the proceeds of the sale of the firm to all of those holding
unsecured claims, including Creditor.
       In this example, at the time of the sale of Debtor for cash, the
prospective owners of Debtor anticipate that they will pay Creditor $50 in
satisfaction of the nonrecourse note (to avoid surrendering the machine,
which is worth $60 the Debtor). Thus, Debtor, which has a going concern
value of $200, will be sold subject to a liability of $50. As a result, the
purchase price will be $150 ($200-$50). The $150 is put in an escrow
account.     Subsequently, Debtor pays Creditor $50 for Creditor’s
nonrecourse note, and Creditor submits an unsecured claim of $50 to the
person managing the escrow account. There are thus a total of $200 in
unsecured claims (Creditor’s $50 plus another $150) that must be paid
with the $150 in the escrow account available to pay unsecured claims.
Each claim is accordingly paid 75 cents on the dollar.
       An alternative method for dealing with unsecured claims is to have
the post-bankruptcy debtor, after the nonrecourse note is resolved and the
amount of the unsecured c laim is determined, pay the secured creditor for
its unsecured claim whatever it would have received had its unsecured
claim been pooled with other unsecured claims.125 So, for example, if the
unsecured claim is determined to be $150 and the payout rate for


    125  Cf. Frederick Tung, Taking Future Claims Seriously: Future Claims and
Successor Liability in Bankruptcy, 49 CASE WESTERN RESERVE L. REV . 435, 500 (1999)
(suggesting a post-bankruptcy treatment of unmatured tort claims based on the
payout rate for unsecured claims at the end of the bankruptcy proceeding).


                                         - 50 -
unsecured claims at the end of the proceeding was 50%, the debtor
would, after resolving the nonrecourse note, be required to pay the
secured creditor $75.
       Under the auction version, the debtor will emerge from bankruptcy
subject to one or more nonrecourse notes. Thus parties who are
contemplating buying the debtor (under the auction approach), accepting
securities in the debtor (under Chapter 11), or considering whether to
exercise their options in the firm (under the options approach) must take
into account the liability represented by these nonrecourse notes in
deciding their course of action. Under the non-auction version, the debtor
will emerge from bankruptcy with the same nonrecourse liabilities. In
addition, when the second method of disposing of the unsecured claim is
used the debtor will emerge with liabilities in connection with the secured
creditor’s residual unsecured claims.
       However, a bidder could easily determine the liabilities
represented by these unpaid unsecured claims. The amount of each
unsecured claim is simply the amount owed the creditor, less the value of
the nonrecourse note, which the bidder would need to estimate in any
event. The payout rate that will be applied to unsecured claims at the end
of the proceeding will depend on the total amount of unsecured claims
presented by unsecured creditors, which is easily observable, and the
amount of value available for distribution at the end of the proceeding,
which is simply the amount bid by the winner of the auction.
       This second method for dealing with unsecured claims of secured
creditors -- delaying the distribution of the proceeds from the sale of the
debtor until after the end of the proceeding and requiring the debtor to
pay the unsecured claim in part -- would yield the same correct result as
the first method. Consider the outcome it would produce in the example
used above. Suppose that in this example Debtor is sold for cash, subject
to the nonrecourse note and the requirement that the Debtor pay
Creditor’s unsecured claim at the same rate as other unsecured claims are
paid in the proceeding. Bidders will be willing to pay ($200 - $50 - X($50))
for Debtor, where X is the fraction of unsecured claims that are paid at the
end of proceeding. However, X is simply the amount that bidders pay for
Debtor, divided by the total amount of unsecured claims (other than that
of Creditor). Thus

      X = $200 - $50 - X($50) or X = 3/4.
                $150

Because X = 3/4, the buyer will pay $112.50 for Debtor. This $112.50 will
be distributed to pay the unsecured creditors, who will get 75 cents on the


                                      - 51 -
dollar. The new owners of Debtor will then pay Creditor $50 for the
nonrecourse note, be presented by Creditor with an unsecured claim for
$50, and pay on account of that claim $37.50.

            H. Using the Mechanism to Implement Partial Priority

       As explained in Part II.A.2.b, it has been a fundamental principle of
bankruptcy law that a secured creditor has a right to receive the full value
of its collateral, up to the amount owed. The implementation of this
principle -- which in prior work we have called the principle of “full
priority” 126 -- requires the valuation of collateral. Currently this valuation
is effected through litigation and bargaining. We have shown that our
proposal could implement full priority -- in a way that is quicker, less
costly, and more consistent with participants’ entitlements, than is
possible with the current approach.
       However, as we have argued elsewhere, full priority might not be
optimal from an efficiency perspective.127 In particular, full priority may
lead to distortions in arrangements between borrowers and their
creditors, including the excessive use of security interests and insufficient
monitoring of borrowers by secured creditors. We have therefore
suggested that according only partial priority to secured claims might be
efficient. We have also demonstrated that partial priority would be
consistent with principles of fairness and respect for the creditor’s
bargain.128 In this section we will show that the mechanism we put
forward could also be used to implement rules that give only partial
priority to secured claims.
       Partial priority rules can usefully be divided into two categories.
The first is “carve-out rules,” rules under which a certain fraction of a
creditor’s collateral is set aside for unsecured creditors before determining
the amount of the creditor’s secured claim. The other category, which we
will call “claim-conversion rules,” consists of rules that determine the
secured claim in the same manner as under full priority, but then convert
a portion of the secured claim into an unsecured claim. Below we show




    126 See Bebchuk & Fried, Uneasy Case, supra note 18, at ___; Bebchuk & Fried,
Reply to Critics, supra note 18 …..; Fried, supra note 18, at ___.
    127 See Bebchuk & Fried, Uneasy Case, supra note 18, at ___; Bebchuk & Fried,

Reply to Critics, supra note, 18, at ____; Fried, supra note 18, at ___.
    128 See Bebchuk & Fried, Uneasy Case, supra note 18, at 931-32; Bebchuk & Fried,

Reply to Critics, supra note 18, at 1290-91.


                                          - 52 -
that our mechanism could be used to implement, without resorting to
bargaining or litigation, either a carve-out or a claim-conversion rule.129
       First consider carve-out rules. Under a carve-out, a specified
fraction of the secured creditor’s collateral is set aside for unsecured
creditors. An example of this approach is the twenty percent Article 9
carve-out proposed by Elizabeth Warren.130 Under Warren’s proposal, up
to twenty percent of a borrower’s personal property serving as collateral
for Article 9 security interests would be set aside to pay unsecured claims.
       Such a carve-out rule could be implemented by modifying the third
stage of the mechanism -- resolution of the nonrecourse note after the
bankruptcy proceeding. In particular, the nonrecourse note would not, as
when the mechanism is implementing full priority, give the noteholder
the right to seize the collateral, sell it at an auction, and keep the proceeds
up to the amount owed. Instead, if the post-bankruptcy debtor does not
pay the amount owed, the noteholder would have the right to seize the
collateral, sell it at an auction, and keep a specified fraction of the proceeds,
up to the amount owed. The remainder of the proceeds would be
returned to the debtor.
       For example, under a twenty percent carve-out rule, eighty percent
of the proceeds at the auction would be given to the noteholder, up to the
amount owed. Under such a rule, the noteholder would expect to get
eighty percent of the foreclosure value of the asset, up to the amount
owed. Therefore the auction price -- which would be the amount the
secured creditor receives for its secured claim -- should be eighty percent
of the foreclosure value of the asset, up to the amount owed -- which
would be the secured creditor’s entitlement under a twenty percent
collateral carve-out rule. The remainder, if any, would be an unsecured
claim.
       Let us now turn to claim-conversion rules. Under such a rule, a
secured creditor’s secured claim and unsecured claim would first be
determined in the same manner as under full priority, and then a portion

    129 We will use the auction-based mechanism (rather than the alternative,
auction-less version of the mechanism) to illustrate how partial priority would be
implemented. However, it would be straightforward to show that the alternative
version can also implement partial priority.
    130 Elizabeth Warren, An Article 9 Set-Aside for Unsecured Creditors, 51

CONSUMER FIN. L. Q. REP. 323, 323 (1997). Warren’s proposed set-aside would be
applied under both state law (outside bankruptcy) and in bankruptcy. Our
procedure could be used to implement the set-aside in bankruptcy. For a
comparison of Warren’s proposal to partial priority rules that apply to all collateral,
but only in bankruptcy, see Bebchuk & Fried, Reply to Critics, supra note 18, at 1347-
48.


                                           - 53 -
of that secured claim would be converted to an unsecured claim and
added to the creditor’s original unsecured claim. Thus, unlike in the case
of a carve-out rule, the secured creditor will not be paid in full unless all
creditors are paid in full. An example of this is the seventy-five percent
fixed fraction rule we put forward for consideration in earlier work.131
Under this rule, a secured creditor would be paid in full for seventy five
percent of its (full priority) secured claim; the remainder of the secured
claim would be added to the creditor’s unsecured claim.
       A claim-conversion rule could be implemented by modifying the
second stage of our mechanism -- the division of value at the end of the
bankruptcy proceeding. The nonrecourse note would give the noteholder
the same rights as under the full priority mechanism. Thus, the
noteholder would expect to get one hundred percent of the foreclosure
value of the collateral, up to the amount owed. However, the amount of
the secured claim -- as determined by the auction of the note -- would be
reduced by the amount specified under the partial priority rule. For
example, the seventy-five percent fixed-fraction rule we put forward132
would pay the secured creditor in full for seventy-five percent of its
secured claim, with the other twenty-five percent of the secured claim
becoming unsecured.

                                  IV. CONCLUSION

       One of the more perplexing and seemingly insoluble problems in
business bankruptcy is the problem of valuing assets serving as collateral
when the debtor’s assets have going concern value. Valuing collateral in
such cases is essential because the value of the asset determines the
amount of the secured creditor’s secured claim and therefore the payment
received by the secured creditor at the end of the proceeding. Currently,
assets in such cases are valued by a court after litigation, or through
bargaining among the parties. These methods give rise to deviations from
parties’ bankruptcy entitlements, and they add costs, delay, and
uncertainty to the bankruptcy proceeding. The problem of valuing
collateral arises not only under current rules, but would also arise under
the two market-based alternatives to Chapter 11 -- auctions and options.
       This paper has proposed a new approach to valuing collateral that
can address the problem under both Chapter 11 as well as under the two
alternative, market-based regimes. The approach is based on
reconceptualizing the amount of a secured creditor’s secured claim as the

    131   Bebchuk & Fried, Uneasy Case, supra note 18, at 909-11.
    132   Id. at 909.


                                           - 54 -
value of a certain nonrecourse note. The part of the secured creditor’s
claim (if any) that is unsecured can then simply be thought of as the
amount owed less the value of the nonrecourse note.                     This
reconceptualization has enabled us to put forward a mechanism for
dividing the secured creditor’s claim into its secured component and its
unsecured residual. The mechanism involves converting the secured
claim into a nonrecourse note that could be asserted against the debtor
immediately after the bankruptcy proceeding. The value of the note
would be determined by the price the note fetches at an auction of the
note that is held shortly before the end of the proceeding. We have also
put forward an alternative mechanism for determining the value of the
note that can be used whenever the firm is sold for cash at the end of the
bankruptcy proceeding. Under this alternative mechanism, the
nonrecourse note is given to the secured creditor in satisfaction of its
secured claim and its value is determined by the post-bankruptcy
resolution of the note.
       We have shown that the mechanism, appropriately designed, could
provide outcomes consistent with participants’ entitlements, with no
participant having any basis to complain that the secured creditor is over-
or under-compensated. In addition, the mechanism would cause neither
disruption nor loss of value during or after the bankruptcy proceeding.
We have also shown that the mechanism could be used not only in
Chapter 11 but also in combination with the two market-based
approaches that have been put forward as alternatives to Chapter 11.
Finally, we have explained how our mechanism could be used to
implement various kinds of partial priority rules if it were decided to give
secured creditors less than full priority in their collateral. We hope that
this new approach to valuing secured claims will in fact contribute to
improving the design of bankruptcy procedures.




                                      - 55 -
