!  "    



      
 
 

  #$#%
&&'(()))*+ *( ()#$#%

    !, , -    .
%/0/ 1 && 2 
+3  /$%4#
5

                 
     
!"    #  !#  "$!"!%& '
()*  +,       -.      +
,  /  !-! 0 ! 1 !. 23!4  3 !
.  3 !   "! 3 "! 3$ / 2 ! 5   / ! / 2  $! 6    ! 0
4 !4 +    +     77 ,   6-  
 , 6 ./'89)8 4(            
 6  .  
/

:2 77  ,        ( !  ( 
,!2     (      !  ,: !
,    

5 & 51 &  1 3 
  3  
!    * #$#%
5 $//%
$%#%

, &5   3& ) 2 3 &&  6  3 & 17  
61&5 351 3  8 1 + 2 )  1 & 1 1&2&5 32  5 88 1&
8&
32 

5 & &1 *  1&  9351 3 &  1 : & 1 ' & & & 8 8&
88 1&  5 & 588 )  1& 1&& 1   31  & 1 &2 &

1& & *  ) && & 351 3 &  1

88 1&  &  & 3&* . 1 1 

)1 )   351 3 &  1 ) +   88 1&2  8& 1 *   & &&
 2 &   ) 8 &  3 & 1 & &&  )   351 3 &  1 
&1& 3 8&  3 & ) 1 &  8)3 &  & & 1 7 1  8 & 
1 * &&1 3  8 1 + 2   1& & 3  1   1  &  1  &
  3 15 5*

 
& & 8 11
 52 && ,2 &5
,2 &5   %;#/$
60<* 3

 
& & 8 11
 52 && ,2 &5
,2 &5   %;#/$
3 !
=<* 3

1

Introduction

From any perspective, the U.S. is a land of contradictions. It is the land
of plenty, yet it is also the land of poverty and crime. From 1960 to 1991,
the crime rate in the U.S. has approximately tripled. The clearance rate,
the ratio of arrests to known crimes, has fallen from around 31% to 21%, the
median time served has fallen, as has the probability of imprisonment.1 Yet as
Freeman (1996) points out there has been mass incarceration, so much so that
“All told, 7 percent as many men were under the ‘supervision of the criminal
justice system’ (incarcerated, paroled or probated) as were in the work force.”
He points out that in 1993, the number incarcerated alone was about the same
proportion of the labor force as the long term unemployed who are on the
dole in many European countries. The incarcerated are disproportionately
young black men, with low educational status. The numbers are frightening.
For example, 34% of black high school dropouts between the age of 25 and
34 were incarcerated in 1993.2 The costs of dealing with such levels of crime
are enormous. Freeman (1996) points out that California spent 9.9% of its
state budget in 1995 on prison while it spent 9.5% on higher education. In
comparison, in 1980 these numbers were 2% and 12.6% respectively. He
estimates that about 2% of GDP is spent on controlling crime by private
1

See Ehrlich (1996) Table 1 for details.
There is recent evidence that the crime wave is receding. The 1999 Þgures from the
FBI show the uniform crime index as being the lowest since 1973 and having fallen by 8%
from1998 and 27% from 1990. Preliminary data for 2000 shows a fall of only .3% suggesting
that this improvement may be levelling oﬀ. Whether this is a short run aberration or a
longer term trend is hard to know at this time.
2

2

individuals and public agencies while the cost incurred by society of criminal
behavior could be another 2%.
Thus, public policy in this area is of great importance. Criminal behavior
involves choices which impact on the future, and on the payoﬀs from choices
made in the future. Hence, explicitly dynamic models of individual behavior
need to be constructed and estimated. Individuals form expectations on
future beneÞts and costs of crime and take them into account when making
choices. Dynamic deterrence works through the threat of future adverse eﬀect
on payoﬀs when caught committing crimes. Thus, if one wishes to uncover
overall deterrence eﬀects of policy, it is hard to do so without using a dynamic
model. For example, consider the eﬀect of rehabilitation in prison. While
this would reduce crime upon release by raising the payoﬀ of not committing
crimes, it would tend to increase crimes early on because of a reduction
in dynamic deterrence. However, much of the work by economists has been
static and/or reduced form in nature, see for example, the seminal theoretical
work by Becker (1968), and recent empirical work by Tauchen et. al. (1994),
and Grogger (1995). While such work is undoubtedly useful, it may give
diﬀerent policy insights than a dynamic model would, as discussed above, as
well as being less amenable to counter factual policy experiments than would
a more structural approach.
There is evidence that dynamic aspects are important in understanding
criminal behavior. For example, since juvenile records are sealed at age 18

3

and juvenile courts sanctions are much milder than those in adult courts,
there is reason to expect crime to be higher below age 18. Levitt (1997)
shows that states where juvenile punishments are relatively mild compared
to adult ones see a sharper drop oﬀ in the age arrest proÞle after 18 than
states where juvenile punishments are relatively harsh. This is consistent
with anticipatory behavior on the part of individuals. There is also evidence
that Þnes are relatively ineﬀective deterrents compared to punishments that
are more publicly visible, such as social service. If the latter have longer
term eﬀects, such as eroding social status, they may act as a strong dynamic
deterrent.
The only paper we are aware of that begins to take a dynamic structural
approach is that of Williams and Sickles (1997). However, their focus is
on how diﬀerences across individuals in the extent of initial social capital
translate into diﬀerent behavior and hence diﬀerent paths of social capital and
career choices. This explains how criminals and non criminals can face similar
wages yet make diﬀerent choices. They estimate a model of continuous choice
of hours of criminal activities using the Euler equation GM M approach.
They focus on hours worked versus spent on criminal activity and omit any
individuals below the age 18 from their data. In contrast, we use a maximum
likelihood approach and emphasize the choice of whether to commit a crime
or not and the consequences on future employment outcomes. We also include

4

both criminal choice during high school and beyond into our estimation.3
Since we allow criminal behavior to aﬀect employment outcomes, we can
model the vicious cycle whereby crime and unemployment serve to reinforce
each other. There have been studies, such as Grogger (1995) and Kling
(1998), which estimate the eﬀect of past arrests on current employment and
wages. They conclude that after taking account of the unobserved heterogeneity via Þxed eﬀect or instruments, the wage and employment eﬀect of
past arrests are small and temporary. However, in their work, it may be
the Þxed eﬀects which capture the vicious cycle of crime and unemployment.
This may well also be why wage and employment eﬀects of past arrests are
small and temporary in such estimations. Despite this, the cumulative eﬀects
of crime and unemployment could be large in a dynamic model. Recently,
Grogger (1998) estimates a static model of wage and employment as well
as criminal behavior. He concludes that wages signiÞcantly aﬀect criminal
behavior. However, such an approach cannot capture any expectational effects. For example, in the static model, an increase in unemployment results
in an increase in crime. In contrast, in the dynamic model, a permanent anticipated increase in unemployment reduces crime. Why? Current criminal
activity adversely aﬀects future employment outcomes. This acts as dynamic
3

The Euler equation GMM estimation technique used by Sickes and Williams (1997)
works well with continuous data, and not so well with the discrete crime data they use,
because they have to infer the number of hours allocated for criminal activities on the
basis of arrests. In addition, they do not focus on dynamic deterrence or counterfactual
experiments.

5

deterrence to crime. A permanent reduction in unemployment reduces the
deterrence eﬀect of greater future unemployment as a consequence of being
caught and hence raises criminal activity.
Lochner (1999) uses a 2 period model to look at some simple dynamic
relations between education, work and crime. The correlations suggested
by this model are examined using data from the 1980 crime survey and the
other panel data of the NLSY. In his paper, he emphasizes the role of human
capital accumulation on criminal behavior. But he only uses a one year
crime survey, and thus cannot adequately deal with the issue of unobserved
heterogeneity. There have also been simulation studies of criminal behavior
based on calibrated dynamic models of representative agents. Among them
are Flinn (1986), Leung (1994), Bearse (1997) and Imrohoroglu et. al. (2000).
However, there has been little eﬀort devoted to actually Þt a dynamic model
to the data.
We model the choice of whether to commit a crime or not as a function of
wages and employment today as well as future wages and employment, which
are aﬀected by the outcome today. Our contribution is to explicitly consider
the eﬀect of increased criminal records on future wages and employment opportunities. This serves as a dynamic deterrence against crime.4 That is, we
explicitly solve the dynamic choice problem faced by agents. We also allow
for unobserved heterogeneity insomuch as there are 4 types of individuals.
4

Previous work has focused on more standard deterrence variables such as police expenditures and sentencing, among others.

6

Which type an agent is likely to fall into is determined by the data. In other
words, type probability assignment is estimated to maximize the likelihood
function. We Þnd that although current wages and employment opportunities have a relatively weak eﬀect on current crime, there is a strong dynamic
deterrence eﬀect. Our approach also allows us to conduct counter factual experiments. The paper proceeds as follows. The data are described in Section
2. The model speciÞcation is discussed in Section 3, and estimation results
are in Section 4. Section 5 presents some simulation exercises including policy experiments. Section 6 contains some concluding remarks. The details of
the model and its solution algorithms are presented in the Appendix.

2

Data

We estimate our model using data from the 1958 Philadelphia Birth Cohort
Study developed by Figlio et. al. (1994). However, instead of converting
the data into an annual panel, as is usually done, we construct a monthly
panel of arrests and employment activities. In this way we obtain a more detailed panel history of the employment transition of each individual and his
criminal activities. We think this diﬀerence is important. If we used annual
data, almost everybody works positive hours. But with monthly data, we observe the long unemployment spells and job transitions which young workers
frequently experience. The data provides detailed juvenile as well as adult
arrest records, basic demographic information, and employment and school-

7

ing records,5 among others. The demographic information includes variables
such as sex, race, date of birth, church membership, and the socioeconomic
status of the individual. Juvenile arrests records from age 14 are compiled
from rap sheet and police investigation reports provided by the Juvenile Aid
Division of the Philadelphia Police Department. Adult arrest records up to
age 26 come from the Municipal and Common Pleas Courts of Philadelphia.
Data on education, employment, health, and some self reported variables on
criminal activities, etc. were collected in a 1988 follow-up survey interview.
The unique characteristic of this data set is that it contains information
on the individual’s criminal activities and background variables, as well as
variables such as schooling and employment. The data is drawn from the
general youth population of Philadelphia. This is in contrast to many data
sets on crime, which only focus on delinquents. In Figure 1, we plot the average age arrest proÞles of the male and female sample. We can see that the age
arrest proÞle of females is much lower than that of males. In our estimation
exercise we chose only the male sample because males are signiÞcantly more
criminally active. For this reason, public interest, as well as past empirical
studies, focus their attention on the criminal behavior of young males.
Figures 1 to 5 depict how arrests, unemployment, wages and incarceration
are related to age. From Figure 1, we see that the arrest rate of males peaks
5

We drop all agents going to college from the sample. 76 individuals out of 440 sample,
i.e. less than 20 percent of the sample went to college. We also ignore the choices of
individuals who went to trade schools and other similar institutions, since attendance was
sporadic.

8

at 18.6 In Figure 5, we see that the age incarceration proÞle increases sharply
until age 17. Thereafter it remains roughly constant until 26. Hence, the age
incarceration proÞle cannot by itself explain the age pattern of arrests of
young individuals. Some sample statistics are shown in Table 1. In Figure
4, we plot the age arrest proÞles for individuals with diﬀerent past criminal
records. Note that these proÞles shift up with past arrests. This is consistent
with the fact that repeat oﬀenders account for large proportion of arrests. In
Figure 3, we plot the mean and median age wage proÞles. The mean wage
proÞle is far above the median. This is typical of wage data, since wages are
known to have many outliers. Since maximum likelihood estimation tries to
Þt the distribution it is robust against the outliers, and as we will see later,
the model Þts the data well in terms of the median.

3

Model SpeciÞcation

In each period an individual chooses whether or not to commit a crime. His
objective is to maximize the expected present value of lifetime utility. In
the terminal period, T , at age 33,7 he receives a payoﬀ of VT (ncT ) which
depends on his past arrests ncT . The criminal history in the terminal period
is summarized by the index ncT . The Þnal period value function is assumed
6

It is interesting that in the original work of Quetelet more than 15 years ago, the age
crime proÞle peaked at age 24 or therabouts. This is reported in Leung (1991).
7
We chose this somewhat early age, because we only have the data of young individuals
until the age 26. Since the parameters estimated are based on data from age 14 to 26, it
makes little sense to solve the model too far out.

9

to take a simple polynomial form:

VT (ncT ) = f ncT
In each period, his past arrest records depreciate at rate 1 − δ. If he
commits a crime and gets caught, then his criminal record is augmented by
unity. That is,

nct+1 = δnct + 1
otherwise,

nct+1 = δnct .
At age 18, we allow for a single period change in δ to δ 18 . This allows us to
capture the eﬀect of juvenile records being sealed at adulthood. This leads
us to expect a lower value for δ 18 than δ.8 Let st ∈ St be the state space
vector for period t. This state space expands as an agent reaches maturity
to reßect the additional choices made by an adult as opposed to a child.
In each period t, before the age 16, st = (t, nct , iht , ²Nt , ²Ct ), where iht = 1
if in the data the individual attends high school in period t and 0 otherwise.
²Nt is the utility shock of not committing a crime and ²Ct is the utility shock
of committing a crime. We assume both of them follow the i.i.d. extreme
value distribution. At or after the age 16, the individual starts working,
8

As expected, our estimates show δ 18 = 0.76, while δ = 0.98.

10

and the state vector is augmented by labor market information. Hence,
st = (t, nct , iht , iut , Wt , ²Nt , ²Ct ) between the ages of 16 and 18, where iut = 1
if the individual is not employed in period t and 0 otherwise and Wt is the
real wage rate. High school age unemployment is not exogenous and the
probability of being unemployed at age 16 has the following logit form:

Phu = exp(θhu )/[1 + exp(θ hu )]
where
θhu = h0 + h1 nct .
Then, after the Þrst month of age 16, he experiences job transitions, and
the probability of staying unemployed depends both on his past criminal
history and the employment status. That is,

Put+1 = exp(θut )/[1 + exp(θut )]
where
θut = b00 I(age < 18) + b01 I(age ≥ 18) + b1 t + b2 ih + b3 nct
+[b40 I(age < 18) + b41 I(age ≥ 18)]iut .
I(age < 18) is an indicator function which equals 1 when the agent is
below 18, and 0 otherwise. All the other indicator functions are analogously
deÞned. The above speciÞcation allows us to have diﬀerent unemployment
probabilities and persistence before and after 18. At age 18, the individual
11

either graduates or does not graduate from high school. We set ihg = 1 if
he graduates from high school, and 0 otherwise. Hence, the state vector at
and after the age 18 is further augmented by high school graduation, i.e.
st = (t, nct , iht , ihg , iut , Wt , ²Nt , ²Ct ) after age 18. At the age 18, the individual
graduates from high school with probability

Pg = exp(θg )/[1 + exp(θg )]
where
θg = g0 + g1 nct .
The starting wage of the individual at the Þrst month of employment
follows the log normal distribution

log(Wt+1 ) ∼ N (µb (nct ), σ b )
where

µb (nct ) = µb0 + µb1 nct .
Furthermore, the wage growth for the individual on a job is assumed to
be log normally distributed such that

log(Wt+1 ) − log(Wt ) ∼ N(µgt (.), σ g ),
where
12

µgt (.) = µg01 I(16 < age ≤ 19) + µg02 I(20 < age ≤ 23) + µg03 I(20 < age)
+[µg11 I(16 < age ≤ 23) + µg12 I(24 < age)]t + µg2 nct .
We solve for the optimal choice of whether to commit a crime or not.9
The value of not committing a crime is
VNt (st ) = uN (st − ²t ) + βEVt+1 (st+1 |st ) + ²Nt
where st ∈ St is the state space vector, and st − ²t denotes the variables in st
having removed those in ²t = (²Nt , ²Ct ) and uNt (st − ²t ) is the deterministic
component of the utility of not committing the crime. Of course, in the event
of not committing a crime, nct+1 = δnct .
The value of committing the crime is
VCt (st ) = uC (st − ²t ) + PC βE[Vt+1 (st+1 )|st ]
+[1 − PC ]V Nt (st − ²t ) + ²Ct
where V N t is the deterministic part of the value of not committing the crime
and PC is the probability of getting caught after committing a crime and
uC (st − ²t ) is the deterministic component of the utility of committing a
crime.10 The probability of catching the oﬀender is not identiÞed, and we
9

The main reason why we do not solve and estimate the jointly optimal choice of
employment and crime is because of the high computational burden. Our horizon for the
DP problem is from age 14 to age 33, which gives us 240 monthly periods for which we
have to evaluate the value functions. This is already quite computationally demanding.
10
The term uC (.) includes the expected loss from being caught and punished. For this
reason there is no cost of punishment that multiplies the probability of being caught above.
In any event, this expected cost of punishment would not be seperately identiÞed.

13

therefore set it to be

PC = 0.16.
This number is consistent with other facts. Clearance rates, that is the ratio
of arrests to reported crimes varied from 92% for murder and non-negligent
manslaughter to 20% for larceny in the U.S. in 1960. In 1991 the range for
clearance rates was about 67% for murder and non-negligent manslaughter
and 13.5% for burglary.11 We chose 16% as a reasonable weighted average.12
Note that we assume that when, despite committing a crime, an agent is not
caught, it is as if he never committed it. It is not the crimes you committed,
but the crimes for which you are arrested that aﬀect future payoﬀs. Since
crime and arrests are linearly related due to our speciÞcation, we use the
words crimes and arrests interchangeably from here on.
We assume that the utility function takes the form

11

These numbers are based upon Table 1 in Ehrlich (1996).
This speciÞcation ignores the possible endogeneity of the probability of getting caught
which could vary with the seriousness of the crime. Those aspects are pointed out by
Tauchen et. al. (1994) and others. Lochner (2000) estimates the manner in which beliefs
about being apprehended are aﬀected by past arrests and other information.
12

14

uN (st − ²t ) = c01 I(age < 18) + c02 I(age ≥ 18) + c03 I(age ≥ 18)age + c1 iht
+[cl1 Il (Wt ) + cm1 Im (Wt ) + ch1 Ih (Wt )]I(age < 18)
+[cl2 Il (Wt ) + cm2 Im (Wt ) + ch2 Ih (Wt )]I(age ≥ 18)
+c5 ihg + c6 (nct )α .
where Ij (Wt ), j = l, m, h are the indicator functions for low, medium and
high wage groups13 and I(age < 18) is the indicator function for being below
age 18. We introduce this diﬀerentiation before and after age 18 to reßect the
diﬀerences in treatment of juveniles and adults under the law. In general,
the criminal justice system treats individuals under and over age 18 quite
diﬀerently. α allows for convexity or concavity in the eﬀect of criminal history.
As is well known from the discrete choice econometric literature, we cannot separately identify the utility of not committing the crime and the utility
of committing the crime just on the basis of data on criminal choice. Hence,
we set

uC (st − ²t ) = 0.
After the utility shocks ²Nt , ²Ct are realized in period t, the agent chooses
13

Low wage group individuals are those with real wages below $5. Medium wage group
individuals are those with real wages between $5 and $8. High wage group individuals are
those with real wages greater than or equal to $8.

15

whichever option yields the higher value. Hence,
Vt (st ) = M ax{VNt (st ), VCt (st )}.
In the section on Bellman equations in the Appendix, we elucidate on the
value functions of the individuals at various ages.
The unit of time in our paper is months. Since no individuals have multiple arrests in our data, we abstract from multiple crimes and assume that
the individuals only have two choices, either to commit a crime or not to
do so. Because of this, the eﬀect of incarceration on crime/arrests is not
identiÞed. Incarceration is interpreted as being unemployed and at the same
time, unable to commit any crimes.14 The richer model incorporating aspects such as the severity of crimes is hard to put into an error structure
that results in easy dynamic logit computation, such as that of Rust (1987),
which we use below. The analysis of the richer dynamic model is, in our
view, a very interesting topic for future research. In fact, some topics, such
as the eﬀects of alternative sentencing requirements can only be addressed in
a model with multiple crime choices resulting in behavior which is aﬀected
by the sentencing structure. We see our work as a start in this direction.15
14

Because of this, the eﬀect of past crimes on unemployment will be biased upwards
and the eﬀect on crimes committed by the unemployed biased downwards. Since in our
results, past crimes raise unemployment and past unemployment raises crimes, the former
might change signs after the bias is removed, but the latter would not. However, in any
case, we believe the bias to be small since the probability of incarceration in the data is
small (see Fig. 5).
15
While we see oﬀenses with various severity - ranging from drunk driving to murder, we
excluded minor oﬀenses such as drunk driving and other traﬃc oﬀenses. Oﬀenses included
are: homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, theft, other assaults, arson,
forgery. See appendix for the detailed description of the oﬀenses.

16

We also include some unobserved heterogeneities. We take a minimalist stand and assume 2 criminal types and 2 unemployment types. We have
crime type 1 and 2 and unemployment type 1 and 2. The agent’s type is modeled as a random eﬀect, and the probability of an agent’s type is estimated
so as to maximize the likelihood function. Crime type 1 and unemployment
type 1 turn out to be the high crime/high unemployment types. As in other
estimation exercises such as Keane and Wolpin (1997) or Eckstein and Wolpin
(1999), we do not include any observed heterogeneity. As a check, we later
look at the regression relationship between the unobserved heterogeneities
and the observed diﬀerences in individual characteristics and conclude that
the unobserved heterogeneities estimated from the data capture the observed
diﬀerences in individual characteristics.
The Maximum Likelihood estimation involves a number of steps. Not
only must the Dynamic Programs be solved, but the likelihood has to be
computed. The steps are as follows.
Step 1 Solution of the Dynamic Programming problem. For any given parameters, and any state vector, st − ²t ∈ St , it is standard to solve
the Dynamic Programming problem to obtain the values V Ntj (st − ²t ),
V Ctj (st − ²t ), which are the deterministic components of the values of
type j. As usual, the solution proceeds from the last period T backwards. As a result of this, for the given parameters, we know what
the value of committing verses not committing the crime would be if
17

we knew the state variables. Now, we want to get some idea of how
likely the parameter chosen is with respect to the data. To do so, we
compute the likelihood function.
Step 2 Computing the likelihood components. Given the data sdit = (td , ndcit , idhit , iduit , Witd )
for individual i and period t, and the parameters in θ, we integrate over
the taste shocks ²t to calculate the probability of committing a crime.
That is, we calculate

Pj (VCt (st ) > VNt (st ))
Z
=
I[V Ctj (sdit ) + ²Ct > V Ntj (sdit ) + ²Nt ]dF (²t ).
This gives the probability that individual i when he is of type
j, commits a crime in period t . This is then done for each period
t, and then repeated for each individual and type. The latter is required since each individual is not assigned a type, but rather a set
of probabilities over types. This gives the 4 probabilities associated
with the individual committing the crime if he was of the given type.
Of course, the probability of being a particular type remains to be
estimated. In this manner, we obtain the criminal choice component
of the likelihood, LitjC (θj ). The other components of the likelihood
are the probability of unemployment and the wage density component,
which are jointly denoted by LitjE (θj ), and the high school graduation
18

probability component denoted by Li18jHS (θj ) in the Appendix. As
before, these probabilities are calculated for all individuals i, periods
t and types j for the given parameter θ. Of course, the probability of
high school graduation is only calculated at age 18. The probability of
unemployment and the high school graduation probability components
have the standard logit form. The wage density component also has
the standard log-normal form.
Step 3 From the previous steps, we can get the values of the likelihood components for diﬀerent parameter values. The likelihood function is the
type probability weighted sum of the likelihood components.
Step 4 We choose the values of the parameters and the prior type probability
parameters π 1 , π 2 , π 11 , and π21 , namely the probability of the 2 crime
types and the conditional probability of being an unemployment type
1 conditional on crime type, to maximize the likelihood. This gives us
the parameter estimates. As usual in maximum likelihood estimation,
standard errors are calculated from the inverse of the sample information matrix.
In general, solving and estimating dynamic discrete choice models, such
as this, is computationally demanding. Recall that in order to solve for the
Bellman equation described in more detail in the Appendix, we needed to
solve for the expected values, E[Vt+1 (st+1 )|st ]. To derive these expected value
19

functions, we needed to integrate over the shocks ²Nt and ²Ct and over the
wage and employment shocks. This integration had to be done for each point
in the state space st − ²t at each period t. On top of this, the above Dynamic
Programming problem had to be solved once at each likelihood evaluation,
when we assume no heterogeneity, and several times when we introduce some
unobserved heterogeneities. As a result, the programming and computation
were non trivial. Details on model estimation are to be found in the section
on the Solution Algorithm and the Likelihood in the Appendix.16

4

Estimation Results

Parameter estimates are presented in Table 2. Notice that the intercept of
the net utility of not committing crime for both types is lower before age 18
(ci01 < ci02 , i = 1, 2). This together with δ 18 < δ is how our model explains
the fact that in the data, arrest rates drop sharply at age 18. In the current
criminal justice system, juvenile oﬀenses have more lenient sentences, and
juvenile records are sealed. Note that the estimated relationship between
arrest rates and wages is not monotonic.17 This could be why the wage
coeﬃcients of crime choice model in past research such as Lochner (1999),
Grogger (1998) have been of mixed sign.

16

The depreciation rate (1 − δ) is about 2% per month, which amounts

The FORTRAN programs used to implement the estimation is available upon request.
The dummies for low, medium and high wages in the utility function are not necessarily
increasing in wage levels.
17

20

to an annual depreciation rate of about 21%. Our estimates are consistent
with past work such as Grogger (1995), Kling (1999), who have pointed out
that the eﬀect of past criminal history on current variables such as employment and wages is temporary. The depreciation rate of the juvenile criminal
record at age 18, or (1 − δ 18 ) is about 24%. This, combined with the annual
depreciation rate of 21% implies that juvenile crime records have a relatively
small eﬀect on the adult behavior.
Before age 18, the parameter estimates indicate that overall for low crime
types, being employed increases crime, i.e., c1l1 , c1m1 , c1h1 < 0, whereas for
high crime types, being employed tends to decrease crime, i.e., c2l1 , c2m1 > 0,
and c2h1 < 0 but insigniÞcant. Furthermore, attending high school decreases
crime for the low crime type (c11 > 0), but increases it for the high crime type
(c21 < 0). One would expect that employment and high school attendance
would reduce crime. However, suppose the low crime types who work instead
of going to high school tend to be the low achievement types, perhaps, because they are less academically gifted, and the high crime types who stay in
high school rather than work tend to be lazy and hence low achievers. Then
this result makes sense, since Eckstein and Wolpin (1999) show that the low
achievers tend to be more criminally active. In short, we need to be more
careful about the unobserved and observed characteristics in explaining the
criminal, labor market and schooling behavior of youth together. Unfortunately, compared to the NLSY data used by Eckstein and Wolpin (1999), our

21

panel data has only limited information on schooling as only the Þnal year
of school attendance is recorded.
Other parameters have either the expected signs or are not signiÞcant.
For example, the state dependence eﬀect indicates that a history of criminal
activity reduces the utility of not committing a crime (c6 < 0, α > 0). While
the high school graduation dummy has a negative sign, it is not signiÞcant.
Nor is the negative sign of the arrest record coeﬃcient in the initial unemployment probability (h1 < 0). The criminal type (type 1) has higher probability
of being of a high unemployment type as evidenced by π 11 > π 21 . π 11 is the
conditional probability of being a high unemployment type (type 1) given
that the agent belongs to the high crime type (type 1) and π 21 is the conditional probability of being a high unemployment type (type 1) given that the
agent belongs to low crime type (type 2). Moreover, high school graduation
reduces unemployment transition probability (b2 < 0) while a longer criminal
record increases it (b3 > 0). Unemployment rate probability intercepts are
lower for employment type 1, both before and after 18 (b100 < b200 , b101 < b201 ).
Also, for both employment types, the unemployment probability falls with
age (b11 < 0, b21 < 0). This is also evident from the age unemployment proÞles
in Fig 2. Wage growth increases with age (µg1i < 0, i = 1, 2) and decreases
with past criminal records (µg2 < 0). The starting wage increases with past
criminal records, but the coeﬃcient is insigniÞcant (µb2 > 0).
We follow Keane and Wolpin (1997) and Eckstein and Wolpin (1999) and

22

do not include the observed characteristics in our model. Our results show
that the criminally at risk type is about 28% of the sample. Moreover, these
types clearly aﬀect behavior, as is evident in the diﬀerence in their crime,
unemployment and wage proÞles depicted in Figures 6 − 8. We argue that
the unobserved types, in particular the unobserved criminal types, reßect
the eﬀect of the observed characteristics on the crime rate. In Table 3, we
report the results of a logit type regression which relates the odds of the
individual being of crime type 1 with several observed characteristics. That
is, we estimated the following equation.

ln[Pc1 /(1 − Pc1 )] = β 0 + β 1 X.
Most of the signs are reasonable. Being white increases the non-criminal
type probability. So does the father and mother being in household from age
12 to 18, socioeconomic status of the family when young, growing up in a
loving household. On the other hand, the father having been unemployed
when young, ever being a gang member, any of the parents ever being arrested, all increase the probability of being the criminal type. Furthermore,
the probability of being a criminal type increases with the number of friends
who are arrested. It is interesting to note that mothers working outside the
home when the individual grew up actually increases the probability of being
a low crime type. The coeﬃcients of the religion dummies are relative to the
unknown religious beliefs. Being Jewish or being Catholic reduces the crimi-

23

nal type probability compared to other religious beliefs. But as the standard
errors indicate, most of the coeﬃcients are insigniÞcant. Both R-squares
and the adjusted R-squares are low, so that much unexplained heterogeneity
remains.

5

Simulation Exercises

This section has two distinct components. The Þrst deals with how well the
data and the simulated model track each other. The second deals with the
eﬀects of some policy experiments.

5.1

Generated and Actual Data

In Figures 1 to 3 and Figure 9 vs. Figure 4, we compare the simulation results
with the data. The model Þts well with regard to the overall age arrest proÞle
and the age unemployment proÞle. It Þts the age median wage proÞle much
better than the age mean wage proÞle. This is quite natural since maximum
likelihood is robust against outliers, and tries to Þt the distribution of wages
instead of its mean. In contrast to most age wage proÞles in empirical labor
economics, real wage growth here is sluggish until the age 24, even showing
occasional decreases. This, we suspect, is due to the fact that our panel data
consists of a single cohort which experienced a business cycle downturn in
the period 1978 to 1982. Figure 9 depicts the simulated age arrest proÞles
with diﬀerent past criminal records. Notice that the simulated arrest proÞles
for individuals with more past arrest records lie above those with fewer ones.
24

This corresponds to the actual proÞles, as depicted in Figure 4. That is,
proÞles indicate that repeat oﬀenders commit more crimes than others. Thus,
greater criminal activity by repeat oﬀenders comes naturally from our setup.
Figure 6 plots the simulated age arrest proÞles of the four types separately.
Notice that there are large diﬀerences in arrest rates among the types. In
particular, the arrest rate of the at-risk youths (criminal types with both
low and high unemployment) seem to be 2 to 4 times as high as that of
the others. This is also consistent with repeat oﬀenders committing most
crimes. Also, notice from Figure 6, that it is the arrest rate of the criminal
types (criminal type 2) that shows a rapid decline after age 18 so that it
is the criminally prone types who improve dramatically after age 18. This
is consistent with the arrest rate decreasing with age after 18. Figures 7 −
8 plot the simulated unemployment and wage proÞles for the 4 diﬀerent
types. The types do look diﬀerent. Note that just as the diﬀerence in age
arrest proÞles is greatest for the criminal types in Figure 6, the diﬀerence
between the age unemployment and age wage proÞles are largest for the two
unemployment types in Figures 7 and 8. Hence, there seems to be evidence
of an interaction between being more prone to committing crimes and being
unemployed. Both crime types for the high unemployment type lie above
the low unemployment type, but there is more separation between the two
crime types in the high unemployment group, and the separation increases
with age. This is consistent with crime and unemployment reinforcing each

25

other.

5.2

Simulation Exercises

Next, we conduct some counter factual simulations to better understand some
policy issues of interest. First, we try and look at the extent of dynamic deterrence. As explained earlier, dynamic deterrence occurs to the extent that
agents are deterred from crime by looking forward and considering the eﬀects
of their current actions on future outcomes. In the simulation, both static
state dependence and dynamic deterrence are present. Criminal history affects employment outcomes as well as choices. At the same time, individuals
take into account the eﬀect of current choices on future outcomes. In order
to get an idea of the extent of static state dependence versus dynamic deterrence, we conduct two experiments. In experiment A, we look at what
the outcomes would have been if criminal history did not aﬀect employment
outcomes, though individuals expected it to do so. The diﬀerence between
the original simulation and this counter factual exercise captures the extent
of state dependence. We implement this counter factual exercise by setting
the coeﬃcients for the number of past oﬀenses in the unemployment probit
in the likelihood calculation to zero. Notice that in this exercise, to make
the policy unanticipated, we still keep the coeﬃcients in the DP routine
unchanged.
In experiment B, in order to get an idea of the extent of dynamic deterrence, we look at what the outcomes would have been if criminal history
26

did not aﬀect employment outcomes, and individuals did not expect it to
do so. The diﬀerence between the second simulation and this counter factual captures the extent of dynamic deterrence. We implement this counter
factual exercise by setting both the coeﬃcients for the past criminal history
(in the unemployment probit in the likelihood calculation) and the coeﬃcients in the DP routine corresponding to the anticipated eﬀects of current
criminal outcomes, to zero. A loose interpretation might be that experiment
A corresponds to the case where all criminal records are destroyed, but no
one knows about it. As a result, there would be no state dependence, employment opportunities of criminals would be better, and for this reason, we
would expect crime to fall. However, if they know about it, which would
correspond to experiment B, crime would rise because dynamic deterrence
would be eliminated.
The results of experiment A are found in Figures 10 − 12 where we plot
the ratios of the proÞles generated by this experiment to the original simulated proÞle. We see that as expected, the unemployment ratio lies below
unity. This makes sense as the impact eﬀect of this experiment reduces the
unemployment rate. In addition, there is an induced eﬀect on the arrest ratio and the wage ratio. The arrest ratio also falls as being employed reduces
the probability of committing a crime after age 16. However, this eﬀect is
small. The arrest ratio can be seen as a measure of the extent of the state
dependence eﬀect, or the stigma eﬀect, of past criminal records on current

27

employment and consequently on current criminal behavior. Wages Þrst fall
then rise as does the wage ratio. This comes from lower wage agents accepting employment which pulls the wage down initially. As past employment
raises wages, wage ratios in the future rise.
What if, in addition, this elimination of criminal records were anticipated?
In Figures 10 − 12 we can see that anticipated elimination also reduces unemployment because of the elimination of past arrest records. But the arrest
rate rises. That is, erasing past criminal records to promote employment
raises the incentives to commit crimes as there is no adverse eﬀect expected
on employment. The diﬀerence in the two crime ratios in experiment B and
A gives an idea of the extent to which future unemployment induced by criminal acts prevents them. This is because B has no dynamic deterrence and A
does, so that their diﬀerence (scaled by the original simulated proÞles) gives
the extent of the dynamic deterrence eﬀect. This diﬀerence is large which
indicates that the prospect of future unemployment works as a strong deterrence against committing crimes. This suggests that the dynamic deterrence
eﬀect is stronger than the static state dependence eﬀect. Not only do they
work in opposite directions, but the dynamic deterrence more than cancels
out the static state dependence eﬀect.18
As is well known, crime rates have fallen in the past decade but show
18

The astute reader might ask whether the results are immune to changing the order of
the experiments, i.e., whether the path matters. When this was checked, no substantive
diﬀerence was found.

28

signs of levelling oﬀ. An important question in the policy arena is the extent
to which this is due to the booming economy of the period. To get a partial
handle on this, consider another policy experiment, where, given the current
state variable, we reduce the one period ahead unemployment probability
after the Þrst month of age 18, by 5%. That is,

Put+1 = 0.95 × exp(θut )/[1 + exp(θut )]
The results on the unemployment, arrest rate and real wage ratios are plotted
in Figures 13 − 15. Because of the persistence of unemployment, unemployment rates are reduced by more than 5%. When the reduction is unanticipated, unemployment falls so the ratio is below unity. Since the employed
commit fewer crimes, the induced eﬀect on the arrest ratio also pulls it below unity. The wage ratio initially falls below unity and then rises for similar
reasons as in experiment A. In contrast to this, if the policy is anticipated,
the reduction in unemployment transition probability increases crime. Again
this is due to the strong dynamic deterrence eﬀect since it is the prospect
of future unemployment which deters crime. This exercise thus makes it
hard to argue that the boom in the 900 s alone can be seen as responsible for
the reduction in crime. However, to the extent that this boom, due to its
length and depth managed to bring those at the very bottom into the labor
force, our approach may be under-estimating the eﬀect of crime reduction.
Bringing such agents into the labor force, thereby providing some a dynamic

29

deterrence eﬀect where none existed before, could well reduce crime.
One way to obtain larger eﬀects on the crime ratio is to consider the effects of an anticipated boom followed by a bust. In this case we get higher
eﬀects on crime ratios as depicted in Figure 16. Given the current state
variable, we reduce the one period ahead unemployment probability by 5%,
after the Þrst month of age 20, for 2 years.19 After this the unemployment
transition probability is assumed to increase by 5%, compared to the original
one for 2 years. Behavior is aﬀected even before the onset of the reduction of
the unemployment transition probability because individuals anticipate the
reduction in future threat of unemployment. Before age 20, expectations of
a good labor market, makes crime and hence arrest rise. As a result, the
arrest rate ratio rises above unity, and once the boom begins, expectations of
a slump to follow reduces crime, and hence, the arrest rate ratio drops below
unity quite considerably to begin with. As the slump occurs, expectations
of normal times raise crime and the arrest ratio. The policy maker, failing
to understand the deterrence aspect of the unemployment eﬀect, could erroneously conclude that low unemployment is the cure for crime. However, a
permanent reduction in unemployment raises crime! Note that if this anticipated boom-slump were the reason for the observed decline in crime seen in
the 90’s, we should expect an increase once the slump comes.
19

We choose the age of 20 so that the change in the behavior of adults as well as juveniles
anticipating this boom and then slump can be iullustrated. It makes no diﬀerence to the
earlier simulations if the same age (of 20) is used there.

30

What about the eﬀect of greater enforcement? This policy, joint with
harsher sentencing, has been the standard approach to combatting crime. In
our next experiment, we increase the anticipated probability of being caught
by 10%. As shown in Figures 17 − 19, the eﬀect is to raise the crime ratio for
the young and reduce it for the old. This occurs as the young face weaker
penalties as their criminal history depreciates at age 18, and they intertemporally substitute towards crime. It reduces the unemployment ratio for
adults below unity since adults commit fewer crimes. It reduces the wage
ratio for the young and raises it for the old as a result of the eﬀect of the
policy on their criminal behavior.
We also look at the eﬀect of not sealing juvenile records. This roughly
corresponds to making δ 18 = δ.20 The arrest ratio is depicted in Figure 20.
As expected, the young commit fewer crimes, realizing that their criminal
record is more permanent. The old commit more crimes as they cannot get
away from their juvenile records.
Finally we look at the what happens if we increase both δ and δ 1 by
0.1%. This corresponds to decreasing the depreciation rate of past criminal histories. There are large diﬀerences between countries in the extent to
which an agent’s past haunts him. In Japan for example, a criminal record
is relatively permanent. In the U.S. on the other hand, criminal history is
20

Of course, if juvenile records were completely eradicated, and there were no other
eﬀects such as diﬀerences in criminal and other human capital among juvenile oﬀenders
and others, then δ 18 should be zero. This is why making δ 18 = δ only roughly corresponds
to the opening of the juvenile records.

31

much easier to disguise. In fact, only in recent years have there been laws
such as Megan’s Law, on informing neighbors of sex oﬀenders who move in.
The results are shown in Figure 21. We notice that even a small decrease in
depreciation rate generates a large decrease in the crime rate. This highlights
the importance of dynamic deterrence. The work of Glaeser, Sacerdote and
Scheinkman (1996), or Williams and Sickles (2000) on social human capital suggests that such eﬀects could be important even though they do not
directly look at depreciation as we do. Casual observations across diﬀerent
countries and regions reinforce this conclusion. In countries where people
live in a closely knit communities, where it is often said that “everybody
knows everybody”, so that there is no depreciation, crime is lower. In these
communities, even though legal consequences of oﬀenses may be lenient and
temporary, past misconduct of their members are not forgotten, and hence
the long memory among the other community members work as a strong
deterrent against crime. These are issues that could be further investigated
by conducting international comparisons of criminal behavior.
In sum, our results emphasize the role of future unemployment as an important factor holding people back from committing crimes. Even though
much attention has been paid to the relationship between labor market outcomes and crime, we think this dynamic deterrence aspect has been neglected.
When researchers consider the eﬀect of unemployment and wages on crime,
they mainly focus on the direct state dependence eﬀect on criminal behav-

32

ior. Instruments and other methods are used to avoid endogeneity problems
due to state dependence or heterogeneity. However, correcting endogeneity
in this manner does not give all the structural parameters of interest, and
hence only incompletely addresses the eﬀect of government policy since expectational eﬀects cannot be incorporated. Our results agree with many past
results insofar as unemployment and wages have small direct eﬀects on crime.
What is new in our work is that despite such small direct eﬀects, government
employment and wage policies could change criminal behavior signiÞcantly,
mainly through changing peoples’ anticipations about their future.
As is the case with all structural estimation results, we need to interpret
the above results with caution, and more work needs to be done to assess
the robustness of the results with respect to various alternative model speciÞcations. For example, we assumed that the individuals only choose between
committing a crime and not committing a crime and we treated all crimes
as the same. Obviously, the criminal justice system pursues the oﬀenders
of diﬀerent crimes with diﬀerent intensities, and punishes and records them
with diﬀerent degrees of severity. Hence, the both the state dependence and
the deterrence eﬀect should be diﬀerent depending on the types of crimes
committed. Such issues could be addressed in the future, with better data
sets.

33

6

Concluding Remarks

Our estimation and simulation exercises show the following. First, note that
our generated data match the actual age arrest, age unemployment and age
median wage proÞles remarkably well, despite the parsimonious model structure and parameterization. Second, the parameter estimates have the expected signs or are insigniÞcant. Third, unobserved as well as observed heterogeneities are very important in explaining the data. In fact, the criminally
prone type, which is about 27% of our population, is estimated to have an
arrest rate up to 4 times as high as the rest of our population. In all of our
simulation results, it is the criminally prone types who decrease their crime
rates faster than the other types after the age 18. This runs counter to the
assertions that criminal behavior cannot be corrected afterwards. Fourth,
employment status has a negative, although small, direct eﬀects on crime.
It is the possibility of future unemployment which works as a strong deterrence against committing crime. Fifth, the simulation exercises show that
the anticipated consequences of committing crimes are very important in
understanding peoples’ criminal behavior. For example, the increase in the
arrest rate, the traditional deterrence measure, leads to both less crime and
unemployment on average, though it raises youth arrest rates slightly while
lowering the adult ones.
What are the implications of our work for the conduct of public policy
towards crime? Our structural dynamic approach provides a uniÞed under34

standing of a number of Þndings in the traditional literature. Kahan (1995)
claims that eﬀective anti-crime policies are those that change people’s anticipation of future punishments. This is exactly our point, and these future
punishments seem to come from the labor market! There have been several papers showing that early intervention programs such as the Job Corps,
The Perry Preschool Program, The Syracuse University Family Development
Plan and the Quantum Opportunity Program are very eﬀective in reducing
crime21 , see Lochner (1999) for a summary of such results. This is exactly
what would be expected from our model, since anticipated later intervention allows criminals to look forward to negating the consequences of their
actions. Hence, the dynamic deterrence eﬀect via future employment is reduced. Early intervention has no such adverse eﬀect on dynamic deterrence.
This suggests that early prevention is more eﬀective than redemption.
Much more needs to be done on this area of structural estimation of
criminal behavior. First, more needs to be done in checking the robustness
with respect to diﬀerent speciÞcations. In particular, in future work, we need
to relax the assumption that individuals can only choose between committing
and not committing crime, and to increase the degree of choice over the extent
of crimes. It is natural to think that certain crimes carry more stigma than
others, and putting all crimes into one category is undesirable, as they are
bound to have diﬀerent eﬀects. In addition, this would allow us to include
21

The Perry Preschool Program for disadvantaged minority children reduced arrests
through age 27 by 50%.

35

sentencing policies in our model since sentencing variation is across a variety
of crimes. Finally, the relationship between high school attendance, work
behavior, and crime before age 18 needs to be better understood. Since
our crime data only has years of last schooling, and lacks any measure of
actual school attendance until then, or achievements with respect to grades,
with our data set it is impossible to conduct an empirical exercise on youth
behavior before the age 18 comparable to the kind of work done by Eckstein
and Wolpin (1999).

36

7

References

Bearse, P.M. (1997) “On the Age Distribution of Arrests and Crime.” University of Tennessee, Department of Economics, mimeo.
Becker Gary S. (1968) “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 73, pp. 169-217.
Eckstein, Zvi and Wolpin, Kenneth, I. (1999) “Why Youths Drop Out
of High School: The Impact of Preferences, Opportunities, and Abilities,” Econometrica, Vol. 67, pp. 1295-1339.
Ehrlich, Isaac (1996) “Crime, Punishment, and the Market for Oﬀenses,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter, Vol. 10, Number 1, pp.
43-65.
Figlio, Robert M., Paul E. Tracy and Marvin E. Wolfgang (1994) “Delinquency in a Birth Cohort II: Philadelphia, 1958-1988, ” Sellin Center
for Studies in Criminology and Law, Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann-Arbor, Michigan.
Flinn, Christopher (1986) “Dynamic Models of Criminal Careers.” in A.
Blumstein et. al., Ed. Criminal Careers and “Career Criminals,”
Washington D.C. National Academy Press, Vol. 2.

37

Freeman, Richard B. (1996) “Why Do So Many Young American Men
Commit Crime and What Might We Do About It?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter, Vol. 10, Number 1, pp. 25-42.
Glaezer, Edward L., Sacerdote, Bruce and Jose Scheinkman (1996)
“Crime and Social Interaction,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI,
May, pp. 507-548.
Grogger, Jeﬀ (1995) “The Eﬀects of Arrests on the Employment and Earnings of Young Men,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 51-71.
Grogger, Jeﬀ (1998) “Market Wages and Youth Crime,” Journal of Labor
Economics, pp. 756-791.
Imrohorglu, Ayse, Antonio Merlo, and Peter Rupert (2000) “What
Accounts for the Decline in Crime?” mimeo.
Kahan, Dan M. (1997) “Social Meaning and the Economic Analysis of
Crime,” Forthcoming, Journal of Legal Studies.
Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth Wolpin (1997) “The Career Decisions
of Young Men,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, pp. 473-521.
Kling, Jeﬀrey R. (1998) “The Eﬀect of Prison Sentence Length on the
Subsequent Employment and Earnings of Criminal Defendants,” mimeo.
Leung, Siu F. (1994) “An Economic Analysis of the Age-Crime ProÞle,”
Journal of Economic Dynamic and Control, 18, pp. 481-497.
38

Levitt, Steven (1996) “The Eﬀect of Prison Population on Crime Rates:
Evidence from Prison Overcrowding Litigation,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 111, pp 319-352.
Levitt, Steven (1997) “Juvenile Crime and Punishment,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, pp. 1156—1186.
Lochner, Lance (1999) “Education, Work, and Crime: Theory and Evidence,” University of Rochester Working Paper, No. 465.
Lochner, Lance (2000) “An Empirical Study of Individual Perceptions of
the Criminal Justice System,” mimeo.
Rust, John (1987) “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold Zurcher,” Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 5, pp.
999-1033.
Rust, John (1997) “Using Randomization to Break the Curse of Dimensionality,” Econometrica, Vol. 65, No. 3, pp. 487-516.
Tauchen, Helen, Anne D. Witte and H. Griesinger (1988)
“Deterrence, Work and Crime: Revisiting the Issue with a Birth Cohort,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2508.
Tauchen, Helen, Anne D. Witte and H. Griesinger (1994) “Criminal
Deterrence: Revisiting the Issue with a Birth Cohort,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 76 (3), pp. 399-412.
39

Waldfogel, Joel (1993) “The Eﬀect of Criminal Conviction on Income and
the Trust “Reposed in the Workmen”,” Journal of Human ResourcesVol.
29, pp. 62-81.
Williams, Jenny and Robin C. Sickles (1997) “An Inter-temporal Model
of Rational Criminal Choice,” University of Texas, mimeo.
Williams, Jenny and Robin Sickles (2000) “An Analysis of the Crime
as Work Model: Evidence from the 1958 Philadelphia Birth Cohort
Study,” mimeo.

40

8
8.1

Appendix
Oﬀense Categories

We did not count some oﬀenses. These were:
1 Driving while intoxicated.
2 Drunkenness.
3 Disorderly conduct.
4 Vagrancy.
5 Cruelty to animals.
6 Selling Þreworks.
7 Fortune telling.
8 Violation of cigarette tax act.
9 Scavenger.
10 Sunday law violation (except sale of liquor).
11 Traﬃc and motor vehicle violations.

41

8.2

Bellman Equations

The value function of the individual before the age 16 of not committing a
crime is

VNt (st ) = uNt (st ) + βE[Vt+1 (st+1 )|st ] + ²Nt .
where

st = (t, nct , iht , ²t ),

nct+1 = δnct ,

²t = (²Nt , ²Ct ).
The value function of not committing a crime at or after the age 16 before
age 18 is:

VNt (st ) = uNt (st − ²t )
+[1 − Pu (st )]
βE[Vt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 0, Wt+1 , ih, ²t+1 )|st ]
+Pu (st )βE[Vt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 1, Wt+1 = 0, ih , ²t+1 )|st ]
+²Nt .
42

That is, it is the utility of not committing a crime today and having an
arrest record of δnct tomorrow. In the next period, you are unemployed with
probability Pu (st ) and have an expected payoﬀ in present value of

βE[Vt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 1, Wt+1 = 0, ih , ²t+1 )|st ].
If you are employed in the next period, the analogous expression arises.
The value function of committing a crime is similarly deÞned.
The value function of the individual at the Þrst month of age 18 of not
committing a crime is has 4 elements, which consists of the continuation
payoﬀs from the 4 combinations of graduating or not, and being employed
or not. That is,

VNt (st ) = uNt (st − ²t )
+Pg (nct )(1 − Pu (t, nct , iut , ihg = 1))
EVt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 0, Wt+1 , ihg = 1, ²t+1 |st )
+Pg (nct )Pu (t, nct , iut , ihg = 1)
EVt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 1, Wt+1 = 0, ihg = 1, ²t+1 |st )
+(1 − Pg (nct ))(1 − Pu (t, nct , iut , ihg = 0))
EVt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 0, Wt+1 , ihg = 0, ²t+1 |st )
+(1 − Pg (nct ))Pu (t, nct , iut , ihg = 0)
EVt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 1, Wt+1 = 0, ihg = 0, ²t+1 |st ) + ²N t .
43

After the Þrst month of the age 18, the individual has either graduated from
high school or not. Hence, the value of the individual not committing any
crime is just a combination of the payoﬀs from being employed or not. That
is,

VNt (st ) = uNt (st − ²t )
+[1 − Pu (st )]βE[Vt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 0, Wt+1 , ihg , ²t+1 )|st ]
+Pu (st )βE[Vt+1 (t, nct+1 = δnct , iut+1 = 1, Wt+1 = 0, ihg , ²t+1 )|st ]
+²Nt .

8.3

The Solution Algorithm and the Log Likelihood

In order to solve for the dynamic programming problem at each DP solution
step, we need to integrate the value function with respect to the taste shock
(²Nt , ²Ct ) and the wage shock. We follow the steps described below.
1) Integration with respect to the taste shock: Rust (1987) suggests a method
which allows for the analytical integration of the value function when
we assume that the shocks ²Nt , ²Ct have i.i.d. extreme values distributions. In this event he points out that the expected value function in
period t has the following expression

E{²} [Vt (st )] = log[exp(V N t (st − ²t )) + exp(V Ct (st − ²t ))]
44

since they have been integrated over. V Nt (st − ²t ), and V Ct (st − ²t )
are the value functions net of the taste shock ²t at period t and state
vector st . This eliminates the need to numerically integrate the value
function with respect to the taste shocks ²Nt ,²Ct .
2) Integration with respect to the wage shock: The expected value function
at period t is
E{W,²} [V (st )|st−1 ] = E{W } (log[exp(V Nt (st −²t ))+exp(V Ct (st −²t ))]|st−1 ).
We approximate this integral by taking Þnite grid points over the wage
distribution and evaluate the density weighted sum of the value function
as the integral (See Rust 1998). That is,
E{W } (log[exp(V N t (st − ²t )) + exp(V Ct (st − ²t ))]|st−1 )
Z
= (1 − Pu (st−1 )) log[exp(V Nt (., iut = 0, Wt , .))
+exp(V Ct (.iut = 0, Wt , .))]f(Wt |st−1 )dWt

+Pu (st−1 ) log[exp(V N t (., iut = 1, Wt = 0, .))
+exp(V Ct (., iut = 1, Wt = 0, .))]

= (1 − Pu (st−1 ))

M
X

log[exp(V N t (., iut = 0, Wtm , .))

m=1

+exp(V Ct (.iut = 0, Wtm , .))]f (Wtm |st−1 )
+Pu (st−1 ) log[exp(V Nt (., iut = 1, Wt = 0, .))
+exp(V Ct (., iut = 1, Wt = 0, .))].
45

Since we assume that past criminal records depreciate at rate (1 − δ),
the past criminal history variable nct is a continuous one. Since we cannot
evaluate the expected value function at inÞnite state space points of nct ,
we solve for the expected value function at Þnite q Chebychev grid points
(nct,1 , ..., nct,q ) and then interpolate them using the Chebychev Polynomial
Least Squares Interpolation (for details, see Judd (1999) ).
After integrating out ²t , the probability of committing a crime and getting caught for individual i under the parameter value θ given sit is

P (iC = 1|sit − ²t , θ) = PC

exp(V Ct (sit − ²t ))
exp(V Nt (sit − ²t )) + exp(V Ct (sit − ²t ))

where iC is deÞned to be 1 if the person gets caught in committing the crime,
and 0 otherwise. PC is the probability of getting caught. If individuals are
of diﬀerent types, then the above needs to be indexed by type as well so that
the likelihood increment for individual i of type j in period t is

Litj (θ j ) = LitjC (θj )LitjE (θj )LitjHS (θj )
where θj is the parameter vector of type j, and

46

LitjC (θj ) = [Pj (iC = 1|sit − ²t , θj )]iC [1 − Pj (iC = 1|sit − ²t , θj )]1−iC ,
LitjE (θj ) = I(age < 16) + I(age ≥ 16)[P (iut |sit − ²t , θj )iut ]
[[1 − P (iut |sit − ²t , θj )]f(Wt |sit − ²t , θj )]1−iut
LitjHS (θj ) = I(age 6= 18) + I(age = 18)P (ihg |sit − ²t )ihg (1 − P (ihg |sit − ²t ))1−ihg .
LitjC (θ j ) is the crime increment of the likelihood function. If the individual commits the crime, then the likelihood is given by the Þrst term, and
if he does not, by the second term. LitjE (θ j ) is the employment and wage
increment of the likelihood. If he is below 16, it equals unity. If he is above
16, and is unemployed, the likelihood increment is P (iut |sit , θj ). If he is employed, then the likelihood increment is the product of the probability of
employment and the wage density. LitjHS (θj ) is the high school graduation
increment of the likelihood, which is deÞned similarly.
In our data, only employment spells of 6 months or more, and only unemployment spells of 2 months or more are recorded. Hence, if we just estimate
the employment dynamics directly from the data, our results will be biased.
Using the steps below, we try to recover the missing employment and unemployment spells through the model of employment dynamics.
1) Missing data after an employment spell must contain an immediate unemployment spell of less than 2 months. Had the unemployment spell
not been immediate, it would have been recorded as employment. Had
47

it been longer than or equal to 2 months, it would have been recorded
as an unemployment spell. Similarly, missing data after an unemployment spell must contain an immediate employment spell of less than 6
months. If the blank data after an employment spell is of one period,
then we infer it has to be an unemployment spell. If it is of 2 periods, it
must be an unemployment spell followed by the employment spell of a
month. If a blank data after an unemployment spell is of one month, it
must be an employment spell. If it is more than one month, we cannot
say.
2) In all other cases, we use the probability of employment in the entering
state to run the employment/unemployment probabilities forward. To
be consistent with the data, the augmented employment spells are restricted to not exceed 6 months and unemployment spells are restricted
not to exceed 2 months.
The likelihood increment for individual i is the product of the likelihood
increments for all quarters and types so that

Li (Θ) =

X
j

πj

X
l

T
Y
π jl [Litj (θ j )]
t=1

where Θ is the vector of parameters for all types. Also π j is the probability of
the individual being of crime type j, while π jl is the conditional probability
of the individual being of unemployment type l, given he is of crime type j.

48

The total log likelihood is

l(Θ) =

N
X

log[Li (Θ)].

i=1

49

9

Tables and Graphs

Table 1: Sample Statistics
% Whites
% Father present in childhood home
% Father unemployed during respondents childhood
% Mother present in childhood home
% Mother worked during respondents childhood
% High socioeconomic status
% Grew up in a not loving household
% Gang member before 18 years old
No. of friends arrested; average
% Parents arrested
% Protestant
% Catholic
% Jewish
% Other religion
% No religious beliefs
% Unknown on religion
% Of high school graduates
% Who obtained the high school equivalency degree
% Who are none of the above two

50

52.2
78.3
14.8
97.0
56.9
49.2
6.04
36.3
1.53
2.47
42.3
31.3
1.92
1.92
12.6
9.89
44.2
17.9
37.9

Table 2: Parameter Estimates

Utility parameters

Constant
High school attend.
Low wage
Medium wage
High wage
Final period value

Constant
High school attend.
Low wage
Medium wage
High wage
Final period value
High school grad.
State dependence
State dependence
Discount factor
Depreciation
Depreciation at 18
Crime type 1 prob.

Utility of not committing crime
Estimates Std. errors
Crime type 1
Before 18
1
c01 1.1992
(2.890)
c102
1
c1
0.33221
(1.611)
Age c103
c1l1
-4.9355
(2.069)
c1l2
c1m1 -2.9786
(3.213)
c1m2
1
ch1 -4.4134
(2.928)
c1h2
f1
-1.4023
(116.2)
Crime type 2
Before 18
c201 -3.6852
(2.724)
c202
c21
-2.5499
(1.891)
Age c203
2
cl1
4.37584
(5.459)
c2l2
c2m1 6.2710
(6.287)
c2m2
2
ch1 -0.59725
(4.961)
c2h2
f2
c5
c6

α
β
δ
δ 18
π1

All
-16.4698
-0.56415
-1.9171
0.09264
0.99022
0.98046
0.76011
0.7284

Estimates

Std. errors

After 18
7.8973
0.03048
1.9377
0.02457
2.29192

(4.871)
(0.932)
(1.729)
(1.620)
(1.370)

After 18
0.4878
0.07621
1.3222
1.1418
-0.1438

(3.396)
(0.0565)
(1.634)
(1.423)
(1.423)

types, all ages
(82.15)
(0.775)
(1.058)
(0.0910)
(0.0134)
(1.202E-3)
(0.0560)
(0.0868)

uN (st − ²t ) = c01 I(age < 18) + c02 I(age ≥ 18) + c03 age ∗ I(age ≥ 18) + c1 iht
+[cl1 Il (Wt ) + cm1 Im (Wt ) + ch1 Ih (Wt )]I(age < 18)
+[cl2 Il (Wt ) + cm2 Im (Wt ) + ch2 Ih (Wt )]I(age ≥ 18)
+c5 ihg + c6 nαct
51

High school graduation parameters
Crime type1
g10 0.47671 (0.252)
Crime type2
g20 -1.6667
(1.087)
Criminal history g1 -0.32986 (0.164)

Pg = exp(θg )/[1 + exp(θg )]
θg = g0 + g1 nct .

Initial unemployment probability
Employment type 1 h10 -0.31411
(0.289)
2
Employment type 2 h0 2.0465
(0.384)
Criminal history
h1 -0.0031551 (0.210)

Phu = exp(θhu )/[1 + exp(θhu )]
θ hu = h0 + h1 nct .

52

Before 18
After 18
Age

Unemployment probability
Employment type 1
Employment type
1
b00 -3.149
(0.145)
Before 18 b200 -1.399
b101 -2.801
(0.190)
After 18
b201 -1.876
1
b1
-0.0573 (9.884E-3) Age
b21
-0.0315

High school grad.
Criminal history
Before 18
After 18

b2
b3
b40
b41

-0.4347
0.1465
3.9475
5.1209

2
(0.110)
(0.178)
(9.52E-3)

All types
(0.0506)
(0.0207)
(0.139)
(0.0432)

Put+1 = exp(θut )/[1 + exp(θut )]
θut = b00 I(age < 18) + b01 I(age ≥ 18) + b1 t + b2 ih + b3 nct
+[b40 I(age < 18) + b41 I(age ≥ 18)]iut .
Probability of being employment type l conditional on being crime type j (π jl )
Crime type 1 π 11 0.54428 (0.0589)
Crime type 2 π 21 0.40896 (0.110)

π j2 = 1 − π j1 , j = 1, 2
Li (Θ) =

X

j=1,2

πj

X

l=1,2

T
Y
π jl [Litjl (θj )]
t=1

53

Wage growth
16-19 dummy
µg01 0.014360
20-23 dummy
µg02 -2.41926E-3
24-26 dummy
µg03 -3.21734E-4
16-23, age
µg11 1.35110E-4
24-26, age
µg12 1.65710E-3
Criminal history µg2
-5.96896E-3
Std. error
σg
0.070657

(7.580E-4)
(9.950E-4)
(6.542E-4)
(3.400E-5)
(2.394E-5)
(2.647E-4)
(4.746E-4)

log(Wt+1 ) − log(Wt ) ∼ N (µgt (.), σ g ),
µgt (.) = µg01 I(16 < age ≤ 19) + µg02 I(20 < age ≤ 23) + µg03 I(20 < age)
+[µg11 I(16 < age ≤ 23) + µg12 I(24 < age)]t + µg2 nct ,
Starting wage
Const.
µb0 1.8006
Criminal history µb1 2.47055E-4
Std. error
σ b 0.58733

(0.0445)
(0.0347)
(7.815E-3)

log(Wt+1 ) ∼ N(µb (nct ), σ b )
µb (nct ) = µb0 + µb1 nct .

54

Table 3: Regression Results of Observable Characteristics on
Posterior Probability of Crime Type 1
Variable
Constant
Race
Father at home
Father unemployed
Mother at home
Mother worked
Socioeconomic status
Loving household
Gang member
No. friends arrested
Parents arrested
Rel: Protestant
Rel: Catholic
Rel: Jewish
Rel: other
Rel: none

Estimates
.117779
.137260
.032373
-.995937E-02
.102740
.197234E-02
.063866
.163008
-.022921
-.020635
-.226739
-.096981
-.024396
.154614
-.109399
-.056244

Std. Error
.150838
.047429
.050116
.055097
.118525
.040322
.039546
.082119
.043140
.015122
.127177
.069995
.072846
.154672
.156237
.082521

R-Squared:

.1173

Adjusted R-Squared:

.0792

55

t-Statistic
.780828
2.89401
.645955
-.180760
.866824
.048914
1.61497
1.98503
-.531325
-1.36461
-1.78286
-1.38555
-.334904
.999624
-.700214
-.681569

P-Value
.435
.004
.519
.857
.387
.961
.107
.048
.596
.173
.075
.167
.738
.318
.484
.496

