                                            




                                                


                                           


                                          !"#"$
                                 %!&''((()*) '!!+'("#"$


                        , ,     
                               -./.++0%1++21
                                 3*4 5.#-6"
                                      




                         
  ! !   "# $ #  %"& '! 
   (  ( !)   *   #  +%  #
,* (  #  - (&(  .    ,  +
   *'      (()          -       "
)  /(             +   % 
  


0    ! -    ) #   / / ( (
 1   /(  (   ()            0    ) 
 
++7 47%0
 
  !)"#"$
#..-
8)9565 -#5 -/


                                               $%#%


        %01+3!+*:17+% %;.!05%
43+0+03!!0+*#;!02 ) %!+217% <1
*7++%%4+7410 % %71( %+%!+217%+%<10++)
0+5%2 3+!++030(4++0+ 7057%
!<+*:7+++%;.!0)03+!+++%!!40%
0%   7 4 1!1  %  7(  +*: 77+) %+ 44 +1
40+%%+032407%"-!+4++144++!11+)




 
  410%71+++
74,2+
745$;6./</.-/
  2(#...<#..-
4
!*%=+74)41
       Summers (1985) argues that there is an absence of research on major questions

that fall between economics and finance. Almost twenty years later, this contention still

rings true with respect to issues of disinflation and the stock market. A large literature in

macroeconomics is concerned with the effect of inflation stabilization on real variables,

such as employment, output and wages (Easterly, 1996; Fischer, 1986; Friedman, 1968;

Gordon, 1982; Lucas, 1973; Okun, 1978; Phelps 1968; Sargent, 1982; Tobin, 1972;

Végh, 1992). However, none of these papers systematically examined the effect of

disinflation on the real price of equity. On the other hand, financial economists have

studied the relationship between inflation and stock returns (Fama and Schwert, 1977;

Fama, 1981; Schwert, 1981; Stulz, 1986), but none of these papers analyzed the effect of

inflation stabilization programs on the stock market. Simply put, previous research in

macroeconomics and finance has not directly addressed the following question. Are

disinflation programs good for the stock market?

       This paper provides an answer by analyzing how stock markets respond to the

adoption of inflation stabilization programs. In a well-functioning and rational stock

market, changes in stock prices reflect both revised expectations about future corporate

profits and the discount rate at which those profits are capitalized. In principle, an

inflation stabilization program may affect both expected future profits and discount rates.

For example, contractionary measures taken to stabilize inflation may raise discount rates

and reduce profits in the short run. However, the reduction in inflation may increase

future profits and reduce discount rates. Therefore, an unanticipated change in the stock

market in response to the news of disinflation measures the expected net benefit (current

and future) of the stabilization program.




                                                                                           1
       The average unanticipated stock market response associated with the 81

disinflation episodes studied in this paper is empirically estimated using the dummy

variable regression framework employed by Stulz (2000a, b). The results show that the

stock market response to the adoption of a stabilization program depends on the level of

inflation. When countries attempt to stabilize annual inflation that is high (above 40

percent), on average, the stock market appreciates by 24 percent in real dollar terms. In

contrast, if the pre-stabilization inflation rate is moderate (below 40 percent), the market

response is economically weak and statistically insignificant.

       The results are not sensitive to the particular definitions of high and moderate

inflation, which are taken from Easterly (1996) and Dornbusch and Fischer (1993). The

same conclusion is also reached for stock market responses conditional on alternative

classifications of high and moderate inflation.

       Reporting the results in real dollar terms requires caution, however. In countries

with high inflation, the rate of depreciation of the official nominal exchange rate may not

keep pace with inflation. Under such a scenario, the real dollar value of the stock market

may become artificially inflated. To account for this possibility, the central estimations

are also performed using real local-currency stock returns. They yield the same result.

The stock market responds in a positive and statistically significant manner when a

country attempts to stabilize high inflation, but there is no significant market response if

the pre-stabilization inflation rate is moderate.

       It is important to know whether this result is driven by variation in the types of

stabilization policies used in high versus moderate inflation. The data suggest that this is

not the case.    Sixty-nine of the 81 stabilization programs studied in this paper are




                                                                                          2
identified by IMF agreements.        The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has been

criticized in recent years for the uniformity of its policy prescriptions in all country

agreements, irrespective of differences in initial macroeconomic conditions and in

country-specific idiosyncrasies (Corden, 1998).         The homogeneity of the Fund’s

stabilization prescriptions across countries suggests that there are not major differences

between the packages of stabilization policies pursued in the high and moderate inflation

subsamples.

       On the other hand, if countries attempt to reduce inflation without help from the

IMF, they may pursue stabilization policies that differ from those prescribed by the Fund.

For example, 12 of the 81 stabilization episodes studied in this paper did not involve an

official agreement with the IMF. All 12 of these programs were directed at stabilizing

high inflation. In 8 of these 12 episodes, the countries involved attempted to stabilize

inflation by fixing the nominal exchange rate. In contrast, none of the IMF episodes

involved exchange-rate-based stabilizations (ERBS). Furthermore, there is an extensive

literature which demonstrates that the short-run real effects of ERBS differ substantially

from those observed in more traditional stabilization programs, such as those pursued by

the Fund (Végh, 1992; Calvo and Végh, 1998; Fischer, Sahay and Végh, 1999).

Therefore, it is important to investigate whether the differential stock market responses

are driven by differences between IMF and non-IMF stabilization policies. Various

robustness checks in Section II suggest that this is not the case.

       After grappling with concerns about robustness, Section III turns to the issue of

how to interpret the central result. Stabilizing high inflation increases the present value

of shareholders’ claims, whereas stabilizing moderate inflation has no effect.         The




                                                                                         3
principle question is: Do the results imply that stabilizing high inflation increases the

present value of aggregate output while stabilizing moderate inflation does not? This

question must be addressed with caution. Stabilizing inflation could increase capital’s

share in national output. In turn, increasing capital’s share in GDP could generate higher

future profits (and therefore stock prices), even if stabilization has no effect on GDP

levels or on growth rates. Therefore, we cannot conclude that stabilizing high inflation

increases the present value of aggregate output. More generally, conclusions about the

effect of disinflation on the present value of aggregate output cannot be directly inferred

from the stock market responses.

       Accordingly, Section III of the paper pursues a narrower question. Do stock

market responses to disinflation rationally forecast stabilization outcomes for the

economy, apart from the publicly traded corporate sector?            Two approaches are

employed. To the extent that the stock market response reflects the expected change in

the present value of profits from stabilizing inflation, it should have some predictive

power for the ex-post change in inflation. Hence, the first approach asks whether the

stock market response helps predict the ex-post change in inflation. The second approach

explores whether the unexpected change in the stock market helps predicts GDP growth,

following the stabilization.   While these two approaches do not provide definitive

evidence, the stock market responses do help predict the change in inflation and output in

the year following efforts to stabilize both high and moderate inflation. This suggests

that the stock market evidence is not spurious.

       The stock market approach to evaluating the real effects of disinflation has three

limitations. First, stock price responses capture the expected net benefits of stabilization




                                                                                          4
to shareholders, not necessarily to the entire economy. Second, stock price responses

measure the change in real wealth that accrues to domestic shareholders, not utility gains

per se.1 Third, to the extent that stabilizations are anticipated, the measured unanticipated

change in equity prices will understate the expected impact of disinflation.

        Despite these limitations, the stock market approach has at least three distinct

advantages. First, there is ample evidence that an unbiased assessment of the effects of

public information releases is quickly incorporated into stock prices (Fama, 1976). In

particular, stock prices in the subset of countries relevant for this paper respond to news

of major economic policy reforms (Henry, 2000a, b). Second, the stock market focuses

the policy debate on the relevant issue of whether the benefits of disinflation outweigh

the costs. Third, the stock market analysis provides a new set of facts about disinflation,

which suggest that stabilizing high and moderate inflation have very different real effects.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section I summarizes the data and presents

descriptive findings. Section II presents the empirical methodology, central results, and

robustness checks. Section III examines whether the stock market responses rationally

forecast outcomes for inflation and aggregate output. Section IV explains how the stock

market approach to analyzing the real effects of disinflation relates to the previous

literature. Section V discusses objections to and alternative interpretations of the results.

Section VI presents the conclusions.



I. Data and Descriptive Findings

        The implementation month and year of the 81 inflation stabilization programs are


1
  A rise in expected future productivity can decrease the value of the stock market value if discount rates
rise by more than the increase in expected future dividends (Lucas, 1978). Nevertheless, welfare improves.


                                                                                                         5
identified using two sources. The first source of event dates is Calvo and Végh (1998).

They identify the best-known stabilizations that received a great deal of attention in the

literature on inflation stabilization. The second source is the Annual Reports of the

International Monetary Fund (IMF). These reports are used to construct a time series of

months in which each of the 21 countries implemented a stabilization program through an

official agreement with the IMF. For example, Argentina signed an IMF agreement in

September of 1977. Thus September of 1977 is an implementation date for Argentina.

       IMF programs typically call for current account stabilization in addition to

inflation stabilization.   The dual stabilization objectives of these programs do not

introduce important biases into the dating procedure. The macroeconomic targets in IMF

programs are generated by the IMF’s Financial Programming Model, which is based on

the monetary approach to the balance of payments (Agénor and Montiel, 1996). Under

the monetary approach, balance of payments problems originate from an excess supply of

money, with monetization of the government deficit typically seen as the proximate cause

of the excess supply. The IMF requires that countries reduce both the fiscal deficit and

the growth rate of the money supply in order to stabilize their current account. Thus, the

prescription for stabilizing the current account is tantamount to a traditional disinflation

program. In fact, the IMF has been intensely criticized in recent years for the uniformity

of its policy prescriptions in all country agreements (Corden, 1998).

       Including the recent IMF agreements in Mexico in 1995, Asia in 1997, Russia in

1998, and Brazil in 1999 would strengthen the central findings of this paper, because

these countries were experiencing moderate inflation and stock prices collapsed during

the months leading up to their agreements with the IMF. Nevertheless, these episodes are




                                                                                          6
excluded from the sample for two reasons. First, Dornbusch (1998a) argues that the

synopsis of stabilization outlined in the preceding paragraph does not provide an accurate

description of these recent episodes. He argues that the recent episodes were not inflation

crises per se, but financial crises; the proximate cause was country balance sheets whose

assets and liabilities were misaligned with respect to both maturity structure and currency

denomination. Second, as part of these recent agreements, the IMF has imposed major

structural and institutional reforms in addition to insisting on its traditional short-run

stabilization objectives (Feldstein, 1998).

       High inflation episodes are defined as in Easterly (1996) and Bruno and Easterly

(1998): 12-month inflation in excess of 40 percent during each of the 24 months leading

up to and including the month in which the stabilization was implemented. Moderate

inflation episodes are defined analogously: 12-month inflation between 10 and 40 percent

during each of the 24 months leading up to and including the month in which the

stabilization was implemented. This definition of moderate inflation corresponds closely

to that of Dornbusch and Fischer (1993).

       Fourteen of the 81 attempted inflation stabilizations are Calvo and Végh (1998)

episodes, 2 of which coincide with IMF agreements (Mexico, 1977; Argentina, 1991).

Thirteen of the 25 attempts at stabilizing high inflation have official IMF sponsorship,

and 7 succeed in reducing high inflation to moderate inflation. Seventeen of the 25

episodes occur in Argentina and Brazil. All 56 of the attempts at stabilizing moderate

inflation have official IMF sponsorship, and 5 succeeded in reducing moderate inflation

to low inflation. Table A1 in the Data Appendix provides details about all of the inflation

stabilization programs identified using both data sources.




                                                                                         7
       The sample includes all countries that: (1) have publicly available stock market

data and (2) have undertaken at least one inflation stabilization program (as defined in

Section IIIB) at some point since their stock market data became readily available. The

21 countries that satisfy both criteria are: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Egypt, India,

Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Korea, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, the

Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe. The principal

source of stock market data is the International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Emerging

Markets Data Base (EMDB).          Stock price indices for individual countries are the

dividend-inclusive, U.S. dollar-denominated IFC Global Index.         For most countries,

EMDB’s coverage begins in December 1975, but for others coverage only begins in

December 1984. For those countries for which the IFC does not provide stock market

data, the analysis uses the share price index given in the IMF’s International Financial

Statistics (IFS). Each country’s U.S. dollar-denominated stock price index is deflated by

the U.S. consumer price index (CPI), which comes from the IFS. All of the data are

monthly. The consumer price index for each country is also obtained from the IFS.

Returns and inflation are calculated as the first difference of the natural logarithm of the

real stock price and CPI, respectively.



I.B. Descriptive Findings

       There are two key questions to be asked about the relationship between the stock

market response and the level of inflation that the stabilization program is attempting to

reduce. First, does the magnitude of the stock market response increase or decrease as a

function of the level of initial inflation? Second, what is the sign of the stock market




                                                                                          8
response and does the sign depend on the level of inflation?



I.B.1. Is the Market Response an Increasing Function of Ex-Ante Inflation?

        Figure 1 provides a rough empirical answer to the first question: The net benefits

of stabilization appear to be an increasing function of the level of ex-ante inflation.

Month “0” is defined as the month in which a given stabilization program is

implemented. The IFC records the value of a country’s stock market index at the end of

the month. The data on stabilization events do not provide the day of the month on which

programs are implemented.          These facts imply that the implementation of a given

stabilization program may occur after the day of the month on which the IFC recorded

prices. In such cases, the change in the stock market index in month [0] may not reflect

the news of the stabilization event.           Accordingly, Figure 1 plots the unadjusted

cumulative change in the real dollar value of the stock market index in months [0, +1]

against the average 12-month inflation rate over the two years prior to implementation.

Figure 1 suggests that the two-month stock price change is an increasing function of the

ex-ante inflation rate. The higher the ex-ante inflation rate, the greater the stock price

response when a stabilization program is implemented.

        The positive linear relationship apparent in Figure 1 is given by the following

regression equation (robust t-statistics in parentheses R 2 =0.10, N=81):

∆ ln( stockprice[0,+1] ) = 3.73 + 0.076* inflation                                      (2)
                            (1.4) (1.9)

        The unconditional relationship is statistically significant but the relationship is

also noisy. There are a number of high inflation episodes for which the actual stock price

change is close to zero. Explanations for these outliers are considered in Section IV.C.1.


                                                                                         9
I.B.2. Is the Sign of the Response Uniform Across All Ranges of Ex-Ante Inflation?

          Figure 1 shows that, on average, the expected net benefits of stabilizing appear to

be roughly zero near the origin, but are clearly positive at high levels of inflation. Table

1 investigates this feature of the data for three different groupings of the 81 stabilization

episodes based on levels of average inflation prior to implementation. The first grouping

corresponds to the Bruno and Easterly (1998) classification of high versus moderate

inflation; the second simply divides the total sample into two groups of equal size: high

inflation (40 cases) and moderate inflation (41 cases). The third comparison splits the

sample into three groups of equal size: high inflation (27 cases), moderate inflation (27

cases), and low inflation (27 cases). The alternative classification schemes are useful for

checking whether the results are sensitive to the Bruno and Easterly inflation

classification. In particular, the two-way numerical split creates a superset of the Bruno

and Easterly high inflation episodes that is not dominated by Argentina and Brazil.

Seventeen of the 25 Bruno and Easterly high inflation episodes are in Argentina and

Brazil.

          The first three rows of Table 1 report summary statistics for the number of

country episodes, the median inflation rate and the median stock price response for the

high and moderate categories under each inflation classification scheme. The fourth row

identifies the number of country episodes for which the stock-price change over the two-

month-implementation window is less than the country-specific median two-month stock

price change.

          The last row of Table 1 reports the two-sided p-value of observing at most the




                                                                                          10
corresponding number of stock-price responses to stabilization below their country-

specific median two-month percentage stock-price change. The sign tests are significant

at the one percent level for the high-inflation episodes under all three inflation

classification schemes. The sign tests are never significant for the moderate-inflation

episodes. These sign tests should be treated with caution, because they are based on raw

returns.   However, the consistency of the findings suggests that more careful

measurements of the stock market response to stabilizing high versus moderate inflation

may not be overly sensitive to any particular classification scheme. For brevity and

comparability to previous work, the next section of the paper estimates the stock market

response to stabilization conditional on inflation being high or moderate in the Easterly

(1996) and Bruno and Easterly (1998) sense.


II. Methodology and Results

       The average stock market response to implementation of an inflation stabilization

program is estimated using a simple dummy variable regression framework as in Rose

(1985). Under the assumption that markets are efficient, a country’s stock market index

will adjust to information about changes in expected future profits or discount rates.

Measuring the response of share prices to inflation stabilization events enables us to infer

whether the expected net benefits of stabilizing inflation are positive or negative.

       Following Stulz (2000a, b), the world capital asset pricing model (CAPM) is used

to measure the expected return on each country’s stock market index. The abnormal

return associated with a stabilization event is the residual from this model. This implies a

stochastic return generating process for country i of the following form that is possibly

affected by inflation stabilization events:



                                                                                         11
Rit = α + β i RtW + γ 1HIGH it + γ 2 MODit + ε it                                                  (3).

Rit is the real return in dollars on country i ’s stock market index in month t. RtW is the

real return in dollars on the Morgan Stanley Capital Market Index (MSCI) world stock

market index in month t.         HIGH it is a dummy variable that is equal to one in high-

inflation-stabilization months [0, +1] in country i . MODit is a dummy variable that is

equal to one in moderate-inflation-stabilization months [0, +1] in country i .                     The

constant intercept term, α , implicitly assumes perfect capital market integration.2

Alternative specifications that allow for country-specific intercepts are also examined and

yield similar results.

        The usual assumption that ε it is a serially uncorrelated, random error term

requires further discussion. Equation (3) is estimated using Feasible Generalized Least

Squares (FGLS).        An assumption of no serial correlation in stock returns could be

justified on the grounds of rational expectations, but the estimation procedure will allow

for the possibility of serial correlation.          The estimation procedure also allows for

heteroscedasticity across countries. However, with an unbalanced panel it is not possible

to relax the assumption of no contemporaneous correlation of the error term across

countries. Therefore, a number of indirect precautions are taken.

        First, short estimation windows are used in all of the central results; the

assumption that country abnormal returns are not contemporaneously correlated is

reasonable if event windows do not overlap in calendar time and overlaps occur less

frequently with short windows. The HIGH and MODERATE stabilization dummies are


2
 For conceptual discussions of the world CAPM see Frankel (1994); Stulz (1999a); Tesar (1999); Tesar
and Werner (1998); Tesar and Werner (1995).


                                                                                                       12
on for two-month windows, [0, +1]. Estimates using one-month windows, [0], are also

provided. Second, the extent to which contemporaneous correlation is likely to be a

problem with short windows was investigated.                     With two-month and one-month

estimation windows, 29 of the 162 and 11 of the 81 event periods overlap, respectively.

These numbers suggest that a small fraction of the abnormal returns from (3) will

potentially be affected by contemporaneous correlation. Third, two of the alternative

regression specifications to equation (3) will estimate abnormal returns relative to the

IFC’s emerging stock market index. Since all of the sample countries are emerging

markets, the inclusion of a composite emerging market index as a right-hand-side

variable will partially control for contemporaneously correlated disturbance terms in the

spirit of Ozler (1989).3 Including the emerging market index does not change the results.

         Equation (3) constrains the coefficient on HIGH to be the same across all months.

Thus, the parameter γ 1 measures the average monthly stock market response to all

attempted stabilizations of high inflation. Similarly, γ 2 measures the average monthly

response to all attempted stabilizations of moderate inflation. Since the dummy variable

for the event window is two-months long, the total stock market response to each type of

stabilization attempt is given by two times the parameter estimate. A different estimation

technique would be to use a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR). This approach would

have the advantage of providing a unique coefficient estimate for each country for each

event. However, there are also several disadvantages to this approach. First, the low

power of hypothesis tests in unconstrained systems severely weakens the ability of the


3
  Ozler estimates a pooled cross-section time series dummy variable model to estimate the average effect of
international debt restructuring on U.S. bank stock returns. Bank abnormal returns are estimated relative to
returns on the U.S. stock market. She controls for contemporaneous correlation across banks by also
including the return on a portfolio of banking industry securities on the right-hand side.


                                                                                                         13
event study methodology to detect the impact of the event (Rose, 1985). Second, SUR

requires a balanced panel. Due to the limited time series availability of stock market

data, creating a balanced panel would result in discarding almost half of the 81

stabilization events.   Given data limitations, the pooled cross-section time series

framework seems appropriate.



II.A. Stock Market Reactions to Attempted Stabilizations of High Versus
      Moderate Inflation

       In order to isolate the effects of stabilization, Panel A of Table 2 presents

estimates of HIGH and MODERATE.             The first row presents estimates from the

benchmark specification given by equation (3).        Heteroscedastic-consistent standard

errors are reported in parentheses. The estimated coefficient on HIGH is 0.121 and is

significant at the one-percent level. This means that the stock market increases by an

average of 12.1 percent per month in real dollar terms when governments attempt to

stabilize high inflation. Therefore, the total stock market increase associated with the

HIGH implementation window is 24.2 percent in real dollar terms.            The estimated

coefficient on MODERATE is 0.001 and is not statistically significant. Therefore, the

stock market response to stabilizing moderate inflation is not significantly different from

0. The column labeled “P-Value of HIGH > MODERATE” shows that the p-value for a

test that the coefficient on HIGH equals the coefficient on MODERATE is 0.01.

Therefore, the coefficient on HIGH is significantly larger than the coefficient on

MODERATE.

       Table 2 also presents estimates of HIGH and MODERATE using alternative

specifications. Row 2 presents estimates that use real US stock returns, RtUS , in place of


                                                                                        14
RtW in equation (3). Row 3 presents estimates that use the real dollar return on the IFC

Emerging Market index, RtLDC , in place of RtW . Row 4 presents estimates that use all

three sets of returns simultaneously. As an alternative to the market model in equation

(3), Row 5 presents estimates based on simple mean-adjusted abnormal returns:

Rit = α + γ 1HIGH it + γ 2 MODERATEit + ε it                                                           (4).

As a final specification, Row 6 presents estimates using a statistical model in which

mean-returns may differ across countries by allowing for country-specific intercept

terms:

Rit = α i + γ 1HIGH it + γ 2 MODERATEit + ε it                                                         (5).

Letting the intercept terms vary across countries allows for the possibility that average

expected returns may differ across countries due to imperfect capital integration.4

         The central result is the same under all six specifications. The stock market

responds positively and significantly to attempts at stabilizing high inflation, with the

average effect ranging from 11.3 to 12.2 percent per month. Thus, the total effect is

between 22.6 and 24.4 percent. The response to stabilizing moderate inflation is small

and never significant. The estimate of HIGH is always significantly larger than the

estimate of MODERATE. Panel B of Table 2 also presents estimates based on month [0]

only. These estimates closely match the month [0, +1] estimates. In some cases, the

month [0] estimate is smaller than the month [0, +1] estimate, which suggests that not all

of price change is captured in month [0].

         As a final robustness check, the analysis explores whether the results are sensitive


4
 For surveys of the literature on imperfect capital market integration see: Stulz (1999a, b); Tesar (1999);
Tesar and Werner (1998). For empirical evidence on the real effects of increased capital market integration
see: Collins (1999); Henry (2000a, b).


                                                                                                        15
to whether real returns are measured in dollars or local currency units. The potential

problem is that in high-inflation countries, the rate of depreciation of the nominal

exchange rate may not keep pace with inflation. If inflation exceeds the rate of nominal

depreciation, then the currency is appreciating in real terms, which means that the real

dollar value of the stock market may become artificially inflated. In order to see whether

the results in Table 2 are driven by real appreciation of the local currency vis-à-vis the

dollar, all of the regressions were re-estimated using real local currency returns instead of

real dollar returns as the left-hand-side variable.5 The results were virtually identical to

the estimates that use dollar-denominated returns.


II.B. Are the Differences Between High and Moderate Inflation Driven by Market
      Anticipation?

        The estimates in Table 2 may understate the stock market response if the market

anticipates stabilizations. In particular, suppose that news of future stabilization attempts

are announced or leaked to the public. Countries with high inflation also have a long

history of failures. Thus, the market may be less prone to believe announcements by

these governments. If this is the case, the stock market may increase in anticipation of

stabilizing moderate inflation. Under this scenario we would incorrectly infer that there

are significant differences in the market response to attempted stabilizations of high and

moderate inflation.

        To explore this possibility, equation (3) is used to estimate abnormal returns and



5
 As another robustness check, the dividend yield, D/P, was also used as a left-hand –side variable. The
dividend yield is a real variable that has no currency units, since the exchange rate appears in both the
numerator and the denomintaor. In the Gordon Model, D/P=r-g, where r is the discount rate on equity and
g is the expected growth rate of dividends. The results using dividend yields as a LHS variable are
consistent with those based on real returns measured in both dollars and local currency.



                                                                                                       16
cumulative abnormal returns for the 12 months prior and the 12 months following

attempted stabilizations of high and moderate inflation. Two important caveats are in

order here. First, in the span of a 24-month window there is lot that could be going on

and the estimates do not control for this. Second, with long estimation windows, the

problem of overlapping event windows is likely to be more severe and the standard errors

are therefore more subject to problems stemming from cross-country correlation in the

error term. Keeping these limitations in mind, the numbers may be useful in providing a

crude sense of whether the market anticipates stabilizations.

       Table 3 presents the results. There is no substantial run-up in prices preceding

attempted stabilizations of high inflation. The cumulative abnormal return from month –

12 to –1 is close to 0. In the case of moderate inflation, the market experiences a

cumulative fall of about 16 percent. This fall in prices is consistent with the view that

stabilization of moderate inflation is a negative net present value event for shareholders

and the market anticipates these events. This fact reinforces the differences between

HIGH and MODERATE evident in Table 2


II. C. Are the Results Driven by Differences in the Policies Used in High and
       Moderate Inflation?

       The evidence in Sections II.A and II.B suggest two key results. The stock market

responds positively and significantly when a country attempts to stabilize high inflation.

There is no significant market response if the pre-stabilization inflation rate is moderate.

It is important to know whether these results are driven by variation in the types of

stabilization policies used in high versus moderate inflation. The uniformity of IMF

programs suggests that there are not major differences between the packages of




                                                                                         17
stabilization policies pursued in IMF-sponsored attempts at stabilizing high and moderate

inflation. However, 12 of the 81 stabilization episodes studied in this paper did not

involve an official agreement with the IMF. All 12 of these programs were directed at

stabilizing high inflation. In 8 of these 12 episodes, the countries involved attempted to

stabilize inflation by fixing the nominal exchange rate. In contrast, none of the IMF

episodes involved exchange-rate-based stabilizations (ERBS). Therefore, it is important

to investigate whether the differential stock market responses are driven by differences

between IMF and non-IMF stabilization policies.

          Three robustness checks suggest that this is not the case. First, the average stock

market reaction to ERBS is statistically indistinguishable from those for non-ERBS.

Second, the difference between the average stock market response to attempted

stabilizations of high and moderate inflation remains economically and statistically

significant when the non-IMF-sponsored programs are excluded from the high inflation

sample.     Third, there is no significant difference between the average stock market

reaction to the attempted stabilization of high inflation in the IMF and non-IMF

subsamples. Subsections II.C.1 and II.C.2 provide the details about these robustness

checks.



II.C.1 Are the High Inflation Results Exclusively an Exchange-Rate-Based
       Stabilization Phenomenon?

          There is an extensive literature on inflation stabilization in developing countries,

which demonstrates that countries that have stabilized inflation by fixing the nominal

exchange rate have experienced output booms (Calvo and Végh, 1998; Fischer et al.,

1999; Végh, 1992). All of these exchange-rate-based stabilization (ERBS) episodes were



                                                                                           18
implemented in high-inflation regimes. Therefore, this subsection investigates whether

the positive and significant stock market response to the attempted stabilization of high

inflation reported in Table 2 is unique to ERBS, or is a more general outcome associated

with stabilizing high inflation.

       In order to address this issue, the 25 attempts at stabilizing high inflation are split

into two groups: those that were exchange-rate-based and those that were not. A total of

8 of these 25 episodes are identified as exchange-rate-based stabilizations by Calvo and

Végh (1998) and Fischer et al. (1999). After separating these two kinds of stabilizations

the following panel regression is estimated:

Rit = α + β i RtW + γ 1 NONERBSit + γ 2 ERBSit + ε it                                     (6).

NONERBS is a dummy variable that equals 1 in months [0, +1] of all non-exchange-

rate-based attempts at stabilizing high inflation. ERBS is a dummy variable that equals

1 in months [0, +1] of all exchange-rate-based attempts at stabilizing high inflation.

       Panel A of Table 4 shows that the estimated coefficients on ERBS range from

10.5 to 15.2 percent per month, and all are significant at the one percent level. These

estimates are consistent with the finding that exchange-rate-based-stabilizations are

associated with output booms (Calvo and Végh, 1998; Fischer et al., 1999 Végh, 1992;).

The point estimates of the coefficient on NONERBS range from 10.2 to 12.1 percent per

month and are also significant at the one-percent level. The column labeled “P-Value of

ERBS>NONERBS” shows that the p-value for an F-test that the coefficient on ERBS is

significantly different from the coefficient on NONERBS is not significant for any

specification in Table 4.       Therefore, the point estimates of ERBS are statistically

indistinguishable from those for NONERBS.



                                                                                           19
        The evidence in Table 4, taken together with the evidence in Table 2, suggests

that the stock market responds more favorably to the stabilization of high inflation than it

does to the stabilization of moderate inflation, regardless of whether the stabilization

program is exchange-rate-based or not. Thus, the stock market evidence also supports

Easterly’s (1996) finding that output booms are not limited to exchange-rate-based

stabilizations of high inflation. However, this point should not be overstated, because the

results are based on relatively few observations (25 total, 8 ERBS).



III.C.2 Are the High Inflation Results Driven by Difference in IMF and Non-IMF
       Sponsored Stabilization Programs?

        Two additional sets of empirical tests suggest that the differential stock market

responses are not driven by differences between IMF and non-IMF stabilization policies.6

First, the stock market response to attempted stabilizations of high and moderate inflation

were re-estimated excluding the non-IMF-sponsored programs from the high inflation

sample.     Specifically, a new dummy variable called IMFHIGH was created.                           This

variable takes on the value one just in those cases where attempts to stabilize high

inflation were implemented through an official IMF agreement.                      The coefficient on

IMFHIGH was positive, significant, and significantly different than the coefficient on

MODERATE.           Thus, the difference between the average stock market response to

attempted stabilizations of high and moderate inflation remains economically and

statistically significant when the non-IMF-sponsored programs are excluded from the

high inflation sample.



6
 For brevity, the results are simply reported and the accompanying tables are not included. These tables
are available upon request.


                                                                                                           20
        Second, estimations were performed to compare the mean response of the stock

market to IMF and non-IMF sponsored attempts at stabilizing high inflation.                          The

coefficients on IMFHIGH and NONIMFHIGH were both positive and significant.

However, the hypothesis that IMFHIGH=NONIMFHIGH could not be rejected. Thus,

the evidence suggests that there is no significant difference between the average stock

market reaction to the attempted stabilization of high inflation in the IMF and non-IMF

sub-samples. Overall, the evidence in this subsection and in III.C.1 suggest that the

central empirical result is not driven by differences in the way countries attempt to

stabilize high versus moderate inflation.


III. Does the Stock Market Get it Right?

        This section of the paper asks whether the stock market rationally forecasts

stabilization outcomes. The analysis employs three approaches. The first approach

examines if controlling for previous failed stabilizations strengthens the positive

relationship between the stock market response and the ex-ante inflation rate. The second

approach asks whether the stock market response helps predict the ex-post change in

inflation. The third approach explores whether the unexpected change in the stock

market helps predicts ex-post GDP growth.7


III.A. Stock Market Responses and Ex-Ante Inflation Rates Revisited

        If the stock market is rational, then it may place a lower probability of success on

stabilization programs that follow on the heels of failed attempts. A lower probability of


7
 The approaches taken here are similar in spirit to Dominguez et al. (1988) and Shapiro (1988).
Dominguez et al. examine whether stock price data help forecast the great depression. Shapiro uses stock
prices and dividend yields to study the success of economic policy in smoothing the volatility of real
activity in the U.S. after World War II.


                                                                                                       21
success will decrease the stock market response to news of stabilization. Therefore, a

low probability of success may explain why the stock price change is close to zero for a

number of high-inflation episodes in Figure 1.              This discussion suggests that the

relationship between the stock market response and ex-ante inflation after controlling for

past failures should be stronger than the unconditional relationship documented in

Section III.B. Two approaches are taken.

        First, equation (2) is re-estimated. This time the inflation rate is interacted with a

variable called PREVFAIL. PREVFAIL is equal to one if there was a failed stabilization

in the previous 24 months (robust t-statistics in parentheses R 2 =0.22, N=81):

∆ ln( stockprice[0,+1] ) = 2.21 + 0.203* inflation − 0.158(inflation * prevfail )         (8)
                           (0.9) (3.6)              (-2.6)

The conditional relationship between the stock market change and the average pre-

stabilization inflation rate is stronger than the unconditional one. Relative to equation (2)

the coefficient on INFLATION is higher, the robust t-statistic is larger, and the R-squared

is bigger. The interactive term, INFLATION*PREVFAIL also has the expected negative

sign and is significant.

        As a second pass at the data, Figure 2 plots the implementation window stock

price change versus the average 12-month inflation rate for only those episodes that were

not preceded by a failed stabilization in the previous 24 months. There are 41 such

episodes. Figure 2 and equation (9) below exhibit a tighter positive linear relationship

between the stock price change and inflation than Figure 1 and equation (2), which do not

control for past failures. The trend line in Figure 2 is given by the following equation

(robust t-statistics in parentheses R 2 =0.48, N=41):




                                                                                           22
∆ ln( stockprice[0,+1] ) = −2.51 + 0.237 * inflation                                    (9)
                            (-0.9) (4.7)

        The outlier in the upper right hand corner of Figure 2 is Peru. In 1989 and 1990

the average inflation rate in Peru was 344 percent and real GDP fell by 12.3 and 5.5

percent, respectively. In August of 1990 Alberto Fujimori was inaugurated as the new

prime minister and implemented a sweeping stabilization program, which came to be

known as “Fujishock.” The stock market increased by 100 percent in real dollar terms

between August and September. In 1991 inflation fell to 44 percent and real GDP grew

by 6.7 percent. The positive linear relationship in Figure 2 remains significant if Peru is

removed.


III.B. Do the Stock Market Responses Predict Ex-Post Changes in Inflation?

        To the extent that the stock market response predicts the expected net benefit that

will accrue to shareholders as a result of stabilizing inflation, it should also have some

predictive power for the ex-post change in inflation. Specifically, the ex-ante stock price

response should be negatively associated with the ex-post change in inflation. Figure 3

examines whether the data support this prediction. The variable on the y-axis is the

change in inflation: the average 12-month inflation rate in the year after stabilization

minus the 12-month inflation rate in the two years prior to stabilization. The variable on

the x-axis is the unexpected stock price change (as measured by the cumulative abnormal

return for months [0,+1]). The trend line in Figure 3 is given by the following equation

(robust t-statistics in parentheses R 2 =0.05, N=81):



∆inflation = −6.60 − 0.546* ∆ ln( stockprice[0,+1] )                                 (10)
              (-1.2) (-2.2)


                                                                                        23
       The stock price response to stabilization seems to have some unconditional

predictive power for what will happen to inflation in the following year.



III.C. Do the Stock Market Responses Predict Future GDP Growth?

       To the extent that the stock market response to stabilization capitalizes the

expected net output benefits, then there should be a positive relationship between the ex-

ante stock price change and GDP growth outcomes following the stabilization. The

unexpected stock market change should reflect the “news” about future GDP growth. If

the sample mean is taken as a measure of the expected future growth rate, then the

deviation of GDP growth from its country-specific sample mean is a metric of the news

in GDP growth.

       Figure 4 compares the average deviation of real GDP growth in years [0, +3] with

the average deviation over the pre-stabilization period (years [-3, -1]), for all episodes of

attempted stabilizations of high inflation. Region B, the area above the average pre-

stabilization deviation, is substantially larger than Region A, the area below. Figure 5

compares the average deviation in stabilization years [0, +3] with the average deviation

over the pre-stabilization period, for all episodes of attempted stabilizations of moderate

inflation. In this figure, Region B is not substantially larger than Region A. Overall, the

comparisons appear at least roughly consistent with the discounted evidence provided by

the stock market (Table 2).

       Figure 6 plots the GDP news measure versus the unexpected stock price change.

The graph suggests that the stock market has predictive power. The corresponding




                                                                                          24
regression confirms the statistical significance of the apparent relationship (robust t-

statistics in parentheses R 2 =0.09, N=81):

GDPDEVIATION = −0.42 + 0.0476 * ∆ ln( stockprice)                                     (11)
                (-1.0) (2.9).

        Equation (11) indicates that, on average, an unexpected stock price increase of

100 predicts GDP growth in the following year that is 4.76 percentage points above its

sample mean. This equation should not be given a causal interpretation. It does not say

that the unexpected stock market change causes growth.



IV. Discussion of the Results and Their Relationship to Previous Work

        This paper uses the stock market to provide an ex-ante measure of the effect that a

stabilization program is expected to have on the present value of current and expected

future profits. The stock market provides a cost-benefit analysis of disinflation. The

stock market approach removes the time dimension of stabilization by collapsing the

entire future stream of stabilization costs and benefits into a single summary statistic.

This net present value analysis focuses attention on the relevant issue of whether the

benefits of disinflation outweigh the costs.

        One limitation of this approach is that the stock market provides a cost-benefit

analysis of expected current and future profits. This is not the same thing as a cost-

benefit analysis of current and expected future output. Therefore, the results speak only

to shareholder welfare and do not tell us whether disinflation increases or decreases the

present value of aggregate output. Nevertheless, understanding the effect of disinflation

on the present value of profits may deepen our understanding of the broader real effects

of disinflation.


                                                                                        25
       The Phillips Curve view of disinflation holds that efforts to reduce inflation will

cause a temporary fall in output (Ball, 1994; Fischer, 1986; Friedman, 1968; Lucas, 1973;

Okun, 1978; Phelps, 1968). In Phillips-Curve-based analyses of disinflation, the short-

run cost of reducing inflation is measured as the sum of undiscounted output losses over

some horizon (Blanchard, 1999; Dornbusch and Fischer, 1998; Hall and Taylor, 1997;

Mankiw, 1997). This approach assumes that there are long-run output benefits associated

with disinflation, without making them explicit in a cost-benefit calculation. Therefore,

these analyses do not directly address the issue of whether the benefits of disinflation

outweigh the costs. The stock market approach taken in this paper focuses attention on

the relevant issue of whether the benefits of disinflation outweigh the costs.

       In contrast to the traditional view of disinflation, advocates of rational

expectations argue that disinflation need not be costly if policy makers credibly commit

to reducing inflation. Under this view, the initial level of inflation should be largely

irrelevant. Sargent (1982) provides supporting evidence for the rational expectations

view. He presents case studies of four countries that abruptly halted post-World War I

hyperinflations at virtually no cost to output.

       In fact, more recent work finds that countries may even experience output booms

while stabilizing high inflation (Végh, 1992). Calvo and Végh (1998) document seven

episodes of expansionary stabilization of high inflation. Fischer et al., (1999) document

nine episodes. Easterly (1996) provides broader evidence against the traditional view of

disinflation. He studies twenty-eight episodes of high inflation that were successfully

stabilized and shows that output expanded on average. In contrast to the recent evidence

that reducing high inflation is expansionary, Dornbusch and Fischer (1993) conclude that




                                                                                       26
moderate inflation can be reduced to low inflation only at a substantial short-term cost to

output. This conclusion is based on their case study of four countries that successfully

reduced moderate inflation to low inflation.

       Taken together, this recent evidence seems to suggest that disinflation is

expansionary when starting from high levels of inflation, but contractionary when

inflation is moderate.    However, these studies focus exclusively on episodes where

inflation was successfully reduced. Calvo and Végh (1998) argue that selection bias

clouds the interpretation of studies that focus exclusively on episodes where inflation was

successfully reduced, instead of all attempts at stabilizing inflation. To illustrate the

theoretical content of Calvo and Végh’s argument, imagine that a country experiencing

high inflation implements a stabilization program.       Now suppose that this country

experiences a favorable output shock. The shock creates two measurement problems.

First, it causes an output boom, which generates a specious positive correlation between

stabilization and output growth. Second, the boom generates a windfall in tax revenue,

which reduces the government’s need for inflationary finance and therefore raises the

probability of a successful stabilization.

       Figure 7 illustrates the empirical thrust of Calvo and Végh’s (1998) selection bias

critique. The figure plots the average deviation of annual output growth from its sample

mean for two subsets of the high inflation episodes to be studied in this paper: those that

were successfully stabilized and those that were not. The graph for the successful cases

suggests that stabilizing high inflation is expansionary, but it is also consistent with the

view that stabilizations succeed because they coincide with favorable exogenous shocks.

Indeed, the figure shows that unsuccessful stabilizations are associated with below




                                                                                         27
average growth.

            However, the graph for the unsuccessful stabilizations is also consistent with

multiple interpretations. Countries may experience recessions because (1) stabilization

policy is contractionary; (2) growth may not improve because the government is not

committed to stabilizing inflation; (3) attempts at stabilizing high inflation may fail

because of adverse exogenous shocks. Thus, the general message of Figure 7 is that

selective examination of ex-post realizations of GDP growth may not accurately measure

the real effects of stabilization policy. In a world where economic agents are rational and

forward-looking, one ideally wants an ex-ante measure of the effect the stabilization

program is expected to have on current and future real output.

            This paper uses the stock market to provide an ex-ante measure of the effect the

stabilization program is expected to have on the present value of current and expected

future profits. Again, measuring the effect of disinflation on the present value of profits

is not equivalent to measuring the effect of disinflation on the present value of aggregate

output. Nevertheless, the stock market approach also focuses attention on the relevant

issue of whether the benefits of disinflation outweigh the costs. Furthermore, answering

the narrow question of whether disinflation is good for the stock market may provide

clues about the broader issue of whether disinflation is a positive net present value event

for the economy as a whole.

            For example, under the traditional view, the total social cost of disinflation

increases monotonically with the initial level of inflation.8 The 24 percent jump in real

equity prices in anticipation of reducing high inflation seems at odds with this prediction.

However, it is possible that stabilizing high inflation is costly in the short run, but these
8
    For a given sacrifice ratio.


                                                                                          28
costs are swamped by the long-run benefits. Therefore, the high inflation results could be

consistent with the traditional view. Analogously, the negligible (and possibly negative)

stock price response in anticipation of stabilizing moderate inflation appears more

consistent with the traditional view than with rational expectations.                     However, it is

possible that stabilizing moderate inflation is costless in the short run, but also generates

minimal long-run growth benefits (Burton and Fischer, 1998; Bruno and Easterly, 1998).

Hence, the moderate inflation results could be consistent with rational expectations.9 The

stock market data cannot resolve these issues but they provide a fresh source of evidence

in favor of the view that efforts at stabilizing high inflation have very different real

implications than those directed at moderate inflation.



V. Objections and Alternative Interpretations

         The paper documents that attempting to stabilize high inflation is good for the

stock market, but attempting to stabilize moderate inflation is not. This result begs an

obvious question. Why does the stock market respond more positively to attempts at

stabilizing high inflation than those directed at moderate inflation? A definitive answer

lies beyond the scope of this paper. Rather, the emphasis of the present article is on

answering a smaller question. Is disinflation good for the stock market? Given that there

is no systematic evidence on this narrower question, establishing a fact in need of further

explanation seems like a reasonable first step. The remainder of this section highlights

some of the key issues that may be addressed by future work.




9
 The moderate inflation results for months [0,+1] could also be consistent with disinflation being neutral.
However, the pre-stabilization window evidence in Table 3 suggests that this is not the case.


                                                                                                          29
         First, it would be helpful to have a sense as to how much of the observed stock

market responses are due to changes in discount rates versus profits. One approach might

be to look at data on total market dividends and dividend yields. These data would allow

for a crude analysis of changes in discount rates and cash flows using the dividend

discount model as in Blanchard (1993). Unfortunately, these data are not available for

the entire sample period in all countries.

         Second, the observed differences in the stock market responses for cases of high

versus moderate inflation may be driven by exogenous factors for which the analysis is

unable to control. For example, stabilizing high inflation might signal broader future

macroeconomic reforms, whereas stabilizing moderate inflation might not (Bruno and

Easterly, 1996; Collins, 1990).10 In such cases, the stock market may respond more

favorably to attempted stabilizations of high inflation, even if there are no substantial

differences in the expected real effects of stabilizing high versus moderate inflation per

se. Using short event windows reduces the chance of contamination from confounding

major events that are unrelated to stabilization. However, even a short window does not

entirely eliminate the concern. The evidence relating the stock market response to ex-

post inflation and growth outcomes is also subject to a similar critique.

         Third, there is the potential for reverse causality. If strong economic performance

drives policy-makers to initiate stabilization programs, then the estimated stock market

response to attempts at stabilizing high inflation may be upward biased.11 The pre-



10
   The differences between high and moderate inflation may also be a function of the way in which inflation
interacts with the taxation of financial assets (Feldstein, 1980). A detailed study of the tax systems of the
21 countries in the sample lies outside the scope of this paper.
11
   Collins (1996) makes a similar conceptual point with respect to drawing conclusions about the real
effects of moving from a fixed to flexible exchange rate regime.


                                                                                                         30
stabilization-window evidence (Table 3) and the data on GDP growth (Figures 4 and 5)

do not suggest reverse causality, but the possibility cannot be dismissed.

       Finally, most of the moderate inflation episodes are identified using IMF

agreements. Section I of the paper provides evidence in support of the view that IMF

programs are tantamount to traditional disinflation programs. If inflation reduction is not

a major objective of IMF programs, then the stock market results for the cases of

moderate inflation may suggest that IMF programs are of marginal net benefit when

inflation stabilization is not the major objective.



VI. Conclusion

       Previous research in macroeconomics and finance does not address the following

question. Is disinflation good for the stock market? This paper provides an answer by

analyzing how stock markets respond to the adoption of inflation stabilization programs.

The evidence suggests three key results. First, the average stock market response to

attempts at stabilizing high inflation is large--the stock market increases by 24 percent in

real dollar terms--and is reliably significant.       Second, the expected net benefits of

stabilizing moderate inflation are economically weak and statistically insignificant.

Third, the stock market response to attempted stabilizations is a reliable, though

admittedly noisy, predictor of changes in future inflation and output growth. This third

result suggests that the stock market evidence is not spurious. Taken together, these

results buttress previous findings that the real consequences of stabilizing high and

moderate inflation are very different.       Future research should try and uncover the

underlying mechanisms responsible for these differences.




                                                                                         31
References

Agénor, Pierre-Richard and Peter Montiel. (1996). Development Macroeconomics,
      Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Ball, Laurence. (1994). “What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?” in Monetary Policy, ed.
        By N. G. Mankiw. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean. (1981). “Output, the Stock Market, and Interest Rates,”
       AmericanEconomic Review, Vol. 71, No. 1, pp. 132-43

Blanchard, Olivier Jean. (1993). “Movements in the Equity Premium,” Brookings
      Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, pp. 75-138.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean. (1999). Macroeconomics. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
      Hall.

Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly. (1998). “Inflation Crises and Long Run
       Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 3-26.

Bruno, Michael and William Easterly. (1996). “Inflation’s Children: Tales of Crises that
       Beget Reforms” American Economic Review, Vol. 86, No. 2, pp. 213-217.

Burton, David and Stanley Fischer. (1998). “Ending Moderate Inflations” in Cottarelli
       and Szpáry eds. Moderate Inflation: The Experience of Transition Economies.
       International Monetary Fund.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carlos Végh. (1998). “Inflation Stabilization and Balance of
       Payments Crises in Developing Countries,” Handbook of Macroeconomics,
       Forthcoming.

Collins, Susan M. (1990). “Lessons from Korean Economic Growth,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp.104-107.

Collins, Susan M. (1996). “On Becoming More Flexible: Exchange Rate Regimes in
       Latin America and the Caribbean,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 51,
       pp. 117-38.

Collins, Susan M. (1999). Capital Flows to Developing Economies: Implications for
       Saving and Investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 143-169.

Corden, W. Max. (1998). “The Asian Crisis: Are the IMF Prescriptions Right,” Working
      Paper, Johns Hopkins University

Dominguez, Kathryn M., Ray C. Fair, and Matthew D. Shapiro. (1988). “Forecasting the
     Depression: Harvard Versus Yale,” The American Economic Review, vol. 78,



                                                                                        32
       No. 4, pp. 595-612.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. (1998a). “After Asia: New Directions for The International
      Financial System,” Mimeo, MIT.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. (1998b). “Containing High Inflation,” Mimeo, MIT.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer. (1993). “Moderate Inflation,” The World Bank
      Economic Review, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 1-44.

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer. (1998). Macroeconomics. New York, New
      York: McGraw Hill.

Easterly, William. (1996). “When is Stabilization Expansionary?” Economic Policy, Vol.
       22, pp. 67-107.

Fama, Eugene F. (1976). Foundations of Finance. New York: Basic Books.

Fama, Eugene F. (1981). “Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation, and Money” American
      Economic Review, Vol. 71, Sept., pp. 545-65.

Fama, Eugene F. and G. William Schwert. (1977). “Asset Returns and Inflation” Journal
      of Financial Economics, Vol. 5, pp. 115-146.

Feldstein, Martin. (1980). “Inflation and the Stock Market,” The American Economic
       Review, Vol. 70, No. 5, pp. 839-47.

Feldstein, Martin. (1998). “Refocusing the IMF,” Foreign Affairs.

Fischer, Stanley. (1986). “Exchange Rate versus Money Targets in Disinflation,” in his
       Indexing, Inflation, and Economic Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 247-
       62.

Fischer, Stanley. (1993). “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,” Journal of
       Monetary Economics, Vol. 32, pp. 482-512.

Fischer, Stanley, Ratna Sahay and Carlos Vegh. (1999). “Modern Hyper and High
       Inflations,” Mimeo, International Monetary Fund and UCLA.

Frankel, Jeffrey. (1994). “Introduction” in The Internationalization of Equity Markets,
       Jeffrey A. Frankel, ed. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, pp.
       231-71.

Friedman, Milton. (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review,
      Vol. LVIII, No. 1, pp. 1-17.




                                                                                          33
Gordon, Robert J. (1982). “Why Stopping Inflation May be Costly: Evidence From
      Fourteen Historical Episodes, “ in R.E. Hall, ed. Inflation: Causes and Effects.
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 11-40.

Hall, Robert and John B. Taylor. (1997). Macroeconomics. New York: Norton and
       Company.

Henry, Peter B. (2000a). “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
       Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance Vol. 55, pp. 529-64.

Henry, Peter B. (2000b) “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?”
       Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 58, pp. 301-34.

Lucas, Robert E. (1973). “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,”
       American Economic Review, Vol. 63, No. 3, pp. 326-334.

Lucas, Robert E. (1978) “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46, pp.
       1429-1445.

Mankiw, N. Gregory. (1997). Macroeconomics. New York: Worth.

Okun, Arthur M. (1978). “Efficient Disinflationary Policies,” American Economic
      Review, Vol. 68, pp. 348-352.

Ozler, Sule. (1989). “On the Relationship between Reschedulings and Bank Value,”
       American Economic Review Vol. 12, pp. 1117-31.

Phelps, Edmund. (1968). “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium,”
       Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 76, pp. 678-711.

Rose, Nancy. (1985). “The Incidence of Regulatory Rents in the Motor Carrier Industry,”
       Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 16, pp. 299-318.

Sargent, Thomas. (1982). “The Ends of Four Big Inflations,” in R.E. Hall, ed. Inflation:
       Causes and Effects. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 41-97.

Schwert, G. William. (1981). “The Adjustment of Stock Prices to Information About
      Inflation,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 15-29.

Shapiro, Matthew. (1988). “The Stabilization of the U.S. Economy: Evidence from the
       Stock Market,” American Economic Review, Vol. 78, pp. 1067-1079.

Stulz, Rene. (1986). “Asset Pricing and Expected Inflation,” Journal of Finance,
        Vol.XLI, No. 1, pp. 209-223.

Stulz, René M., Bong-Chan Kho, and Dong Lee. (2000a), “U.S. Banks, Crises, and



                                                                                         34
       Bailouts: From Mexico to LTCM” American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No.2,
       pp. 28-31

Stulz, René M. and Bong-Chan Kho. (2000b). Banks, the IMF, and the Asian Crisis
        Working paper, Dice Center for Financial Economics, The Ohio State University.

Stulz, René M. (1999a). "International Portfolio Flows and Security Markets" in Martin
        Feldstein, ed. International Capital Flows. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Stulz, René M. (1999b). “Globalization, Corporate Finance, and the Cost of Capital,"
        Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 12, pp. 8-25.

Summers, Lawrence. (1985). “On Economics and Finance,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 40,
     No. 3, pp. 633-635.

Tesar, Linda L. (1999). “The Role of Equity in International Capital Flows” in Martin
       Feldstein, ed. International Capital Flows. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       pp. 235-55.

Tesar, Linda L. and Ingrid M. Werner. (1998). “The Internationalization of Securities
       Markets Since the 1987 Crash” in Robert E. Litan and Anthony M. Santomero
       eds. Brookings –Wharton Papers on Financial Services (Brookings Institution
       Press, Washington).

Tesar, Linda L. and Ingrid M. Werner (1995). “U.S. Equity Investment in Emerging
       Stock Markets” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 109-129.

Tobin, James. (1972). “Inflation and Unemployment” American Economic Review,
       Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 1-18.

Végh, Carlos A. (1992) “Stopping High Inflation: An analytical overview” IMF Staff
       Papers, Vol. 39, pp. 626-695.




                                                                                        35
                                                      Figure 1. The Stock Market Response to Implementation of a Stabilization Program as a
                                                                        Function of the Pre-Stabilization Level of Inflation

                                                    120


                                                    100
Percentage Change in the Stock Market Index




                                                    80


                                                    60


                                                    40


                                                    20


                                                     0
                                              -50         0      50        100         150          200          250           300   350   400   450

                                                    -20


                                                    -40


                                                    -60
                                                                            Average 12-Month Inflation Rate for the Prior 2 Years




                                                                                                                                                       36
                                                                  Figure 2. The Stock Market Response to Implementation of a Stabilization Program as a
                                                                  Function of the Pre-Stabilization Level of Inflation: No Failed Stab in Previous 24 months

                                                                  120
Unanticipated Percentage Change in the Stock Market Index




                                                                  100


                                                                  80


                                                                  60


                                                                  40


                                                                  20


                                                                   0
                                                            -50         0       50          100            150            200           250       300     350   400

                                                                  -20


                                                                  -40


                                                                  -60
                                                                                          Average 12-Month Inflation Rate for the Prior 2 Years




                                                                                                                                                                      37
                                                Figure 3. Change In the Inflation Rate in Year +1 as a Function of the Stock Market Response
                                                                        to Implementation of a Stabilization Program

                                                                         100



                                                                          50



                                                                           0
Change in the Inflation Rate in Year +1




                                          -60       -40         -20            0          20            40            60          80   100     120


                                                                         -50



                                                                        -100



                                                                        -150



                                                                        -200



                                                                        -250



                                                                        -300
                                                                      Unanticipated Percentage Change in the Stock Market Index




                                                                                                                                                     38
                                        Figure 4. Average Deviation of Real GDP Growth From Country-Specific Sample Mean: All
                                                               Attempted Stabilizations of High Inflation

                             0.5




                               0
Percentage Point Deviation




                             -0.5




                                                                                                                        Average Pre-Stab Dev
                              -1
                                                                                                                        Average Deviation



                             -1.5




                              -2




                             -2.5
                                    0                        1                                 2                 3
                                                           Year Relative to Attempted Stabilization




                                                                                                                                               39
                                        Figure 5. Average Deviation of Real GDP Growth From Country-Specific Sample Mean: All
                                                            Attempted Stabilizations of Moderate Inflation

                             1.5




                               1
Percentage Point Deviation




                             0.5

                                                                                                                    Average Pre-Stab Deviation
                                                                                                                    Average Deviation

                               0




                             -0.5




                              -1
                                    0                       1                               2                3
                                                         Year Relative to Attempted Stabilization




                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                     Figure 6. GDP Growth "News" in Year +1 as a Function of the Stock Market Response to
                                                                                           Implementation of a Stabilization Program

                                                                                              10
Deviation of Real GDP Growth Deviation from Country-Specific




                                                                                               8


                                                                                               6


                                                                                               4
                   Sample Mean in Year +1




                                                                                               2


                                                                                               0
                                                               -60       -40        -20            0          20            40           60           80   100   120

                                                                                              -2


                                                                                              -4


                                                                                              -6


                                                                                              -8


                                                                                             -10
                                                                                          Unanticipated Percentage Change in the Stock Market Index




                                                                                                                                                                       41
                                       Figure 7. Average Deviation of Real GDP Growth From Country-Specific Sample Mean
                                                    Around Attempted Stabilizations of High Inflation Episodes

                             1




                             0
Percentage Point Deviation




                             -1




                                                                                                                          Successful (N=7)
                             -2
                                                                                                                          Failed (N=18)



                             -3




                             -4




                             -5
                                  -3        -2           -1                0                 1     2           3
                                                        Year Relative to Attempted Stabilization




                                                                                                                                             42
Table 1. Differences Between Median Stock Price Reactions to Attempted Stabilizations of High Versus Moderate Inflation Under Three Different
Classifications of High and Moderate Inflation

                             Bruno Easterly Classification                    Two-Way Numerical Split                                 Three-Way Numerical Split

                                 High              Moderate                   High              Moderate                     High            Moderate              Low
Number of                        25                 56                         40                 41                          27               27                   27
Episodes

Median Inflation                 118                 15                         77                  11                         116               26                  10

Median Stock                     16                  1                          14                  1                          15                11                  1
Price Change

Number Negative                  6                   25                         11                  20                         7                 10                  14

P-Value                          0.01                0.25                       0.01                0.5                        0.01              0.12                0.65
Notes: Table 1 divides the 81 stabilization episodes into three groups based on levels of average inflation prior to implementation. The first grouping corresponds to the Bruno
Easterly (1998) classification of high versus moderate inflation; the second simply divides the total sample into two groups of equal size: high and moderate inflation. The third
comparison splits the sample into three groups of equal size: high, moderate, and low inflation. The first three rows provide summary statistics for each grouping: the number of
episodes, the median inflation rate and the median stock price response for the high and moderate categories under each inflation classification scheme. The fourth row reports the
number of episodes for which the stock price change over the two-month-implementation window is less than the median (country-specific) two-month stock price change. The
last row reports the two-sided p-value of observing at most the corresponding number of stock price responses to stabilization below the median (country-specific) two-month
percentage change in the stock price.




                                                                                                                                                                               43
Table 2. Differences Between Average Stock Market Reactions to Attempted Stabilizations of High Versus Moderate Inflation Under
the Bruno Easterly Classification of High and Moderate Inflation

                               Panel A: Month [0, +1] Estimates                                                      Panel B: Month [0] Estimates

                          HIGH             MODERATE             P-Value of                                   HIGH             MODERATE             P-Value of
                                                                HIGH>                                                                              HIGH>
                                                                MODERATE                                                                           MODERATE


World                     0.121***               0.001                 0.00                                   0.126***             -0.004                 0.00
                         (0.023)                (0.01)                                                       (0.032)               (0.012)

U.S.                      0.119***               0.001                 0.00                                   0.121***             -0.006                 0.00
                         (0.023)                (0.01)                                                       (0.032)               (0.012)

LDC                       0.113***               0.005                 0.00                                   0.081**               0.008                 0.08
                         (0.026)                (0.012)                                                      (0.037)               (0.02)

All                       0.114***               0.006                 0.00                                   0.080**               0.006                 0.07
                         (0.026)                (0.012)                                                      (0.037)               (0.02)

Constant-                 0.122***               0.001                 0.00                                   0.124***             -0.003                 0.00
Mean                     (0.023)                (0.01)                                                       (0.032)               (0.01)

Country-                  0.122***               0.001                 0.00                                   0.122***             -0.003                 0.00
Mean                     (0.001)                (0.01)                                                       (0.033)               (0.01)
Notes: The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. The estimation procedure is feasible generalized least squares. Heteroscedastic-consistent
standard errors are given in parentheses. The column labeled Month [0,+1] presents estimates of HIGH and MODERATE using the two-month announcement
window described in the text. The column labeled Month [0] presents estimates of HIGH and MODERATE using the one-month announcement window described in
the text. The first row presents estimates of HIGH and MODERATE from the benchmark specification using a World stock return index. Row 2 presents estimates of
HIGH and MODERATE from a specification that uses U.S. stock returns in place of a World stock return index in equation (3). Row 3 presents estimates that use the
IFC Emerging Market index. Row 4 presents estimates that use all three sets of returns simultaneously. Row 5 presents estimates of HIGH and MODERATE based
on simple mean-adjusted abnormal returns. Row 6 presents estimates using a statistical model, which allows for country-specific intercept terms. The column labeled
P-Value of HIGH>MODERATE: shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on HIGH is significantly larger than the coefficient on MODERATE. The symbols
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent confidence levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                           44
Table 3. Does the Stock Market Anticipate Attempted Stabilizations? Abnormal Returns and Cumulative Abnormal Returns Associated With
the 12-Month Window Preceding Attempted Stabilizations of High Versus Moderate Inflation Under the Bruno and Easterly Classification of
High and Moderate Inflation

                                  Panel A: World-Return Model                                                    Panel B: Constant-Mean-Return Model

                              High Inflation                    Moderate Inflation                            High Inflation                    Moderate Inflation
Month
Relative to
Stabilization                  AR         CAR                      AR          CAR                            AR          CAR                      AR          CAR
     -12                      -.036       -.036                   -.008        -.008                         -.038        -.038                   -.010        -.010

      -11                     -.033       -.069                   -.018        -.026                         -.033        -.070                   -.016        -.026

      -10                     -.053       -.122                   -.012        -.038                         -.050        -.121                   -.014        -.040

      -9                      .007        -.116                   -.010        -.048                         .002         -.119                   -.012        -.052

      -8                      -.005       -.121                   -.007        -.054                         -.003        -.122                   -.007        -.058

      -7                      .027        -.094                   .011         -.043                         .028         -.094                    .012        -.047

      -6                      .042        -.052                   -.020        -.063                         .043         -.051                   -.019        -.065

      -5                      .035        -.018                   -.023        -.086                         .037         -.014                   -.024        -.090

      -4                      -.005       -.022                   -.030        -.116                         -.004        -.018                   -.030        -.120

      -3                      .057         .035                   -.026        -.142                         .060         .041                    -.026        -.146

      -2                      -.028        .006                   -.008        -.150                         -.025        .016                    -.007        -.153

      -1                      -.030       -.023                   -.014        -.163                         -.032        -.016                   -.013        -.166

       0                      .088         .064                   -.008        -.172                         .085         .069                    -.007        -.173

       1                      .126         .190                   .011         -.161                         .127         .196                     .011        -.162
Notes: The abbreviation AR stands for abnormal return. The abnormal return for month [n] is defined as the coefficient on a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 in
nth month before implementation of the stabilization. The abnormal returns in Panel A are calculated using regression equation (3) in the text. The abnormal returns in
Panel B are generated using regression equation (4) in the text.


                                                                                                                                                                          45
Table 4. Differences Between Average Stock Market Reactions to Exchange-Rate-Based (ERBS) Versus Non-Exchange-Rate
Based Stabilizations (NONERBS) of High Inflation

                              Panel A: Month [0, +1] Estimates                                                   Panel B: Month [0] Estimates

                                               Non                                                                            Non
                   Exchange-                Exchange-               P-Value of                     Exchange-               Exchange-               P-Value of
                  Rate-Based               Rate-Based               ERBS>NON                      Rate-Based              Rate-Based               ERBS>NON
                  Stabilization            Stabilization              ERBS                        Stabilization           Stabilization              ERBS

World                  0.152***                0.102***                 0.28                          0.154***               0.109***                 0.49
                      (0.037)                 (0.029)                                                (0.052)                (0.041)

U.S.                   0.148***                0.100***                 0.31                          0.146***               0.106***                 0.55
                      (0.037)                 (0.029)                                                (0.052)                (0.041)

LDC                    0.105***                0.121***                 0.77                          0.039                  0.113**                  0.308
                      (0.04)                  (0.034)                                                (0.055)                (0.049)

All                    0.122***                0.105***                 0.75                          0.035                  0.116**                  0.27
                      (0.034)                 (0.04)                                                 (0.055)                (0.049)

Constant-              0.152***                0.102***                 0.29                          0.151***               0.108***                 0.52
Mean                  (0.037)                 (0.029)                                                (0.052)                (0.041

Country-               0.150***                0.103***                 0.32                          0.149***               0.106***                 0.52
Mean                  (0.037)                 (0.029)                                                (0.052)                (0.042)
Notes: The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. The estimation procedure is feasible generalized least squares. Heteroscedastic-
consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. The column labeled Month [0,+1] presents estimates of the stock market response to exchange-rate-based
and non-exchange-rate-based stabilizations of high inflation using the two-month announcement window described in the text. The column labeled Month [0]
presents estimates of ERBS and NONERBS using the one-month announcement window described in the text. The first row presents estimates using the
benchmark specification using a World stock return index. Row 2 presents estimates of ERBS and NONERBS from a specification that uses U.S. stock returns
in place of the World stock return index in equation (6). Row 3 presents estimates of ERBS and NONERBS from a specification that uses the IFC Emerging
Market index. Row 4 presents estimates of ERBS and NONERBS from a specification that uses all three sets of returns simultaneously. Row 5 presents
estimates based on simple mean-adjusted abnormal returns. Row 6 presents estimates using a statistical model, which allows for country-specific intercept terms.
The column labeled P-Value of ERBS>NONERBS shows the p-value for a test that the stock market response to exchange-rate-based stabilizations of high
inflation is significantly different from the stock market response to non-exchange-rate-based stabilizations of high inflation. The symbols ***, **, and * denote
statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent confidence levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                              46
Data Appendix: Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market?

         Each panel of Table A1 corresponds to a given country. Column 1 identifies the

country to which each panel applies. Column 2 enumerates the month and year of all the

stabilization programs that were implemented in each of the countries during the sample

period (the period for which stock market data are available for each country). Columns

3 and 4 provide information on how the stabilization dates in Column 2 were identified.

A “Yes” in a given row of column 3 indicates that the stabilization date in the

corresponding row of Column 1 is a Calvo and Végh (1998) episodic stabilization

program. A “Yes” in a given row of column 4 indicates that an agreement was signed

with the IMF. The type of IMF agreement is given in parentheses. SB denotes a Stand-

By agreement and EFF denotes an Extended Fund Facility agreement.1

         Column 5 provides information on the nature of the inflation regime that existed

at the time the stabilization program was initiated. A “Yes” in Column 5 indicates that

the country was experiencing high inflation. A “Yes” in Column 6 indicates that there

was a stabilization program in the previous 24 months. A “Yes” in Column 7 indicates

that there was a stabilization program in the subsequent 24 months. A “Yes” in Column

8 indicates that the stabilization program was ex-post successful. In keeping with the

spirit of the Bruno and Easterly (1995) definition of high inflation, a stabilization

program implemented in the midst of high inflation is defined as ex-post successful if


1
  Stand-By (SB) arrangements typically cover periods of one to two years and focus on macroeconomic
policies--such as fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies--aimed at overcoming balance of payments
difficulties. Most programs supported by stand-by arrangements also include some policies to address
structural or supply-side weakness, although because of the short duration of these arrangements, this focus
is not as strong as in extended arrangements. Under the Extended Fund Facility (EFF), the IMF supports
medium-term programs through extended arrangements that generally run for three or four years and are
aimed at overcoming balance of payments difficulties stemming from macroeconomic and structural
problems.
(prior to the implementation of another stabilization program) annualized monthly

inflation falls below 40 percent and remains below 40 percent for two or more years. In

accordance with Dornbusch and Fischer (1993) and Burton and Fischer (1998), a

stabilization program implemented in the midst of moderate inflation is defined as ex-

post successful if annualized monthly inflation falls below 10 percent and remains below

10 percent for two or more years. A “Yes” in Column 9 indicates that the stabilization

program was exchange-rate-based according to Calvo and Vegh (1998) and Fischer et al.

(1999).

          The databases Lexis/Nexis Research Software Version 4.06 and the Dow Jones

Interactive Publications Library were searched in an attempt to find announcement dates

corresponding to the implementation dates listed in Table A1. For most stabilization

programs no announcement dates were available. In other cases, the “announcement”

corresponds to informal agreements between the country and the IMF in advance of the

official signing (i.e., implementation date) of the stabilization program, which begs the

question of when the market first learned of the negotiations leading to the informal

agreement. Thus, the search reinforces Easterly’s (1996) point that announcement dates

uncovered using public news sources are likely to be poor proxies for the date at which

information about the stabilization first reaches market participants. In the absence of

reliable data on announcement dates, this study focuses on implementation dates. This

approach may bias against finding any effect of stabilization if stabilizations are

anticipated.
Table A1. Inflation Stabilization Programs in Emerging Economies with Stock Markets


                                                                     Stabilization    Stabilization
              Date of                                      High      in the           in the        Stabilization Exchange
              Stabilization                     IMF        Inflation Previous 24      Following     Ex-Post       Rate
Country       Program       Episodic            Agreement? Crisis?   Months?          24 Months? Successful? Based?
Panel A:
Argentina
              Aug 1976                          Yes (SB)     Yes                      Yes
              Sept 1977                         Yes (SB)     Yes        Yes           Yes
              Dec 1978       Yes (Tablita)                   Yes        Yes                                      Yes
              Jun 1983                          Yes (SB)     Yes                      Yes
              Dec 1984                          Yes (SB)     Yes        Yes           Yes
              Jun 1985       Yes (Austral)                   Yes        Yes                                      Yes
              Jul 1987                          Yes (SB)     Yes        Yes
              Nov 1989       Yes (Bonex)                     Yes        Yes           Yes
              Jul 1991       Yes                Yes (SB)     Yes        Yes                        Yes           Yes
                             (Convertibility)
              Mar 1992                          Yes (EFF)               Yes


Panel B:
Brazil
              Mar 1983                          Yes (SB)     Yes
              Feb 1986       Yes (Cruzado)                   Yes                      Yes                        Yes
              Jul 1987       Yes (Bresser)                   Yes        Yes           Yes
              Aug 1988                          Yes (SB)     Yes        Yes           Yes
              Jan 1989       Yes (Summer)                    Yes        Yes           Yes
              Apr 1990       Yes (Collor)                    Yes        Yes           Yes
              Jan 1992                          Yes (SB)     Yes        Yes
              Mar 1994       Yes (Real)                      Yes        Yes                        Yes           Yes
Table A1--Continued


                                                                Stabilization   Stabilization
              Date of                                 High      in the          in the        Stabilization Exchange
              Stabilization                IMF        Inflation Previous 24     Following     Ex-Post       Rate
Country       Program       Episodic       Agreement? Crisis?   Months?         24 Months? Successful? Based?
Panel C:
Chile
              Feb 1978     Yes (Tablita)               Yes                                   Yes           Yes
              Jan 1983                     Yes (SB)
              Aug 1985                     Yes (EFF)
              Nov 1989                     Yes (SB)                                          Yes


Panel D:
Egypt
              May 1991                     Yes (SB)                                          Yes


Panel E:
India
              Nov 1981                     Yes (EFF)
              Jan 1991                     Yes (SB)                             Yes
              Oct 1991                     Yes (SB)              Yes


Panel F:
Indonesia
              May 1973                     Yes (SB)                                          Yes


Panel G:
Israel
              Jul 1985     Yes                         Yes                                   Yes           Yes
Table A1--Continued


                                                            Stabilization   Stabilization
              Date of                             High      in the          in the        Stabilization Exchange
              Stabilization            IMF        Inflation Previous 24     Following     Ex-Post       Rate
Country       Program       Episodic   Agreement? Crisis?   Months?         24 Months? Successful? Based?
Panel H:
Jamaica
              Aug 1977                 Yes (SB)                             Yes
              Jun 1978                 Yes (EFF)             Yes            Yes
              Jun 1979                 Yes (EFF)             Yes            Yes
              Apr 1981                 Yes (EFF)             Yes
              Jun 1984                 Yes (SB)              Yes            Yes
              Jul 1985                 Yes (SB)              Yes            Yes
              Mar 1987                 Yes (SB)              Yes            Yes
              Sept 1988                Yes (SB)              Yes            Yes
              Mar 1990                 Yes (SB)              Yes            Yes
              Jun 1991                 Yes (SB)              Yes            Yes
              Dec 1992                 Yes (SB)    Yes       Yes                         Yes


Panel I:
Jordan
              Jul 1989                 Yes (SB)
              Feb 1992                 Yes (SB)
              May 1994                 Yes (EFF)


Panel J:
Kenya
              May 1993                 Yes                                               Yes
Table A1--Continued


                                                              Stabilization   Stabilization
              Date of                               High      in the          in the        Stabilization Exchange
              Stabilization              IMF        Inflation Previous 24     Following     Ex-Post       Rate
Country       Program       Episodic     Agreement? Crisis?   Months?         24 Months? Successful? Based?
Panel K:
Korea
              May 1977                   Yes (SB)
              Mar 1980                   Yes (SB)                             Yes          Yes
              Feb 1981                   Yes (SB)              Yes
              Jul 1983                   Yes (SB)                             Yes
              Jul 1985                   Yes (SB)              Yes


Panel L:
Mexico
              Jan 1977     Yes           Yes (EFF)             Yes
              Jan 1983                   Yes (EFF)
              Nov 1986                   Yes (SB)    Yes                      Yes
              Dec 1987     Yes (Pacto)               Yes       Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
              May 1989                   Yes (EFF)



Panel   M:
Nigeria
              Jan 1987                   Yes (SB)
              Feb 1989                   Yes (SB)                             Yes
              Jan 1991                   Yes (SB)              Yes
Table A1--Continued


                                                             Stabilization   Stabilization
               Date of                             High      in the          in the        Stabilization Exchange
               Stabilization            IMF        Inflation Previous 24     Following     Ex-Post       Rate
Country        Program       Episodic   Agreement? Crisis?   Months?         24 Months? Successful? Based?
Panel    N:
Pakistan
               Mar 1977                 Yes (SB)
               Nov 1980                 Yes (EFF)                            Yes
               Dec 1981                 Yes (EFF)             Yes
               Dec 1988                 Yes (SB)
               Sept 1993                Yes (SB)                             Yes
               Feb 1994                 Yes (EFF)             Yes


Panel    O:
Peru
               Aug 1990     Yes                     Yes
               Mar 1993                 Yes (EFF)   Yes                                   Yes


Panel     P:
Philippines
               Oct 1986                 Yes (SB)
               May 1989                 Yes (EFF)                            Yes
               Feb 1991                 Yes (SB)              Yes
               Jun 1994                 Yes (EFF)


Panel Q: S.
Africa:
               Jan 1976                 Yes (SB)                             Yes
               Aug 1976                 Yes (SB)              Yes
               Nov 1982                 Yes (SB)
Table A1--Continued


                                                             Stabilization   Stabilization
               Date of                             High      in the          in the        Stabilization Exchange
               Stabilization            IMF        Inflation Previous 24     Following     Ex-Post       Rate
Country        Program       Episodic   Agreement? Crisis?   Months?         24 Months? Successful? Based?
Panel    R:
Thailand
               Jul 1978                 Yes (SB)
               Jun 1981                 Yes (SB)                             Yes
               Nov 1982                 Yes (SB)              Yes
               Jun 1985                 Yes (SB)


Panel     S:
Turkey
               Jul 1994                 Yes (SB)    Yes


Panel     T:
Venezuela
               Jun 1989                 Yes (EFF)


Panel   U:
Zimbabwe
               Apr 1981                 Yes (SB)                             Yes
               Mar 1983                 Yes (SB)              Yes
               Jan 1992                 Yes (EFF)                            Yes
               Sept 1992                Yes (EFF)             Yes

Total
Number         81           14          69          25        42             47           12            8
Table A1--Continued


                                                             Stabilization   Stabilization
               Date of                             High      in the          in the        Stabilization Exchange
               Stabilization            IMF        Inflation Previous 24     Following     Ex-Post       Rate
Country        Program       Episodic   Agreement? Crisis?   Months?         24 Months? Successful? Based?
Panel    R:
Thailand
               Jul 1978                 Yes (SB)
               Jun 1981                 Yes (SB)                             Yes
               Nov 1982                 Yes (SB)              Yes
               Jun 1985                 Yes (SB)


Panel     S:
Turkey
               Jul 1994                 Yes (SB)    Yes


Panel     T:
Venezuela
               Jun 1989                 Yes (EFF)


Panel   U:
Zimbabwe
               Apr 1981                 Yes (SB)                             Yes
               Mar 1983                 Yes (SB)              Yes
               Jan 1992                 Yes (EFF)                            Yes
               Sept 1992                Yes (EFF)             Yes


Total          81           14          69          25        42             47           12            8
Number
