   - + +  

       
          



 
!"#$$%&"'
()%'*+",.
/00,11222'3(*1,",12.


4  4  
5""/00 &'
"#3%6*7 .8
" 



        !
" #   $  $%& ! %  #  
%'() *   # #+* !(+++, +   + 
-    '   ++ + +    
++   + '  +.)  $!    
,$   -! ,$  +   +% 
'  +( /' -0 1-) !-2  ! -) +,,
$$3    ,$  $  $!  +    /  
 ! -

/990(9 $9""'6": 9(#
/"0%"$ $$%'*(9%'*$(0/%'0/"'6
 "'6!"#$$%&"'
  ()%'*+", (.
" .
!  (.7878
$%#%



/0":"'62$9",(*"#0/"0,(&%6%'(#"'6%')%'63'9%00(%'*$#(0//"&

/"'*66"#"0%"$$ %''0 "//"'*3*"'"9"3")"0/#%6"'6$#%'"06
2%0/0/;2$9"$"20/"0<'662$9""2)'2%0=/0":"'62$9"/"'*/"&
/",$ %'"60/#,$( #'0(9%'*$#(0/"'602$9"($$(2&7$%00$%)'(2"3(0
0/990(90/,($% /"'*('0/$%&%'*('6%0%('(9%'*$#(0/"'60/%/%$6'06%
(90/($"&%'*2$9"/"&9('60/"0"30"'0%"$,'0"*/"&,(3$#," %'*'07,/"%'*
'(*/9((67"'6," %'*0%$%0 3%$$0/06%/"&9('6"6$%'%'%'(#"#('*0/2(0(99
%'*$#(0//*("$(90/%,",%0(:"#%'0/#"0%"$2$$3%'*(9%'*$#(0/"'60/%
9"#%$%39("'6(('"902$9"9(#4%'*6"0"9(#02('"0%('"$$ ,'0"0%&/(/($6
& 2:"#%'0/('#,0%(',"00'(9%'*$#(0/"'60/%9"#%$% 9%'60/"00/
#"0%"$('6%0%('(9%'*$#(0/6%6'(06$%'%''0 "7%0/%'"3($00#($"0%&
0(%'*$/%$6$2(#'(#"%6#(0/'#(0"7(&%6'**00/"00/#"0%"$
('6%0%('(9%'*$#(0//"&%#,(&6$%*/0$ 7&'9(/%*/$ 6%"6&"'0"*6%'*$#(0/

 
,"0#'0(9('(#%"'6
'0%009(+($%  "/
(0/20'4'%&%0
.8/%6"' ("6
&"'0('7 ;.
"'6 
3# >'(0/20'6

!"#$$%&"'
,"0#'0(9('(#%"'6
'0%009(+($%  "/
(0/20'4'%&%0
.8/%6"' ("6
&"'0('7 ;.

I. Introduction

Recently, state and federal policy makers dramatically changed tax and transfer programs
for single mothers. The changes encouraged work and discouraged welfare receipt. Welfare and
tax reform began in the mid-1980s and had many elements, culminating with the Personal
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA) that “ended
welfare as we knew it.” Welfare caseloads declined by more than 40 percent in the four years
after their peak in March of 1994, and the increases in employment and earnings of single
mothers sharply accelerated after 1993.
Two recent studies found that total family income (including transfers) fell after 1994 for
single mothers near the bottom of the income distribution. Moreover, studies of those leaving
welfare have found that a substantial percentage of leavers have problems providing enough
food, paying utility bills, and paying rent. The goal of this paper is to examine the material
conditions of single mothers and their families before and soon after welfare reform in order to
assess the net effect of recent policy changes on the well-being of these families. Using data
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics we examine
the consumption patterns of single mothers and their families. We examine both absolute
changes in the consumption of single mothers and changes relative to those for single women
without children and married mothers.
We focus on consumption for two main reasons. First, economic theory suggests that
consumption is usually a better measure of well-being than income. Consumption captures longterm income prospects including anticipated future income, while current income is likely to be
disproportionately influenced by transitory fluctuations. Consumption is a more direct measure
of well-being and includes the effect of in-kind transfers that income misses. Second, income
tends to be under-reported. A substantial enthnographic literature indicates extensive underreporting of earnings and private transfers by welfare recipients. Other research indicates that
there has been substantial under-reporting of government transfers and that this under-reporting
has increased in recent years in key survey datasets. These observations are supported by direct
comparisons from survey data that show consumption sharply exceeding income for those near
the bottom. Of particular importance for evaluating welfare reform is the likelihood that under-

reporting is different for single mothers than other groups, partly due to program incentives, and
that this difference has changed over time.
By looking at single mothers we concentrate on the at risk population that is most likely
to be affected by the recent reforms. Single mother families account for about 90 percent of the
cash assistance caseload, they receive two-thirds of the credit dollars distributed through the
EITC, and they are also the primary beneficiaries of many of the in-kind transfer programs. A
large percentage of all single mothers benefit directly from tax and welfare programs. For
example, in 1996 more than one-third of all single mother families received means-tested cash
transfers. In this analysis, we concentrate on two groups that are likely to be affected by recent
reforms, all single mothers and low-educated single mothers. We choose these groups because
current welfare recipients or those leaving the rolls are not the only women affected by welfare
reform.1 The increased state discretion under waivers and PRWORA combined with political
changes has led to reforms which discourage welfare receipt and often divert potential welfare
recipients from traditional programs. Under these conditions, it is likely that the characteristics
of those on or leaving welfare will change sharply over time.
In the following section we highlight some of the key features of the reforms in tax and
welfare policies that have taken place over the past decade. In Section III, we provide a brief
overview of the vast and growing literature on welfare reform. This section is followed by a
discussion of why consumption is a better proxy for material well-being than income, and a
description of our sources of consumption data. In Section V, we outline our methodology and
present the descriptive results for both single mother households and the comparison groups.
Section VI discusses our main results from regressions that look at the absolute and relative
changes in consumption for the average household and for those near the bottom of the
consumption distribution, controlling for household characteristics. The robustness of these
results are further investigated in section VII. We offer conclusions in section VIII.

1

See National Research Council (1999) and Jencks and Swingle (2000) for related arguments.

2

II. Policies, Caseloads, and Employment

The 1980s and 1990s was a period of experimentation and rapid change in the tax and
transfer programs for single mothers. PRWORA was only a part of the changes and occurred at
the end of the period we examine. Early in this period, states reduced real welfare benefits and
increased the share of benefits kept by those working. Substantial change took place under
welfare waivers—applications to the Secretary of Health and Human Services to change certain
program requirements for AFDC (Aid to Families with Dependent Children). Between January
1993 and August 1996, 43 states had waivers approved. The most common waivers imposed
work requirements and time limits, loosened asset restrictions and restrictions on two-parent
families, or applied family benefit caps. Nevertheless, because of implementation lags and
experimental waivers, until 1995 only a small fraction of women were in states which had
implemented major changes under waivers.
The passage of PRWORA in 1996 accelerated this gradual overhaul of the welfare
system. AFDC was replaced by state administered Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF) block grants. Also added were mandated work requirements, time limits, and additional
stipulations for minor parents that required them to live with an adult and work toward a high
school degree. Besides these new requirements, PRWORA left the design of welfare programs
up to the discretion of each state. The states have responded with a range of programs that differ
widely in their eligibility requirements, time limits, and earnings disregards, as well as in
additional provisions such as training and childcare.
At the same time that policy makers were remaking welfare policy, the nature of other tax
and transfer programs that affect single mothers also changed. The Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC) grew nearly nineteen-fold over fifteen years, from $1.6 billion in 1984 to $30 billion in
1999.2 About two-thirds of the credit dollars go to single parents.3 The generosity of the EITC

2

See Committee on Ways and Means (2000), table 13-14. The 1999 figure is projected. These figures
are in nominal terms; in real terms EITC outlays grew by a factor of 9.7 during this time period. For a
description and history of the EITC see Liebman (1998).
3
Using figures from Committee on Ways and Means (1996) Table 14-13 and IRS (1996) Table 2.5 we
calculate that approximately 68 percent of total EITC dollars went to single parents in 1996.

3

increased following the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and also expanded every year from 1991 to
1996. These increases resulted in a substantial rise in the after-tax income of working single
mothers. After-tax income for single mothers with annual earnings of $7,500 and at least two
children, for example, increased by more than $1,500 from 1993 to 1996.4 Although the
parameters of the credit did not change in real terms after 1996, it is likely that there was a lagged
effect as women became more aware of the changes over the next year or two.5
Medicaid also significantly expanded during this time period. The expansions allowed
many single mothers and/or their children to continue to receive medical coverage when their
earnings increased. Medicaid caseloads for families with dependent children increased by 60
percent between 1984 and 1994 while expenditures increased by a factor of three for these
families.
In addition to these changes, after 1984 there were large increases in federal and state
child care spending; training programs were expanded and reoriented; and state income tax
provisions affecting the poor were changed. These policies are described in detail in Meyer and
Rosenbaum (2000, forthcoming).
The preceding discussion indicates that many policy changes potentially affecting the
well-being of single mothers began well before the passage of PRWORA in 1996. Furthermore,
the changes were not limited to cash transfer programs, as in-kind transfers and taxes also
changed dramatically. Given this wide variety and uncertain timing of the policy changes, we
examine changes in employment and welfare caseloads to assess when we might expect the
conditions of single mothers to change. Table 1 reports the employment rate of single mothers
and two comparison groups for the years 1984-1998. The employment rate of single mothers
increased sharply after 1993, in absolute terms and relative to single women without children or
married mothers. Already by 1996 the employment rate of single mothers was six percentage
points higher than it was in 1993. The increase in employment seems to roughly coincide with a
sharp decline in welfare receipt. Figure 1 shows the AFDC/TANF caseload for 1963-1998. The

4

See Meyer and Rosenbaum (2000).
Both Eissa and Liebman (1996) and Meyer and Rosenbaum (forthcoming) find evidence of a lagged
effect of EITC changes.

5

4

number of families on welfare rose steeply to a peak in March 1994 and then fell sharply
afterwards. Both the sharp increase in employment and rapid dropout in welfare caseloads
preceded the passage of PRWORA by over two years.
The magnitude of the contribution of various policies and the macroeconomy to these
changes is a subject on which there is a small literature. Meyer and Rosenbaum (2000,
forthcoming) find that the EITC is responsible for a large share of employment increases through
1996, with a smaller, but still important role for welfare benefit cuts and changes in welfare
programs under waivers.6 Improvement in the macroeconomy also increased the employment of
single mothers, but had a very similar effect on single women without children. The welfare
caseload literature (Levine and Whitmore 1998, Blank 1997, Ziliak et al. 1997) has reached
conflicting results about the relative importance of waivers and macroeconomic conditions. For
the purposes of this paper, we will be agnostic about the relative importance of different policies
in changing the employment and welfare receipt of single mothers in recent years, as we are
estimating the aggregate effect of many reforms independent of macroeconomic effects rather
than identifying the specific effect of any single reform.

III. Previous Research on the Effects of Welfare Reform

Not surprisingly, the reforms discussed in the previous section have motivated an
extensive amount of research on the effects of these policy changes on the well-being of single
mothers. Most of the research evaluating the effects of welfare reform on well-being takes one
of three forms: analyses of the outcomes of former welfare recipients after they leave the rolls
(leaver studies); evaluations of the effects of policy changes within a state using randomized
experiments; or comparisons of outcomes between states, exploiting the heterogeneity in reforms
between two or more states. Moving beyond these generally state specific studies, some recent
research has used nationally representative data to evaluate the broader effects of welfare reform,
6

Also see Ellwood (2000), who attributes recent employment increases to welfare reform, the EITC, and
improvements in macroeconomic conditions. Dickert et al. (1995) and Keane (1995) simulated recent
tax changes (before they were implemented) and predicted employment changes somewhat larger than
those that occurred.

5

as this study does. Although each of these methodological approaches has its shortcomings, this
early work on welfare reform provides useful insights on the well-being of single mothers.
More than a dozen welfare leaver studies examine how former welfare recipients have
fared since leaving the rolls.7 These studies differ noticeably in the types of families followed,
the frequency and duration of follow-ups, and the nature of questions asked. Nevertheless, some
broad generalizations can be drawn. These studies show that a majority of former recipients have
worked since leaving welfare—the employment rate varies from 53 percent to 88 percent across
studies. In most cases, welfare leavers are employed in low wage jobs. In general, these studies
suggest that the family incomes of leavers tend to be lower or similar to their combined earnings
and benefits before exit, but poor family income data often limit the conclusions that can be
drawn. There is some evidence that former welfare recipients are more likely to experience
hardships such as difficulty providing food, paying utilities, or paying rent after exiting welfare,
but questions on hardships were asked in only a few of the leaver studies.
Although these studies provide an interesting description of families leaving welfare in
certain states, they have methodological problems. Due to significant differences in the design of
these studies, it is very difficult to compare results across the studies. These studies fail to
consider how welfare leavers are doing relative to the counterfactual–if they had remained on the
rolls. The lack of a control group and historical information makes it extremely difficult to draw
causal inferences about the effects of reforms. Lastly, leaver studies only evaluate the effects of
welfare reform on those who exit, ignoring the likely effects that recent reforms have in
discouraging families from applying for assistance and the potential effects on those that remain
participants.
Randomized social experiments are another common methodology used to evaluate
welfare policy. These experiments, generally conducted at the state or county level, compare the
outcomes of two groups of welfare applicants: a control group that participates in a program
under the pre-reform policies, and a treatment group that is subject to the new provisions of
welfare reform in that state. For example, an experiment conducted in Indiana separated a

7

The General Accounting Office (GAO 1999) discusses 18 state-sponsored leaver studies. See the
National Research Council (1999) and Brauner and Loprest (1999) for other summaries of leaver studies.

6

sample of families who applied for welfare at a point in 1995 into treatment and control groups,
and followed these families for two years.8 Preliminary results from this experiment suggest that
reforms in Indiana increased the average share of income from earnings, but average total income
did not rise. The results also show that although there were modest employment gains as a result
of reforms for a select group of “employment ready” participants, after two years there was little
evidence of a difference in employment between the treatment and control groups. A second
example is the experimental evaluation of Florida’s Family Transition Program that evaluated the
combination of a small earnings supplement (a larger earnings disregard), a time limit on receipt
of welfare benefits, and some job finding services.9 This combination, which is similar in some
respects to policies undertaken more recently in other states, seems to have improved the material
well-being of recipients. For the group subject to the new program, the incidence of housing and
neighborhood problems was significantly lower, and food consumption was higher, though not
significantly.
Experimental designs yield more persuasive evidence than other approaches because the
randomization enables these studies to isolate the effects of changes in a policy, avoiding
problems that arise when other factors, such as in the macroeconomy or demographics, change
simultaneously with policy reforms. Unfortunately, these studies also have drawbacks. First, it
is difficult to make inferences about the overall effects of welfare reform from evaluations of a
few program elements for the populations in a few localities. This is particularly true because of
the pronounced heterogeneity in the nature of reforms across states. Second, these experiments
took place at a time when perceptions about welfare and the culture within welfare offices were
changing dramatically. Given this reform-oriented environment researchers are likely to have a
difficult time insulating control group participants from these changes. Consequently, these
experiments are not immune to biases due to spillover and imitation effects. Probably the
greatest difficultly with experimental evidence is that randomization occurs when individuals
apply for benefits. Thus, the experimental studies fail to capture the effects of reforms on nonapplicants. Lastly, experiments have focused on changes in cash assistance policies, leaving

8
9

See Holcomb et al. (1998) for a description of this experiment and a summary of the results.
See Bloom et al. (2000) for a description of this experiment and a summary of the results.

7

unexamined other components of reform that some researchers have found to be crucial, such as
the EITC and Medicaid.
Other research has identified the effects of different reforms by comparing outcomes
across states. These cross-state studies compare outcomes from individuals in one state where a
particular reform has been implemented to individuals in another state with similar welfare
policies, but where the reform has not been implemented. For example, in an evaluation of the
Wisconsin Works welfare reform program, Wiseman (1999) compares employment, poverty, and
material well-being outcomes for low income families in Wisconsin to similar families in
Michigan and Minnesota, and to national averages. Wiseman (1999) identifies the effects of the
Wisconsin Works program by exploiting the fact that Wisconsin emphasized work and
termination of assistance, while Michigan’s policies focused on encouraging work while on the
rolls, and Minnesota’s policies were much more lenient with respect to work requirements. This
study suggests that different welfare reform strategies in neighboring states produced similar
results in terms of poverty, employment, and material well-being. Although it is clear that the
nature of reforms differed across these states, the precise nature of these differences is difficult to
characterize for the purposes of evaluation. The difficulty of characterizing the differences in
reforms across states is a major obstacle for these cross-state studies.10 Furthermore, the complex
nature of many state reforms makes it difficult to evaluate specific aspects of reforms and to
extrapolate the results to other localities.
Due to the limitations of state-level studies, other researchers have turned to nationally
representative data. Bavier (1999) and Primus et al. (1999) both analyze how the income of
single mother headed families has changed in the midst of welfare reform using repeated crosssectional data from the Current Population Survey (CPS). Both studies show that although
family incomes for the poorest segments of single mothers rose from 1993 to 1995, incomes for
these families fell in the 1996-1997 period. Because losses in transfer income outstripped
earnings gains in these years, the results suggest that the recent reforms such as PRWORA made
this population worse off. These papers would benefit from examining comparison groups in

10

See Ellwood (2000) for a version of this argument.

8

order to disentangle the effects of changes in welfare policies from changes in the
macroeconomic environment. Moreover, it would be useful to supplement the income data with
additional information given the under-reporting of income, especially means-tested transfer
income, and given questions about the accuracy of imputations of taxes and tax credits in the
CPS.
Schoeni and Blank (2000) also use the CPS in their study of the effects of welfare reform.
They use both a difference-in-differences methodology—comparing less educated women to
more educated women—and cross state variation in the timing of welfare reform implementation
to identify the effects of reforms on a variety of outcomes. Their results suggest that policy
changes in the 1990s resulted in caseload reductions, higher family incomes, and a decline in
poverty. They found no evidence that income increased in response to TANF reforms, though
some of their results suggest that family incomes for less-skilled women increased in response to
waivers, primarily as a result of increased employment for these women.
The majority of the studies evaluating the effects of welfare reform concentrate on
outcomes such as earnings, employment, poverty status, family structure, or welfare
dependence.11 Research designs that use these outcomes are particularly important for evaluating
whether welfare reform is successfully achieving explicit goals such as ending dependence,
promoting work, and reducing non-marital childbirth. By themselves, however, these outcomes
provide little evidence on the overall effects of reforms on well-being. Other studies look at the
effects of welfare reform on the well-being of single mothers and their families by monitoring the
changes in family income of welfare eligible families in light of recent reforms. Using income as
a proxy for well-being can be problematic particularly for the evaluation of the well-being of low
income groups, not only because of under-reporting of public assistance income, but also because
almost all single mothers supplement their income with informal employment and money from
family or friends. These sources of income generally are not captured in survey data (Edin and
Lein, 1997). To avoid many of these shortcomings we focus on family consumption as a proxy

11

For an excellent review of studies of welfare reform and a discussion of various outcomes used in these
studies see National Research Council (1999).

9

for the material well-being of single mothers. Consumption is arguably the best proxy for wellbeing available for empirical research, and expenditures are less likely to be susceptible to the
reporting errors that often plague measures of family income. We discuss these issues further in
the following section.

IV. Data

To measure the material well-being of single mothers, we focus on consumption data
rather than income data, for two primary reasons. First, income systematically understates the
financial resources available to a household. Second, consumption is a more direct measure of
well-being than income. Furthermore, the measurement problems with income appear
particularly problematic for intertemporal analyses of the well-being of single mothers because
the biases have changed over time, and they are correlated with welfare and tax reform.
Income is likely to understate material well-being in several ways. As numerous studies
have documented, national surveys under-report family income. For low income households,
this under-reporting problem is exacerbated by the prevalence of off-the-books income and
transfers. Ethnographic research has shown that almost all single mothers supplement their
income with informal employment and money or goods from family and friends. These sources
of support from informal sources and the underground economy generally are not captured in
survey data on income (Edin and Lein 1997).
The problem of understated income is exacerbated by changes in the extent of underreporting that are likely related to recent policy changes. For example, with diminished
dependence on cash transfers with their high implicit tax rates, there is a reduced incentive to
hide income. AFDC caseloads fell dramatically after March of 1994, reducing the incentive for
single mothers to hide income. Consequently, reported income for these households might rise
even if the true value of income does not change.12 Incentives to under-report income were also

12

Mayer and Jencks (1993) provide evidence for an earlier period that the growth in both means-tested
transfers and illegitimate income resulted in an increase in the under-reporting of income.

10

changed by recent EITC expansions that increased the incentive to substitute on-the-books
earnings (which would be partially matched by credit dollars) for off-the-books income.
In addition to the under-reporting of earnings and private transfers, household surveys
also fail to capture the full value of government transfers, particularly for single mothers. Underreporting of means-tested cash transfers has increased in recent years (Bavier, 1999), which
would imply that recent measured changes in income are biased downward. Comparisons of
CPS numbers to administrative data suggest that by 1993 unreported means-tested cash transfers
were equal to over 11 percent of total reported income for single mothers in the bottom income
quintile. Overall, unreported cash transfers grew by 68 percent from 1993 to 1997. Assuming
households at the bottom under-report these transfers at the same rate as all welfare recipients,
this rise in under-reporting alone would bias downward measured changes over this period in
income for single mothers in the bottom income quintile by nearly 8 percentage points.13
Under-reporting is not the only reason that income measures are likely to understate the
financial wherewithal of households. Income data also fail to capture in-kind transfers, such as
food stamps, that are reflected in expenditure data. These in-kind transfers are a particularly
important source of support for households with low cash incomes. Recent changes in Medicaid
are likely to substantially affect family well-being without affecting measured family income.
On the other hand, non-medical consumption measures would reflect Medicaid changes.
Whether income changes understate or overstate well-being changes as a result of reforms in
Medicaid policy is unclear. If families are less likely to receive Medicaid when they leave
AFDC/TANF now than in the past, then changes in income would overstate changes in wellbeing. On the other hand, for families that became eligible for health benefits as a result of
recent Medicaid expansions, changes in income would understate changes in well-being.
Income also fails to capture the insurance value of means tested transfers. If welfare is a
valuable source of insurance for poor households, then the value of this insurance falls as welfare
reform introduces more rigid eligibility rules such as time limits and work requirements. This

13

This figure is based on the authors’ calculations using CPS and administrative data reported in Bavier
(1999).

11

creates an incentive for these households to find alternative sources of insurance such as
increased savings. Again, the loss of insurance due to a weaker safety net would not reduce
income, but could reduce consumption as families save for a rainy day. Also, income measures
fail to capture disparities in consumption that result from differences across households in the
accumulation of assets or access to credit (Cutler and Katz, 1991).
Certainly, consumption is measured with error as well. There is less evidence, however,
that these errors have changed systematically over time, or that they are correlated with changes
in welfare. Households do not have the same incentives to under-report consumption, so there is
little reason to suspect that the rate at which households mis-report consumption has changed
over time. Furthermore, consumption data should capture changes in welfare policy that are
overlooked using income measures. The consumption behavior of the household should reflect,
for example, the effects of changes in Medicaid eligibility or changes in the insurance value of
welfare.
Evidence from survey data shows that the disparity between income and consumption is
particularly evident for single mothers. A comparison of total after-tax household
income–including earnings and transfers for all family members–to total household expenditures
from 1984 to 1998 shows that expenditures exceed income by an average of 14 percent for single
mother households.14 For single mothers who have a high school degree or less education, the
disparity is even larger–16 percent on average from 1984 to 1998–suggesting that income
numbers are a more problematic measure of well-being for less-skilled single mothers; precisely
the demographic group most directly affected by recent changes in government transfer policies.
The relationship between consumption and income follows a different pattern for other types of
households. Single women without children outspent total income by less than 3 percent on

14

Comparisons of income and consumption data are based on the authors’ calculations from Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) data. For this analysis we restrict attention to consumer units in the CEX that
are “complete” income reporters. Between 10 and 15 percent of all consumer units are classified as
incomplete income reporters by the BLS because of missing data for primary sources of income for these
households.

12

average during the period of our sample, while two parent families had income that exceeded
expenditures by more than 9 percent on average, implying a higher rate of saving by these
households.
Economic theory suggests that current expenditures serve as a better proxy for the
material well-being of the household than current income.15 Current income can be a misleading
indicator of the economic status of the household because earnings are susceptible to temporary
fluctuations due to transitory events such as layoffs or changes in family status. These temporary
changes cause current income to vary more than consumption, but they do not necessarily reflect
changes in well-being. Also, while current income only reflects short term resources,
consumption is more likely to capture a household’s forward looking behavior, thus avoiding the
volatility associated with short term fluctuations in income. Furthermore, Poterba (1991)
provides evidence that the difference between current income and current expenditures is larger
for very young and very old households, suggesting that some of this disparity is likely the result
of life-cycle behavior, and that current income understates well-being for these households.
Research looking at both household income and expenditures shows that reported income
falls well short of reported expenditures, and studies looking at the relationship between income
and well-being have argued that income is only weakly correlated with material hardship (Mayer
and Jencks 1989). These weaknesses with income data as well as the more direct relationship
between consumption and material well-being provide a strong argument for exploiting
household expenditure data in an analysis of well-being. Although household expenditures do
ignore many important components of well-being such as physical and mental health,
neighborhood and school quality, and family functioning, expenditures are arguably the best
aggregate measure of the material well-being of a household.
We draw on two different sources for expenditure data: the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CEX) and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). We use both datasets to
provide two independent sources of evidence on the consumption of single mothers and because

15

For further discussion see Cutler and Katz (1991), Slesnick (1993), or Poterba (1991).

13

each dataset has its strengths and weaknesses. We can then report on the patterns that are similar
in the two sources.
The CEX is a nationally representative survey conducted by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) that is designed to provide a continuous summary of the spending habits of U.S.
households. Among other uses, these data are the basis for updating the expenditure weights
used in the calculation of the Consumer Price Index. This rotating panel survey interviews
approximately 5,000 households quarterly and follows each household for up to five consecutive
quarters.16 The BLS estimates that the survey accounts for up to 95 percent of all household
expenditures, making it the most comprehensive survey on household consumption.17 The CEX
also reports detailed information on demographic characteristics as well as employment and
income information for each member of the household.
Observations in the CEX are organized by consumer unit, which generally refers to all
related members in a household. Unrelated individuals that pool their incomes to make joint
expenditure decisions are also classified as a single consumer unit (for ease of exposition
“consumer unit” and “household” will be used interchangeably). Expenditure measures are
provided at the household level only.18
From total expenditures for each household, we construct a measure of total current
consumption by excluding spending that can be construed as an investment. Thus, our main
outcome variable, total consumption, includes all household expenditures less spending on
education and health care, cash contributions, and outlays for retirement including pensions and
social security. In addition to total consumption, we report spending on a few of the components

16

Many households fail to complete all four interviews. For a discussion of attrition in the CEX and its
effects on our analysis see the Data Appendix.
17
Hamermesh and Slesnick (1995) assert that the CEX is “the only source of satisfactory spending data
in the United States.”
18
Because the CEX does not provide data on consumption at the subfamily level our sample will not
include single mothers who reside in a household with their parents. To address concerns about how this
might bias our results, we looked at subfamily patterns from the CPS. The ratio of single mother
subfamilies to all single mother families has remained remarkably steady at about 0.2 throughout the
period from 1987 to 1998. The fact that the prevalence of single mother subfamilies has changed very
little over time suggests the following analysis is less vulnerable to bias that may result from failing to
observe consumption at the subfamily level.

14

of this total. Food consumption includes spending on food at home, spending on food away from
home, and food stamps received but excludes food received as pay. Work expenses include
spending on domestic services and child care, while child care expenses are a subcomponent of
work expenses. Discretionary spending reflects household outlays for alcoholic beverages,
tobacco, entertainment, reading materials, and apparel. To address concerns about the lumpy
nature of expenditures on durables, we convert reported housing and vehicle spending to service
flow equivalents. Refer to the Data Appendix for a more detailed description of the CEX data.
The PSID is an annual longitudinal survey that has followed a nationally representative
random sample of families, their offspring, and coresidents since 1968. The survey provides
detailed economic and demographic information on both the household and individual level for a
sample of about 7,000 households each year. The PSID is a primary source of high quality panel
data on household income and labor force participation. Unlike the CEX, the PSID follows
households that relocate.
Although the PSID does not survey households about all expenditures, it does collect data
on household food expenditures. We construct a measure of total food consumption as the sum
of expenditures on food at home, expenditures on food away from home, and dollars of food
stamps received. To make this measure consistent with CEX figures, we report these
expenditures in quarterly terms. A more detailed description of PSID data is also provided in the
Data Appendix.
From the CEX we construct a sample of household-quarter observations, and from the
PSID our unit of observation is a household-year. To analyze consumption behavior throughout
this period of welfare reform we draw on data from 1984 through 1998.19 For both surveys, we
restrict attention to households whose head is between the ages of 18 and 54 and whose family
type falls into one of the following categories: single mothers with at least one child less than 18
years old, single women without children, and married mothers with at least one child less than
18. In addition, we exclude any observation with a non-positive measure of quarterly food
consumption.

19

From the CEX we include data from the first quarter of 1984 wave through the first quarter of 1999
wave. From the PSID we include data from the 1984 wave through the 1997 wave.

15

V. Methodology and Descriptive Results

As discussed in Section III, a common problem with many of the recent evaluations of
welfare reform, particularly the leaver studies, is that they only consider the effects of policy
changes on former recipients. Given that diversion of potential applicants was an important
component of recent reforms,20 this approach ignores the impact of policy changes on
nonparticipants. It is likely that the characteristics of the population of welfare recipients have
also changed as caseloads sharply increased and then fell steeply. For these reasons, some
researchers have concluded that looking at all single mothers is the only way to evaluate the
overall effects of welfare reform.21 By looking at single mothers we focus on the at risk
population that is most likely to be affected by the recent reforms. About 40 percent of all single
mother households received means-tested cash benefits in 1991.22 This fraction dropped to 36
percent by 1996 and to less than 30 percent by 1998. In 1996, 35 percent of all single mother
households received food stamps, while more than 60 percent benefitted from the EITC. For
single mothers with a high school degree or less, 54 percent received cash benefits in 1991, but
this dropped to 47 percent in 1996 and to 43 percent by 1998. More than 40 percent of these less
educated single mothers received food stamps in 1996 and 62 percent received the EITC. Single
mother families account for about 90 percent of the cash assistance caseload, they receive twothirds of the credit dollars distributed through the EITC, and they are also the primary
beneficiaries of many of the in-kind transfer programs discussed in Section II.
To simplify the presentation of our results, we group the years from 1984 through 1998
into four distinct time periods. The first period, 1984 to 1990, ended before implementation of
most of the significant policy changes discussed in Section II. The period from 1991 to 1993
20

Diversion has taken many forms ranging from placing potential applicants in more appropriate
programs to discouraging welfare receipt through onerous requirements.
21
For example, see Jencks and Swingle (2000).
22
These figures are based on the authors’ calculations using CPS data for female household heads
between the ages of 18 and 54 with children less than 18 years old. The fraction of single mothers
receiving cash transfers is adjusted using figures from Bavier (1999) to reflect under-reporting of these
transfers in the CPS.

16

coincided with the start of the major expansions in the EITC. Welfare waivers were also starting
to appear in several states during this time. In the following period, 1994 to 1995, waivers
became noticeably more prevalent, the EITC continued to expand, caseloads started a steep
decline, and trends in employment for single mothers changed noticeably. In the final period
from 1996 to 1998, waivers continued, PRWORA was passed and implemented, and the EITC
expansions were completed.23
A major obstacle to any non-experimental analysis of the impact of policy changes is that
it is difficult to disentangle the effects of these changes from the effects of changes in
macroeconomic conditions. This problem may be particularly important for the case of welfare
reform given the prolonged economic expansion that took place in the 1990s. While we also
estimate specifications controlling for unemployment rates, out main approach is to compare
consumption changes for single mothers to those for other groups. By selecting an appropriate
comparison group we may be able to control for these macroeconomic changes. Ideally, this
comparison group would be affected by economic changes in the same way as single mothers but
would not be affected by the changes in tax and welfare policy. We focus on the relative effects
of welfare reform on all single mothers using two separate comparison groups: single women
without children and married mothers. All three groups of women have similar wages, and this
similarity is especially strong when one conditions on educational attainment.24 Although this
approach will not enable us to identify the separate effects of specific reforms, it should provide
evidence on how the series of dramatic changes in welfare and tax policy has affected the wellbeing of single mothers.
Tables 2 and 3 provide summary descriptive statistics for each of these three groups in the
CEX and the PSID respectively.25 Each panel in the tables provides information for a single time
23

While these periods are somewhat arbitrary, we have confirmed that our analyses are not sensitive to
the exact division of the years. For example, if 1996 is included with the 1994-1995 period our results do
not change qualitatively.
24
For additional evidence supporting the validity of single women without children as a comparison
group see Meyer and Rosenbaum (2000, forthcoming), who find that employment for the two groups
responds in an extremely similar way to changes in aggregate unemployment.
25
In both the CEX and the PSID a single household may remain in the survey’s sample for multiple
waves. The standard errors reported in Tables 2 through 7 are corrected for this within household
correlation by bootstrapping. We calculate bootstrap standard errors by resampling at the household

17

period. Both data sources paint a similar picture. Single mothers in these samples are less
educated and are more likely to be minorities than either single women without children or
married mothers. The mean age is fairly similar across the three groups. The differences
between single mothers and the comparison groups (seen by comparing columns 4 and 5 across
panels) remain fairly stable over time. The relative means for educational attainment, family size
and racial background change very little between 1984 and 1998, though all three groups become
somewhat more educated over time, and this increase in educational attainment is slightly more
noticeable for single mothers. None of the changes in educational attainment for single mothers
relative to single childless women are significantly different from zero. In the CEX, however,
the changes in educational attainment relative to married mothers from the 1984-1990 period to
the 1996-1998 period are significant. In the PSID, we see a significant rise from 1984-1990 to
1996-1998 in the fraction of single mothers that attain only a high school degree relative to this
fraction for married mothers. Consistent with the employment data from the CPS reported in
Table 1, the employment rate for single mothers in both the CEX and PSID increases noticeably
in recent years both in absolute and relative terms.26 The employment rate of single women
without children falls gradually over our sample period, while employment increases slightly for
married mothers. The rise in the employment rate of single mothers relative to single women
without children from 1984-1990 to 1996-1998 is statistically significant in both the CEX and
the PSID. In the CEX, the rise in the employment of single mothers relative to both comparison
groups from 1994-1995 to 1996-1998 is also statistically significant.
Tables 4 and 5 provide the same statistics as the previous tables, restricting attention to
households headed by a woman with a high school degree or less. Within this less educated
group, single mothers again have fewer years of education, are less likely to work, and are more
likely to be minorities than the comparison groups. Again, family size and race change very little
both in absolute and relative terms. Since the 1984-1990 period, low-skilled single women have
become slightly more educated. This increase is significant relative to married mothers in the

level, taking all observations for a given household, rather than at the household-year (PSID) or
household-quarter (CEX) level. These bootstrap standard errors are estimated using 200 replications.
26
The employment measure is the percentage of each group of women that report having worked for at
least one week in the 12 months prior to the interview.

18

CEX. We also see an increase in the percentage of low-skilled single mothers who work relative
to the control groups. As is the case with all single women, the rate of employment of less
educated single mothers rises relative to the employment of less educated single women without
children from 1984-1990 to 1996-1998, and this increase is statistically significant in both the
CEX and the PSID.
In order to evaluate how the relative well-being of single mothers changes over the
sample period, we compare the changes in the consumption levels of single mothers to the
changes in consumption levels of our comparison groups. The mean quarterly levels of various
components of consumption from the CEX and food consumption from the PSID are reported in
Table 6.27 The means from the CEX show that total consumption changes little over time in real
terms for all three groups of women. (To see this, compare total consumption in columns 1-3
across panels). For single mothers, we see almost no change in total consumption from 19841990 through 1994-1995. After 1994-1995, consumption by single mothers increases
significantly from $4,597 in the 1994-1995 period to $4,933 in the following period. Between
our first and last periods, the level of total consumption for single mothers rises by more than 7
percent in real terms, a statistically significant increase. Consumption rises for both comparison
groups over this same period as well, although these increases are much smaller (about 3
percent), and for single women without children this rise is not significantly different from zero.
The results for relative total consumption over time (compare columns 4 and 5 across
panels) show that single mothers on average experience a slight drop in relative consumption
after the 1984-1990 period, but relative consumption subsequently rises in the 1996-1998 period.
This pattern is more evident relative to single women without children, while consumption
relative to married mothers changes very little, rising slightly in the most recent period. Changes
between 1994-1995 and 1996-1998 show that consumption for single mothers rises significantly
by 8.4 percentage points relative to single women without children. For this same period,
consumption for single mothers rises by 2.6 percentage points relative to married mothers, but
this change is not significantly different from zero.

27

All consumption figures are converted to 1995:2 dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditure
deflator reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

19

Looking at some of the components of total consumption reported in Table 6, data on
food consumption from both the CEX and the PSID show that the recent rise in relative
consumption for single mothers is not driven by an increase in spending on food. Relative food
consumption does not change noticeably, falling only slightly after the 1984-1990 period in the
CEX relative to single childless women, but changing very little thereafter. None of the changes
in relative food consumption in the CEX are significantly different from zero. In the PSID, only
the change in food consumption for single mothers from 1984-1990 to 1994-1995 relative to
married mothers is significant. Both housing and discretionary spending for single mothers
relative to the comparison groups rise in the most recent years, with discretionary spending
increasing by 10 percentage points and housing rising by 6.3 percentage points from 1994-1995
to 1996-1998 relative to single childless women. However, neither of these increases are
significant. The only statistically significant increase in discretionary spending is the 14
percentage point rise relative to single childless women from 1984-1990 to 1996-1998. The
pattern for work related expenditures is consistent with the marked increase in the relative
employment rates of single mothers after 1993. Both work expenses and child care spending
increase for single mothers relative to married mothers after 1993, but these changes are not
statistically significant.28 In any case, the magnitude of child care and work expenses is too small
to account for much of the changes in aggregate consumption.
We report these same results for our more restricted sample of women with a high school
degree or less in Table 7. The rise in consumption in recent years is much less noticeable for
these less skilled women than for the sample of all women. Total consumption for less skilled
single mothers remains virtually unchanged throughout our sample period, falling only slightly in
the 1991-1993 period. Total consumption for both of the less skilled comparison groups falls
modestly between the 1984-1990 period and the 1996-1998 period, resulting in a small rise in
relative consumption for single mothers between these periods. None of these changes in relative
total consumption, however, are statistically significant. The components of total consumption

28

While average child care expenses are small here, they are consistent with numbers reported in Blau
(2000) once one accounts for the fact that the mothers in our samples are low income, many do not work
in a typical week, and the vast majority do not pay for child care.

20

also change little over time. In the CEX, food consumption and housing expenditures fall for
less educated single mothers relative to less educated single women without children in the early
1990s, although these changes are not statistically significant. In the PSID, food consumption for
less educated single mothers relative to less educated married mothers is significantly lower in
1984-1990 than in any of the three following periods, but food consumption relative to lowskilled single women without children does not change significantly. Discretionary spending
falls for all three groups in the 1991-1993 period and changes little in subsequent periods.
Comparing discretionary spending for less educated single women with and without children,
relative discretionary spending increases significantly from 1984-1990 to 1991-1993 for single
mothers, but this change is driven by a drop in discretionary spending by single childless women.
Relative discretionary spending remains unchanged after 1993.
Interesting patterns are evident in these descriptive results from the CEX and the PSID.
First, consumption for single mothers relative to single women without children remains virtually
unchanged in the years preceding 1996 and rises in the short period following. Second, relative
to married mothers, consumption for single mothers also varies only slightly during this period,
rising in more recent years, although this increase is less noticeable than the rise relative to single
childless women. Third, changes in total consumption are reflected through changes in housing,
discretionary spending, and other consumption categories more than through changes in food
consumption. Lastly, patterns of relative consumption for less skilled women do not change
noticeably during our sample period. None of these results, however, condition on differences in
household demographics or control for how these demographics may change over time. For this
reason, in the following section we employ regression methods in order to better isolate the
effects of recent policy changes on the relative consumption of single mothers.

VI. Mean and Quantile Regressions Accounting for Household Characteristics

By comparing single mothers to single women without children and married mothers we
can isolate the impact of changes in welfare policy, which affect single mothers differently than
the comparison groups, from the impact of other changes in the economic environment, which
21

arguably affect all three groups similarly. Changes in the differences in mean consumption,
however, may also result from changes in the characteristics of those in one of these three
groups.
To isolate the effects of changes in policies we estimate regression models of the
following form:
ln(Ciq) =

1

+ SMi*PERIODiq

2

+ PERIODiq

3

+ Xiq

4

+ Miq

5

+

iq

(1)

where the dependent variable is log consumption for household i in quarter q; SMi is an indicator
for whether the household head is a single mother; PERIODiq is a vector of indicators for each of
the four time periods discussed earlier, 1984-1990, 1991-1993, 1994-1995, or 1996-1998 (19961997 for the PSID); Xiq is a vector of demographic characteristics including family size and age
composition measures as well as race, educational attainment, and a cubic in age for the female
family head;29 Miq is a vector of month dummies indicating the specific months during which the
expenditures take place;30 and

iq

is a household-quarter error term. Each element of the vector

2

represents the effect on log consumption of being a single mother in a particular period relative
to being in one of our comparison groups. Thus, comparisons of the components of this vector
of parameter estimates indicate how the relative consumption of single mothers changes across
periods. For example, to examine how consumption for single mothers relative to single women
without children changes between 1994-1995 and 1996-1998, we estimate equation (1) for our
sample of single women. The coefficient on the interaction term SMi*(1994-1995)i from this
estimation can be interpreted as the ratio minus one of consumption for single mothers to

29

We experimented with different controls for family size and age composition in order to measure
different households in equivalent terms. Our results are not notably sensitive to how we control for
family size and composition. All results reported in the paper are from specifications which include a
third order polynomial in the number of children and adults in the household, as well as controls for the
number of children less than 6 years old and the number of children between 6 and 11 years old.
30
Month dummies are only included for the CEX samples. The month dummies capture seasonal
differences in consumption behavior. We use monthly rather than quarterly dummies to account for the
fact that quarterly consumption was approximated using monthly expenditure data. We weight the month
dummies in order to appropriately reflect seasonality; each month dummy takes on a value equal to the
number of times that month’s expenditures are counted towards quarterly expenditures. For example, if
an observation’s only reported expenditures for the fourth quarter are for the month of October then the
October dummy would equal 3 and all other month dummies would equal zero.

22

consumption for single women without children in the 1994-1995 period, while the coefficient
on SMi*(1996-1998)iq yields this same ratio for the 1996-1998 period.31 Thus, the difference
between these two coefficients can be interpreted as the percentage point change in the relative
consumption of single mothers between these two periods.
To capture the relative change in expenditures, we estimate equation (1) for four separate
samples—all single women, all mothers, less educated single women, and less educated
mothers—using both mean and quantile regressions. We employ both regression models in order
to allow policy effects to differ at different points in the consumption distribution. The mean
regressions estimate the effect of policy changes for the average single mother, while our quantile
regressions estimate the policy effects for those at either the 25th percentile or the 15th percentile
of the consumption distribution.
In Figure 2 we plot the estimated year effects from equation (1) for two samples: all
single mothers and less educated single mothers. We exclude the comparison group interaction
terms and use single year dummies rather than period dummies in order to show how the level of
total consumption changes from 1984 through 1998 for single mother households. The 1984
year dummy is excluded so that the figure represents changes in the level of consumption relative
to 1984. Total consumption for single mothers begins to rise after 1988, and rises more
noticeably after 1993. Moreover, this pattern is evident not only for single mothers with average
consumption levels but also for those at both the 15th and 25th percentiles of the consumption
distribution, as well as for less educated single mothers.
The estimates for equation (1), excluding the interaction terms, for these same samples of

31

This is true because consumption is expressed in log terms, and for small changes the difference
between two logged values is approximately equal to the percentage change: ln(a) - ln(b) . (a - b)/b, for
small |(a - b)/b|.

23

single mothers are presented in Table 8.32, 33 Consistent with Figure 2, the point estimates in
Table 8 show that consumption levels for single mothers are higher after 1990. Across all five
specifications, total consumption is significantly higher in 1996-1998 than in 1984-1990. For
example, consumption for a single mother at the 25th percentile in 1996-1998 is 9.8 percent
higher than consumption for a single mother at the 25th percentile in 1984-1990, and for less
educated single mothers, the level of consumption is 12.4 percent higher at the 25th percentile in
this later period. Total consumption for single mothers in 1996-1998 is also significantly higher
than consumption in 1991-1993 across all specifications. These results provide strong evidence
that, conditioning on household characteristics, the level of consumption for less educated single
mothers is higher in the 1996-1998 period than either of the periods prior to 1994. Although the
point estimates suggest that consumption rises from 1994-1995 to 1996-1998, this increase is
only significant when comparing single mothers at the 15th percentile where total consumption
increases by 9.3 percentage points (p-value: 0.0148). We also examine whether consumption for
single mothers does not fall appreciably over time. In nearly every case we can reject the
hypothesis that the level of consumption for single mothers in a given period falls by more than 5
percent relative to the previous periods. This is true for all single mothers as well as for less
educated single mothers.
Tables 9 through 11 report estimates for equation (1) showing how relative consumption
for single mothers changes during our sample period. Results for total consumption in the CEX
(see Table 9) are fairly consistent with the results for mean consumption reported in Tables 6 and
7. Although the means suggest that relative consumption rises only after 1994-1995,

32

As with the descriptive statistics, the standard errors reported in Tables 8-11 are corrected for within
household correlation. For the mean regressions the conventional White estimator is used. For the
quantile regressions we calculate bootstrap standard errors by resampling at the household level, taking
all observations for a given household, rather than at the household-year (PSID) or household-quarter
(CEX) level. Again, we use 200 replications to estimate these bootstrap standard errors. This correction
increases the magnitude of our standard errors by a factor of about 1.95 on average with the increase
ranging from a factor of 1.5 to 2.6.
33
The p-values reported in Tables 8 through 11 reflect a high covariance between the estimates for
different time periods when we include flexible controls for family size and composition. Since the
standard errors of the time period coefficients also increase, the precision of our estimates for changes in
relative consumption over time are not appreciably affected.

24

conditioning on family demographics the rise in relative consumption for single mothers appears
to begin after 1984-1990. Looking at the results for single women (in the odd numbered columns
in Table 9), total consumption for single mothers relative to single women without children is
higher in the 1996-1998 period than in any of the earlier periods. Comparing 1984-1990 to
1996-1998, relative consumption is higher in the later period relative to both comparison groups.
This rise in relative consumption is significant across all specifications except when comparing
less educated single women at the15th percentile, where consumption rises by 10.3 percentage
points (23.0% - 12.7%), a weakly significant increase (p-value: 0.0783). There is some evidence
that consumption for single mothers relative to single women without children rises slightly
between the 1994-1995 period and the 1996-1998 period, and this rise is slightly more evident
for all single women (columns 3 and 7) than for less educated single women (columns 5 and 9).
None of these changes, however, are statistically different from zero.
Although these estimates provide some evidence that total consumption for single
mothers relative to single childless women is higher in 1996-1998 than in 1984-1990, we cannot
make conclusive statements about changes in relative consumption for single mothers after 1990.
These results do show, however, that relative consumption for single mothers does not fall
noticeably after 1990. For example, we can reject the null hypothesis that consumption for single
mothers relative to single women without children falls by more than 5 percentage points from
1991-1993 to 1996-1998 across all specifications except for less educated single women at the
15th percentile. Moreover, looking at the results for all single women (columns 3 and 7) we can
reject the hypothesis that the relative consumption of single mothers falls by more than 5
percentage points between 1994-1995 and 1996-1998.
Estimates for changes in total consumption for single women without children (captured
by the period dummy coefficients in the odd numbered columns in Table 9) suggest that the level
of consumption for this comparison group did not change much over time. In only one case is
the estimated drop for single women without children from 1984-90 to 1996-1998 greater than
1.49 percent, and the estimates are never significantly different from zero. This result implies
that only a small fraction of any increase in relative consumption for single mothers can be
explained by a fall in consumption for single childless women.

25

The results comparing the total consumption behavior of mothers (in the even numbered
columns in Table 9) are similar to those for single women. Across all specifications the
consumption of single mothers relative to married mothers rises over time. Between 1984-1990
and 1996-1998 relative consumption rises by more than 10 percentage points, and this increase is
significant in each specification. For mothers at the 25th percentile, for example, relative
consumption increases significantly by 12.8 percentage points (0.464-0.336). Looking at more
recent changes suggest that relative consumption for single mothers increases by 2 to 7
percentage points between 1994-1995 and 1996-1997. These changes, however, are only
marginally significant for a single mother at the 25th percentile of all mothers (column 4; p-value:
0.0509) or at the 15th percentile of all mothers (column 8; p-value: 0.0537). Again, the results
provide fairly strong evidence that relative consumption for single mothers does not fall during
this period of reforms. Other than the period from 1991-1993 to 1994-1995, we can consistently
reject the hypotheses that consumption for single mothers relative to married mothers falls by
more than 5 percentage points over time.
Looking at the year effects for the sample of mothers shows that although the level of
consumption for married mothers drops after 1984-1990 this only partially explains the rise in
the relative consumption of single mothers. Much of the fall in consumption for married mothers
occurs between 1984-1990 and 1991-1993 where consumption drops significantly by 2.5 to 4.7
percent. After 1991-1993, however, consumption for married mothers remains unchanged or
increases slightly.
Figures 3 and 4 provide a summary of the results for changes in relative total
consumption reported in Table 9. In these figures we plot the coefficients on the interaction term
from equation (1), using single year dummies rather than period dummies, for a sample of all
single women (Figure 3) and of all mothers (Figure 4). The interaction of the single mother
household indicator with the 1984 year dummy is excluded so that the figures represent changes
in relative consumption since 1984. Figure 3 shows that consumption for single mothers relative
to single women without kids falls noticeably between 1984 and 1987, but then rises steadily
after 1989. This trend is fairly similar at different points in the consumption distribution, and for
different levels of educational attainment. Figure 4 shows that relative to married mothers,

26

consumption for single mothers remains steady from 1984 to 1989 and then rises modestly from
1989 to 1991. After 1991 relative consumption falls slightly, but it rises noticeably after 1994.
Tables 10 and 11 report estimates from the CEX and the PSID respectively using food
consumption as the outcome variable. The estimates from the CEX in Table 10 show little
change in relative food consumption over time using either comparison group. Very few of the
changes over time in relative food consumption for single women are statistically different from
zero. Looking at the results for single women (the odd columns in Table 10), the point estimates
suggest that relative food consumption for single mothers falls from 1984-1990 to 1996-1998,
but these changes are small, ranging from 1.1 to 6.6 percentage points, and either not significant
or only weakly significant.
The results for food consumption for mothers (even columns) show that food
consumption for single mothers rises slightly over time relative to married mothers. In a few
cases, the rise in relative food consumption from 1984-1990 to either 1994-1995 or 1996-1998 is
significant. For a single mother at the 25th percentile 1996-1998 relative food consumption rises
by 4.5 percentage points, a weakly significant rise (p-value: 0.0605), and at the 15th percentile
relative food consumption rises significantly by 5.3 percentage points (p-value: 0.0450).
Increases in relative food consumption are also evident for the less educated sample of mothers.
The rise in relative food consumption for a less educated single mother with average food
consumption is significant (p-value: 0.0098). This change, however is only weakly significant
for a low-skilled single mother at the 15th percentile (p-value: 0.0924), and the increase is not
significant for a low-skilled single mother at the 25th percentile (p-value: 0.1827). For this
sample of mothers we can usually reject the hypothesis that relative food consumption for single
mothers falls by more than 5 percentage points over time.
The results for food consumption from the PSID in Table 11 follow a fairly similar
pattern as the results reported in Table 10, although the results for the PSID are somewhat less
precise due to smaller sample sizes. Consistent with the results reported for the CEX, most
changes over time in the food consumption for single mothers relative to single women without
children are not significantly different from zero. Looking at the results for single women in the
PSID, however, there is some evidence that relative food consumption rises from 1994-1995 to
27

1996-1997. For example, relative food consumption rises significantly by 18.4 percentage points
(p-value: 0.0393) for a less educated single mother at the 25th percentile and by 15.5 percentage
points (p-value: 0.0089) for a single mother at the 15th percentile. All other changes in relative
consumption for single women are not significantly different from zero. Across all specifications
for single women, we can reject the hypothesis that relative food consumption for single mothers
falls by more than 5 percentage points from 1994-1995 to 1996-1997. In most cases we can also
reject this hypothesis for changes in relative consumption between 1991-1993 and 1996-1997.
Relative food consumption for single mothers also rises relative to married mothers.
Between 1984-1990 and 1996-1997 this increase in relative food consumption ranges from 10.6
to 16.8 percentage points and is significant for all specifications. These changes in relative
consumption can be explained in part by a drop in food consumption by married mothers of more
than 7 percent during this time. In all cases, we reject the hypothesis that food consumption for
single mothers relative to married mothers falls by more than 5 percentage points between 19841990 and any of the following periods.
In sum, these estimates from the CEX and the PSID indicate how the relative material
well-being of single mothers has changed in response to the reforms enacted throughout the past
decade. There is substantial evidence that total consumption by single mothers increases from
1984-1990 to 1996-1998 in absolute terms and relative to both single women without children
and married mothers. This increase in consumption does not appear to be driven by work
expenses or child care costs. The results reported in Tables 8-11 consistently show that
consumption for single mothers does not fall appreciably in either absolute or relative terms
during this period of reforms after 1990. Consumption during this period for less skilled single
mothers and for single mothers near the bottom of the consumption distribution follow a similar
pattern. In cases where there is evidence of increases in relative consumption for single mothers,
only some of the gains can be explained by a drop in consumption for the comparison groups.
The estimates suggest that this period of reform did not have a negative impact on the relative
material well-being of single mothers. In fact, we repeatedly reject the null hypothesis that
relative total consumption falls by more than 5 percentage points after the 1984-1990 period.
Comparing relative consumption in 1996-1998 to 1994-1995 shows only a small, insignificant

28

increase in relative consumption for single mothers. Again, however, there is some significant
evidence that relative consumption does not fall appreciably during this time, suggesting that the
relative material well-being of single mothers has not fallen in response to the reforms
implemented in 1996.

VII. Other Estimates and Checks on the Results

While part of the favorable situation of single mothers that we found above is likely due
to improved macroeconomic conditions in the later years that we examine, we do not believe that
it is a large part of the explanation for several reasons. First, the baseline period of 1984-1990
was a time of growth and low unemployment. Second, we see similar patterns in consumption if
we compare single mothers to single women without children or to married mothers or if we
compare the low educated among either of these groups. Finally, our results are fairly consistent
at different points in the consumption distribution for these groups.
As a check on whether changes in macroeconomic conditions have a significant effect on
the relative consumption of single mothers, we also estimate versions of the specifications
reported in Tables 9 and 11, where we add controls for either the national or state unemployment
rate and its interaction with being a single mother.34 In general, the addition of unemployment
controls does not change our results for the changes in relative consumption for single mothers.
We do not emphasize these estimates for two reasons. First, we lose some precision as sample
sizes fall because the BLS suppresses the state identifier for some respondents. Second,
especially with the national unemployment rate, we cannot convincingly identify the effects of
economic conditions given that there is one recession during our sample period. A related issue
is that we obtain counter-intuitive results for the cyclicality of consumption in some
specifications. In the CEX sample, our estimates with these unemployment controls lead to
conclusions that are similar to those from the estimates without unemployment controls.

34

Results using the state unemployment rate are only feasible with the CEX data because the PSID early
release data from 1994 through 1997 do not have state identifiers.

29

Looking at the results for single women, in most specifications both groups of single women fare
slightly better in low unemployment times, though the estimates of the effects of unemployment
on consumption are very noisy. The results including unemployment controls for the total
consumption of single mothers relative to married mothers also follow a very similar pattern as
those reported without these controls. For mothers, the unemployment rate coefficients are
contrary to expectation in some specifications, with single mothers estimated to have slightly
higher consumption when the unemployment rate is higher, while married mothers have lower
consumption under worse economic conditions. Again these estimates are very imprecise. In the
PSID sample, the estimates corresponding to Table 11, but with unemployment controls, have
roughly the same pattern as those without the controls. The estimates for changes in relative
food consumption, however, are much less precise than those reported without unemployment
controls. For single mothers relative to single women without children the estimates with
unemployment controls imply greater relative increases in consumption in the last two years for
single mothers than do the estimates without controls. Again, some of the unemployment effects
are contrary to expectation. Higher unemployment is generally associated with higher
consumption for both single mothers and married mothers, while single childless women fare
worse in times of high unemployment.

VIII. Conclusions

In the 1990s the U.S. saw some of the most notable reforms in government tax and
transfer programs since President Johnson declared a war on poverty in 1964. Implementation of
state waivers in the early to mid-1990s initiated an overhaul of the welfare system, which
culminated with the passage of PRWORA in 1996. During this same time, new state and federal
programs were created and others including the EITC were expanded to boost the earnings and
work incentives for low income families.
These reforms had some clear and immediate consequences. Caseloads fell by more than
40 percent from their peak in 1994. Employment rates for single mothers increased by 12
percent from 1993 to 1998, and their earnings grew in real terms. Despite this significant
30

increase in earnings, reductions in transfer income resulted in lower total income for some single
mothers in some datasets, implying that the net effect of these reforms on the well-being of single
mothers is unclear. This paper analyzes the consumption of single mothers and their children in
absolute terms and relative to comparison groups in order to determine how the material wellbeing of single mothers has changed in the midst of these reforms.
Our results show that the level of total expenditures for single mothers increases slightly
in real terms throughout this period. In relative terms, there is some evidence that consumption
for single mothers near the bottom of the consumption distribution increased over the 1990s, and
this increase is also noticeable for less skilled single mothers. In most cases, we see a
statistically significant increase in relative total consumption for single mothers between 19841990 and 1996-1998. Our results also show that some of these gains in consumption for single
mothers occur after 1995, but these changes are quite small and in many cases not statistically
significant. Nevertheless, across our different specifications we can repeatedly reject the
hypothesis that relative consumption fell by more than 5 percentage points, providing strong
evidence that the material well-being of single mothers has not appreciably declined as a result of
recent reforms.
This evaluation of the effects of welfare reform adds to the existing literature in several
ways. First, by looking at all single mothers, as opposed to only those on welfare, we are able to
capture both the direct effect of reforms on current and past recipients, as well as effects on those
induced not to receive welfare. Second, we use household consumption to evaluate the effects of
welfare reform on the well-being of single mothers. Consumption is likely to be a better proxy
for well-being than income, and is less likely to be under-reported than income, particularly for
poor families. Third, rather than just looking at levels of consumption, we compare the
consumption behavior of single mothers to two separate comparison groups. Assuming other
economic changes that occurred in the past decade affected single mothers and the comparison
groups similarly, this approach enables us to isolate the effects of welfare and tax changes.
Lastly, we are able to strengthen these initial findings by analyzing consumption behavior from
two independent data sources. The similar patterns of consumption changes that emerge from
the PSID and the CEX suggest that our results are fairly robust.

31

This study provides a first look at how recent changes in tax and welfare policy have
affected the material well-being of single mothers and their children. While consumption is
arguably the best aggregate measure of material well-being, we should emphasize that it misses
many important components of well-being such as physical and mental health, leisure, family
functioning, and neighborhood and school quality. Our analysis is also restricted to short-term
effects of policy changes since only a few years have passed since the most recent reforms were
enacted.

32

Data Appendix

Consumer Expenditure Survey: This survey, conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS),
collects detailed expenditure data at the household level for a nationally representative sample.
The survey also provides income and demographic information for each household (consumer
unit). The BLS interviews approximately 5,000 households quarterly, and follows each
household for five consecutive quarters, although many households do not remain in the sample
for all five interviews. Data from the first of these interviews, which collects an inventory of
household durables as well as demographic characteristics, are not publicly available. Each
subsequent interview reports expenditures for the three months prior to the interview month. The
household is dropped from the survey after the fifth interview. The survey does not follow
households that relocate.
With this rotating panel design, one-fifth of the respondents are replaced each quarter.
Interviews are conducted monthly, with about one-third of the sample surveyed each month. At
each interview households are asked about expenditures for the previous three months, so only
about one-third of the interviews report expenditures according to actual calendar quarters (i.e.
those interviewed in January, April, July, or October), while expenditures reported by the other
two-thirds will span two consecutive quarters. For households that do not report spending
according to an actual calendar quarter schedule, expenditures are allocated to the appropriate
calendar quarter by linking expenditure data across interviews. For example, consider a
household that is interviewed twice: in March (reporting expenditures for December, January and
February) and June (reporting expenditures for March, April, and May). We calculate first
quarter expenditures by combining January and February expenditures reported in the March
interview with March expenditures reported in the June interview. If a household reports only
one or two months of expenditures for any calendar quarter, spending is extrapolated. Referring
to the previous example, we only have two months of recorded expenditures for the second
calendar quarter. In this case we would approximate second quarter expenditures by multiplying
the sum of expenditures in April and May by 1.5. Following this procedure, we construct a
sample of household-quarter observations.
33

From total expenditures for each household, we construct a measure of total current
consumption, by excluding spending that can be construed as an investment. Our measure of
total consumption includes all household expenditures less spending on education, health care,
cash contributions, and outlays for retirement including pensions and social security. Included in
total consumption, are all other expenditures made by the household for itself or others. This
spending includes all sales and excise taxes but excludes all reimbursed and business related
expenditures.
To address concerns about the lumpy nature of expenditures on durables, we convert
reported housing and vehicle spending to service flow equivalents. To capture housing flows, we
subtract from total expenditures mortgage interest payments, property tax payments, and
spending on insurance, maintenance and repairs, and add to total expenditures the self-reported
rental equivalent value of the home.35 This procedure partly follows Cutler and Katz (1991).
For vehicles, we estimate the value of new car purchases for each household that owns a
car, and calculate a service flow that is a function of this predicted value of new vehicle
purchases and the age of each vehicle the household owns assuming a constant geometric vehicle
depreciation of 5 percent per quarter.36 Again following the lead of Cutler and Katz (1991), the
predicted value of new car purchases is generated for all households that own a vehicle. Using
the sample of households that report a purchase of a new car in the three months prior to the
interview, we regress actual expenditures for new vehicles on total expenditures (less new
vehicle expenditures), expenditures squared, the age and education level of the consumer unit, a
set of household type dummies interacted with family size, and a set of year dummies. Parameter
estimates from this regression are then used to predict the value of new vehicle purchases, Vi, for
each household that owns a vehicle. Vehicle service flows, Si, for household i with N vehicles
35

CEX surveys from the third quarter of 1993 through the fourth quarter of 1994 did not ask home
owners about the rental equivalent of the home. This value is imputed by regressing the rental equivalent
on the reported market value of the home and a set of household type dummies for households from our
sample between 1990 and 1998 for whom rental equivalent and market value are observed. The
parameter estimates from this regression are then used to predict the rental equivalent for households for
which these data are not available.
36
This depreciation method follows research on the depreciation of automobiles; depreciation rates
generated from this functional form are fairly consistent with automobile valuation analysis using data on
the sale price of used cars (Peles, 1988).

34

which were produced tj quarters ago for j=1,...,N, are specified as:
N

Si = Vi * ∑ δ (1 − δ )

tj

j =1

where is the quarterly depreciation rate. These flows are generated for cars and trucks only;
spending on other types of vehicles are excluded from total consumption.
In addition to total consumption, we also look at components of consumption spending.
Food consumption includes spending on food at home, spending on food away from home, and
food stamps received, but excludes food received as pay. Work expenses include spending on
domestic services and child care, while child care expenses are a subcomponent of work
expenses. Discretionary spending reflects household outlays for alcoholic beverages; tobacco;
entertainment expenses such as spending on sporting events, movies, television, radio, pets, and
hobbies; reading materials such as newspapers, magazines, books, and encyclopedias; and
apparel including spending on clothes and footwear for both adults and children.
The BLS does make an effort to address concerns about a household’s ability to
accurately recall all expenditures. The interview surveys, which have a recall period of three
months, a relatively short period compared to most income surveys, compile data on major
expenditures such as housing, transportation or large durables quarterly through a series of
detailed questions that itemize each purchase separately. The BLS estimates that these questions
account for 60 to 70 percent of all household expenditures. For smaller or more frequent
purchases, the BLS constructs estimates of quarterly expenditures by asking each household to
report spending on broad categories such as quarterly expenditures at grocery stores. These
expenses are estimated to account for 20 to 25 percent of total household expenditures. Together
these quarterly surveys account for approximately 80 to 95 percent of all expenditures. The BLS
frequently compares expenditure measures from the CEX with other expenditure data for quality
evaluation. Branch (1994), for example, compares various components of expenditures from the
CEX to several different data sources, and finds these independent sources of expenditure data to
35

be fairly consistent. For more information on the CEX see Bureau of Labor Statistics (1997).
A potential concern with CEX data is the degree of attrition bias (Bavier 2000). While
attrition rates have always been high in the CEX, these rates have increased in recent years. This
increase in attrition rates could be particularly problematic if they are different for single mothers
than for our comparison groups, or if those who dropped out were systematically different from
those who remain in the survey for all four quarters (“stayers”). For example, if single mothers
who drop out of the sample are more likely to have low levels of consumption than single
mothers that remain in the sample, then an increase in attrition over time would provide spurious
evidence suggesting consumption for single mothers has increased. Furthermore, if attrition rates
were more stable for comparison groups, then we might spuriously conclude that the relative
consumption of single mothers had increased.
In order to determine whether attrition has biased our results from the CEX, we take a
closer look at attrition rates and how they have changed over time. While about 60 percent of
single mothers remained in the sample for all four reported interviews for the years from 1989
through 1994, this number drops to around one-half in 1995, and to about 40 percent in 1996 and
1997. Much of the increase in attrition that occurs in 1995 can be explained by a sample
redesign, but the reasons for high attrition in subsequent years are unclear. A similar pattern of
attrition rates is evident for less educated single mothers, while single mothers in the bottom
quartile of the consumption distribution show higher increases in attrition in recent years.
Attrition rates for single women without children are higher than those for single mothers, but the
changes in attrition rates over time are similar for both groups.
More important for our analysis is whether consumption behavior for stayers and nonstayers differs, and whether this difference changes over time. We found little evidence that
attrition is correlated with the consumption behavior of single mothers. Average total
expenditures for single mothers that remain in the sample do not differ noticeably from the
expenditures of single mothers that do not complete all interviews.
Attrition does seem to be a bit more problematic for our comparison groups. For single
women without children, for example, stayers consume more than non-stayers. The average
consumption of stayers relative to non-stayers, however, falls over time, implying that stayers in
36

later years do not clearly consume more. Nevertheless, the changes in the consumption patterns
of stayers relative to non-stayers give rise to concerns about the possibility of attrition bias in our
comparison group. As a test of this bias, we estimate equation (1) using only the first reported
interview for each household in our CEX sample. Using this restricted sample, the results for
single women do not change qualitatively, and while some of the estimates for mothers change,
the numbers still indicate that relative consumption did not fall for single mothers during our
sample period.

Panel Study of Income Dynamics: The PSID is a nationally representative panel survey
conducted by the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan. This annual
longitudinal survey has followed a random sample of families, their offspring, and coresidents
since 1968. The survey provides detailed economic and demographic information on both the
household and individual level for a sample of about 7,000 households each year. The PSID is a
primary source of high quality panel data on household income and labor force participation.
Unlike the CEX, the PSID follows households that relocate.
Although the PSID does not ask households about all expenditures, it does collect data on
household food consumption. As with the CEX, consumption is only available at the household
level. The 1988 and 1989 waves did not include questions on food expenditures, but in all other
years for our sample the questionnaire asks, “in addition to what you bought with food stamps,
did you spend any money on food that you used at home?” Respondents are also asked about the
food expenditures of the household outside of the home and receipt of food stamps in the month
prior to the interview. As several other studies have argued (see Zeldes 1989, Gruber 1997), it is
likely that the respondent will report consumption levels at the time of the interview. For this
reason, we interpret the consumption response as pertaining to the interview year rather than the
previous year. We construct a measure of total food consumption as the sum of expenditures on
food at home, expenditures on food away from home, and dollars of food stamps received. We
report all expenditures in quarterly terms to be consistent with the figures from the CEX.

37

References:

Bavier, Richard, “An Early Look at the Effects of Welfare Reform,” mimeo, March 1999.
Bavier, Richard, “What’s Going on in the Bottom Quintile,” mimeo, January 2000.
Blank, Rebecca M., “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?” NBER Working
Paper No. 6343, May 1997.
Blau, David M., “Child Care Subsidy Programs,” NBER Working Paper No. 7806, July 2000.
Bloom, Dan, James J. Kemple, Pamela Morris, Susan Scrivener, Nandita Verma, and Richard
Hendra, “FTP: Final Results of Florida’s Initial Time-Limited Welfare Program,” (New
York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, December 2000).
Branch, E. Raphael, “The Consumer Expenditure Survey: A Comparative Analysis,” Monthly
Labor Review, December (1994), 47-55.
Brauner, Sarah and Pamela Loprest, “Where are They Now? What States’ Studies of People Who
Left Welfare Tell Us,” (Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, 1999).
Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Consumer Expenditures and Income,” in BLS Handbook of Methods,
U.S. Department of Labor, 1997.
Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz, “Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1991, 1-74.
Dickert, Stacy, Scott Houser, and John Karl Scholz, “The Earned Income Tax Credit and
Transfer Programs: A Study of Labor Market and Program Participation,” in Tax Policy
and the Economy 9, James M. Poterba, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), 1-50.
Edin, Kathryn and Laura Lein, Making Ends Meet: How Single Mothers Survive Welfare and
Low-Wage Work, (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1997).
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman, “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1996), 605-637.
Ellwood, David T., “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy Reforms on
Work, Marriage and Living Arrangements,” National Tax Journal, 53:4 Pt.2 (December
2000), 1063-1106.
Falk, G. “Consumption Expenditures for Families with Children,” mimeo, Congressional
Research Service, July 2000.
General Accounting Office, “Welfare Reform: Information on Former Recipients’ Status,”
(Washington, DC: GAO/HEHS-99-48, April 1999).
Gruber, Jonathan, “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,”
American Economic Review, 87:1 (1997), 192-205.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Daniel T. Slesnick, “Unemployment Insurance and Household
38

Welfare: Microeconomic Evidence 1980-93,” NBER Working Paper No. 5315, October
1995.
Haskins, Ron, “The Second Most Important Issue: Effects of Welfare Reform on Family Income
and Poverty,” mimeo, U.S. House of Representatives, 2000.
Holcomb, Pamela A., Terri S. Thompson, Caroline E. Ratcliffe, David J. Fein, Erik Beecroft,
William Hamilton and Wang S. Lee, “The Indiana Welfare Reform Evaluation: Program
Implementation and Economic Impacts After Two Years,” (Washington, D.C.: The Urban
Institute and Abt Associates, 1998).
Jencks, Christopher and Joseph Swingle, “Without a Net,” The American Prospect vol. 11 no. 4,
January 3, 2000.
Keane, Michael, “A New Idea for Welfare Reform,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Quarterly Review, XXXVIII (1995), 2-28.
Levine, Phillip B. and Diane M. Whitmore, “The Impact of Welfare Reform on the AFDC
Caseload,” National Tax Association Proceedings, Ninetieth Annual Conference, (1998),
24-33.
Liebman, Jeffrey B., “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and Income
Distribution,” in Tax Policy and the Economy 12, James M. Poterba, ed. (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1998), 83-120.
Mayer, Susan E. and Christopher Jencks, “Poverty and the Distribution of Material Hardship,”
Journal of Human Resources, 24:1 (1989), 88-113.
, “Recent Trends in Economic Inequality in the United States: Income versus Expenditures
versus Material Well-Being,” in Poverty and Prosperity in the USA in the Late Twentieth
Century, Edward N. Wolff, ed. (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1993), 121-203.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum, “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics (NBER
Working Paper Number 7363, September 1999).
, “Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Changes in Tax and Welfare Policy and their
Effects,” forthcoming, National Tax Journal, 53:4 Pt. 2 (December 2000), 1027-1062.
National Research Council, Evaluating Welfare Reform: A Framework and Review of Current
Work, Robert Moffitt and Michele Ver Ploeg, eds. (Washington, DC: National Academy
Press, 1999).
Peles, Yoram C., “On the Depreciation of Automobiles,” International Journal of Transport
Economics, 25:1 (1988), 43-54.
Poterba, James M., “Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?” in Tax Policy and the Economy 5, David
Bradford, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991), 145-164.
Primus, Wendell, Lynette Rawlings, Kathy Larin, and Kathryn Porter, “The Initial Impacts of
Welfare Reform on the Incomes of Single-Mother Families,” (Washington, DC: Center
39

on Budget and Policy Priorities, 1999).
Schoeni, Robert F. and Rebecca M. Blank, “What has Welfare Reform Accomplished? Impacts
on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure,” NBER
Working Paper No. 7627, March 2000.
Slesnick, Daniel T., “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States,” Journal of
Political Economy, 101:1 (1993), 1-38.
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means, Green Book, Background
Material and Data on Programs within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and
Means, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, various years).
Wiseman, Michael, “In Midst of Reform: Wisconsin in 1997,” (Washington, D.C.: The Urban
Institute, 1999).
Zeldes, Stephen P., “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: an Empirical Investigation,”
Journal of Political Economy, 97:2 (1989), 305-346.
Ziliak, James P., David N. Figlio, Elizabeth E. Davis, and Laura S. Connolly, “Accounting for
the Decline in AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or Economic Growth?” mimeo, July
1997.

40

Figure 1
Monthly AFDC/TANF Caseloads (1963-1998)
(in Millions)
6

Peak: March, 1994

5

3

2

1

Notes : Caseload levels are based on reports from the Department of Health and Human Services. They represent total family
caseloads, including AFDC-UP and child-only cases, from all 50 states as well as Washington D.C., but do not include cases
from the U.S. territories.

Apr-98

Apr-97

Apr-96

Apr-95

Apr-94

Apr-93

Apr-92

Apr-91

Apr-90

Apr-89

Apr-88

Apr-87

Apr-86

Apr-85

Apr-84

Apr-83

Apr-82

Apr-81

Apr-80

Apr-79

Apr-78

Apr-77

Apr-76

Apr-75

Apr-74

Apr-73

Apr-72

Apr-71

Apr-70

Apr-69

Apr-68

Apr-67

Apr-66

Apr-65

Apr-64

0
Apr-63

Total Families

4

Figure 2
Total Consumption:
Single Mothers, 1984 - 1998
0.2

Mean regression: less
educated single mothers

0.15
0.1

25% quantile regression: all
single mothers

0.05

25% quantile regression:
less educated single
mothers
15% quantile regression: all
single mothers

0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15

15% quantile regression:
less educated single
mothers

19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98

-0.2

Figure 3
Relative Total Consumption:
Single Mothers v. Single Women without Kids, 1984 - 1998
0.15

Mean regression: less
educated single women

0.05

25% quantile regression:
all single women

-0.05

25% quantile regression:
less educated single
women
15% quantile regression:
all single women

-0.15

15% quantile regression:
less educated single
women

-0.25

19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98

-0.35

Figure 4
Relative Total Consumption:
Single Mothers v. Married Mothers, 1984 - 1998
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1

Mean regression: less
educated married women
25% quantile regression: all
married women
25% quantile regression:
less educated married
women
15% quantile regression: all
married women

-0.15

19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98

-0.2

15% quantile regression:
less educated married
women

Table 1
Employment Rates for Single Mother and Comparison Households
Sample: Women Ages 18-54, CPS
Worked Last Year
Year
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998

Single Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married Mothers

Difference

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

0.7900

0.9381

0.6840

-0.1481

0.1060

(0.0055)

(0.0027)

(0.0035)

(0.0061)

(0.0065)

0.7991

0.9446

0.6917

-0.1455

0.1074

(0.0056)

(0.0025)

(0.0035)

(0.0061)

(0.0066)

0.7934

0.9423

0.7148

-0.1488

0.0786

(0.0056)

(0.0026)

(0.0034)

(0.0061)

(0.0065)

0.7899

0.9392

0.7102

-0.1493

0.0797

(0.0056)

(0.0026)

(0.0035)

(0.0062)

(0.0066)

0.7855

0.9454

0.7195

-0.1599

0.0660

(0.0059)

(0.0026)

(0.0036)

(0.0065)

(0.0069)

0.7926

0.9403

0.7288

-0.1477

0.0638

(0.0056)

(0.0025)

(0.0034)

(0.0061)

(0.0065)

0.7899

0.9419

0.7263

-0.1520

0.0636

(0.0056)

(0.0025)

(0.0034)

(0.0061)

(0.0066)

0.7853

0.9313

0.7318

-0.1459

0.0535

(0.0056)

(0.0027)

(0.0034)

(0.0062)

(0.0066)

0.7767

0.9287

0.7300

-0.1520

0.0467

(0.0058)

(0.0028)

(0.0035)

(0.0064)

(0.0067)

0.7782

0.9293

0.7411

-0.1512

0.0371

(0.0058)

(0.0028)

(0.0035)

(0.0064)

(0.0068)

0.8144

0.9261

0.7512

-0.1117

0.0632

(0.0055)

(0.0029)

(0.0035)

(0.0062)

(0.0065)

0.8240

0.9306

0.7565

-0.1066

0.0675

(0.0056)

(0.0030)

(0.0037)

(0.0064)

(0.0067)

0.8369

0.9335

0.7591

-0.0966

0.0778

(0.0054)

(0.0029)

(0.0037)

(0.0061)

(0.0065)

0.8546

0.9350

0.7624

-0.0804

0.0922

(0.0052)

(0.0028)

(0.0037)

(0.0059)

(0.0064)

0.8734

0.9356

0.7616

-0.0622

0.1118

(0.0049)

(0.0028)

(0.0037)

(0.0057)

(0.0062)

Notes : Calculations are from the 1985-1999 March Current Population Surveys. These rates represent the
fraction of women in each category that report having worked at all during the year. Women that do not work
because of an illness or disability, or because they are going to school, are excluded. All numbers are weighted.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 2
Mean Characteristics of Single Mother and Comparison Households
Sample: Women Ages 18-54, CEX
Panel A: 1984 - 1990

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.266
(0.012)
0.382
(0.012)
0.240
(0.011)

0.106
(0.007)
0.230
(0.010)
0.335
(0.011)

Age

34.68
(0.184)

Employment

Panel B: 1991 - 1993

Difference

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Difference

Difference

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

0.134
(0.004)
0.417
(0.006)
0.307
(0.006)

0.160
(0.014)
0.152
(0.016)
-0.094
(0.016)

0.132
(0.008)
-0.035
(0.012)
-0.066
(0.013)

0.248
(0.017)
0.364
(0.018)
0.268
(0.015)

0.094
(0.011)
0.214
(0.015)
0.326
(0.016)

0.120
(0.006)
0.367
(0.008)
0.271
(0.008)

0.154
(0.020)
0.151
(0.023)
-0.058
(0.022)

0.128
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.017)
-0.003
(0.018)

33.22
(0.252)

34.93
(0.086)

1.460
(0.312)

-0.254
(0.204)

34.87
(0.323)

35.89
(0.382)

35.53
(0.116)

-1.021
(0.500)

-0.661
(0.344)

0.704
(0.012)

0.924
(0.007)

0.704
(0.005)

-0.220
(0.014)

0.000
(0.013)

0.691
(0.018)

0.914
(0.010)

0.731
(0.008)

-0.223
(0.020)

-0.040
(0.019)

Family Size

2.996
(0.030)

1.000
(0.000)

4.111
(0.012)

1.996
(0.030)

-1.116
(0.033)

2.971
(0.041)

1.000
(0.000)

4.092
(0.017)

1.971
(0.041)

-1.121
(0.044)

Race (White=1)

0.633
(0.012)

0.863
(0.008)

0.899
(0.003)

-0.229
(0.014)

-0.266
(0.012)

0.659
(0.020)

0.848
(0.012)

0.891
(0.005)

-0.189
(0.023)

-0.232
(0.020)

7,014

8,641

3,266

3,695

Educational Attainment
High School Dropout
High School Graduate
Some College

N

36,833

Panel C: 1994 - 1995

15,121

Panel D: 1996 - 1998

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Difference
(4) = (1) - (2)

Difference
(5) = (1) - (3)

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Difference
(4) = (1) - (2)

Difference
(5) = (1) - (3)

0.217
(0.017)
0.406
(0.020)
0.277
(0.017)

0.074
(0.011)
0.207
(0.017)
0.355
(0.022)

0.118
(0.007)
0.348
(0.010)
0.273
(0.009)

0.143
(0.020)
0.199
(0.027)
-0.078
(0.028)

0.099
(0.013)
0.057
(0.020)
0.005
(0.024)

0.189
(0.014)
0.366
(0.016)
0.317
(0.017)

0.054
(0.007)
0.193
(0.013)
0.387
(0.015)

0.111
(0.005)
0.307
(0.009)
0.295
(0.008)

0.135
(0.016)
0.173
(0.021)
-0.070
(0.023)

0.077
(0.009)
0.059
(0.015)
0.022
(0.017)

Age

35.09
(0.333)

35.80
(0.469)

36.02
(0.152)

-0.718
(0.575)

-0.939
(0.366)

35.55
(0.275)

35.70
(0.358)

36.70
(0.113)

-0.149
(0.452)

-1.153
(0.297)

Employment

0.702
(0.018)

0.891
(0.015)

0.749
(0.009)

-0.189
(0.023)

-0.048
(0.020)

0.765
(0.014)

0.865
(0.012)

0.749
(0.007)

-0.100
(0.018)

0.016
(0.016)

Family Size

2.977
(0.041)

1.000
(0.000)

4.095
(0.022)

1.977
(0.041)

-1.118
(0.046)

2.990
(0.034)

1.000
(0.000)

4.094
(0.016)

1.990
(0.034)

-1.104
(0.038)

Race (White=1)

0.644
(0.020)

0.865
(0.012)

0.894
(0.007)

-0.220
(0.023)

-0.249
(0.013)

0.612
(0.019)

0.824
(0.012)

0.874
(0.006)

-0.212
(0.022)

-0.262
(0.014)

2,324

2,543

10,194

3,296

4,227

14,863

Educational Attainment
High School Dropout
High School Graduate
Some College

N

Notes : The calculations are from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Observations represent a household-quarter. See text for additional explanations. All numbers are weighted.
Bootstrap standard errors that correct for within household dependence are in parentheses. The omitted education group is college graduate.

Table 3
Mean Characteristics of Single Mother and Comparison Households
Sample: Women Ages 18-54, PSID
Panel A: 1984 - 1990

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.303
(0.024)
0.272
(0.024)
0.338
(0.023)

0.097
(0.015)
0.198
(0.020)
0.366
(0.024)

Age

33.33
(0.426)

Employment

Panel B: 1991 - 1993

Difference

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Difference

Difference

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

0.148
(0.009)
0.321
(0.011)
0.338
(0.012)

0.206
(0.028)
0.074
(0.031)
-0.029
(0.033)

0.155
(0.026)
-0.048
(0.026)
-0.001
(0.026)

0.284
(0.026)
0.377
(0.026)
0.212
(0.022)

0.077
(0.014)
0.299
(0.026)
0.267
(0.027)

0.107
(0.009)
0.395
(0.014)
0.239
(0.011)

0.207
(0.030)
0.078
(0.037)
-0.055
(0.035)

0.177
(0.028)
-0.018
(0.030)
-0.028
(0.025)

33.00
(0.429)

34.95
(0.175)

0.324
(0.605)

-1.620
(0.461)

34.86
(0.457)

35.08
(0.532)

35.88
(0.182)

-0.221
(0.701)

-1.028
(0.492)

0.751
(0.018)

0.959
(0.007)

0.729
(0.009)

-0.208
(0.020)

0.022
(0.020)

0.793
(0.019)

0.963
(0.008)

0.790
(0.009)

-0.170
(0.020)

0.004
(0.021)

Family Size

3.059
(0.047)

1.000
(0.000)

4.113
(0.023)

2.059
(0.047)

-1.054
(0.052)

3.056
(0.055)

1.000
(0.000)

4.121
(0.023)

2.056
(0.055)

-1.066
(0.060)

Race (White=1)

0.570
(0.031)

0.854
(0.019)

0.900
(0.008)

-0.284
(0.036)

-0.330
(0.031)

0.553
(0.033)

0.824
(0.025)

0.900
(0.008)

-0.271
(0.042)

-0.347
(0.034)

2,934

1,798

1,833

1,151

Educational Attainment
High School Dropout
High School Graduate
Some College

N

11,220

Panel C: 1994 - 1995

6,547

Panel D: 1996 - 1997

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Difference
(4) = (1) - (2)

Difference
(5) = (1) - (3)

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Difference
(4) = (1) - (2)

Difference
(5) = (1) - (3)

0.254
(0.027)
0.375
(0.030)
0.223
(0.021)

0.070
(0.014)
0.284
(0.026)
0.283
(0.030)

0.091
(0.008)
0.369
(0.014)
0.251
(0.010)

0.184
(0.031)
0.091
(0.039)
-0.060
(0.037)

0.163
(0.028)
0.006
(0.033)
-0.027
(0.024)

0.237
(0.026)
0.373
(0.027)
0.228
(0.020)

0.066
(0.014)
0.249
(0.023)
0.294
(0.028)

0.109
(0.008)
0.338
(0.012)
0.241
(0.011)

0.171
(0.029)
0.124
(0.035)
-0.066
(0.034)

0.129
(0.027)
0.035
(0.030)
-0.013
(0.023)

Age

35.46
(0.476)

36.54
(0.532)

36.57
(0.186)

-1.084
(0.714)

-1.111
(0.511)

35.72
(0.394)

36.44
(0.575)

37.12
(0.193)

-0.719
(0.697)

-1.403
(0.439)

Employment

0.811
(0.023)

0.935
(0.012)

0.783
(0.010)

-0.124
(0.026)

0.029
(0.025)

0.850
(0.022)

0.942
(0.011)

0.792
(0.009)

-0.092
(0.024)

0.058
(0.024)

Family Size

2.999
(0.060)

1.000
(0.000)

4.088
(0.023)

1.999
(0.060)

-1.089
(0.064)

3.039
(0.055)

1.000
(0.000)

4.112
(0.020)

2.039
(0.055)

-1.073
(0.059)

Race (White=1)

0.528
(0.037)

0.818
(0.028)

0.897
(0.009)

-0.290
(0.047)

-0.370
(0.038)

0.527
(0.033)

0.808
(0.023)

0.844
(0.008)

-0.281
(0.040)

-0.317
(0.034)

1,394

771

4,442

1,183

697

3,993

Educational Attainment
High School Dropout
High School Graduate
Some College

N

Notes : The calculations are from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. See text for additional explanations. All numbers are weighted. Bootstrap standard errors that correct for within
household dependence are in parentheses. The omitted education group is college graduate.

Table 4
Mean Characteristics of Single Mother and Comparison Households
Sample: Women Ages 18-54 with a High School Degree or Less, CEX
Panel A: 1984 - 1990

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.410
(0.015)

0.315
(0.019)

Age

34.08
(0.251)

Employment

Panel B: 1991 - 1993

Difference

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Difference

Difference

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

0.243
(0.007)

0.096
(0.024)

0.167
(0.016)

0.405
(0.026)

0.306
(0.029)

0.246
(0.011)

0.099
(0.038)

0.158
(0.028)

35.78
(0.476)

34.46
(0.114)

-1.700
(0.538)

-0.376
(0.275)

33.632
(0.183)

40.020
(0.338)

34.725
(0.085)

-6.388
(0.385)

-1.093
(0.202)

0.630
(0.016)

0.875
(0.015)

0.657
(0.007)

-0.245
(0.022)

-0.027
(0.018)

0.593
(0.011)

0.858
(0.010)

0.696
(0.005)

-0.265
(0.015)

-0.102
(0.012)

Family Size

3.142
(0.037)

1.000
(0.000)

4.174
(0.018)

2.142
(0.037)

-1.032
(0.041)

3.141
(0.026)

1.000
(0.000)

4.118
(0.012)

2.141
(0.026)

-0.977
(0.029)

Race (White=1)

0.605
(0.015)

0.818
(0.016)

0.905
(0.005)

-0.213
(0.022)

-0.300
(0.016)

0.606
(0.023)

0.799
(0.023)

0.885
(0.009)

-0.192
(0.033)

-0.279
(0.025)

4,529

2,840

1,953

1,129

Educational Attainment
High School Dropout

N

19,949

Panel C: 1994 - 1995

7,149

Panel D: 1996 - 1998

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Difference
(4) = (1) - (2)

Difference
(5) = (1) - (3)

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Difference
(4) = (1) - (2)

Difference
(5) = (1) - (3)

0.348
(0.026)

0.263
(0.042)

0.253
(0.014)

0.085
(0.050)

0.095
(0.030)

0.340
(0.022)

0.218
(0.028)

0.266
(0.012)

0.122
(0.036)

0.074
(0.025)

Age

33.97
(0.211)

39.32
(0.447)

35.04
(0.104)

-5.36
(0.494)

-1.07
(0.236)

33.83
(0.182)

39.10
(0.346)

35.85
(0.091)

-5.27
(0.391)

-2.02
(0.203)

Employment

0.646
(0.013)

0.773
(0.016)

0.692
(0.007)

-0.126
(0.021)

-0.046
(0.014)

0.679
(0.011)

0.784
(0.013)

0.679
(0.006)

-0.105
(0.017)

0.000
(0.012)

Family Size

3.089
(0.028)

1.000
(0.000)

4.155
(0.016)

2.089
(0.028)

-1.066
(0.032)

3.131
(0.026)

1.000
(0.000)

4.200
(0.013)

2.131
(0.026)

-1.069
(0.030)

Race (White=1)

0.610
(0.026)

0.802
(0.032)

0.891
(0.009)

-0.191
(0.041)

-0.281
(0.028)

0.548
(0.023)

0.768
(0.025)

0.863
(0.009)

-0.220
(0.034)

-0.315
(0.025)

1,434

660

4,630

1,828

1,024

6,087

Educational Attainment
High School Dropout

N

Notes : See the notes to Table 2. The omitted education group is high school graduate.

Table 5
Mean Characteristics of Single Mother and Comparison Households
Sample: Women Ages 18-54 with a High School Degree or Less, PSID
Panel A: 1984 - 1990

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.527
(0.034)

0.328
(0.043)

Age

32.01
(0.420)

Employment

Panel B: 1991 - 1993

Difference

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Difference

Difference

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) = (1) - (2)

(5) = (1) - (3)

0.316
(0.018)

0.198
(0.055)

0.211
(0.039)

0.430
(0.035)

0.205
(0.035)

0.214
(0.015)

0.224
(0.049)

0.216
(0.038)

34.80
(0.930)

34.57
(0.271)

-2.784
(1.021)

-2.555
(0.500)

33.50
(0.507)

35.66
(0.829)

35.11
(0.236)

-2.158
(0.972)

-1.613
(0.559)

0.665
(0.027)

0.909
(0.020)

0.688
(0.013)

-0.245
(0.033)

-0.024
(0.030)

0.758
(0.024)

0.934
(0.016)

0.762
(0.013)

-0.176
(0.029)

-0.004
(0.028)

Family Size

3.157
(0.073)

1.000
(0.000)

4.187
(0.035)

2.157
(0.073)

-1.030
(0.081)

3.150
(0.068)

1.000
(0.000)

4.175
(0.037)

2.150
(0.068)

-1.024
(0.077)

Race (White=1)

0.515
(0.035)

0.803
(0.033)

0.879
(0.012)

-0.288
(0.048)

-0.363
(0.036)

0.523
(0.035)

0.760
(0.042)

0.893
(0.010)

-0.236
(0.055)

-0.370
(0.037)

1,828

644

1,282

521

Educational Attainment
High School Dropout

N

5,549

Panel C: 1994 - 1995

3,495

Panel D: 1996 - 1997

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Difference
(4) = (1) - (2)

Difference
(5) = (1) - (3)

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Difference
(4) = (1) - (2)

Difference
(5) = (1) - (3)

0.404
(0.041)

0.197
(0.035)

0.198
(0.017)

0.207
(0.054)

0.206
(0.044)

0.389
(0.034)

0.209
(0.038)

0.243
(0.018)

0.180
(0.051)

0.145
(0.038)

Age

34.37
(0.576)

37.12
(0.906)

36.04
(0.283)

-2.750
(1.074)

-1.671
(0.642)

35.04
(0.543)

38.35
(0.994)

36.47
(0.250)

-3.311
(1.132)

-1.434
(0.598)

Employment

0.739
(0.033)

0.888
(0.024)

0.760
(0.014)

-0.149
(0.041)

-0.021
(0.036)

0.792
(0.033)

0.887
(0.027)

0.767
(0.015)

-0.095
(0.042)

0.025
(0.036)

Family Size

3.055
(0.081)

1.000
(0.000)

4.111
(0.032)

2.055
(0.081)

-1.056
(0.087)

3.154
(0.080)

1.000
(0.000)

4.184
(0.036)

2.154
(0.080)

-1.030
(0.088)

Race (White=1)

0.482
(0.043)

0.714
(0.043)

0.898
(0.012)

-0.233
(0.061)

-0.416
(0.045)

0.495
(0.040)

0.731
(0.038)

0.812
(0.013)

-0.235
(0.055)

-0.317
(0.042)

753

268

1,857

Educational Attainment
High School Dropout

N
925
342
2,153
Notes : See the notes to Table 3. The omitted education group is high school graduate.

Table 6
Quarterly Consumption by Single Mother and Comparison Households
Sample: Women Ages 18-54, CEX and PSID
Panel A: 1984 - 1990
Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Ratio

(1)

(2)

(3)

4,593
(86.19)

4,261
(53.18)

Food

998
(12.64)

Housing
Discretionary

Panel B: 1991 - 1993
Ratio

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Ratio

Ratio

(4) = (1) / (2)

(5) = (1) / (3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) = (1) / (2)

(5) = (1) / (3)

8,662
(49.32)

1.078
(0.024)

0.530
(0.010)

4,519
(83.16)

4,326
(73.84)

8,432
(72.14)

1.045
(0.026)

0.536
(0.011)

651
(8.77)

1,654
(9.97)

1.534
(0.028)

0.603
(0.008)

991
(16.17)

675
(10.32)

1,609
(14.75)

1.468
(0.033)

0.616
(0.012)

2,073
(48.40)

1,914
(29.54)

3,438
(20.73)

1.083
(0.030)

0.603
(0.015)

2,043
(43.86)

1,987
(38.34)

3,391
(34.13)

1.028
(0.030)

0.603
(0.014)

826
(19.43)

945
(22.46)

1,810
(19.40)

0.874
(0.029)

0.456
(0.012)

767
(26.95)

817
(24.13)

1,658
(27.54)

0.939
(0.043)

0.463
(0.018)

Work Expenses

-

-

-

-

-

230
(48.51)

19
(3.83)

432
(34.45)

11.836
(3.417)

0.532
(0.120)

Child Care

-

-

-

-

-

94
(18.59)

-

164
(14.07)

-

0.572
(0.124)

7,014

8,641

36,833

3,266

3,695

15,121

1,125
(19.67)

737
(21.06)

1,826
(20.58)

1,135
(24.15)

734
(19.91)

1,727
(17.97)

1.548
(0.053)

0.657
(0.016)

2,934

1,798

1,833

1,151

CEX
Total

N
PSID
Food
N

1.526
(0.051)

0.616
(0.013)

11,220

Panel C: 1994 - 1995

6,547

Panel D: 1996 - 1998

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Ratio
(4) = (1) / (2)

Ratio
(5) = (1) / (3)

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Ratio
(4) = (1) / (2)

Ratio
(5) = (1) / (3)

4,597
(92.52)

4,418
(101.30)

8,686
(75.40)

1.040
(0.032)

0.529
(0.012)

4,933
(93.85)

4,389
(69.14)

8,881
(73.37)

1.124
(0.028)

0.555
(0.012)

Food

1,017
(23.68)

684
(15.61)

1,598
(16.27)

1.486
(0.048)

0.636
(0.016)

1,010
(17.41)

683
(13.03)

1,616
(12.44)

1.479
(0.038)

0.625
(0.012)

Housing

2,103
(42.19)

2,057
(40.72)

3,599
(38.92)

1.023
(0.029)

0.584
(0.013)

2,302
(44.68)

2,121
(36.97)

3,699
(31.05)

1.085
(0.028)

0.622
(0.013)

Discretionary

765
(25.43)

839
(32.91)

1,698
(31.19)

0.911
(0.047)

0.451
(0.017)

807
(29.36)

796
(22.78)

1,665
(22.69)

1.014
(0.047)

0.485
(0.019)

Work Expenses

288
(27.35)

41
(8.15)

471
(19.50)

6.954
(1.517)

0.612
(0.063)

287
(20.18)

35
(6.28)

456
(17.40)

8.188
(1.575)

0.629
(0.050)

Child Care

123
(10.85)

-

182
(8.19)

-

0.676
(0.067)

118
(8.26)

-

178
(7.00)

-

0.664
(0.053)

2,324

2,543

10,194

3,296

4,227

14,863

1,137
(27.33)

766
(23.81)

1,711
(19.01)

1,117
(23.68)

743
(23.81)

1,738
(22.20)

1.503
(0.058)

0.643
(0.016)

1,394

771

4,442

1,183

697

3,993

CEX
Total

N
PSID
Food
N

1.485
(0.058)

0.664
(0.018)

Notes : All consumption figures are expressed in 1995:2 dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditure index reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The
components of consumption needed to determine child care and work expenses were not available before the fourth quarter of 1993. Thus, child care and work expenses
reported in Panel B only include observations from the last quarter of this period. See the notes to Table 2 for additional comments.

Table 7
Quarterly Consumption by Single Mother and Comparison Households
Sample: Women Ages 18-54 with a High School Degree or Less, CEX and PSID
Panel A: 1984 - 1990

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Ratio

(1)

(2)

(3)

Total

3,920
(95.56)

3,613
(88.82)

Food

948
(14.34)

Housing
Discretionary

Panel B: 1991 - 1993

Ratio

Single
Mothers

Single, no
Children

Married
Mothers

Ratio

Ratio

(4) = (1) / (2)

(5) = (1) / (3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) = (1) / (2)

(5) = (1) / (3)

7,446
(50.05)

1.085
(0.038)

0.526
(0.013)

3,766
(89.88)

3,538
(107.63)

7,028
(76.62)

1.065
(0.041)

0.536
(0.014)

583
(15.08)

1,519
(11.96)

1.626
(0.049)

0.624
(0.011)

939
(21.94)

590
(18.82)

1,444
(15.91)

1.590
(0.063)

0.650
(0.017)

1,774
(64.63)

1,626
(45.11)

2,866
(23.82)

1.091
(0.050)

0.619
(0.023)

1,690
(46.09)

1,707
(59.09)

2,768
(32.50)

0.990
(0.044)

0.610
(0.018)

659
(20.88)

762
(37.34)

1,458
(19.79)

0.866
(0.051)

0.452
(0.016)

609
(23.91)

573
(32.76)

1,283
(34.44)

1.063
(0.074)

0.475
(0.023)

Work Expenses

-

-

-

-

-

140
(38.11)

6
(2.59)

160
(19.10)

25.154
(13.585)

0.871
(0.259)

Child Care

-

-

-

-

-

49
(13.81)

-

63
(8.67)

-

0.776
(0.243)

4,529

2,840

19,949

1,953

1,129

7,149

1,044
(18.57)

654
(26.02)

1,726
(26.11)

1,090
(24.79)

663
(24.66)

1,611
(21.69)

1.643
(0.072)

0.677
(0.018)

1,828

644

1,282

521

CEX

N
PSID
Food
N

1.597
(0.070)

0.605
(0.014)

5,549

Panel C: 1994 - 1995

3,495

Panel D: 1996 - 1998

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Ratio
(4) = (1) / (2)

Ratio
(5) = (1) / (3)

Single
Mothers
(1)

Single, no
Children
(2)

Married
Mothers
(3)

Ratio
(4) = (1) / (2)

Ratio
(5) = (1) / (3)

Total

4,000
(92.06)

3,627
(178.19)

7,287
(93.89)

1.103
(0.060)

0.549
(0.014)

4,002
(85.09)

3,483
(109.97)

7,291
(83.74)

1.149
(0.044)

0.549
(0.013)

Food

975
(25.97)

641
(28.48)

1,459
(19.64)

1.521
(0.079)

0.668
(0.020)

940
(20.87)

589
(19.31)

1,454
(17.21)

1.594
(0.063)

0.646
(0.016)

Housing

1,837
(50.96)

1,713
(64.80)

2,976
(53.64)

1.072
(0.050)

0.617
(0.020)

1,875
(47.80)

1,716
(51.50)

2,960
(34.15)

1.092
(0.043)

0.633
(0.018)

Discretionary

641
(26.32)

594
(56.27)

1,343
(47.67)

1.080
(0.112)

0.477
(0.026)

603
(26.05)

557
(35.92)

1,266
(29.45)

1.083
(0.084)

0.476
(0.023)

Work Expenses

182
(22.49)

13
(3.11)

222
(19.70)

14.469
(4.007)

0.819
(0.125)

203
(21.48)

14
(2.95)

222
(16.52)

14.488
(3.416)

0.912
(0.118)

Child Care

84
(10.47)

-

92
(8.34)

-

0.912
(0.141)

87
(9.22)

-

92
(7.18)

-

0.949
(0.125)

1,434

660

4,630

1,828

1,024

6,087

1,110
(33.37)

685
(31.12)

1,581
(20.53)

1,117
(30.15)

676
(32.82)

1,601
(21.63)

1.652
(0.092)

0.698
(0.021)

925

342

2,153

753

268

1,857

CEX

N
PSID
Food
N

Notes : See the notes to Table 6.

1.621
(0.088)

0.702
(0.023)

Table 8
Regression and Quantile Estimates of the Level of Log Consumption for Single Mother Households
1984 - 1998, CEX
OLS
Single Mothers with High
School Degree or Less
(1)

Quantile Regressions
Single Mothers with High School
All Single Mothers
Degree or Less
25th Percentile 15th Percentile 25th Percentile 15th Percentile
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

1991-1993

0.0032
(0.0249)

0.0137
(0.0257)

0.0289
(0.0273)

0.0173
(0.0294)

0.0363
(0.0283)

1994-1995

0.0640
(0.0285)

0.0448
(0.0263)

0.0141
(0.0375)

0.0915
(0.0390)

0.0899
(0.0404)

1996-1998

0.0838
(0.0259)

0.0978
(0.0241)

0.1068
(0.0297)

0.1241
(0.0298)

0.1191
(0.0319)

H0: 1994-1995 - 1984-1990 = 0
H0: 1996-1998 - 1984-1990 = 0

0.0250
0.0010

0.0880
0.0000

0.7070
0.0000

0.0190
0.0000

0.0260
0.0000

H0: 1994-1995 - 1991-1993 = 0
H0: 1996-1998 - 1991-1993 = 0

0.0445
0.0046

0.3173
0.0019

0.6770
0.0123

0.0554
0.0017

0.1736
0.0143

H0: 1996-1998 - 1994-1995 = 0

0.5054

0.0751

0.0148

0.4634

0.4795

H0: 1994-1995 - 1984-1990 < -0.05

0.0001

0.0002

0.0438

0.0002

0.0003

H0: 1996-1998 - 1984-1990 < -0.05
H0: 1994-1995 - 1991-1993 < -0.05

0.0000
0.0002

0.0000
0.0046

0.0000
0.1611

0.0000
0.0007

0.0000
0.0043

H0: 1996-1998 - 1991-1993 < -0.05
H0: 1996-1998 - 1994-1995 < -0.05

0.0000
0.0095

0.0000
0.0003

0.0000
0.0001

0.0000
0.0315

0.0001
0.0275

9,744

15,900

15,900

9,744

9,744

P-values from tests of linear restrictions:

N

Notes : Results are from regressions of the log of total consumption on indicators for the time period, a full set of month dummies, family size, a cubic in age, and the race and
education of the female head for a sample of single mother households. The standard errors in parentheses are corrected for within household dependence by either using the
conventional White estimator (OLS) or by bootstrapping (quantile regressions).

Table 9
Regression and Quantile Estimates of Total Consumption by Single Mother and Comparison Households
1984 - 1998, CEX
OLS
Women with High School
Degree or Less

All Women

Quantile Regressions
Women with High School
All Women
Degree or Less

Women with High School
Degree or Less

25th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(3)
(4)

25th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(5)
(6)

15th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(7)
(8)

15th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(9)
(10)

-0.4427
(0.0243)

0.0791
(0.0671)

-0.4638
(0.0276)

0.0982
(0.0939)

-0.4587
(0.0339)

0.0736
(0.0848)

-0.4848
(0.0331)

0.1266
(0.1026)

-0.4754
(0.0381)

0.1333
(0.0736)

-0.3960
(0.0288)

0.1025
(0.0671)

-0.3987
(0.0301)

0.1432
(0.0956)

-0.3956
(0.0383)

0.0962
(0.0850)

-0.4113
(0.0375)

0.1948
(0.1085)

-0.4184
(0.0458)

Single Mother*1994-1995

0.1867
(0.0813)

-0.3608
(0.0338)

0.1118
(0.0705)

-0.4011
(0.0355)

0.2043
(0.1108)

-0.3493
(0.0451)

0.0817
(0.0841)

-0.4289
(0.0447)

0.1963
(0.1085)

-0.4001
(0.0535)

Single Mother*1996-1998

0.2273
(0.0766)

-0.3381
(0.0297)

0.1682
(0.0665)

-0.3364
(0.0323)

0.2436
(0.1065)

-0.3078
(0.0371)

0.1621
(0.0813)

-0.3560
(0.0377)

0.2301
(0.1083)

-0.3378
(0.0453)

1991-1993

-0.0322
(0.0367)

-0.0455
(0.0111)

-0.0066
(0.0246)

-0.0467
(0.0090)

-0.0140
(0.0447)

-0.0345
(0.0135)

0.0028
(0.0283)

-0.0410
(0.0105)

-0.0244
(0.0614)

-0.0252
(0.0154)

1994-1995

-0.0269
(0.0445)

-0.0219
(0.0126)

0.0098
(0.0272)

-0.0258
(0.0093)

0.0035
(0.0622)

-0.0038
(0.0154)

0.0198
(0.0290)

-0.0200
(0.0115)

0.0351
(0.0568)

0.0115
(0.0183)

1996-1998

-0.0491
(0.0372)

-0.0281
(0.0119)

-0.0036
(0.0261)

-0.0380
(0.0096)

-0.0149
(0.0479)

-0.0301
(0.0131)

0.0188
(0.0280)

-0.0351
(0.0109)

0.0067
(0.0478)

-0.0237
(0.0148)

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1984-1990 = 0

0.0847

0.0081

0.4455

0.0458

0.1804

0.0130

0.8672

0.1349

0.3417

0.0874

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1984-1990 = 0

0.0034

0.0002

0.0104

0.0000

0.0124

0.0000

0.0296

0.0000

0.0783

0.0002

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1991-1993 = 0

0.3459

0.2904

0.8421

0.9466

0.4749

0.3277

0.7723

0.6819

0.9868

0.6897

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1991-1993 = 0

0.0660

0.0668

0.1177

0.0387

0.1739

0.0278

0.1675

0.1243

0.6620

0.0584

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1994-1995 = 0

0.4720

0.4887

0.2104

0.0509

0.6500

0.3491

0.1087

0.0537

0.6388

0.1858

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1984-1990 < -0.05

0.0039

0.0000

0.0269

0.0002

0.0244

0.0002

0.1151

0.0023

0.0513

0.0022

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1984-1990 < -0.05

0.0001

0.0000

0.0001

0.0000

0.0004

0.0000

0.0004

0.0000

0.0045

0.0000

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1991-1993 < -0.05

0.0341

0.0053

0.1009

0.0972

0.0970

0.0210

0.2396

0.2256

0.2778

0.0676

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1991-1993 < -0.05

0.0025

0.0003

0.0030

0.0001

0.0209

0.0003

0.0076

0.0017

0.1453

0.0011

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1994-1995 < -0.05

0.0542

0.0134

0.0091

0.0003

0.1513

0.0195

0.0047

0.0006

0.1224

0.0086

15,397

47,559

35,006

92,911

15,397

47,559

35,006

92,911

15,397

47,559

Single
(1)

Mothers
(2)

Single Mother*1984-1990

0.0954
(0.0722)

Single Mother*1991-1993

P-values from tests of linear restrictions:

N

Notes : The dependent variable is the log of total consumption. In addition to the variables reported above, all models include a full set of month dummies, family size, a cubic in age, and the race and education of the female head. The standard errors in
parentheses are corrected for within household dependence by either using the conventional White estimator (OLS) or by bootstrapping (quantile regressions).

Table 10
Regression and Quantile Estimates of Food Consumption by Single Mother and Comparison Households
1984 - 1998, CEX
OLS
Women with High School
Degree or Less

All Women

Quantile Regressions
Women with High School
All Women
Degree or Less

Women with High School
Degree or Less

25th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(3)
(4)

25th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(5)
(6)

15th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(7)
(8)

15th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(9)
(10)

-0.2802
(0.0246)

0.2643
(0.0785)

-0.2852
(0.0246)

0.3232
(0.1068)

-0.2427
(0.0317)

0.2164
(0.0903)

-0.3135
(0.0302)

0.2895
(0.1134)

-0.2670
(0.0369)

0.2048
(0.0829)

-0.2330
(0.0292)

0.2127
(0.0858)

-0.2514
(0.0304)

0.2489
(0.1193)

-0.2250
(0.0391)

0.1639
(0.0946)

-0.2878
(0.0302)

0.1969
(0.1202)

-0.2601
(0.0385)

Single Mother*1994-1995

0.1468
(0.0861)

-0.1898
(0.0327)

0.2371
(0.0814)

-0.2141
(0.0279)

0.2201
(0.1121)

-0.1907
(0.0343)

0.1521
(0.0985)

-0.2764
(0.0392)

0.1369
(0.1299)

-0.2346
(0.0456)

Single Mother*1996-1998

0.1907
(0.0814)

-0.2073
(0.0307)

0.2064
(0.0796)

-0.2401
(0.0283)

0.2831
(0.1135)

-0.1987
(0.0365)

0.1500
(0.0888)

-0.2601
(0.0308)

0.2778
(0.1267)

-0.2000
(0.0401)

1991-1993

0.0053
(0.0413)

-0.0354
(0.0118)

0.0453
(0.0249)

-0.0509
(0.0098)

0.0637
(0.0438)

-0.0321
(0.0152)

0.0509
(0.0278)

-0.0391
(0.0115)

0.0838
(0.0429)

-0.0218
(0.0201)

1994-1995

0.1121
(0.0433)

-0.0359
(0.0126)

0.0355
(0.0278)

-0.0640
(0.0103)

0.1235
(0.0543)

-0.0378
(0.0157)

0.0590
(0.0274)

-0.0505
(0.0126)

0.1772
(0.0538)

-0.0144
(0.0188)

1996-1998

0.0261
(0.0385)

-0.0559
(0.0121)

0.0478
(0.0240)

-0.0651
(0.0094)

0.0437
(0.0497)

-0.0586
(0.0149)

0.0691
(0.0268)

-0.0568
(0.0101)

0.0436
(0.0633)

-0.0502
(0.0166)

Single
(1)

Mothers
(2)

Single Mother*1984-1990

0.2013
(0.0769)

Single Mother*1991-1993

P-values from tests of linear restrictions:

N

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1984-1990 = 0

0.2880

0.0036

0.4351

0.0030

0.0892

0.1481

0.1330

0.2673

0.0143

0.4567

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1984-1990 = 0

0.8187

0.0098

0.0669

0.0605

0.4806

0.1827

0.0810

0.0450

0.8773

0.0924

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1991-1993 = 0

0.3028

0.2020

0.5446

0.2246

0.7047

0.4137

0.7921

0.7570

0.3815

0.5829

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1991-1993 = 0

0.7946

0.4246

0.8677

0.7055

0.6485

0.5127

0.7349

0.2975

0.2761

0.1624

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1994-1995 = 0

0.4310

0.6109

0.4339

0.3714

0.3977

0.8381

0.9644

0.6557

0.1009

0.4741

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1984-1990 < -0.05

0.4651

0.0000

0.2571

0.0000

0.1906

0.0023

0.3696

0.0046

0.0498

0.0290

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1984-1990 < -0.05

0.1955

0.0000

0.4014

0.0001

0.4310

0.0022

0.3334

0.0001

0.3063

0.0017

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1991-1993 < -0.05

0.4430

0.0030

0.0322

0.0023

0.3898

0.0222

0.1959

0.0471

0.4419

0.0520

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1991-1993 < -0.05

0.2542

0.0093

0.1244

0.0202

0.1312

0.0287

0.1897

0.0017

0.0390

0.0053

H0: SM*1996-1998 - SM*1994-1995 < -0.05

0.0462

0.1721

0.3107

0.2052

0.0647

0.1407

0.1591

0.0347

0.0131

0.0401

15,397

47,559

35,006

92,911

15,397

47,559

35,006

92,911

15,397

47,559

Notes : The dependent variable is the log of food consumption. See Table 9 for additional notes.

Table 11
Regression and Quantile Estimates of Food Consumption by Single Mother and Comparison Households
1984 - 1997, PSID
OLS
Women with High School
Degree or Less

All Women

Quantile Regressions
Women with High School
Degree or Less
All Women

Women with High School
Degree or Less

25th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(3)
(4)

25th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(5)
(6)

15th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(7)
(8)

15th Percentile
Single
Mothers
(9)
(10)

-0.2890
(0.0295)

0.3970
(0.0999)

-0.3468
(0.0320)

0.3982
(0.1053)

-0.3391
(0.0424)

0.5255
(0.1112)

-0.3469
(0.0366)

0.5189
(0.1555)

-0.3456
(0.0451)

0.3957
(0.0873)

-0.1974
(0.0314)

0.3604
(0.1013)

-0.2529
(0.0320)

0.4017
(0.1085)

-0.2248
(0.0423)

0.4816
(0.1171)

-0.3026
(0.0439)

0.5145
(0.1595)

-0.2953
(0.0533)

Single Mother*1994-1995

0.3869
(0.0996)

-0.1680
(0.0374)

0.3537
(0.1056)

-0.2948
(0.0383)

0.3317
(0.1172)

-0.2455
(0.0470)

0.4394
(0.1270)

-0.3025
(0.0503)

0.4669
(0.1665)

-0.2738
(0.0692)

Single Mother*1996-1997

0.4399
(0.1018)

-0.1677
(0.0321)

0.4426
(0.1160)

-0.2411
(0.0337)

0.5156
(0.1323)

-0.1893
(0.0426)

0.5942
(0.1185)

-0.2329
(0.0475)

0.6163
(0.1578)

-0.1780
(0.0618)

1991-1993

0.0280
(0.0514)

-0.0641
(0.0119)

0.0693
(0.0339)

-0.0624
(0.0105)

0.0517
(0.0612)

-0.0548
(0.0149)

0.0490
(0.0455)

-0.0449
(0.0130)

0.0281
(0.0895)

-0.0470
(0.0179)

1994-1995

0.0383
(0.0611)

-0.0939
(0.0149)

0.0261
(0.0423)

-0.0770
(0.0136)

0.0840
(0.0723)

-0.0762
(0.0183)

0.0541
(0.0528)

-0.0735
(0.0149)

0.0577
(0.0950)

-0.0734
(0.0230)

1996-1997

0.0060
(0.0693)

-0.0771
(0.0155)

-0.0306
(0.0632)

-0.0768
(0.0148)

-0.0351
(0.0874)

-0.0818
(0.0223)

-0.0385
(0.0518)

-0.0844
(0.0146)

-0.0125
(0.0845)

-0.0809
(0.0239)

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1984-1990 = 0

0.9995

0.0016

0.4146

0.1787

0.3759

0.0265

0.2088

0.3617

0.6192

0.2596

H0: SM*1996-1997 - SM*1984-1990 = 0

0.4858

0.0002

0.5038

0.0006

0.2047

0.0002

0.2576

0.0125

0.3242

0.0028

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1991-1993 = 0

0.8804

0.3442

0.8852

0.2092

0.3433

0.5827

0.5343

0.9987

0.6604

0.7015

H0: SM*1996-1997 - SM*1991-1993 = 0

0.5143

0.3378

0.2332

0.7003

0.2259

0.3449

0.1026

0.1171

0.3520

0.0243

H0: SM*1996-1997 - SM*1994-1995 = 0

0.3848

0.9912

0.1788

0.0905

0.0393

0.1397

0.0089

0.0845

0.1248

0.1216

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1984-1990 < -0.05

0.2313

0.0000

0.4494

0.0042

0.4131

0.0004

0.2990

0.0262

0.4925

0.0279

H0: SM*1996-1997 - SM*1984-1990 < -0.05

0.0880

0.0000

0.0807

0.0000

0.0353

0.0000

0.0252

0.0002

0.0678

0.0001

H0: SM*1994-1995 - SM*1991-1993 < -0.05

0.2404

0.0054

0.1754

0.4046

0.3931

0.2184

0.4549

0.1271

0.4908

0.1012

H0: SM*1996-1997 - SM*1991-1993 < -0.05

0.0825

0.0052

0.0276

0.0223

0.0407

0.0115

0.0092

0.0036

0.0826

0.0007

H0: SM*1996-1997 - SM*1994-1995 < -0.05

0.0458

0.0557

0.0179

0.0006

0.0044

0.0027

0.0003

0.0015

0.0203

0.0093

6,550

17,830

11,748

33,534

6,550

17,830

11,748

33,534

6,550

17,830

Single
(1)

Mothers
(2)

Single Mother*1984-1990

0.3869
(0.0909)

Single Mother*1991-1993

P-values from tests of linear restrictions:

N

Notes : The dependent variable is the log of food consumption. See Table 9 for additional notes.

