 %

   

     
      

 !"#!$"
%"&'(")*+,
!(-../""'.(("0.)*+,
  1   
2+3+00 !40054
/"#'6+,2*)
7

             
     
! " !  #     $ $   %    
&  ' ( )  ' *   "   + 
*  *  * $*  ,          *($ -.** 
*    $* , % % /* 0    ,1   *
 2$$ * *",( %     *   (" 
+   *  3  (  *'  )  ( %    ,!  
*$ $   4 5$5664222,  ,6* 6 2 ,  !20$   
*         *)  '  *  ,
74 .2 ,1    &,! ,,(   *0  0
2 $   $ 48 2 0$$ $  *  7 
   ,

!"&### 4/" 0(" ' !  &"540
#  !"#!$"
 %"&'(")*+,
7,++2
829
$%#%



 :47 "540

 !$'70 &0(("5$/0 ("0;; $

!"7-# $000!5# $(" 04"2<<),+++0($6!$#"0;0!"; (7
"=( #" 5=0!"0; (76/4$>=%("=($5$50*#
$"/"'#0$!0/$0(" '#40!"0$ 0"060!0
5"(" #/4=(05"(00/$0$$0!"5# ;"(0(" 00!0!0!"'
00"="$7!'!6$'=($/$"/"'(("40


"#4 !$;4000
5"07;! '
22+203)WK "
! '6?+?*@
#
$-@@*@+,?929
1=-@@*@+,+93)
$A'0/4 ! '#4

 !"#!$"
"#4 !$;4000
5"07;! '
22+203)WK "
! '6?+?*@
#

There are two important implications of the efficient market hypothesis. The first is that
it is not easy to earn excess returns. The second is that prices are “correct” in the sense that
prices reflect fundamental value. This latter implication is, in many ways, more important than
the first. Do asset markets offer rational signals to the economy about where to invest real
resources? If some firms have stock prices that are far from intrinsic value, then those firms will
attract too much or too little capital. While important, this aspect of the efficient market
hypothesis is difficult to test because intrinsic values are unobservable. That is why tests of
relative valuation, for example using closed-end funds, are important. The fact that closed-end
funds often trade at substantial discounts or premia makes one wonder whether other assets may
also be mispriced.
The most basic test of relative valuation is the law of one price: the same asset cannot
trade simultaneously at different prices. The law of one price is usually thought to hold nearly
exactly in financial markets, where transactions costs are small and competition is fierce.
Indeed, the law of one price is in many ways the central precept in financial economics. Our
goal in this paper is to investigate violations of the law of one price, cases where prices are
almost certainly wrong in the sense that they are far from the frictionless price. Although the
number of cases we examine is small, the violations of the law of one price are large.
The driver of the law of one price in financial markets is arbitrage, defined as the
simultaneous buying and selling of the same security for two different prices. The profits from
such arbitrage trades give arbitrageurs the incentive to eliminate any violations of the law of one
price. Arbitrage is the basis of much of modern financial theory, including the Modigliani-Miller
capital structure propositions, the Black-Scholes option pricing formula, and the arbitrage pricing
theory and related multi-factor asset pricing models.
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 1

Do arbitrage trades actually enforce the law of one price? This empirical question is
easier to answer than the more general question of whether prices reflect fundamental value.
Tests of this more general implication of market efficiency force the investigator take a stance on
defining fundamental value. Fama (1991) describes this difficulty as the “joint-hypothesis”
problem: “market efficiency per se is not testable. It must be tested jointly with some model of
equilibrium, an asset-pricing model.” In contrast, one does not need an asset-pricing model to
know that identical assets should have identical prices.
The same difficulty that economists face in trying to test whether asset prices generally
reflect intrinsic value is also faced by real world arbitrageurs looking for mispriced securities.
For example, suppose security A appears to be overpriced relative to security B. Perhaps A is a
glamorous growth stock, say a technology stock, and B is a boring value stock, say an oil stock.
An arbitrageur could short the technology stock and buy the oil stock. Unfortunately, this
strategy is exposed to “bad model” risk, another name for the joint hypothesis problem. Perhaps
the arbitrageur has neglected differences in liquidity, risk, or taxes, differences that are properly
reflected in the existing prices. In this case, the trade is unlikely to earn excess returns.
Researchers have not been able to settle, for example, whether value stocks are too cheap relative
to growth stocks (as argued by De Bondt and Thaler (1985) and Lakonishok, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1994)) or just more risky (as favored by Fama and French (1993)).
Another second risk for the arbitrageur is fundamental risk. An arbitrageur who shorts
technology companies and buys oil companies runs the risk that peace breaks out in the Middle
East, causing the price of oil to plummet. In this case, perhaps the original judgment that oil
stocks were cheap was correct but the bet loses money ex post.
In contrast, if A and B have identical cash flows but different prices, the arbitrageur
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 2

eliminates fundamental risk. If securities A and B have other similar features, for example
similar liquidity, then bad model risk is minimized as well. Violations of the law of one price are
easier for economists to see, and safer for arbitrageurs to correct. For example, suppose A is a
portfolio of stocks, and B is a closed end fund that owns A. If B has a lower price than A, then
(ignoring issues such as fund expenses), the arbitrageur can buy B, short A, and hope to make a
profit if the prices converge. Unfortunately, this strategy is exposed to a third sort of risk, noise
trader risk. An arbitrageur that buys the fund and shorts the underlying shares runs the risk that
the discount may widen as investor sentiment shifts. This risk can be either systematic (all
closed-end fund discounts widen) or idiosyncratic (De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann
(1990), Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991)). Since there is no guarantee that A and B will converge
in price, the strategy is risky.
Noise trader risk can be eliminated in the long run in situations where A and B are certain
to converge in finite time. For example, suppose at time T the closed end fund B will liquidate,
and all holders of B will receive a cash settlement equal to the net asset value of the portfolio,
i.e., A. We know that the price of A and B will be identical at time T. Noise trader risk still
exists in the intermediate period between now and T, but not over the long run. The terminal
date eliminates other concerns as well, for example liquidity is not an issue for investors holding
until time T. In this case, with no fundamental risk, bad model risk, or noise trader risk, there
still is another problem that can cause the prices of A and B to be different: transactions costs.
Both market efficiency and the law of one price are affected by transactions costs. If
transactions costs are not zero, then arbitrageurs are prevented from forcing price all the way to
fundamental value, and the same security can have different prices. In this case, then Fama
(1991) describes an efficient market as one in which “deviations from the extreme version of the
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 3

efficiency hypothesis are within information and trading costs.” An example is a market where it
is impossible to short a stock, equivalent to infinite transactions costs for short sales. In this
market, a stock could be massively overpriced, yet since there is no way for arbitrageurs to make
money, the market is still efficient in the sense that there is no money left on the table. Still, this
is market efficiency with very wrong prices.
In this paper we investigate apparent violations of the law of one price where there are
few risk issues involved but transactions costs involved with short selling play an important role
in limiting arbitrage. We study equity carve-outs in which the parent has stated its intention to
spin off its remaining shares. A notable example is Palm and 3Com. Palm, which makes handheld computers, was owned by 3Com, a profitable company selling computer network systems
and services. On March 2nd, 2000, 3Com sold a fraction of its stake in Palm to the general public
via an initial public offering (IPO) for Palm. In this transaction, called an equity carve-out,
3Com retained ownership of 95 percent of the shares. 3Com announced that, pending an
expected IRS approval, it would eventually spin off its remaining shares of Palm to 3Com’s
shareholders before the end of the year. 3Com shareholders would receive about 1.5 shares of
Palm for every share of 3Com that they owned.
This event put in play two ways in which an investor could buy Palm. The investor could
buy (say) 150 shares of Palm directly, or he could buy 100 shares of 3Com, thereby acquiring a
claim to 150 shares of Palm plus a portion of 3Com’s other assets. Since the price of 3Com’s
shares can never be less than zero (equity values are never negative), here the law of one price
establishes a simple inequality: the price of 3Com must be at least 1.5 times the price of Palm.
Since 3Com held more than $10 a share in cash and securities in addition to its other profitable
business assets, one might expect 3Com’s price to be well above 1.5 times the price of Palm.
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 4

The day before the Palm IPO, 3Com closed at $104.13 per share. After the first day of
trading, Palm closed at $95.06 a share, implying that the price of 3Com should have jumped to at
least $145 (using the precise ratio of 1.525). Instead, 3Com fell to $81.81. The “stub value” of
3Com (the implied value of 3Com’s non-Palm assets and businesses) was minus $63. In other
words, the stock market was saying that the value of 3Com’s non-Palm business was minus 22
billion dollars! The “information costs” mentioned by Fama (1991) are small in this case, since
the mispricing took place in a widely publicized IPO that attracted frenzied attention. The nature
of the mispricing was so simple that even the dimmest of market participants and financial
journalists were able to grasp it. On the day after the issue, the mispricing was widely discussed,
including in two articles in the Wall Street Journal and one in the New York Times, yet the
mispricing persisted for months.
This is a gross violation of the law of one price, and one for which most of the risks
identified above do not apply. An arbitrageur who buys 100 shares of 3Com and shorts 150
shares of Palm is essentially buying the 3Com stub for minus $63. If things go as planned, in
less than a year this value must be a least zero. We do not need to agree on a model of asset
pricing to agree on the proposition that one share of 3Com should be worth at least 1.5 shares of
Palm. Noise trader risk is minimized because there is a terminal date at which the shares will be
distributed. When the distribution occurs the 3Com stub cannot have a negative price.
Fundamental risks about the value of Palm are completely hedged. The only remaining problem
is costly arbitrage. Still, investors were willing to pay over $2.5 billion dollars to buy expensive
shares of Palm rather than buy the cheap Palm shares embedded in 3Com and get 3Com thrown
in.
We do not claim that this mispricing creates exploitable arbitrage opportunities. To the
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 5

contrary, we document the precise market friction that allows prices to be wrong, namely
shorting costs. These costs arise when short sales are either very expensive or simply
impossible. Although shorting costs are necessary in order for mispricing to occur, they are of
course not sufficient. Shorting costs can explain why a rational arbitrageur fails to short the
overpriced security, but not why anyone buys the overpriced security. To explain that, one needs
investors who are (in our specific case) irrational, woefully uninformed, or endowed with very
strange preferences. We will refer to these conditions collectively as “irrational,” but they could
be anything that causes a downward sloping demand curve for specific stocks (despite the
presence of cheaper and nearly identical substitutes). Thus two things, trading costs and
irrational investors, are necessary for mispricing. Trading costs, by limiting arbitrage, creates an
environment in which simple supply and demand intuition is useful in explaining asset prices. In
our case, the demand for certain shares by irrational investors was too large relative to ability of
the market to supply these shares via short sales, creating a price that was too high.
We investigate this question using all the cases we could find that share the key elements
of the Palm-3Com situation, namely a carve-out with an announced intention to spin off the new
issue in the near future. By limiting ourselves to these cases (as opposed to the much larger
category of all carve-outs) we are able to minimize the risks that the spin-off never takes place
and thus reduce the risk inherent in the arbitrage trade.
We start in section I by describing carve-outs and spin-offs, showing how we construct
the sample and describing its main features. In section II we document high apparent returns that
are implicit in market prices, describe relevant risks, and ask whether the high returns can
plausibly be explained by risk. In section III we describe the short-sale constraints that allow
mispricing to persist. We document another notable departure from the law of one price, the
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 6

violation of put-call parity, and explain how this departure is consistent with short sale
constraints. In section IV we ask why stubs become negative, look at IPO day returns on parents
and issues, and show the characteristics of investors in parents and issues.
I.

Sample of carve-outs

We examine carve-outs followed by spin-offs. An equity carve-out, also known as a
partial public offering, is defined as an IPO for shares (typically a minority stake) in a subsidiary
company. In an equity carve-out, a subsidiary firm raises money by selling shares to the public
and then typically giving some or all of the proceeds to its parent. A spin-off occurs when the
parent firm gives remaining shares in the subsidiary to the parent’s shareholders; no money
changes hands.
We study a sample of equity carve-outs in which the parent firm explicitly states its
intention to immediately spin off its remaining ownership in the subsidiary. We study this
sample of firms since in this case, negative stubs appear to present a trading opportunity with
fairly clear timing. In contrast, Cornell and Liu (2000), Schill and Zhou (2000), and Mitchell,
Pulvino, and Stafford (2001) look at negative stub situations generally, not necessarily involving
an explicit intention to spin off. Our focus on cases with a terminal date allows us to ignore
some issues they discuss such as agency costs (the possibility that the parent firm may waste the
cash generated by the subsidiary).
Spin-offs can be tax-free both to the parent firm and to its shareholders. In order to be
tax-free, spin-offs need to comply with Internal Revenue Code Section 355, which requires that
the parent (prior to the spin-off) owns at least 80 percent of the subsidiary. Thus if a firm plans a
carve-out followed by a tax-free spin-off, it is necessary to carve out less than 20 percent of the
subsidiary.
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 7

There are several reasons why a firm might carve out before spinning off. First, the
parent firm might want to raise capital for itself (Allen and McConnell, 1998). Second, the
parent might wish to raise capital for the subsidiary to use. Third, a standard explanation is that
the parent might want to establish an orderly market for the new issue by selling a small piece
first (see Cornell, 1998). According to this explanation, the parent avoids flooding the market
with a large number of new shares in a full spin-off, and the IPO gives an incentive for
investment banks to market and support the new issue. Raising capital via a carve-out of the
subsidiary, rather than an equity issue for the parent stock, is especially attractive if the firm
believes that the parent stock is underpriced or the subsidiary will be overpriced, as in Nanda
(1991) and Slovin et al (1995).
A. The Sample
We start building our sample by obtaining from Securities Data Corporation a list of all
carve-outs in which the parent retains at least 80 percent of the subsidiary. Their list contains
155 such carve-outs from April 1985 to May 2000. To their list, we added one issue (PFSWeb)
that appears to have been miscoded by them, and four issues occurring after May 2000. Using
the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Edgar database, we then searched registration form
S-1 for explicit statements by the parent firm that it intended to distribute promptly the remaining
shares to the shareholders. We discarded all firms for which we were unable to find a definitive
statement that the parents intended to distribute all its shares. A typical statement, from Palm’s
registration, is: “3Com currently plans to complete its divestiture of Palm approximately six
months following this offering by distributing all of the shares of Palm common stock owned by
3Com to the holders of 3Com's common stock.” The statements often mentioned IRS approval
as a pre-condition of distribution; the specified time frame for the distribution was usually 6 to
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 8

12 months.
We searched registrations starting in 1995, although since Edgar’s database is incomplete
prior to May 6, 1996, we were unable to find all firms before then. As it happens, we find no
firms in 1995 that satisfied our requirements, so the final sample contains 18 issues from April
1996 to August 2000. This sample, shown in Table 1, consists of every carve-out of less than 20
percent of subsidiary shares in which the parent declared its intention to distribute the remaining
shares.
B. Constructing stubs
We define the stub value using the ratio of subsidiary shares to be given to parent
shareholders at the distribution date. The ratio is the parent’s holdings of the subsidiary divided
by the outstanding number of shares of the parent on the record date of the distribution.
Unfortunately, this ratio is not known with certainty on the issue date, because the number of
parent shares outstanding can fluctuate, e.g. due to the conversion of convertible debt or the
exercise of options owned by insiders.
Let the parent stock have date 0 price per share of P0P and the subsidiary stock P0S . Let x
be the ratio of subsidiary shares that are given to parent shareholders at the distribution date. A
negative stub means S0 = P0P − xP0S < 0 . We can also express the stub as a fraction of the parent,
P0P − xP0S S0
= P .
which we do with a lower case s, s0 =
P0P
P0
Thus to calculate stub values, we have to estimate the expected ratio at each point in time.
We did this in two stages. First, we simply used the naïve ratio of the parent holdings in the
subsidiary divided by the current parent shares outstanding, using Center for Research in
Security Prices (CRSP) data on shares outstanding. Since the various contingencies generally
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 9

raise the number of shares of the parent, this naïve ratio likely overstates the actual ratio and thus
makes the calculated stub more negative. Second, after examining the pattern of stubs in the 18
cases, we more carefully studied the cases of potential negative stubs.
We concentrate on negative stubs in order to consider only cases of clear violations of the
law of one price. Of course, there may be mispricing in other situations, but in such cases there
is no uncontroversial proof of mispricing. So negative stubs should be considered the extreme
cases of unambiguous mispricing. For the potential negative stubs, we gathered information that
was available in real-time to construct the estimated ratio. In all but one case the uncertainty
about the final ratio appears to be small.1
Of our 18 firms, nine clearly had positive stubs. We classify three stubs as marginally
negative (ATL Products, Orient Express Hotels, and TransAct Technologies). These were cases
where we observed a small negative stubs on one or two days only, or where the correct ratio is
sometimes unclear due to changing numbers of shares. For these cases we think that a
reasonable person would not be convinced that the stub was negative given all available
information. None of the three marginal cases involves a negative stub at or near the IPO date.
We identify six cases of unambiguously negative stubs: UBID, Retek, PFSWeb, Xpedior,
Palm, and Stratos Lightwave.2 All six are technology stocks. UBID is an on-line auction firm.
Retek produces B2B inventory software. PFSWeb provides transactions management services
for e-commerce. Xpedior is an e-business consulting firm. Stratos Lightwave is an optical
networking firm. Both the six parents and the six subsidiaries trade on NASDAQ.
As shown in Table 2, for the six cases with negative stubs, four were negative at closing
prices on the first day of trading, and the other two were negative by two days after. For five of
the cases, the stub was negative for at least two months, with a maximum of 187 trading days for
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 10

Stratos. For one case, Xpedior, the stub was negative for only two days before turning positive
again. Xpedior’s minimum stub also had a fairly small magnitude of only -19 percent of the
parent company’s value, unlike the other five that had minimum stubs of -39 to -137 percent of
parent value. Thus Xpedior is a much weaker case in terms of the persistence and magnitude of
the mispricing.
Table 2 shows the magnitude of the mispricing in a variety of ways. Perhaps the most
relevant is the market value of the shares trading in the subsidiary. This number (which uses the
number of publicly trading shares, not the number of outstanding shares) is at its peak $2.5
billion for Palm, meaning that investors worth $2.5 billion thought it was better to own Palm
than to own 3Com.
C. Time pattern of negative stubs
Figures 1 through 4 show the time series of stub values for the six cases of negative stubs.
Except in Figure 2 (which is crowded), the solid line shows the stub prior to distribution and the
dashed line shows the parent share price after the distribution. Several patterns are apparent.
First, stubs start negative and gradually get closer to zero, eventually becoming positive.
Second, the announcement of IRS approval and the consequent announcement of a distribution
date (occurring on the same day) cause the stub to go from negative to positive in two cases,
UBID and Palm. Thus in these cases the market is acting as if there is significant news on these
days.3
In one case, Xpedior, the distribution never occurred. On March 22, 2000, the parent
company Metamor announced another firm was acquiring it. Xpedior’s stub rises markedly on
this day. However, one could argue that on and after this date, Xpedior’s stub has little meaning,
since the distribution is presumably cancelled. On the announcement day, although not
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 11

explicitly canceling the spin-off, the acquirer failed to confirm the spin-off and instead
announced it had gained control of Xpedior and was investing additional money in it.
Most of our sample is mostly concentrated in the year 2000. Despite this time clustering,
however, the picture is one of predictable idiosyncratic movement in stubs. Stubs start off
negative, and then get positive. This pattern is repeated over time, and does not appear to reflect
systematic exposure to some common factor, but rather idiosyncratic developments.
We draw two conclusions from the analysis so far. First, we are able to identify six cases
of clearly negative stubs. We do not think that the proportion of negative stubs, one third of the
cases we study, is particularly significant. As we stressed above, a negative stub indicates a
gross case of mispricing. Even a single case would raise important questions about market
efficiency. The fact that we find six such cases indicates that the highly publicized Palm
example was not unique.4
Second, all the cases we study show a similar time pattern of returns whereby the stub
becomes less negative over time and eventually becomes positive. This suggests that market
forces act to mitigate the mispricing, but slowly. We return to this slow adjustment, which
reflects the sluggish functioning of the market for lending stocks, in section III.
II.

Risk and return on stubs

In this section, we investigate the returns to an investment strategy of buying the parent
and shorting the subsidiary. We find that this strategy produces high returns with low (and
largely idiosyncratic) risk. However, we caution readers not to rush out to form hedge funds to
exploit this phenomenon; as we show in the next section, the high returns we find on paper are
probably not achievable in practice, due to the difficulty of shorting the subsidiary (although we
are aware of individual investors who did make money on these situations). Thus, the question
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 12

we ask is whether the investment strategy would have produced profits if it could have been
implemented.
This investment strategy is related to several controversies in finance: value, IPO’s, and
the diversification discount. First, it is a value strategy of buying cheap stocks and shorting
expensive stocks. Second, it is a strategy that shorts IPO’s. Ritter (1991) documents that IPO’s
tend to have low subsequent returns, but the statistical soundness of this finding has been the
subject of a vigorous debate summarized in Fama (1998) and Loughran and Ritter (2000). As a
subset of the IPO debate, Vijh (1999) finds that carve-outs stocks do not have low subsequently
returns. Third, it is a strategy of that buys firms with a large diversification discount. Lamont
and Polk (2001) show the diversification discount partly reflects subsequent returns on
diversified firms, so that the diversification discount does not only reflect agency concerns such
as wasteful managers. In the case of our firms, it seems unambiguous that mispricing drives the
subsequent pattern of returns, so that we have a clear example where the
value/IPO/diversification effect is due to mispricing.
A. Returns on stub positions
The following analysis ignores dividends and assumes the distribution takes place with
fixed distribution ratio at time T. First, since the stub must go from negative to positive by date
T, it must be the case that RTP > RTS , where RTP and RTS are the return on the parent and
subsidiary between date zero and date T. Thus if an investor buys the parent and shorts an equal
dollar amount of the subsidiary, she gets a positive return of RTP - RTS . In a frictionless market in
which the investor gets access to short sale proceeds, this strategy is a zero-cost or self-financing
strategy. For this strategy, the exact distribution ratio x is not important, as long as one knows

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 13

that the stub is negative initially. On paper, this strategy is an arbitrage opportunity, since it has
zero cost and generates strictly positive cash flow in the future.
Assuming the distribution takes place with known ratio x, one can construct a position
that is a pure bet on the stub. This second strategy eliminates the effect of fluctuations in
subsidiary value, and again guarantees strictly positive returns. It buys one share of the parent,
shorts x shares on the subsidiary, and (again assuming access to the short sale proceeds) invests
the resulting -S0 dollars of cash in the initial period at the risk free rate of RF. Again, this
strategy is theoretically self-financing, and puts equal amounts into the long portfolio (consisting
of riskless assets and the parent) and the short portfolio (consisting of the subsidiary). One can
express the returns on this strategy as

− s0 F
1
RTP +
RT − RTS .
1 − s0
1 − s0

Table 3 shows returns from the strategy of buying the parent and shorting the subsidiary
at the closing price on the first day that the stub is negative. We examine two holding periods:
holding until one day after the announcement date, or holding until one day before the
distribution date. For the purposes of Table 3, we use the takeover announcement for Xpedior’s
announcement date, and the takeover consummation as Xpedior’s distribution date. Table 3
shows that parents had returns that were 30 percent higher than subsidiaries holding until the
announcement date, and 33 percent higher holding until the distribution date. This difference
was statistically significant. From this evidence alone, one cannot say whether the subsidiary is
overvalued or the parent is undervalued. Later, we show evidence from options markets
implying that it is the subsidiary that is mispriced.
B. Traditional measures of risk
Table 3’s T-statistics do not adjust for the substantial clustering of the observations.
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 14

Table 4 addresses this concern by using monthly data on portfolio returns reflecting a strategy of
buying parents and shorting subsidiaries. On the last trading day of the month, if the subsidiary
has a negative stub on that day, we buy the parent and short the subsidiary. We maintain this
position until the last day of the month prior to the distribution date. We calculate equal
weighted returns on the portfolio holdings on this strategy. The strategy holds one to three
paired positions each month, for the 21 months of returns from January 1999 to May 1999
(UBID) and December 1999 to March 2001 (the other four subsidiaries; the strategy does not
take a position in Xpedior).
Over this period, the simple strategy of buying parents and shorting subsidiaries in equal
dollar amounts has a monthly return that averages 10 percent per month (significantly different
from zero) with a standard deviation of 14 percent per month, producing a monthly Sharpe ratio
of 0.67 per month. The hedged strategy that takes a pure bet on the stub has a slightly higher
Sharpe ratio of 0.70 a month. Over the same period, the average market excess return (value
weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ return from CRSP minus T-bill returns from Ibbotson
Associates) was negative. From July 1927 to March 2001 the market had a Sharpe ratio of 0.12.
Thus stub strategies have risk-return tradeoffs more than four times more favorable than the
market’s.
Table 4 shows estimates of a CAPM equation. Although the strategy has a positive and
significant market beta (so that subsidiaries have more market risk than parents), the α is a huge
10 percent per month for the simple strategy and 9 percent for the hedged strategy. The tstatistic on α formally tests the hypothesis that the stubs trading strategy can be used to produce
a higher Sharpe ratio than the market. Even using these highly undiversified portfolios with only
21 monthly observations, we are able to resoundingly reject the hypothesis that α is zero. Using
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 15

the three factor model of Fama and French (1993) does not change the conclusion.
C. Risks specific to stubs
Since our sample is so small, it is useful to discuss some events that didn’t occur but
might be expected to occur in a larger sample. Events that might have a negative impact on
arbitrage investors include canceling the spin-off or changing the distribution ratio by lowering
the number of subsidiary shares that each parent shareholder receives. If the expected ratio
changes, then the stub can go from negative to positive without any change in prices. As
discussed previously, this ratio changes with the number of parent shares.
Cancellation of the distribution can occur for several reasons. First, if the firm does not
receive IRS approval, the spin-off is not tax-free and will probably be cancelled. Our impression
from press reports is that IRS rejection is a very low probability event. Second, the firm might
change its mind and cancel the spin-off even if the IRS does approve. Although the parents in
our sample stated their intention to distribute their ownership, this statement is not legally
binding. An example that occurred in our larger sample of 18 carve-outs is Blockbuster. The
parent, Viacom, stated in an SEC filing four months after the carve-out that it would wait until
Blockbuster’s share price was higher before completing the separation. In this example,
Viacom’s decision is not much of negative event for the stub strategy of shorting the subsidiary,
since the distribution only is cancelled in the state of the world where the subsidiary price
remains low. Nevertheless, it is always possible for a cancelled spin-off to cause the trading
strategy to reap negative returns.
Another reason a distribution can be cancelled is a takeover by a third party or
shareholder pressure. We have already discussed the case of Xpedior, whose parent was
acquired. As shown in Table 3, this acquisition did not prevent the stub strategy from earning
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 16

high returns. Another example from our sample is PFSWeb. Prior to the carve-out the parent
firm received an unsolicited takeover bid which was conditional on canceling the spin-off, and
later a large shareholder in the parent publicly objected to the spin-off and threatened legal
action. Despite these events, the carve-out and distribution took place as planned.
These examples highlight the fact that the trading strategy is not riskless. It is worth
noting, however, that many of these unpredictable events seem likely to benefit strategies that
buy parent shares and short subsidiary shares. Takeover of the parent company (with the usual
takeover premia), shareholder pressure to increase value to parent shareholders, or cancellation
of the distribution due to low prices of the subsidiary all are positive for the strategy.
Since returns are high, and the risks seem both quite low and almost entirely
idiosyncratic, it appears that these subsidiaries are overpriced relative to the parent shares.
However, with only six pairs of firms, and only 21 months of returns, this evidence is not
conclusive. It is possible that there was some negative event capable of generating large losses
to the arbitrage strategy that just did not come up during the period we studied. To address these
concerns we will turn to the options market for additional evidence on mispricing.
III.

Short sale constraints and the persistence of mispricing

The previous section argued that the negative stub situations created very attractive
investment opportunities. Why, then, didn’t rational arbitrageurs step in to correct the
mispricing, by buying the parent and shorting the subsidiary? There are many types of reasons
that in general might prevent rational investors from correcting mispricing. These reasons
include fundamental risk, noise trader risk, liquidity risk, institutional or regulatory restrictions,
and tax concerns. Shleifer and Vishny (1997) discuss idiosyncratic risk and agency problems in
delegated portfolio management (see also Pontiff (1996)). In the cases we study, the principle
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 17

idiosyncratic risk is the possibility that the distribution will not take place, and consistent with
this idea, when the distribution date is announced, the stub values sometimes go from negative to
positive. This pattern is consistent with arbitrageurs who are reluctant to take on substantial
idiosyncratic risk.
In many situations, noise trader risk, institutional restrictions, etc. might cause assets to
be mispriced. In our specific case, however, these issues appear to be minimal, and the chief
impediment to arbitrage is short sale constraints. Short sales constraints come in two ways. First
shorting can be simply impossible. Second, when shorting is possible, it can have large costs.
A. Description of shorting process
The market for shorting stock is not simply the mirror image of buying stocks long, for
various legal and institutional reasons. To be able to sell a stock short, one must borrow it, and
because the market for borrowing shares is not a centralized market, borrowing can be difficult
or impossible for many equities. In order to borrow shares, an investor needs to find an
institution or individual willing to lend shares. Financial institutions, such as mutual funds,
trusts, or asset managers, typically do much of this lending. These lenders receive a fee in the
form of interest payments generated by the short-sale proceeds, minus any interest rebate that the
lenders return to the borrowers. Stocks that are held primarily by retail investors, stocks with
low market capitalization, and illiquid stocks can be more difficult to short.
Being simply unable to short is particularly likely for individual retail investors, although
there is extensive anecdotal evidence of institutional investors unable to short the overpriced
subsidiaries. Regulations and procedures administered by the SEC, the Federal Reserve, the
various stock exchanges, and individual brokerage firms can mechanically impede short selling,
especially immediately after the IPO. In some cases, firms ask their stockholders not to lend
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 18

their stock, to prevent short-sellers from driving down the price. In the specific case of Palm, the
Wall Street Journal reported that “It may be possible to short sometime next week…The
brokerage firms and institutional investors that control much of Palm's stock generally agree not
to immediately lend the stock to short sellers until sometime after the IPO date” (WSJ 3/6/00).
For institutions that are able to find shares to borrow, the cost of shorting is reflected in
the interest rate rebate they receive on the short sale proceeds. This rebate acts as a price that
equilibrates supply and demand in the securities lending market. The rebate can be negative,
meaning institutions that sell short have to make a daily payment to the lender for the right to
borrow the stock (instead of receiving a daily payment from the lender as interest payments on
the short sale proceeds). This rebate apparently only partially equilibrates supply and demand,
because the securities lending market is not a centralized market with a “market-clearing” price.
Instead, rebates reflect individual deals struck among security owners and those wishing to short,
and these actors must find each other. This search may be costly and time-consuming (Duffie
(1996) suggests that the securities lending market could be described by a search model).
B. Shorting costs and overpricing
Short sale constraints have long been recognized as crucial to the workings of efficient
markets. Diamond and Verrechia (1987) describe a model with some informed traders, other
uninformed but rational traders, and possible restrictions on shorting. In their model, although
short sale constraints impede the transmission of private information, short sale constraints do
not cause any stocks to be overpriced. Uninformed agents rationally take into account short sale
constraints, and set prices realizing that negative opinion may not be reflected in trading.
With irrational traders, however, short sale constraints can cause some stocks to become
overpriced. With short sale constraints, rational arbitrageurs can only refrain from buying
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 19

overpriced stocks, and if there are enough irrational traders, stocks can be overpriced (see, for
example, Miller (1977), Russell and Thaler (1985), and Chen, Hong, and Stein (2000)). A
variety of evidence is consistent with such overpricing. Figlewski and Webb (1993) and
Dechow et al (2001) show that stocks with high short interest have low subsequent returns.
Miller (1977) describes how short sale constraints can cause prices to reflect only the
views of optimistic investors. In describing the types of stocks likely to be overpriced due to
divergence of opinion, he presciently lists many of the characteristics of our sample: IPO’s with
short operating history and exciting new products. He discusses how short sale constraints might
explain the diversification discount; our firms are extreme examples of such discounts.
One potentially confusing aspect of short sales is that the cost for those borrowing the
stock is income for those lending the stock. Thus, it is not quite accurate to say that only an
irrational investor would buy an overpriced stock. A rational investor might be willing to buy an
overpriced stock if he can derive sufficient income from lending it to short sellers. Based on this
fact, one might be tempted to conclude that the situation we observe is therefore “rational,” since
rational investors are willing to buy the subsidiaries. Along these lines, one could argue that the
observed returns for Palm, for example, are not a “real” return since the true return should
include the income from lending (reflecting the convenience yield or dividend from securities
lending), and that the “marginal” investor sets the traded price to embody all income generated
by the shares.
Such an interpretation would be a mistake. It is important to recognize that irrationality,
or at least some unexplained phenomena causing downward sloping demand curves for stocks, is
a crucial element to any explanation of the facts we are studying. Consider the following
example. A firm, consisting of $100 in cash, issues 100 shares. The firm will liquidate
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 20

tomorrow, and each share will pay a liquidating dividend of $1. These shares are issued and sold
by auction to investor I who buys all 100 shares directly from the firm. Investor I mistakenly
believes the shares will pay out $2.01 tomorrow, and “wins” the auction with a bid of $2.00 per
share. It is clear in this example that investor I has overpaid for the shares, and that $2 is a “real
price.” We label this overpayer investor I because he is either irrational, ignorant (perhaps
because he is illiterate or innumerate), institutionally constrained in some way, or endowed with
insane preferences.
Now suppose two other investors, Y and Z, enter the market. Y buys all 100 shares from
the firm for $2, and lends them to Z. Z pays Y a fee of $1 for each share lent, and sells the shares
to I for $2. Now in this example, Y and Z are both acting rationally. However, there is no sense
in which Y and Z are the “marginal” investors that set prices. Y and Z would be just as happy
with a price of $200 per share (and a corresponding loan fee of $199). It is the willingness of
investor I to overpay that sets the price of the shares. The price of $2 is a real price, and the firm
should rationally respond to the mispricing by issuing more shares. The fact that Y and Z are
intervening actors between the firm and the owner are irrelevant in this example.
It is always true that someone has to own the shares issued by the firm; not all buyers can
lend their shares. If the firm issues 100 shares, exactly 100 shares have to be owned by someone
who is not lending them out. Thus it is not an empirical issue whether the owners of Palm lend
out their shares or not, but rather a simple identity: $2.5 billion worth of shares were owned by
investors who were not receiving any lending income from their shares.
More generally, in any situation where the shorting market is imperfect and some
investors have a downward sloping demand curve for a particular security, equilibrium prices
depend on supply and demand. For example, Duffie (1996) and Krishnamurthy (2001) study the
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 21

market for Treasury bonds. At some times, the price of on-the-run Treasury bonds is particularly
high relative to off-the-run bonds, perhaps reflecting liquidity concerns. At these times, the cost
of shorting reflects these prices differences, so that it is not necessarily profitable to short the
expensive bond and buy the cheap one, and it might well be rational to buy the expensive bond
in order to reap the lending income. These price movements reflect the existence of a demand
curve for on-the-run securities. In a frictionless market, arbitrageurs would be able to supply
bonds to meet this demand for on-the-run securities. Similarly, in our example, if investor Z was
able to manufacture new shares, he might be able to satiate investor I.
C. Evidence on short sales
Given the obvious nature of the mispricing in the cases of negative stubs, and the
publicity associated with some of the cases such as Palm, it is not surprising that many investors
were interested in selling the subsidiaries short. Table 5 shows the level of short interest for
parents and subsidiaries. Short interest is much higher in subsidiaries than in parents, consistent
with the idea that the subsidiaries are overpriced. For parents, we report short interest divided
by total shares outstanding. For subsidiaries, we report short interest divided by total shares sold
to the public in the IPO, since these shares are the only ones trading in the market.
Table 5 shows that on the first reporting date after the IPO, the parents had an average of
3.7 percent of their shares shorted. The subsidiaries had a significantly larger short interest of
19.1 percent. A month later, on the second reporting date, 43.4 percent of subsidiary shares were
shorted. This dramatic increase over time could be produced by some combination of two
factors. First, it may take a while for investors to become aware of the mispricing and decide to
try to exploit it. Second, and more plausibly, the short sale market works sluggishly. Only
shares that are held by institutions willing to lend them are available for interested short sellers,
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 22

and it takes time for lendable shares to find their way to the market for shorting.
Table 5 also shows the peak level of short interest for subsidiaries, for the time between
the IPO and the distribution date. At the peak, short sales are 79.5 percent of total shares trading,
and for Palm the level is an amazing 147.6 percent. More than all the floating shares had been
sold short. This is possible if shares are borrowed, then sold short to an investor who then
permits the shares to be borrowed again. Again, the multiplier-type process takes time to
operate, due to frictions in the securities lending market. This peak level of short interest for
Palm was reached on 7/14/00, two weeks before the announced distribution, at a time when the
stub was positive but rising.
Figures 5 and 6 show short interest (expressed as a percent of total shares issued) and
stub value (expressed in dollars per parent company stock price) for Palm and Stratos over the
relevant period. The figures show that as the supply of shares available grows via short sales, the
stub value gets more positive. One might interpret this pattern as roughly tracing out the demand
curve for the overpriced subsidiary. As the supply of shares grows via short sales, we move
down the demand curve of irrational investors and the subsidiary price falls relative to the parent.
Although quantity data in the shorting market is readily available, price data is not. We
do not know precisely what was the cost of shorting the overpriced subsidiaries. We do have
scattered evidence for four of the six subsidiaries. D’Avolio (2000) reports maximum borrowing
costs of 50 percent (in annual terms) for Stratos Lightwave on December 2000, 35 percent for
Palm in July 2000, and 10 percent each for PFSWeb (June 2000) and Retek (September 2000).5
We next look at options markets to get more complete quantitative evidence on just how
expensive it is to sell short.

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 23

D. Short selling constraints: evidence from options
Options can facilitate shorting, both because options can be a cheaper way of obtaining a
short position and because options allow short-sale constrained investors to trade with other
investors who have better access to shorting. Figlewski and Webb (1993) show that optionable
stocks have higher short interest. Sorescu (2000) finds that in the period 1981-95, the
introduction of options for a specific stock cause its price to fall, consistent with the idea that
options allow negative information to become impounded into the stock price.6
In a frictionless market, one expects to observe put-call parity. It should hold exactly
(within trading costs) for European options, and approximately for American options. One way
of expressing put-call parity is to say that synthetic shares (constructed using options plus
borrowing and lending) should have the same price as actual shares, plus or minus trading costs
such as the bid/ask spread. This equality is just another application of the law of one price. A
weaker condition than put-call parity, which should always hold for non-dividend-paying
American options, is the following inequality: the call price minus the put price is greater than
the stock price minus the exercise price. For options that are at-the-money (so that the option’s
exercise price is equal to the current price of the stock), this inequality says that call prices
should be greater than put prices.
For our six cases with negative stubs, three had exchange-traded American options within
the relevant time frame: Xpedior, Palm, and Stratos. Obtaining time-stamped option prices
proved to be surprisingly difficult, and required that we physically visit the Chicago Board of
Exchange to hand collect data from their equipment. Due to the labor-intensive nature of the
data collection, we used weekly share prices and weekly options prices, as of 4 PM Eastern Time
on Friday.
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 24

Table 6 shows an example from the first week of trading in Palm’s options (occurring
more than two weeks after the IPO) using options that are closest to being at-the-money.
Options on Palm display massive violations of put-call parity, and violate the weaker inequality
as well. Instead of observing at-the-money call prices that are greater than put prices, we find
puts were about twice as expensive as calls. We also calculate the implied price of synthetic
securities. For example, on March 17th one can create a synthetic short position in Palm by
buying a November put (at the ask price), writing a November call (at the bid price), and
borrowing dollars. The payoff from holding the synthetic short until November is identical to
the payoff from shorting the stock and holding until November (ignoring shorting costs). These
calculations are done using the assumption that one can borrow from March to November at the
six month LIBOR rate. On March 16th the price of synthetic short was about $39.12, far below
the actual trading price of Palm, $55.25 at that time. This constellation of prices is a significant
violation of the law of one price, since the synthetic security is worth 29 percent less than the
actual security. May and August options also showed substantial, though smaller violations of
put-call parity.
The synthetic shorts at different horizons in Table 6 can be used to calculate the implied
holding cost of borrowing Palm’s shares. For an investor who is indifferent to shorting actual
Palm shares from March until May, and creating a synthetic short, the holding costs must be 14
percent over two months or about 119 percent at an annual rate. For an investor planning to
short for 8 months, until November, the holding costs must be 29 percent or 147 percent at an
annual rate. Thus the options prices suggest that shorting Palm was either incredibly expensive,
or that there was a large excess demand for borrowing Palm shares, a demand that the market
could not meet for some institutional reasons.
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 25

Since the evidence from D’Avolio (2000) indicates a much lower 35 percent shorting
cost for Palm during this period, it is clear that there must be other costs of shorting Palm. One
is the cost of actually finding shares to borrow. A second, discussed in Liu and Longstaff (2000)
and Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford (2001) is the requirement that short sellers post additional
collateral if the price of Palm rises. A third, discussed in Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford (2001),
is “buy-in” risk, which is due to the fact that the Palm lender has the right to recall his loan at any
time. If the Palm lender decides to sell his shares after they have risen in price, the short sellers
may be forced to close their position at a loss if they are unable to find other shares to borrow.
We now have three different market estimates of Palm’s value: the embedded value
reflected in 3Com’s share price, the value reflected in options prices, and the actual share price.
The options market and the shareholders in 3Com seemed to agree: Palm was worth far less than
its market price. The direction of the deviation from the law of one price is consistent with the
difficulty of shorting Palm. To profit from the difference between the synthetic security and the
underlying security, one would need to short Palm and buy the synthetic long. The price of the
synthetic short reflects the high demand and slow supply for borrowing Palm stock. Similarly,
Figlewski and Webb (1993) find that in general, stocks with high short interest have puts that are
more expensive relative to calls (although they look at implied volatilities instead of put-call
parity).
Again, although the prices here are consistent with very high shorting costs, one can turn
the inequality around and ask why anyone would ever buy Palm (without lending it). On March
17th one can create a synthetic long Palm by buying a call and selling a put, and this synthetic
long is 23 percent cheaper than buying an actual share of Palm and holding until November.7
Arguments that buying the parent is a more risky substitute than buying the subsidiary (because
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 26

the planned spin-off may not occur) are irrelevant to the synthetic long constructed using
options. Why are investors who buy Palm shares directly willing to pay much more than they
could pay using the options market? The answer must involve either irrationality, ignorance,
institutional constraints, or insane preferences. A plausible explanation is that the type of
investor buying Palm is ignorant about the options market and unaware of the cheaper
alternative.
E. The time pattern of implied shorting costs
One can use the synthetic short price of Palm to create a synthetic stub value. On March
17, 2000, the actual stub value for Palm was -$16.26 per share. The synthetic stub for Palm,
constructed using the synthetic short price implied in six month at-the-money options, was
positive at $1.56. Although this value seems low (i.e., less than the cash 3Com held) it is at least
positive and thus no longer so close to a pure arbitrage opportunity.
We have earlier seen that the actual stubs became less negative over time and eventually
turned positive. In Figure 5 we display the time series of the actual stubs along with the
synthetic stubs for the time period up to the distribution date (constructing synthetic stubs using
options that are closest to six months and at-the-money). The solid line, the actual stub, goes
from strongly negative at the beginning to positive $10 a share. The dotted line, the synthetic
stub, is positive in all but one week. By the distribution date, the difference between the two
lines is close to zero, roughly consistent with put-call parity. The pattern shows that options
prices adjust to virtually eliminate profitable trading opportunities. Put differently, the implied
cost of shorting falls as the desirability of shorting falls.
Figure 6 shows the case for Stratos. The pattern is similar; again, there is a single week
where the synthetic stub is negative at the beginning, and the synthetic stub stays around $5 per
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 27

share, correctly forecasting the eventual free-standing price of the parent. As the stub becomes
less negative, the gap between the actual and synthetic stub narrows. Thus Stratos also supports
the idea that the high cost of shorting allows the new subsidiary to be overpriced.
Our third case with exchange-traded options is Xpedior. Unfortunately, Xpedior is a
marginal case and Xpedior produces a stub that is only strongly negative for one week when
options are trading. When we examine the difference between actual and synthetic prices (not
shown in a figure), Xpedior does not seem to display a high cost of shorting, although we have
little power since the actual stub is so marginally negative.
In Table 7, we regress the violation of put-call parity (the deviation of the synthetic stub)
on the actual stub, for Palm and Stratos. For Palm, the synthetic stub deviation moves strongly
with actual stub, and even with just 19 weekly observations, we can reject the hypothesis that the
two do not move together. The R-square is a whopping 96 percent, suggesting that violations of
put-call parity are strongly related to apparent near-arbitrage opportunities. For Stratos, the Rsquare is lower at 0.70, but again we can easily reject the hypothesis that the stub and the
deviation of actual from synthetic are unrelated.
Are these violations of put-call parity unusual? Most empirical studies of options prices
have found that put-call parity basically holds, with small or fleeting violations due perhaps to
trading costs or asynchronous price data (Klemkosky and Resnick (1979), Bodurtha and
Courtadon (1986)). One might wonder whether put-call parity generally holds using data from
our sample period and using our sources and methods. Although a thorough investigation of putcall parity for all equity options is beyond the scope of this paper, we did do a brief check as
follows. We picked a random date, 10/10/00, and compared the synthetic short on Stratos with
those of other options. Stratos options started trading on the CBOE on 7/12/00. We looked at 28
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 28

other firms where options were initially listed on the CBOE between 6/11/00 and 7/12/00. Most
of these firms were, like Stratos, recent technology IPO’s. We omitted firms paying dividends or
firms with a stock price below $10 a share. On 10/10/00, the stub value for Stratos was -$1.66 a
share, and the synthetic short price constructed using six month options was 24 percent below the
actual price of Stratos (similar to the deviation seen for Palm in Table 6), or $5.89 below the
actual price per share. For the 28 other firms, the average synthetic short price was only three
percent below the actual price, or 87 cents in per share, easily explainable with bid/ask spreads
on options. The maximum deviation was eight percent below the actual price, only a third of the
deviation observed for Palm and Stratos. Based on this evidence, the Palm and Stratos cases
appear to present unusually large violations of put-call parity.
To conclude, in the case of Palm and Stratos, we have strong evidence from options
markets confirming that the new issues are overpriced, and no one should buy them (at least
without lending them out, which not everyone can do in equilibrium) because cheaper
alternatives are available. Although shares in the parent are not perfect substitutes for shares in
the subsidiary (due to the risk of spin-off cancellation), the synthetic shares are virtually
identical. Although not an exploitable arbitrage opportunity, this is a case of blatant mispricing.
IV.

What causes mispricing?

We hope to have convinced even the most jaded reader that the cases we are studying are
clear violations of the law of one price. Given that arbitrage cannot correct the mispricing, why
would anyone buy the overpriced security? Why are some investors willing to buy shares in
Palm when there are cheaper alternatives available in the market, either by buying the parent or
by buying Palm synthetically in the options market? In this section we investigate this question,
first by asking a simple question: who buys the expensive subsidiary shares, and how long do
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 29

they hold them? We then look at IPO day returns for evidence on how these investors affect
prices of the parent.
A. Investor characteristics
The left-hand side of Table 8 displays volume data for both parents and subsidiaries in
our six cases with negative stubs. We show turnover for the 20 days of trading, defined as
average daily volume divided by shares outstanding (for parents) or by total shares sold to the
public (for the IPO). The turnover measure does not include the first day of trading itself. All
twelve stocks trade on NASDAQ. Since NASDAQ is a dealer market, reported volume includes
dealer trades, and the turnover caused by trades between actual investors is approximately half
the turnover reported in Table 8.
The first thing to note is that subsidiaries have turnover that is more than five times that
of parent turnover, with 37.8 percent of all tradable shares turning over per day. Higher turnover
means that subsidiary shareholders have lower holding periods and thus shorter horizons,
compared to parent shareholders. UBID shareholders, for example, had an average investor
horizon of two trading days, since turnover was more than 50 percent (excluding dealer trades).
These turnover figures suggest that the subsidiaries may have been more liquid that the
parents. If investors value liquidity, then more liquid securities should have higher value and
should have higher turnover. To investigate this possibility, Table 8 reports bid/ask spreads as a
percent of price for the first 20 days of trading. Contrary to the hypothesis of greater liquidity,
there is no significant difference in bid/ask spread for the parents and subsidiaries.
Table 8 also shows institutional ownership for parents and subsidiaries using data from
quarterly 13F filings, reflecting holdings by institutional investment managers having equity
assets under management of $100 million or more. In the first quarter after the IPO, institutional
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 30

ownership is 15 percent higher for parents than subsidiaries (this difference is understated due to
the heavy short interest in subsidiaries).8
One potential explanation for the mispricing involves restrictions on what institutions are
allowed to hold. For example, Froot and Dabora (1999) show that Royal Dutch and Shell (two
stocks representing the same firm) seem mispriced relative to each other. In recent years, the
stock which is part of the S&P 500 trades at a premium to a stock which is not, possibly
reflecting the fact that index funds are forced to buy the more expensive stock and cannot
substitute the cheaper one. Similarly, one money manager told us (discussing stub situations in
general) that although he was well aware that a particular subsidiary was overpriced relative to
the parent, he could not buy the cheaper parent instead of the subsidiary because he ran a growth
fund, and the cheaper stock was by definition value. However, Table 8 suggests that such
institutional explanations are unlikely to explain the overpricing, since most owners are
individuals.
The information in Table 8 also helps explain why the supply of lendable shares to short
was so sluggish. First, high turnover impedes securities lending because when a share lender
sells his shares, the share borrower is obliged to return the shares and must find a new lender.
Second, shares held by individual investors are less likely to be lent than shares held by
institutions.
To summarize, Table 8 shows that subsidiaries had very high turnover but not high
liquidity, and had low institutional ownership. This evidence is perfectly consistent with
irrational or ignorant investors. We next turn to evidence from IPO day returns for additional
evidence.

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 31

B. IPO day returns
Hand and Skantz (1998), looking at carve-outs generally, provide evidence that irrational
investors can affect carve-out pricing. As documented in Schipper and Smith (1986) and Allen
and McConnell (1998), when announcing the carve-out, parents earn excess announcement
returns of around 2 percent. Hand and Skantz (1998) show that on the IPO date itself, parents
have excess returns of -2 percent. One explanation is that optimistic investors who desire to hold
the subsidiary drive up the price of the parent on the announcement days, and then dump the
parent in favor of the subsidiary on the IPO day.
Table 9 looks at evidence for segmentation in our sample from IPO day returns. It
compares IPO day returns for the 14 subsidiaries that had positive stubs on the IPO date and the
4 subsidiaries with negative stubs (for Xpedior and Retek the stubs only became negative after a
few days of trading). Table 9 shows that subsidiaries resulting in negative stubs had much
higher IPO returns than other subsidiaries, where the returns are offer price to closing price for
the new subsidiary. This difference is unsurprising since one way to get negative stubs is to have
a high price of the subsidiary.
Another way to get a negative stub is to have a low price of the parent. Table 9 also
shows that the prices of parents in negative stub situations fell 14 percent from the day before the
IPO to the close on the IPO day. For the 14 cases with positive stubs on the IPO date, the
parents fell an average of one percent. The differences between the positive stub and negative
stub IPO’s are large and statistically significant for both parent returns and subsidiary returns
(the statistical significance does not change if one categorizes Xpedior and Retek, which had
negative stubs in the next few days, in the second group).
The large decline in parent prices in negative stub situations is surprising, since the
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 32

parents own so much of the new issue. One might think that when the subsidiary does
unexpectedly well on the issue date, the parent would benefit as the value of its holdings
increase. For example, prior to the issue, Palm’s underwriters had originally estimated the
offering price to be $14 to $16 per share. After gauging investor demand, they increased the
estimated offering price to $30 to $32. Finally, the night before the offer, they chose $38 as the
final issuing price. On the first day of trading, Palm immediately went to $145, and later rose as
high as $165, before ending the day at $95.06 a share. Thus, the very high subsidiary return
seems likely to have been a surprise, making the drop in the price of 3Com that day mystifying.9
These patterns are all consistent with irrational investors. Prior to the IPO, irrational
optimists who desire to own Palm have to hold 3Com instead. 3Com trades in the optimistic
segment of the market. Once the IPO occurs, these optimists buy Palm directly (ignoring the
cheaper alternative of holding 3Com). 3Com now trades in the more rational segment of the
market, and its price falls to the rational price, as in Hand and Skantz (1998).
V.

Conclusion

One of us used to have a colleague who, when teaching the basic finance course to
impressionable young first year MBA students would shout the name of a well-known game
show as a key conclusion of efficient markets: The Price is Right! He would offer little
empirical support for this claim, but could rest assured that it was a claim that was hard to
disprove. The trick to testing the “price is right” hypothesis is to find unambiguous relative price
comparisons, such as closed-end funds.
The negative stubs in this paper are in a similar category, though the mispricing appears
to be even more blatant. Unlike closed-end funds, where arguments about agency costs by the
fund managers, tax liabilities, and bad estimates of net asset value can cloud the picture, in this
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 33

case any investor who can multiply by 1.5 should be able to tell that Palm is overpriced relative
to 3Com. The evidence from options markets shows that these stocks were unambiguously
overpriced, and is difficult to explain why in equilibrium anyone would own these shares. The
mispricing persisted because of the sluggish functioning of the shorting market
There are two key findings of this paper that need to be understood as a package. First,
we observe gross violations of the law of price. Second, these do not present exploitable
arbitrage opportunities because of the costs of shorting the subsidiary. In other words, the no
free lunch component of the efficient market hypothesis is intact, but the price equals intrinsic
value component takes another beating.
Still, it possible to argue that we have only six cases here that collectively represent a tiny
portion of the US equity market. Maybe everything else is just fine. Why should we be
concerned? Put another way, are these cases of blatant mispricing the tip of a much bigger
iceberg, or the entire iceberg? In one respect, our overpriced stocks are clearly different than
most stocks. They were difficult or expensive to borrow because the supply of lendable shares
did not quickly respond to the mispricing. In contrast, most stocks and particularly large cap
stocks are easy to borrow. D’Avolio (2000) and Reed (2001) show that few stocks are expensive
to short, and Figlewski and Webb (1993) report that average short interest as a percent of
outstanding shares is only 0.2 percent. Although Ofek and Richardson (2001) report that Internet
stocks had higher average short interest and were more expensive to short than non-internet
stocks in the period we study, the average difference in cost was only one percent per year. So,
perhaps it is only the rare cases in which shorting is very expensive that lead to mispricing. That
is the rosy interpretation of our findings.
There is another interpretation, however, that is less rosy but more plausible. We think a
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 34

sensible reading of our evidence should cast doubt on the claim that market prices reflect rational
valuations because the cases we have studied should be ones that are particularly easy for the
market to get right. Suppose we consider the possibility that Internet stocks were priced much
too high around 1998-2000. The standard efficient markets reaction to such claims is to say that
this cannot happen. If irrational investors bid up prices too high, arbitrageurs will step in to sell
the shares short, and in so doing will drive the prices back down to rational valuations. The
lesson to be learned from this paper is that arbitrage doesn’t always enforce rational pricing. In
the case of Palm, arbitrageurs faced little risk, but could not find enough shares of Palm to satiate
the demands of irrational investors. We have identified cases in which arbitrageurs are unable to
arbitrage relative mispricing. In the more general case there can be cases of mispricing in which
arbitrageurs are unwilling to establish positions because of fundamental risk or noise trader risk.
Perhaps many investors thought that Internet stocks were overpriced during the mania, but only a
small minority were willing to take a short position, and these short sellers were not enough to
drive prices down to rational valuations. Further, many institutions are either not permitted to
sell short or simply choose not to do so for various reasons. Almazan et al (2000) find that only
about thirty percent of mutual funds are allowed to sell short, and only two percent actually do
sell short.
Limits of arbitrage can create market segmentation. If irrational investors are willing to
buy Palm at an unrealistically high price, and rational but risk averse investors are unwilling or
unable to sell enough shares short, then two inconsistent prices can co-exist. The same argument
can apply to any apparent mispricing, from closed-end fund discounts and premia, to differences
in returns between value stocks and growth stocks. The traditional view is that a stock with a
low expected return must have low risk. The examples given here suggest an alternative
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 35

possibility, namely that the investors who buy apparently expensive stocks are just making a
mistake.
The conclusion we draw is that there is one law of economics that does still hold: the law
of supply and demand. Prices are set where the number of shares demanded equals the number
of shares supplied. In the case of Palm, the supply of shares could not rise to meet demand
because of the sluggish response of lendable shares to short. Similarly, if optimists are willing to
bid up the shares of some faddish stocks, and not enough courageous investors are willing to
meet that demand by selling short, then optimists will set the price.

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 36

ENDNOTES
1

In one case, Retek, there appears to have been substantial uncertainty about the final

ratio since the parent’s number of shares was somewhat volatile. Retek’s parent ultimately
decided to accelerate the vesting of the options held by insiders.
2

In these six cases, we calculated the estimated distribution ratio (prior to the actual

distribution ratio announcement) as follows. For Ubid and Retek, we used the ratio from the
CRSP shares outstanding. For Palm and Stratos, we always used the ratios provided by Spinoff
Advisors. For PFSWeb, we used the ratio provided by Spinoff Advisors until March 2000, then
used the CRSP shares. For Xpedior, we used the ratio provided by the company web page (in
real time).
3

In one case, Retek, the stub has less of trend. Due to the uncertainty about the ultimate

distribution ratio, Retek’s true stub is not totally clear in July 2000. The reaction of the stub to
the distribution announcement has a different meaning for Retek, since the announcement
contains important quantitative information. The announced ratio was 1.24, while 10 days
earlier an analyst report contains an estimate of 1.40.
4

It is hard to say whether the ratio of one third overestimates or underestimates the

prevalence of mispricing. On the one hand, perhaps firms tend to do carve-outs when they think
their subsidiaries are overpriced, in which case the 18 firms are not a representative sample
(firms should issue equity when that equity is overpriced, as argued by Stein, 1996). Further, it
could be that 1998-2000 was a time when mispricing was prevalent, but in most years mispricing
is rare. Ritter (2000) shows that this period was one with extraordinary IPO first day returns, and

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 37

Ofek and Richardson (2001) show that internet-related IPO’s had especially high first day
returns in this period. On the other hand, mispricing could occur more than one third of the time.
We only show that six of the eighteen have negative stubs. Perhaps the other 12 have stubs that
are too low or too high. So in that sense, perhaps one third is a lower bound for relative
mispricing.
5

With the exception of Stratos Lightwave (which has a distribution date occurring after

D’Avolio’s sample ends), all these dates are on or near the distribution date.
6

This effect was present in our sample, since in the three cases with negative stubs, when

exchange-traded options were introduced, all three had sizable increases in the stub value. In all
three cases, the subsidiary fell on the day that options started trading.
7

Of course, the put-call parity formula holds only for stocks paying no dividends. One

benefit of owning Palm is that it yields a “dividend” from lending it out to short sellers. As
before, however, someone is holding all of Palm stock without lending it out; this owner would
be better off owning the synthetic short.
8

We report institutional ownership as a percent of parent shares outstanding or subsidiary

shares trading. For example, Palm sold 26.5 million shares in the IPO on 3/2/00, had 5.1 million
shares in short interest as of 3/15/00, and institution ownership of 12.1 million shares at the end
of March. Although 26.5 million shares were issued, 31.6 million shares were owned by
somebody, thanks to short-sellers who borrowed shares and sold them. Thus institutions held 46
percent of the shares issued, but only 38 percent of all the ownable shares.
9

More generally, Bergstresser and Karlan (2000) examine cross-corporate equity

holdings similar to the ones considered here (but without the terminal date), and find that parent
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 38

firm stock prices under-react to changes in the value of their holdings. Similarly, closed end
funds trading in the US but holding foreign securities have prices that do not always react
properly to foreign market movements (see Klibanoff, Lamont, and Wizman (1998)).

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 39

References
Almazan, Andres, Keith C. Brown, Murray Carlson, and David A Chapman, 2000, Why
constrain you mutual fund manager?, University of Texas at Austin working paper.
Allen, Jeffrey W. and John J. McConnell, 1998, Equity carve-outs and managerial discretion,
Journal of Finance 53, 163-186.
Bergstresser, Daniel and Dean Karlan, 2000, The market valuation of cross-corporate equity
holdings, MIT working paper.
Bodurtha, James N. Jr., and Georges R. Courtadon, 1986, Efficiency tests of the foreign currency
options market, Journal of Finance 41, 151-162.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, Breadth of ownership and stock
returns, http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/stein/papers.html
Cornell, Bradford and Qiao Liu, 2000, The parent company puzzle: When is the whole worth
less than one of the parts, UCLA working paper.
Cornell, Joseph W., 1998. Spin-off to pay-off: analytical guide to investing in corporate
divestitures (McGraw-Hill, New York, NY).
D’Avolio, Gene, 2000, The market for borrowing stock, Harvard University working paper
De Bondt, Werner F. M., and Richard M. Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?,
Journal of Finance 40, 793-805.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, 1990,
Noise trader risk in financial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738
Dechow, Patricia M., Amy P. Hutton, Lisa Meulbroek, and Richard G. Sloan, 2001, Shortsellers, fundamental analysis and stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Robert E. Verrechia, 1987, Constraints on short-selling and asset
price adjustment to private information, Journal of Financial Economics 18, 277-311.
Duffie, Darrell, 1996, Special Repo Rates, Journal of Finance 51, 493-526.
Fama, Eugene F., 1991, Efficient Capital Markets: II, Journal of Finance, Vol. 46, No. 5. (Dec.,
1991), pp. 1575-1617.

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 40

Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance, Journal of
Financial Economics 49, 283-306.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Figlewski, Stephen, and Gwendolyn P. Webb, 1993, Options, short sales, and market
completeness, Journal of Finance 48, 761-777.
Hand, John R.M. and Terrance R. Skantz, 1998, Noise traders in event studies? The case of
equity carve-outs, http://itr.bschool.unc.edu/faculty/hand/
Klemkosky, Robert C. and Bruce G. Resnick, Put-Call Parity and Market Efficiency,
Journal of Finance, Vol. 34, No. 5. (Dec., 1979), pp. 1141-1155.
Klibanoff, Peter, Owen Lamont, and Thierry A. Wizman, 1997, Investor reaction to salient news
in closed-end country funds, Journal of Finance 53, 673-699.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2001, The Bond/Old-Bond Spread, Northwestern University working
paper.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian Investment,
Extrapolation, and Risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578
Lamont, Owen A., and Christopher Polk, 2001. The diversification discount: cash flows
vs. returns. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Lee, Charles M.C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard Thaler, 1991, Investor sentiment and the
closed-end fund puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75-109.
Liu, Jun and Francis A. Longstaff, 2000, Losing money on arbitrages, UCLA working
paper.
Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter, 2000, Uniformly least powerful tests of market
efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 361-389.
Miller, Edward M., 1977, Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance 32,
1151-1168.
Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Erik Stafford, 2001, Limited arbitrage in equity markets,
Harvard Business School working paper.

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 41

Nanda, Vikram, 1991, On the good news about equity carve-outs, Journal of Finance 46, 17171737.
Ofek, Eli and Matthew Richardson, 2001, Dotcom mania: A survey of market efficiency in the
internet section, NYU working paper.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111, 1135-1151.
Reed, Adam, 2001, Costly short-selling and stock price adjustment to earnings
announcements, Wharton working paper
Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The Long-Run Performance Of Initial Public Offerings, Journal of
Finance 46, 3-27.
Ritter, Jay R., 2000, Big IPO Runups of 1975-2000, http://bear.cba.ufl.edu/ritter
Russell, Thomas, and Richard Thaler, 1985, The Relevance of Quasi Rationality in Competitive
Markets, The American Economic Review 75, 1071-1082.
Schill, Michael J. and Chungsheng Zhou, 1999, Pricing an Emerging Industry: Evidence from
Internet Subsidiary Carve-Outs, University of California at Riverside working paper (October
1999)
Schipper, Katherine, and Abbie Smith, 1986, A comparison of equity carve-outs and seasoned
equity offerings: Share price effects and corporate restructuring, Journal of Financial Economics
15, 153-186.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52,
35-55.
Slovin, Myron B., Marie E. Sushka, and Steven R. Ferraro, 1995, A comparison of the
information conveyed by equity carve-outs, spin-offs, and asset sell-offs, Journal of Financial
Economics 37, 89-104.
Sorescu, Sorin M., 2000, The effect of options on stock prices: 1973 to 1995, Journal of Finance
55, 487-514.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1996, Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world, Journal of Business 69,
429-455
Summers, Lawrence H. 1985. “On Economics and Finance.” Journal of Finance. July, 40:3, pp.
633-35.
Can the market add and subtract? - Page 42

Vijh, Arnand M., 1999, Long-term returns from equity carveouts, Journal of Financial
Economics 51, 273-308.

Can the market add and subtract? - Page 43

Table 1
Sample of carve-outs
Issue
Date

Parent

Subsidiary

4/3/96
8/21/96
11/13/96
3/6/97
8/12/98
12/3/98
2/4/99
8/10/99
11/17/99
11/17/99
12/1/99
12/15/99
3/1/00
4/3/00
6/26/00
6/26/00
7/10/00
8/9/00

AT&T
Tridex
Santa Fe Energy Resources
Odetics
Cincinnati Bell
Creative Computers
General Motors
Viacom
Hewlett-Packard
HNC Software
Daisytek
Metamor Worldwide
3Com
Cabot Corporation
Methode Electronics
Deluxe
Eaton
Sea Containers

Lucent Technologies
TransAct Technologies
Monterey Resources
ATL Products
Convergys
UBID
Delphi Automotive Systems
Blockbuster
Agilent Technologies
Retek
PFSWeb
Xpedior
Palm
Cabot Microelectronics
Stratos Lightwave
Efunds
Axcelis Technologies
Orient Express Hotels

Distribution
Date

Negative
stub?

09/30/96
03/31/97
07/25/97
10/31/97
12/31/98
06/07/99
05/28/99
Cancelled
06/02/00
09/29/00
07/06/00
Cancelled
07/27/00
09/29/00
4/28/01
12/11/00
12/29/00

No
Marginal
No
Marginal
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Marginal

List of 18 equity carve-outs, 1995-2000, in which the parent stated its intention to distribute to its
shareholders its remaining shares in the subsidiary. Issue date is the pricing date for the initial
public offering, occurring one day prior to the first day of trade. Distribution date is the date that
the spin-off is completed, occurring some time after the record date for the distribution.

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 44

Table 2
Stub values and market values between IPO and distribution
------------- Trading days -------------

Creative/UBID
HNC/Retek
Daisytek/PFSWeb
Metamor/Xpedior
3Com/Palm
Methode/Stratos

Min stub,
St,
$ per
Min stub,
parent
st, fraction
of parent
share

Max market
value of
issue
First
($ mil)
neg.

Next
first
pos.

Last
neg.

Distribution
announcement

-74.81
-49.01
-13.72
-5.26
-63.16
-20.95

342
594
157
315
2514
499

114
50
82
5
48
133

113
178
81
92
47
146

113
181
131
67
47
187

-1.37
-0.56
-0.63
-0.19
-0.77
-0.39

1
2
1
3
1
1

Pt P − xt Pt S
S
= Pt is stub value as a fraction
P
Pt
Pt
of parent value. First day of trading is day 1. Minimum stub between IPO and distribution.
“Max market value of issue” is the maximum price times number of shares issued (not
outstanding), during the interval between first negative and next first positive. “First neg.” is the
first trading day with a negative stub. “Next first pos.” is the subsequent day on which prices
imply a positive stub. “Last neg.” is the last day on which a negative stub occurs. All
calculations are based on closing prices. For Metamor/Xpedior, day 67 is the day that the
takeover of parent Metamor is announced.
St = Pt P − xt Pt S is stub value in dollars per share. st =

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 45

Table 3
Total returns from first negative stub to announcement/distribution days
First
neg.
Stub

-- Announcement day plus one-- ---Distribution day minus one--RTP
RTS
RTP - RTS Stub RTP
RTS
RTP - RTS
Stub

Creative/UBID
HNC/Retek
Daisytek/PFSWeb
Metamor/Xpedior
3Com/Palm
Methode/Stratos

-8.09
-8.04
-13.72
-3.65
-63.16
-10.06

5.17
14.94
5.64
7.75
4.09
2.42

Average
T-stat

-17.78 6.67
-1.94 3.70

Average Excluding
Xpedior
-20.61 6.45
T-stat
-1.93 2.94

0.49
-0.19
-0.48
0.15
-0.41
-0.59

0.00
-0.34
-0.84
-0.22
-0.69
-0.72

0.49
0.15
0.36
0.37
0.28
0.13

6.32
17.80
5.39
9.89
13.43
5.79

0.25
0.23
-0.59
-0.06
-0.17
-0.59

-0.22
0.09
-0.90
-0.48
-0.61
-0.78

0.47
0.13
0.31
0.41
0.44
0.20

-0.17 -0.47 0.30
-1.02 -3.46 5.21

9.77
4.79

-0.16 -0.48 0.33
-1.03 -3.20 5.78

-0.24 -0.52 0.28
-1.23 -3.36 4.18

9.75
3.90

-0.18 -0.48 0.31
-0.95 -2.62 4.69

Returns are total simple returns from the day of the first negative stub to either the day after the
announcement day, or the day prior to the distribution day. For Xpedior, we count the
announcement day as the day that Xpedior’s parent announces that it is being acquired, and the
distribution day as the day Xpedior’s parent ceases trading.

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 46

Table 4
CAPM and three factor regression for monthly trading strategies

α
RMRF
HML
SMB

R2

Simple strategy
0.10
0.10
(0.03)
(0.03)
1.22
1.41
(0.53)
(0.60)
0.46
(0.45)
0.47
(0.63)

Hedged strategy
0.09
0.09
(0.03)
(0.03)
0.89
1.06
(0.47)
(0.53)
0.42
(0.40)
0.43
(0.56)

0.22

0.16

0.27

0.21

Monthly regressions of strategy returns on factors. Calculations use closing prices. The strategy
takes a position on the last day of the month if the stub is negative on that day, and holds until
the last day of the month prior to the distribution month. In all five cases, the position is initiated
at the end of the first month of trading. Since Metamor/Xpedior does not have a negative stub at
the end of the month, it is not included in this strategy. Equal weighted returns on from one to
three paired positions per month. The simple strategy is RtP - RTS . The hedged strategy is
− s0 F
1
RTP +
RT − RTS . RtP is the monthly return from parent stock and RTS is monthly return
1 − s0
1 − s0
P0P − xP0S
is the stub value as a percent of parent stock price, as
P0P
of the last day of the first month of trading. RMRF is CRSP value weighted market return minus
Ibbotson T-bill return. HML and SMB are the value and size factors from Fama and French
(1993) and come from the web page of Kenneth French. HML is the returns on stocks with high
book to market ratios minus the returns on stocks with low book to market ratios. SMB is the
return on small cap stocks minus the returns on big cap stocks. Number of observations is 21
months. Standard errors in parentheses.
from the subsidiary stock. s0 =

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 47

Table 5
Percent Short Interest
First Month First Month
Parent
Subsidiary

2nd Month
Subsidiary

Peak
Subsidiary

Creative/UBID
HNC/Retek
Daisytek/PFSWeb
Metamor/Xpedior
3Com/Palm
Methode/Stratos

4.2
7.5
1.6
4.9
2.6
1.5

8.5
19.8
17.7
17.2
19.4
31.8

54.7
37.4
48.6
24.6
44.9
50.3

70.9
53.4
63.7
26.8
147.6
114.7

Average
Difference from previous column
T-stat

3.7

19.1
15.3
4.4

43.4
24.3
4.5

79.5
36.1
2.3

Short interest calculated as percent of parent shares outstanding or subsidiary shares trading.
The level of short interest comes from NASD, and is on or prior to the 15th calendar day of the
month. The shares outstanding of the parent are from CRSP and the shares issued in the IPO are
from company SEC filings. “First month” is the first observed short interest after the IPO, and
“2nd month” is one month later. “Peak” is the highest level between the IPO date and the
distribution date.

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 48

Table 6
Palm options on 3/17/00
LIBOR
three month
six month

6.21
6.41

Stock prices
Palm
3Com

55.25
68

Options Prices
May 55
August 55
November 55

--- Call --Bid
Ask
5.75 7.25
9.25 10.75
10
11.5

--- Put --Bid
Ask
10.625 12.625
17.25 19.25
21.625 23.625

Synthetic
Short
47.55
43.57
39.12

Percent
Deviation
-14
-21
-29

Synthetic
Long
51.05
47.07
42.62

Percent
Deviation
-8
-15
-23

May options expire 5/20/00. August options expire 08/19/00, November options expire
11/18/00. A synthetic short position buys a put (at the ask price), sells a call (at the bid price),
and borrows the present value of the strike price. A synthetic long position sells a put (at the bid
price), buys a call (at the ask price), and lends the present value of the strike price. We discount
May cash flows by three month LIBOR and August and November cash flows by six month
LIBOR. Source of options price data: CBOE. Source of LIBOR: Datastream

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 49

Table 7
Regression of synthetic stub deviation on actual stub

Palm
-8.15
(0.24)

Stratos
-5.95
(0.50)

St

0.50
(0.02)

0.83
(0.08)

N
R2

19
0.96

42
0.71

Constant

The dependent variable is St − Sˆt , the deviation between the actual stub and the synthetic
stub, expressed in dollars per parent share. The actual stub, St = Pt P − xt Pt S , uses actual prices of
the shares. The synthetic stub, Sˆ = P P − x Pˆ S , uses the actual price of parent shares and the
t

t

t t

synthetic short price of subsidiary shares. The synthetic short price, − Pˆt S , is constructed by
selling a six month at-the-money call at the bid prices, buying a six month at-the-money put at
the ask prices, and borrowing the present value of the exercise price at the six month LIBOR
rate. The regression for Palm uses 19 weekly observations as of Friday, 3/17/00 to 7/21/00;
regression for Stratos uses 42 weekly observations as of Friday, 7/14/00 to 4/27/01

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 50

Table 8
Volume, liquidity, and institutional ownership
Turnover
Parent
Creative/UBID
HNC/Retek
Daisytek/PFSWeb
Metamor/Xpedior
3Com/Palm
Methode/Stratos
Average
Difference,
parent vs. subsidiary
T-stat

Bid/ask spread
Subsidiary Parent Subsidiary

Institutional ownership
Parent
Subsidiary

23.98
3.68
2.42
2.13
4.54
2.63

106.47
22.19
25.53
11.79
19.18
41.67

0.69
0.32
0.62
0.42
0.09
0.42

0.93
0.26
0.81
0.49
0.14
0.20

17.71
96.38
71.88
53.06
52.22
69.47

10.38
72.28
69.95
35.96
46.01
36.63

6.56

37.80

0.43

0.47

60.12

45.20

31.24
2.83

0.04
0.62

-14.92
-3.06

Turnover is daily volume as percent of parent shares outstanding or subsidiary shares trading.
Subsidiary shares trading are shares sold to the public in the IPO. Volume is average daily
volume from the first 20 trading days after the IPO date (not including the first day of trading).
The shares outstanding of the parent are from CRSP and the shares issued in the IPO are from
company SEC filings. Bid/ask spread is average percent of price from the first 20 trading days
after the IPO date (not including the first day of trading). Institutional ownership, from 13F
filings to the SEC (via Securities Data Corporation), is for the first quarterly filing after the IPO.
Institutional ownership as a percent of parent shares outstanding or subsidiary shares trading.

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 51

Table 9
IPO day returns for entire carve-out sample

HP/Agilent
Odetics/ATL
Eaton/Axcelis
Viacom/Blockbuster
Cabot Corp/Cabot Micro
Cincinnati Bell/Convergys
GM/Delphi
Deluxe/Efunds
AT&T/Lucent
Santa Fe/Monterey
Sea Containers/Orient Express
HNC/Retek
Tridex/TransAct
Metamor/Xpedior

-----Subsidiary----Offer
Closing Percent
Price
Price
Change

--------Parent-------Pre-IPO Closing
Percent
Price
Price
Change

30.00
11.00
22.00
15.00
20.00
15.00
17.00
13.00
27.00
14.50
19.00
15.00
8.50
19.00

78.00
19.63
69.50
40.56
29.50
29.75
87.06
23.88
64.13
14.75
28.13
61.00
10.44
33.19

42.75
11.88
23.94
15.00
24.88
16.63
18.63
12.00
30.63
16.50
19.75
32.56
8.75
26.00

Average for 14 subsidiaries with
positive stub on first day
3Com/Palm
Daisytek/PFSWeb
Methode/Stratos
Creative/UBID

43
8
9
0
24
11
10
-8
13
14
4
117
3
37

94.31
18.25
69.50
39.94
28.00
28.69
85.94
23.31
62.88
15.00
26.25
60.88
10.63
29.00

20
38.00
17.00
21.00
15.00

95.06
44.13
34.13
48.00

150
160
63
220

21
-7
0
-2
-5
-4
-1
-2
-2
2
-7
0
2
-13

-1
104.13
22.63
43.94
35.25

81.81
21.94
41.88
26.25

-21
-3
-5
-26

Average for 4 subsidiaries with
negative stub on first day

148

-14

T-statistic for difference in means,
14 carve-outs vs. 4 carve-outs

5.69

2.61

Daily closing prices from CRSP. “Pre-IPO Price” is the price of the parent on the day previous
to the IPO.

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 52

Figure 1

Creative Computers/Ubid Stub
12/4/98 - 8/24/99
20
6/7: Distribution
10
0

5/18: Distribution announcement
-20
-30
-40
-50
-60
-70

8/
13

7/
30

7/
16

7/
2

6/
18

6/
4

5/
21

5/
7

4/
23

4/
9

3/
26

3/
12

2/
26

2/
12

1/
29

1/
15

1/
1

12
/1
8

-80

12
/4

Dollars per share

-10

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 53

Figure 2

Stub values for HNC/Retek, Daiseytek/PFSWeb, and Metamor/Xpedior
30

3/22/00: Takeover of Metamor announced

20

8/7/00: Retek distribution
announcement

12/31/99: Xpedior options start trading

10

6/8/00: PFSWeb distribution announcement

-10
-20
-30
-40
-50

Retek

Xpedior

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 54

0
/0

9/
21

7/
00
9/

0
/0

8/
24

/0

0

0

8/
10

/0

0

7/
27

/0

/0

0

7/
13

0

6/
29

/0

6/
15

1/
00

0

PFSWeb

6/

/0

5/
18

0

4/
00
5/

/0

4/
20

0

6/
00
4/

/0

3/
23

0

9/
00
3/

/0

/0

0

2/
24

0

2/
10

/0

/0

0

1/
27

9

1/
13

/9

9

/3
0
12

/1
6

/9

99
12

/2
/
12

/1
8

/9

9

-60

11

Dollars per share

0

Figure 3

3Com/Palm Stub
3/2/00 - 9/18/00
30
7/27: Distribution
20
10

3/20: 3Com announced distribution to occur
by September, earlier than planned

Dollars per share

0
-10

5/8: IRS approval announced,
Palm shares to be distributed 7/27

-20
-30
-40

3/16: Options start
trading on subsidiary

-50
-60
-70
3/2

3/9 3/16 3/23 3/30

4/6 4/13 4/20 4/27

5/4 5/11 5/18 5/25

6/1

6/8 6/15 6/22 6/29

7/6 7/13 7/20 7/27

8/3 8/10 8/17 8/24 8/31

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 55

9/7 9/14

Figure 4

Methode/Stratos Stub
6/27/00 - 5/7/01
10
4/28/01: Distribution
5

7/12/00: Options start
trading on subsidiary
3/23/01: Distribution announcement

-5

-10

-15

-20

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 56

5/
1

4/
17

4/
3

3/
20

3/
6

2/
20

2/
6

1/
23

1/
9

12
/2
6

12
/1
2

11
/2
8

11
/1
4

10
/3
1

10
/1
7

10
/3

9/
19

9/
5

8/
22

8/
8

7/
25

7/
11

-25
6/
27

Dollars per share

0

Figure 5

3Com/Palm: Actual Stub, Synthetic Stub, and Short Interest
3/3/00 to 7/21/00
200

20

180
10

140
120

-10

100
-20

80
60

-30

40
-40
20

Actual Stub (left axis)

Synthetic Stub (left axis)

Short interest (right axis)

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 57

21
7/

14
7/

7
7/

30
6/

23
6/

16

9
6/

6/

2
6/

26
5/

19
5/

12
5/

5
5/

28
4/

21
4/

14
4/

7
4/

31
3/

24
3/

17
3/

10

0
3/

3

-50
3/

$ per parent share

0

Percent of issued shares

160

Figure 6

Methode/Stratos: Actual Stub, Synthetic Stub, and Short Interest
6/3/00 to 4/27/01
15

200
180

10

160

0

120

-5

100
80

-10

60
-15
40
-20

20

Actual Stub (left axis)

Synthetic Stub (left axis)

Short interest (right axis)

Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs - Page 58

4/
20

4/
6

3/
23

3/
9

2/
23

2/
9

1/
26

1/
12

12
/1
5
12
/2
9

12
/1

11
/1
7

11
/3

10
/2
0

10
/6

9/
22

9/
8

8/
25

8/
11

7/
28

0
7/
14

-25
6/
30

$ per parent share

140

Percent of issued shares

5

