                                "          #   




                                                


                                            


                                          !$%&'
                                 (!)**+++,*! !-*+$%&'


                            ."/ /             0
                                   1232 -- 4(5--65
                                      ,7 2'1%$
                                          5




                                     
       !" #$%&  #   '"   #       
(        %   )# *  +*  ,   " *
-  +. /   # 0 1 *"  ( "    !" #$     # %
* . 2         #           '  ,# #
    %


3) %" %(    * %"    2    2  .           
4# . #  2    *   #  #3  *    #  %
4 8  7!  6-

"  !$%&'
5'221
.'1'%%1


                                               $%#%


        (--- -56-(,78- 4((  --(+(884484! 6--
89547,!,9-8 -48  7 4  :(  9 57+, -4
;5-- -7-(< 94 ! 9 4( 9(( 58 4(8=( 
-7-(   994 -(-( (  956-8
-(-  -(  956-8 =477 94 ! 9 -4( 9
(( 587675 9!>4-+(8-=( -7-( 94 ! 9,57
!4--    994 -(-( (  956-8?-76-
-(-  -(  956-8?-76-=  777-45--(
(4 9 7!4 9+( , --749(-;5--(--  9-,89-4(-
-8(!94 -8(-+8, 7--5-,( 444- 7((8(
8





! 844-
0 6 7/6-
. 5 '2@
 ,7 2'1%$
>A-B( 6 775
       I. Introduction

       A fundamental question in corporate finance is this: to what extent does capital get

allocated to the right investment projects? In a perfect world, with frictionless capital markets of

the sort envisioned in Modigliani and Miller (1958), funds flow in such a way that the marginal

product of capital is equated across every project in the economy. Of course, in the real world,

there are a variety of distortionary forces that prevent things from working this well. Taxes and

transactions costs are examples of such frictions. But perhaps the most pervasive and important

factors influencing the efficiency of corporate investment are those that arise from informational

asymmetries and agency problems.

       This essay surveys research–both theoretical and empirical–that speaks to the influence of

asymmetric information and agency on investment behavior. I organize the material by noting

that the fundamental question posed above can be divided into two sub-questions. First, does

the external capital market channel the right amount of money to each firm? In other words, does

the market get across-firm allocations right, so that the marginal return to investment in firm i is

the same as the marginal return to investment in firm j?

       Second, do internal capital markets channel the right amount of money to individual

projects within firms? In other words, does the internal capital budgeting process get within-firm

allocations right, so that the marginal return to investment in, say, firm i’s division A is the same

as the marginal return to investment in firm i’s division B?

       Although these two questions are logically distinct–in the sense that the workings of the

external capital market appear in many ways to be quite different from those of the internal



                                                  1
capital market–an overarching goal of this essay is to emphasize the common elements of the

capital-allocation problem across and within firms. For example, just as investors in the external

capital market have to be wary of dealing with a CEO who is better informed about firm

prospects than they, and whose incentives diverge from theirs, so must a CEO overseeing the

internal capital budgeting process be wary of dealing with subordinates who are better informed

about divisional prospects than she, and whose incentives diverge from hers. While the external

capital market may ultimately resolve this problem through different means than the internal

capital market–with different consequences for investment behavior–it is nevertheless important

to appreciate that the underlying problem may well be the same one in both cases.

       Both of the sub-questions have been the subject of extensive theoretical and empirical

work. Still, it is fair to say that research on the first sub-question–that having to do with the

efficiency of across-firm capital allocation–is currently at a more mature stage. On the notion

that life is more exciting near the frontier, I will thus devote a somewhat disproportionate share

of my attention to surveying work on the second sub-question, that of within-firm capital

allocation. On the first, and especially when it comes to empirical work, I will defer more to

existing survey papers (e.g., Hubbard (1998)).



       Scope of the essay: what’s covered and what’s left out

       As much as possible, I am going to focus on research that speaks directly to the impact of

information and agency problems on investment behavior. To oversimplify, but not by much,

most of the empirical papers that I will touch on have some measure of investment as the left-

hand-side variable. Of course, the concepts of asymmetric information and agency are central to


                                                  2
virtually every major topic in corporate finance, including corporate governance, capital

structure, the design of incentive contracts, financial intermediation, etc. Indeed, one can think

of governance, capital structure, incentive contracts and intermediation as a variety of curative

mechanisms that arise endogenously to mitigate the effects of information and agency problems

on investment outcomes. Thus, at some level, it is difficult to satisfactorily address the subject

of investment without taking on these other topics as well.

       Nevertheless, although this will no doubt lead to some awkwardness and many omissions,

I will for the most part leave these curative mechanisms lurking in the background.1 This can be

thought of as a partial equilibrium approach, where it is implicitly assumed that certain types of

information and agency distortions are not fully resolved by the curative mechanisms, and

thus–for reasons that are exogenous to the model–remain relevant in equilibrium. This partial

equilibrium approach is the only way I can think of to keep the scope of this essay manageable.

       Moreover, in much of what follows, I will give primary emphasis to those types of

investment distortions that are the most pervasive and stubborn, in the sense that they are likely

to exist even when agency and information problems are relatively “mild”–that is, even when the

legal, auditing, and contracting environment is highly evolved. (Think of the U.S. environment,

for example). I will have less to say about more extreme distortions that arise in economies and

situations where investors are poorly protected, and managers can loot, tunnel, etc.2


       1
         Fortunately, there are already several surveys on these topics. In addition to the essays in
this volume, see, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny (1997) on governance, and Harris and Raviv (1991)
on capital structure.
       2
         See Johnson, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2000) for several examples of
tunneling. Of course, even in economies such as the U.S. where it is not often observed in
equilibrium, the out-of-equilibrium threat of such very bad behavior may do a lot to explain

                                                 3
         Finally, although I will discuss the general consequences of high leverage for investment,

I will not address the details of how financially distressed companies restructure their assets,

either inside or outside of formal bankruptcy. So perhaps the best way to interpret much of what

I am doing is to think of a financially healthy firm operating in an environment where governance

and other curative mechanisms are about as good as they can be, and to ask: what can still go

wrong?



         Organization

         The remainder of this essay is divided into two main parts. Part One deals with

investment at the firm level, and contains three sections. I begin in Section II by reviewing the

various major classes of theories that are relevant for understanding investment at the firm level.

In Section III, I discuss the empirical evidence that speaks to these theories. In Section IV, I

touch briefly on the macroeconomic implications of this research.

         Part Two of the essay deals with investment inside firms. Section V covers the

theoretical work, and Section VI the associated empirical work.

         Finally, in Section VII, I conclude by offering some tentative thoughts on how the central

ideas in the essay can be used to think about the boundaries of the firm.




various features of governance, law, disclosure policies, etc.

                                                  4
       PART ONE: INVESTMENT AT THE FIRM LEVEL

       II. Theoretical Building Blocks: Investment at the Firm Level

       There are many, many theoretical models that have implications for investment at the

firm level, and there a variety of ways that one could go about grouping them. For the purposes

of the discussion that follows, I will take an empirically-oriented approach to organizing the

theories. That is, I will cluster together those models that have similar empirical implications,

even if the underlying theoretical mechanisms are quite distinct. The converse and potentially

awkward feature of this approach is that sometimes models that are quite close in terms of their

underlying logic will get placed into different categories. To take a concrete example, the models

of Myers (1977) and Hart and Moore (1995) are both built on the same foundation–the idea that

a large debt burden can prevent a company from raising the funds to undertake new investment.

But in the former paper, managers are benevolent towards outside shareholders, and there is

always underinvestment in equilibrium; in contrast, in the latter, managers are self-interested and

there can be either underinvestment or overinvestment, depending on the state of the world.

Thus, although the formal structure of these models is quite similar, I will put them into different

groupings.



       II.A. Models of Costly External Finance

       The first broad class of models to be considered are those that unambiguously predict

underinvestment relative to a first-best benchmark. In these models, managers can for the most




                                                 5
part be thought of as acting in the interests of current shareholders, at least in equilibrium.3 Thus

when managers have access to unlimited discretionary resources, investment converges to the

efficient level. However, when managers are resource-constrained in some way or another, there

will be too little investment, because there are frictions associated with raising finance externally.



       II.A.1. Costs of equity finance

       An important insight, due to Myers and Majluf (1984), Myers (1984) and Greenwald,

Stiglitz and Weiss (1984), is that raising equity externally will generally be problematic due to an

adverse-selection problem of the sort first identified by Akerlof (1970).4 To the extent that

managers favor their current stockholders at the expense of potential future investors, they will

wish to sell new shares at times when their private information suggests that these new shares are

most overvalued. As a result, equity issues are rationally interpreted by the market as bad news

(Asquith and Mullins (1986), Masulis and Korwar (1986), Mikkelson and Partch (1986)), which

in turn can make managers of good firms (those with high realizations of their private

information) reluctant to sell equity in the first place. The bottom line is that even firms who are

badly in need of new equity–say because they have good investment opportunities but scarce

internal resources–may be unable or unwilling to raise it.


       3
         Though in some cases, (e.g., Townsend (1979), Gale and Hellwig (1985), Bolton and
Scharfstein (1990), Hart and Moore (1998)) managers act on behalf of shareholders only because
they are in equilibrium the only shareholders. In these entrepreneurial-firm models, agency
problems are so severe as to rule out the use of outside equity finance.
       4
         The Myers-Majluf model has been extended and refined by many authors, (e.g., Krasker
(1986)). See Harris and Raviv (1991) for a discussion and references. Dybvig and Zender
(1991) have questioned the microfoundations of the assumption that managers act on behalf of
existing shareholders, while Persons (1994) has offered a rationalization of this assumption.

                                                  6
        II.A.2. Costs of debt finance

        Of course, an inability to access new equity would not compromise investment if firms

could frictionlessly raise unlimited amounts of debt financing. However, a variety of theories

suggest that this is unlikely to be the case.



        II.A.1.a. adverse selection, moral hazard and credit rationing in the debt market

        The same basic adverse selection argument that is used by Myers and Majluf (1984) for

the equity market can be applied to the debt market, to the extent that the debt involved has some

default risk: at any given interest rate, managers will be more likely to borrow if their private

information suggests that they are relatively prone to default. Or, as a variation on the theme,

there can be moral hazard, whereby those managers who borrow have an increased incentive to

take the sort of risks that lead to default. As has been shown by Jaffee and Russell (1976),

Stiglitz and Weiss (1981, 1983) and others, these sorts of considerations can lead to credit

rationing, whereby firms are simply unable to obtain all the debt financing they would like at the

prevailing market interest rate.5



        II.A.2.b. debt overhang

        Myers (1977) is another paper that speaks to the limitations of debt finance. Here the

problem is not so much in accessing the debt market ex ante, but rather in what happens after the

money is borrowed. In particular, a large debt burden on a firm’s balance sheet discourages


        5
        In spite of the similarities, Myers (1984) and Myers and Majluf (1984) argue that adverse
selection problems are generally likely to be more severe in the equity market, because equity
values are more sensitive than debt values to managers’ private information.

                                                  7
further new investment, particularly if this new investment is financed by issuing claims that are

junior to the existing debt. This is because if the existing debt is trading at less than face value, it

acts as a tax on the proceeds of the new investment: part of any increase in value generated by the

new investment goes to make the existing lenders whole, and is therefore is unavailable to repay

those claimaints who put up the new money.6

        Debt overhang models can be thought of as having two distinct sorts of empirical

implications: ex post (once the debt burden is in place) they suggest that highly-leveraged firms,

such as those that have recently undergone leveraged buyouts, will be particularly prone to

underinvestment. Ex ante, they offer a reason why even more modestly-levered firms,

particularly those with attractive future investment opportunities, may be reluctant to raise much

debt in the first place, even if this means foregoing some current investment projects.7



        II.A.2.c. optimal contracting models of debt: underinvestment in entrepreneurial firms

        The above-discussed models of debt and equity finance take the existence of these types

of financial claims as given, and then go on to derive implications for investment, capital

structure, etc. Another branch of the literature seeks to endogenize the financial contract,



        6
         The basic debt overhang concept has proved to be enormously useful in addressing a
wide range of questions having to do with: i) debt structure (seniority, security, etc.); as well as
ii) the more specific details of how financial distress plays itself out and is resolved. For a few
examples from a very large literature, see Stulz and Johnson (1985), Berkovitch and Kim (1990),
Bergman and Callen (1991) Hart and Moore (1995), and Gertner and Scharfstein (1991). Again,
see Harris and Raviv (1991) for more complete references.
        7
        Jensen and Meckling (1976) offer another reason why firms might be unwilling to take
on too much debt ex ante: an excessive debt burden can create incentives for managers, acting on
behalf of shareholders, to take on risky negative-NPV projects at the expense of lenders.

                                                   8
typically by positing some specific agency problem (e.g., managers’ penchant for diverting the

firm’s cashflow to themselves) and asking what sort of claim represents an optimal response to

this agency problem.

       In much of this work, the optimal contract that emerges resembles a standard debt

contract, and there is no outside equity financing.8 Thus the firms in question should be

interpreted as “entrepreneurial”, in the sense that their only stockholders are their managers.

Early examples include Townsend (1979) and Gale and Hellwig (1985), who assume that outside

investors can only verify a firm’s cashflows by paying some fixed auditing cost. As long as the

manager turns over the stipulated debt payments, there is no audit, and the manager gets to keep

the rest of the firm’s cashflow. However, if the manager fails to make the debt payment, the

lender audits, and keeps everything he finds; this can be interpreted as costly bankruptcy. The

implications for investment follow from the auditing/bankruptcy cost. In particular, the less

wealth the manager is able to put up, and hence the more he must borrow, the greater is the

likelihood of the auditing cost being incurred. Thus less managerial wealth translates into greater

deadweight costs of external finance, and less investment.

       More recently, following the work of Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore

(1990), and Hart (1995) on incomplete contracting, the emphasis has shifted to thinking of

financial contracts in terms of the allocation of control rights that they embody; Aghion and



       8
         Debt tends to be an attractive contract when verification of cashflows is costly or
impossible, so that managers have broad scope for diverting these cashflows to themselves.
However, Fluck (1998) and Myers (2000) show how outside equity financing can also be
sustained in such a setting, provided there is an infinite horizon. (See also Gomes (2000) for a
related argument.) In other cases, when cashflows can be more readily verified, optimal
financing schemes can involve a richer mix of claims. See, e.g., Dewatripont and Tirole (1994).

                                                 9
Bolton (1992) were among the first to take this point of view. In this context, debt is often seen

as an incentive scheme that rewards management with continued control if it makes the required

debt payments, and punishes it with loss of control otherwise. In a multi-period framework, this

type of incentive scheme enables outside lenders to extract payments from managers even in the

extreme case where cashflows are completely unverifiable. Well-known papers in this vein

include Bolton and Scharfstein (1990), and Hart and Moore (1994, 1998).

       Like the costly-state-verification models, these models also have the feature that there is

underinvestment ex ante, with this underinvestment problem being a decreasing function of

managers’ wealth. Moreover, given the multi-period nature of the models, one can also interpret

some of them as implying a form of ex-post underinvestment as well, with assets sometimes

being prematurely seized and liquidated by lenders when managers are unable to meet their debt

payments.9



       II.A.3. Synthesis: A Reduced-Form Model of Costly External Finance

       In spite of the wide variety of modeling approaches, all the theories surveyed thus far

have broadly similar empirical implications for investment. Indeed, the essence of what these

theories have to say about investment can be captured in a very simple reduced-form model.

Although the model may appear ad hoc, Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1993) demonstrate that it

can be mapped precisely into a variant of the Townsend (1979) and Gale-Hellwig (1985) costly-

state-verification models. Also, Stein (1998) shows that an appropriately parameterized version

of the Myers-Majulf (1984) adverse-selection model leads to essentially the same reduced form.


       9
        See also Diamond (1991) for a model with excessive ex post liquidation by lenders.

                                                10
        The setup is as follows. The firm invests I at time 1, which yields a gross return of f(I) at

time 2, where f( ) is an increasing, concave function. Of the investment I, an amount w is

financed out of internal resources (managers’ wealth, or the firm’s retained earnings) and an

amount e is raised externally, via new issues of debt, equity or some other claim. Thus the

budget constraint is I = e + w. In a first-best world, managers would seek to maximize:



        max f(I)/(1 + r) - I                                                                 (1)



where r is the risk-adjusted discount rate. This involves setting the marginal product of capital,

fI, equal to (1 + r).

        One can loosely capture some of the financing frictions discussed above by assuming that

there are deadweight costs associated with funds raised externally, and that these costs are given

by C(e), where C( ) is an increasing convex function, and  is a measure of the degree of the

financing friction. Thus the firm’s problem becomes:



        max f(I)/(1 + r) - I - C(e)                                                         (2)



        Kaplan and Zingales (1997) show that the solution in this case has the following

properties. First, I is always less than or equal to the first best. Also, dI/dw  0 and dI/d  0: I

is (weakly) increasing in the firm’s internal resources w, and (weakly) decreasing in the degree of

the financing friction . These features are exactly what one would expect. However, there is

more subtlety in the behavior of some the higher-order derivatives of I. In particular, d2I/dw2


                                                 11
cannot be unambiguously signed. Thus while the local sensitivity of investment to internal cash,

dI/dw, eventually converges to zero for w high enough, this convergence need not be monotonic.

Similarly, one cannot in general sign d2I/dwd. As Kaplan and Zingales (1997) emphasize, the

important message for empirical work is that one has to be careful in using measures of dI/dw as

proxies for . That is, in comparing two firms, it is not necessarily true that the one with the

higher empirically-measured sensitivity of investment to internal cash should be thought of as the

one facing the more severe financing frictions. I will return to this caveat below.



       II.B. The Agency Conflict Between Managers and Outside Stockholders

       In the models discussed so far, there is in equilibrium no meaningful conflict between

managers and stockholders. This is either because managers are simply assumed to act in the

interests of stockholders (as in Myers and Majluf (1984), and Myers (1977)) or, at the other

extreme, because the threat of managerial expropriation of outside stockholders is so great that

equity financing is not viable in equilibrium, and the firm remains owner-managed. But a central

theme in much of the corporate-finance literature–with a lineage going back to Berle and Means

(1932), and including the influential work of Jensen and Meckling (1976)–is that the managers of

publicly-traded firms pursue their own private objectives, which need not coincide with those of

outside stockholders.

       There are many possible manifestations of the manager-stockholder agency conflict. For

example, managers may simply not exert as much effort as they would in a first-best world

(Holmstrom (1979)). Given the focus of this essay, however, I restrict attention to those variants

of the agency problem that have the most direct implications for investment.


                                                 12
       II.B.1. Empire-building

       II.B.1.a. Empire-building and overinvestment

       One way in which managers’ interests may diverge from those of stockholders is that

managers may have an excessive taste for running large firms, as opposed to simply profitable

ones. This “empire-building” tendency is emphasized by Baumol (1959), Marris (1964),

Williamson (1964), Donaldson (1984) and Jensen (1986, 1993), among many others.

       Jensen (1986, 1993) argues that empire-building preferences will cause managers to

spend essentially all available funds on investment projects. This leads to the prediction that

investment will be increasing in internal resources. It also implies that investment will decrease

with leverage, because high current debt payments force cash out of the firm, thereby reducing

managers’ discretionary budgets. Note that these are the same basic predictions that emerge from

the costly-external-finance genre of models described in Section II.A above, though of course

the welfare implications are very different.

       Jensen’s ideas have been further developed and refined in formal models by Stulz (1990),

Harris and Raviv (1990), Hart and Moore (1995), and Zwiebel (1996).10 These models typically

incorporate empire-building preferences by using the modeling device of managerial private

benefits of control (Grossman and Hart (1988)), and assuming that these private benefits are

proportional to either the amount the firm invests (Hart and Moore (1995)), or the gross output




       10
        With respect to the general idea that debt can serve as a disciplinary device, an
important precursor to these papers is Grossman and Hart (1982).

                                                13
from investment (Stulz (1990)).11    One insight that comes from these models is that no matter

how strong the underlying agency problem, it would be wrong to conclude that empire-building

tendencies necessarily lead to an empirical prediction of overinvestment on average. Rather, the

usual outcome in the models is an endogenously determined level of debt that attempts to balance

ex post over- and underinvestment distortions. Thus the models predict ex post overinvestment

in some states of the world (when the level of free cashflow relative to investment opportunities

is higher than expected), and ex post underinvestment in others.

       As a very loose heuristic way of comparing the empirical content of empire-building

models to those of costly external finance, one can modify equation (2) above in the spirit of

Stulz (1990) and Hart and Moore (1995) by adding a term equal to f(I) to the objective function.

This captures the idea that managers derive private benefits from gross investment output, as in

Stulz (1990), with   measuring the intensity of the agency conflict. Thus (2) becomes:



       max (1 + )f(I)/(1 + r) - I - C(e)                                                    (3)



       As internal resources w go to infinity, the marginal product of capital now asymptotes at

(1 + r)/(1 + ), rather than at (1 + r)–i.e., there is overinvestment. However, more generally,

there can be either over- or underinvestment, depending on the realization of w relative to other




       11
        The latter formulation–private benefits proportional to output–implies that managers
overinvest, but that conditional on the level of investment, they rank projects in the right order,
from high to low NPV. This seems to capture the behavior described by Donaldson (1984).

                                                 14
parameter values.12 And importantly, most of the other comparative statics of the model–having

to do with dI/dw, dI/d, d2I/dw2 and d2I/dwd–are the same as before. Again, this underscores

the challenges associated with empirically distinguishing the two classes of theories.13




       II.B.1.b. Empire-preservation, entrenchment and diversification

       If managers do in fact derive private benefits from being in charge of large corporate

empires, this is likely to show up not just as an overall tendency toward overinvestment. Rather,

some specific types of investments will seem especially attractive to managers. For example,

Amihud and Lev (1981) argue that there will be a managerial preference for diversification, as

this reduces the risk of the empire going out of business. And Shleifer and Vishny (1989)

suggest that managers will be particularly keen to invest in projects that require their specific

human capital, thereby strengthening their chances of keeping their jobs.



       II.B.2. Reputational and career concerns

       Another source of conflict between managers and shareholders is that managers may be

concerned with how their actions affect their reputations, and ultimately their perceived value in




       12
         The models discussed above suggest that w will be in part endogenously determined by
the firm’s choice of capital structure policy.
       13
         Hadlock (1998) argues that empire-building models have the property that dI/dw is
decreasing in managerial incentives, while a costly-external-finance model of the Myers-Majluf
(1984) type has the opposite property, and uses this insight to construct a differentiating test.

                                                 15
the labor market.14 This idea, elegantly modeled by Holmstrom (1999a), has a variety of specific

applications to investment.15



       II.B.2.a. Short-termism

       Narayanan (1985) observes that managers concerned with their labor-market reputations

may have incentives to take actions that boost measures of short-term performance at the expense

of long-run shareholder value. Stein (1989) makes a similar point about managers concerned not

with their own reputations per se, but rather with their firms’ stock prices over a near-term

horizon.16 In both cases, the key to the argument is that managers can do things that are

unobservable to outside shareholders. For example, managers may be able to boost reported

earnings by underinvesting in hard-to-measure assets, such as maintenance, customer loyalty,

employee training, etc. From the perspective of outside investors, such myopic behavior cannot

be disentangled from other, more positive shocks (e.g., increases in customer demand) that also

lead to higher reported profits. Consequently underinvestment is rewarded with an increase in

either the stock price, or in managers’ personal reputations.

       The model of Bebchuk and Stole (1993) also shares the general idea that a concern with


       14
         Fama (1980) is one of the first to discuss how career concerns might affect agents’
incentives. He stresses how career concerns can in some cases lead to better-behaved agents.
       15
         See Dewatripont, Jewitt and Tirole (1999) for a recent extension of Holmstrom’s model
to more complex information structures.
       16
          In Stein (1989), managers maximize a weighted average of near-term stock prices and
long-run value. Thus although the modeling apparatus is taken from Holmstrom (1999a), the
conflict of interest is not the classic agency conflict between managers and their principals, but
rather one between short-term and long-term stockholders. Other models of underinvestment
with a similar structure include Miller and Rock (1985) and Stein (1988).

                                                 16
near-term stock prices or reputation can lead to investment distortions. However, they point out

that the nature of the investment distortion can be quite sensitive to the information structure. In

particular, a desire to impress the stock market or the labor market in the short run can in some

circumstances lead to overinvestment, rather than underinvestment. This will happen if, for

example, the act of investment itself is observable and the asymmetry of information instead has

to do with managers’ ability to generate good investment opportunities. Now, managers seeking

to boost their reputations will want to invest more, rather than less.

       The most basic empirical implications of short-termism models flow from the

comparative-static proposition that investment distortions will be greatest when the concern with

impressing the market is most pronounced. Thus Stein (1988, 1989) suggests that

underinvestment will be particularly acute when firms are either subject to takeover pressure, or

are preparing to issue new equity; in either case, the fact that shares will actually be sold at the

current market price makes maximizing this price more of a pressing concern to managers. In a

similar vein, Gompers (1996) and Baker (2000) argue that young venture capital firms–who do

not yet have well-established track records, and who must boost their reputations if they are to

attract more capital–are more likely than older venture firms to take distortionary actions to

enhance their near-term performance.



       II.B.2.b.Herding

       Another manifestation of managers’ career concerns is that they may exhibit an excessive

tendency to “herd” in their investment decisions, with any given manager ignoring his own

private information about payoffs, and blindly copying the decisions of previous movers.


                                                  17
Scharfstein and Stein (1990) show how the herding incentive can arise in a reputation-based

model. They assume that “smart” agents receive signals about future payoffs that are

informative, but that contain a common error component. In contrast, “dumb” agents receive

signals that are uncorrelated noise. This information structure has the property that, holding

fixed the absolute payoff to an agent’s investment choice, the labor market should rationally infer

that he is more likely to be smart if his choice was the same as that of other agents. This form of

endogenous relative performance evaluation generates an incentive for all agents to mimic each

other, regardless of their actual signals.17

        As with short-termism models, one way to generate empirical predictions from

reputational herding models is to think about cross-sectional variation in managers’ incentives to

boost their reputations. For example, one might posit that younger managers with less of a track

record have more to gain from trying to manipulate the labor market’s assessment of their

ability.18 If so, it follows that there should be more herd-like behavior among young managers

than among older managers.



        II.B.2.c. Other distortions induced by career concerns

        As the above discussion suggests, models of career concerns can deliver a wide range of

outcomes, depending on the specific assumptions that are made about information structure, etc.

Holmstrom and Ricart i Costa (1986) demonstrate that career concerns may induce a general

        17
         Zwiebel (1995) builds a related model of reputational herding. Given his information
structure, herding requires managerial risk aversion, unlike in Scharfstein and Stein (1990). See
also Trueman (1994) for a model of herding among security analysts.
        18
         For a more detailed analysis of how herding incentives can vary over the course of an
agent’s career, see Prendergast and Stole (1996) and Avery and Chevalier (1999).

                                                18
reluctance on the part of managers to undertake new investment projects. This is because the

performance of a new project will reveal information about managerial ability; in contrast, if no

project is undertaken, no information is revealed. If managers are risk-averse, they will prefer to

avoid the variation in wages that accompanies any labor-market updating about their ability.

Hirshleifer and Thakor (1992) build a related model of excessive conservatism in which

reputational considerations lead managers to favor safe projects over riskier ones.

       Career concerns can also come into play when the decision at hand is not whether to

initiate a new project, but rather, whether to kill an existing one. Boot (1992) and Baker (2000)

both argue that managers may be reluctant to either liquidate or divest poorly-performing lines of

business, for fear that such actions will be interpreted as an admission of failure on their part.



       II.B.3. The quiet life

       Although empire-building and career-concerns theories have probably received the most

attention, there are other variations on the classic manager-shareholder agency conflict that also

have implications for investment. A recent paper by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2000) considers

an especially simple variant: managers prefer the “quiet life”, and thus are prone to excessive

inertia when it comes to making tough decisions. On the one hand, this can lead to something

that looks much like empire-building overinvestment, if the decision at hand is whether to shut

down an existing, poorly-performing plant. On the other hand, it can also lead to

underinvestment if the decision concerns whether to enter a new line of business.19



       19
        Agaarwal and Samwick (1999) build a model in which underinvestment is a result of
managerial laziness.

                                                  19
       II.B.4. Overconfidence

       A final–and potentially very promising–agency theory of investment builds on the

premise that managers are likely to be overly optimistic about the prospects of those assets that

are under their control. That such overconfidence exists at the individual level has been

repeatedly established in the psychology literature.20 Moreover, unlike in the asset-pricing arena,

one cannot easily appeal to arbitrage considerations to argue that the effects of individual-level

overconfidence will not show up in aggregate corporate investment.

       Roll (1986) is one of the first papers to explicitly introduce overconfidence into a

corporate-finance context. Roll argues that managerial “hubris” can explain a particular form of

overinvestment, namely overpayment by acquiring firms in takeovers, but his general logic

would seem to carry over to other forms of investment as well.

       More recently, Heaton (1998) demonstrates that an overconfidence model can deliver not

only a broad tendency towards overinvestment, but also many of the liquidity-constraints-type

patterns associated with the costly-external finance models reviewed in Section II.A. Heaton’s

insight is that when managers make overly optimistic assessments of their firms’ prospects, they

will be reluctant to issue new equity, as the stock price will often seem unfairly low to them.

This leads to very much the same conclusions as in Myers-Majluf (1984)–there will be little

external equity financing, and investment will increase with internal resources.21 Thus an


       20
            See, e.g., Weinstein (1980).
       21
         In contrast, one weakness of pure empire-building models is that they have a hard time
explaining why managers–disregarding shareholders’ preferences–don’t simply issue large
amounts of external equity so that they can grow their empires faster.

                                                 20
assumption of overconfidence can be an alternative and relatively parsimonious way to generate

a reduced form that looks very much like the unified empire-building/costly-external-finance

model summarized in equation (3).

       One reason for taking overconfidence seriously in a corporate-finance setting is that,

compared to other agency problems, it is likely to be relatively impervious to some of the

obvious remedies. This is because overconfident managers will think that they are acting

benevolently on behalf of shareholders, even though from the perspective of objective outsiders

their decisions may destroy value. As a result, the distortions associated with overconfidence

cannot be easily resolved by, e.g., giving managers higher-powered incentive contracts.



       II.C. Investment Decisions When Stock Prices Deviate From Fundamentals

       All of the theories discussed to this point share the common premise that financial

markets are informationally efficient–i.e., that the prices of debt and equity accurately reflect

fundamental values–even if individual managers are prone to making mistakes, as in Roll (1986)

and Heaton (1998). However, a growing body of work in behavioral finance (surveyed in

Shleifer (2000)) suggests that one might wish to view this market-efficiency premise with some

skepticism. If so, the relevant question for our purposes is how the presence of non-fundamental

noise in asset prices might influence the behavior of corporate investment, and thereby alter some

of the conclusions offered above. Although this topic is beginning to generate some interest

among finance researchers, the existing literature on it is quite small. So I will just briefly

mention a few of the most prominent themes.

       First, a market-inefficiency perspective can potentially shed light on the empirical



                                                  21
relationship between stock prices and investment, which has been studied in a number of papers,

including Fischer and Merton (1984), Barro (1990), Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990a), and

Blanchard, Rhee and Summers (1993). According to traditional efficient-market theories, one

should expect to see a strong association between Tobin’s (1969) q and firm investment, since q

is a summary statistic for the market’s information about investment opportunities. Although

there is certainly a significant positive relationship in the data, this relationship (after controlling

for fundamentals like firm profitability) has been characterized by some as relatively limited in

economic terms–e.g., Morck, Shleifer and Vishny argue that the stock market is something of a

sideshow in terms of its influence on investment. Such a sideshow outcome can be easily

rationalized in the context of an inefficient market, to the extent that managers are relatively

rational and far-sighted, and therefore do not let investment respond to noise in stock prices.

        Second, and perhaps more interestingly, market inefficiencies can interact with some of

the other financing frictions discussed above to produce a variety of cross-sectional and time-

series patterns in investment. For example, Stein (1996) hypothesizes that firms that are heavily

dependent on external equity (i.e., those that are growing fast relative to their retained earnings,

and that have little debt capacity) will have investment that is more sensitive to non-fundamental

variations in stock prices than firms that have plenty of cash on hand. Intuitively, when stock

prices are below fundamental values, rational managers of equity-dependent firms are very

reluctant to invest, because for them investment requires the issuance of stock at a too-low price.

This is effectively the same mechanism as in the Myers-Majluf (1984) model, but now it works

with a vengeance. In contrast, when stock prices are above fundamental values, the problems

identified by Myers and Majluf go away, and equity-dependent firms find it more attractive to



                                                   22
issue new shares and invest.22 In this story, the stock market may well be a sideshow for some

firms–those with ample cash or debt capacity–but it is a much more important determinant of

investment for the subset of equity-dependent firms.

       Finally, Shleifer and Vishny (2001) argue that stock-market inefficiencies may be helpful

in explaining a variety of broad-brush facts about mergers and acquisitions, such as the tendency

for aggregate M&A activity to be clustered in periods when market prices are high relative to

observable fundamentals. Their idea is that at such times, the manager of an overvalued firm

would like to issue large amounts of equity, but needs a valid excuse for doing so–simply issuing

stock and parking the proceeds in T-bills won’t work. Given the adjustment costs associated

with new physical investment, a stock-for-stock acquisition of another less-overvalued firm may

be the best way (or at least, a good way) to go.




       22
         Many studies have documented that there is a strong positive link between stock prices
and the propensity of firms to issue equity. See Baker and Wurgler (2001) for a recent treatment
and further references.

                                                   23
       III. Evidence on Investment at the Firm Level

       III.A. Financial Slack and Investment

       III.A.1. What we know: firms with more cash and less debt invest more

       According to the Modigliani-Miller (1958) paradigm, a firm’s investment should depend

only on the profitability of its investment opportunities, as measured, e.g., by its value of Tobin’s

(1969) q. Nothing else should matter: not the firm’s mix of debt and equity financing, nor its

reserves of cash and securities, nor financial market “conditions”, however defined. Perhaps the

one clearest empirical finding emerging from research on investment over the last 15 or so years

is that this theoretical proposition is false. In fact, controlling for investment opportunities, firms

with more cash on hand invest more, as do firms with lower debt burdens.

       The literature that establishes these results is by now very large, and includes important

contributions by Meyer and Kuh (1957), Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988), Hoshi, Kashyap

and Scharfstein (1991), Whited (1992), Schaller (1993), Bond and Meghir (1994), Calomiris and

Hubbard (1995), Chirinko (1995), Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995), Hubbard, Kashyap and

Whited (1995), and Lang, Ofek and Stulz (1996). This work is surveyed in detail by Hubbard

(1998), so I will confine myself to a few brief observations.

       First, it is important to recognize that the evidence speaks to the effect of financial slack

on a wide range of investments, not just expenditures on plant and equipment. These include

investments in inventories (Carpenter, Fazzari and Petersen (1994), Kashyap, Lamont and Stein

(1994)), in R&D (Hall (1992), Himmelberg and Petersen (1994)), in pricing for market share

(Chevalier (1995a, 1995b), Chevalier and Scharfstein (1995, 1996), Phillips (1995)), and in labor

hoarding during recessions (Sharpe (1994)).



                                                  24
       Second, taken as a whole, the literature has convincingly dealt with a fundamental

endogeneity problem, namely that a firm’s cash position or its debt level may contain information

about its investment opportunities. For example, firms will tend to accumulate cash when they

are abnormally profitable, and high profitability may be an indicator that marginal q (which is

hard to measure accurately) is high as well.23 Or firms may take on debt precisely at those times

when they plan to cut investment, so that it can be tricky to infer causality from, e.g., the finding

that dramatic increases in leverage are associated with sharply reduced investment (Kaplan

(1989)).

       Different papers have addressed this endogeneity problem in different ways, and there has

been some debate as to the merits of various approaches to identification. But at this point, even

a skeptic would have to concede that the case has been made. Perhaps the cleanest evidence

comes from a series of “natural experiments”which isolate shocks to firms’ financial positions

that appear obviously unrelated to (at least a subset of) their investment opportunities. For

example, Blanchard, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (1994) show that firms’ acquisition activity

responds to large cash windfalls coming from legal settlements unrelated to their ongoing lines of

business. Peek and Rosengren (1997) document that declines in the Japanese stock market lead

to reductions in the U.S.-lending-market share of U.S. branches of Japanese banks, with these

reductions being larger for banks with weaker balance sheets. Similarly, Froot and O’Connell

(1997) find that reinsurance companies cut back on their supply of earthquake insurance after




       23
       See Erickson and Whited (2000) for a recent analysis of the biases arising from
measurement errors in q.

                                                 25
large hurricanes impair their capital positions.24

        A related natural-experiment approach to identification, pioneered by Lamont (1997),

involves looking at how investment in one division of a firm responds to shocks originating in

another, ostensibly unrelated division. As has been found by Lamont (1997), Lang, Ofek and

Stulz (1996), Houston, James and Marcus (1997), Shin and Stulz (1998), among others, increases

in cashflow or decreases in leverage attributable to one of a firm’s divisions translate into

significant increases in the investment of other divisions. As these papers ultimately speak more

to the topic of the second part of this essay–within-firm investment allocation–I defer a more

complete discussion of them until later. For the time being, suffice it to say that they represent

one more nail in the coffin of the Modigliani-Miller null hypothesis that a firm’s investment is

unrelated to its liquidity position or its leverage ratio.



        III.A.2. What we don’t know: why firms with more cash and less debt invest more

        While it is becoming very hard to argue with the proposition that financial slack matters

for investment, it is much less clear what the precise mechanism is that drives this relationship.

Most of the empirical findings discussed above can be loosely understood in the context of

equation (3), which nests both the empire-building and costly-external-finance models, and

which contains the latter as a special case (where        = 0). Consequently, these findings do not for

the most part allow one to sharply discriminate between the two.25

        24
         Other work that can arguably be thought of in this natural-experiment spirit includes
Froot and Stein (1991) and Calomiris and Hubbard (1995).
        25
         It should be noted that on this point, my reading of the literature differs from that of
Hubbard (1998). Hubbard interprets the evidence almost entirely in terms of models of costly
external finance, and concludes that: “the free cash flow (empire-building) story does not appear

                                                     26
        Indeed, given that the models can be so naturally nested, it is not even clear that it is a

sensible goal to try to universally reject one in favor of the other. The only way to do so would

be to establish that   = 0 always, i.e., that managers never seek to empire-build. As is discussed

in more detail below, there is a variety of other evidence that appears to directly contradict this

hypothesis. And if it is the case that   > 0, then the unified empire-building/costly-external-

finance model in equation (3) admits either over- or underinvestment, and a more interesting

question to ask is simply this: as an empirical matter, which distortion is more prevalent?

        On this point, some helpful evidence is provided by McConnell and Muscarella (1985).

They look at how the stock market responded to firms’ announcements of new capital

expenditures during the period 1975-81. In most cases, the market reaction was positive.26

However, in the oil industry–in which, according to Jensen (1986), there was systematic

overinvestment during the sample period–the market reaction to new investment was negative.

A simple and appealing interpretation of these findings is that the unified model with both

empire-building and financing constraints is the right one, and that in many, but not all cases, the

parameters line up in such a way that the typical firm is in the underinvestment region, where the

NPV of the marginal investment is positive.27

        Unfortunately, the full story for why investment is related to financial slack is likely to be

somewhat more complicated. Kaplan and Zingales (2000) point to the case of Microsoft, which



to explain the link between net worth and investment...” (page 214).
        26
         As discussed below, the stock market often seems more skeptical about another form of
corporate investment–mergers and acquisitions.
        27
         Alternatively, one could say the same thing about Heaton’s (1998) overconfidence
model, since, as argued above, it delivers a reduced form similar to that in equation (3).

                                                  27
over the period 1986-1997, had a very high sensitivity of investment to cashflow. On the one

hand, given Microsoft’s extraordinarily strong financial position–no debt and almost $9 billion in

cash on hand in 1997–this underscores Kaplan and Zingales’ (1997) warning that one cannot

assume that high values of dI/dw are necessarily indicative of tightly binding financing

constraints.28 But the puzzle goes deeper than this. In light of the high level of inside ownership

(by Bill Gates and other top managers) it is also hard to believe that the high investment-

cashflow correlation is telling us that Microsoft is a worst-case example of the traditional

agency/empire-building effect. One is thus tempted to conclude that even if the unified model in

equation (3) describes a good part of what is going on, there must be something else at work in

the data as well.



       III.B. Direct Evidence of Agency-Related Overinvestment

       While much of the evidence discussed above–on the correlation between investment and

measures of financial slack–does not speak to the question of whether empire-building

tendencies exert an important influence on investment, there are a variety of other studies that do.

I now briefly review some of this work.



       III.B.1. Acquisitions as a form of empire-building

       There are a number of studies that suggest that acquiring firms often overpay when

buying other companies. For example, in many deals, the acquiror’s stock price falls upon

announcement of the transaction. (See Roll (1986) for references to this work.) Moreover, it


       28
            See also Cleary (1999) and Almeida and Campello (2001) for more on this point.

                                                 28
appears that the tendency towards this particular form of overinvestment is linked to agency

conflicts. Lewellen, Loderer and Rosenfeld (1985) document that negative announcement effects

are most pronounced for those acquirors where management has a small equity stake. Similarly,

Lang, Stulz and Walking (1991) find that negative announcement effects are stronger when the

acquiror has a low value of q and relatively high cashflows–precisely the configuration of excess

cashflow relative to investment opportunities that, according to Jensen (1986), exacerbates

empire-building overinvestment. And Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990b) find more negative

announcement effects when acquirors are engaging in unrelated diversification. As noted above,

unrelated diversification represents a type of merger for which there is a natural presumption of

an agency motivation, with managers seeking to build not only larger, but more stable empires.29

       Blanchard, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (1994) look at how a small sample of firms

respond to large cash windfalls coming from legal settlements. The firms in their sample have

for the most part very poor investment opportunities as measured by low values of q. Yet rather

than turning over the windfalls to their shareholders, they typically spend the cash on

acquisitions, in many cases on deals that represent unrelated diversification. This is a clear-cut

violation of the Modigliani-Miller theorem–exogenous cash shocks have a big impact on

investment–and it also seems very consistent with an empire-building view of the world. But

just to restate a point stressed above: while this sort of evidence goes a long way toward rejecting

the hypothesis that     = 0, it does not imply that, across the entire universe of firms, the dominant

problem is one of overinvestment. It is quite possible that, were firms with high values of q and

scarce internal resources to receive similar windfalls, they would spend them on value-creating


       29
            See Section VI below for more about empirical work on unrelated diversification.

                                                  29
investment in their own line of business, as suggested by models of costly external finance.30



       III.B.2. Is agency-related overinvestment always empire-building?

       Although it has become commonplace in the literature to associate overinvestment with

the specific mechanism of empire-building, there are, as noted above, other agency effects that

can also give rise to overinvestment under some circumstances. Bertrand and Mullainathan

(2000) argue that a managerial preference for the “quiet life”–effectively, a resistance to

change–can lead to excessive continuation of existing negative-NPV projects. Consistent with

this hypothesis, and in contrast to a naive empire-building story, they find that when discipline on

managers (in the form of takeover pressure) decreases, firms are less likely to shut down old

plants, but also less likely to build new ones. In a somewhat similar vein, Baker (2000) builds a

model in which reputational concerns deter managers from discontinuing negative-NPV projects,

as this would be an admission of failure. He then finds evidence which suggests that the

youngest venture-capital firms–who are presumably the most concerned about reputation-

building–are also the most reluctant to liquidate bad investments.



       III.C. Evidence on Reputational Models of Investment

       III.C.1. Short-termism

       Short-termism models such as that of Stein (1989) can be difficult to test directly. This is

because their central prediction is that there will be underinvestment in those types of activities


       30
         Indeed, Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen (1994) find evidence to just this effect: small
businesses whose owners receive windfalls in the form of inheritances are more likely to survive,
and to grow rapidly, than their peers.

                                                 30
that are not directly observable by the market. For example, a firm may skimp on maintenance,

advertising, worker training, etc., because the resulting cost savings are interpreted by investors

not as reduced investment per se, but rather as increases in firm profitability. But to the extent

that an econometrician’s information set is no better than that of investors, this makes it difficult

to actually document the underinvestment behavior explicitly.

       Nevertheless, there is a good deal of circumstantial evidence consistent with the main

comparative-static prediction of the theory, namely that underinvestment will be most

pronounced in circumstances when managers are most concerned with hyping their stock prices

or labor-market reputations. Perhaps the best example comes from studies that examines the

operating performance of firms around the time of equity offerings. A number of papers,

including Hansen and Crutchley (1990), DeGeorge and Zeckhauser (1993) and Loughran and

Ritter (1997) find that firms typically have abnormally strong operating performance relative to

their peers in the year or two preceding an equity issue (either a seasoned issue or an IPO), and

abnormally weak performance in the years after the issue. Although this is not definitive proof, it

is exactly the pattern that one would expect to see if the desire to elevate the stock price at the

time of the issue were leading managers to sacrifice long-run value for higher current profits.31

       Also noteworthy is the work of Gompers (1996). He observes that for venture-capital

firms, having the startup companies in their portfolio go public is often one of the most visible

and credible signs of strong performance. He then documents that younger venture firms take

their startups public at an earlier stage of their life-cycle than do older, more established venture

firms. If there is an optimal time for startups to go public, and going too soon is therefore costly,


       31
            See also Teoh, Wong and Welch (1998a, 1998b) for closely related evidence.

                                                  31
this would represent another form of distortionary short-run performance boosting.



       III.C.2. Herding

       A number of recent papers provide evidence supportive of reputational herding models.

For the most part, this evidence comes not from garden-variety corporate investment decisions,

but rather from either: i) the investment choices of institutional investors; or ii) the

recommendations of security analysts. In some of the work, (Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny

(1992), Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995), Falkenstein (1996), Nofsiger and Sias (1996),

Wermers (1999), Welch (2000)) the aim is simply to determine whether certain groups of agents

look like they are herding–e.g., whether all money managers try to buy the same stocks at the

same time–without relating this herding behavior to career concerns. However, there are also

several papers that tie actions directly to measures of agents’ reputations, thereby providing

sharper tests of the reputational herding mechanism. Notable work in this latter category

includes Stickel (1990), Lamont (1995), Ehrbeck and Waldmann (1996), Graham (1999),

Chevalier and Ellison (1999), and Hong, Kubik and Solomon (2000).

       The Chevalier-Ellison (1999) and Hong-Kubik-Solomon (2000) papers are especially

interesting from a career-concerns perspective in that they both: i) identify the implicit labor-

market incentives that agents face; and ii) show how these implicit incentives color behavior.

For example, in their study of mutual fund managers, Chevalier and Ellison find that young

managers (with presumably less well-established reputations) are more likely to be fired if their

portfolio choices differ from those of their peers, even after controlling for the absolute

performance of these portfolios. The result that, controlling for absolute performance, an agent



                                                  32
is punished for a decision that differs from the herd, is precisely what is predicted by the model

of Scharfstein and Stein (1990). Chevalier and Ellison then go on to show that consistent with

the incentives they face, younger money managers are indeed less likely to take positions that

differ from benchmark weightings. In a similar vein, Hong, Kubik and Solomon demonstrate

that inexperienced security analysts are more likely to be fired for earnings forecasts that deviate

from the consensus, controlling for forecast accuracy. And, in the face of these incentives,

inexperienced analysts tend to issue earnings forecasts that are in fact closer to the consensus.



       IV. Macroeconomic Implications

       Thus far, I have been taking a very microeconomic perspective on corporate investment,

focusing on the extent to which information or agency problems can lead a single firm’s

investment to deviate from its first-best value. But the work surveyed thus far has important and

far-reaching macroeconomic implications as well. Unfortunately, giving a complete and

satisfactory treatment of these macro implications–which are fleshed out in a what has become a

very large literature in its own right–would would take me well outside the scope of this essay.

So what follows is intended to be only an extremely cursory and selective review.



       IV.A. The Financial Accelerator

       Over the years, many macroeconomists, including Fisher (1933), Bernanke (1983), and

Eckstein and Sinai (1986), have argued that financial-market imperfections can play an

important role in propagating and amplifying business-cycle fluctuations. More recently,

researchers have begun explicitly embedding financing frictions of the sort discussed in Section



                                                 33
II into formal macro models. One of the first and most significant papers in this genre is

Bernanke and Gertler (1989). Using an adaptation of Townsend’s (1979) costly-state-

verification model, they show how economy-wide movements in firms’ internal resources can be

a source of output dynamics. In particular, an initial positive shock to the economy improves

firms’ profits and retained earnings; this in turn leads to increased investment and output, which

amplifies the upturn, and so forth. A converse effect plays out during recessions.

       Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) add a substantial kick to the Bernanke-Gertler story by noting

that movements in asset values–as opposed to just cashflows–can also exert a strong influence on

firms’ ability to fund their investments. In the language of the heuristic model sketched above,

Kiyotaki and Moore would say that a firm’s internal resources w can be a function of asset prices,

if, for example, the firm owns substantial amounts of land. In such a scenario, an initial positive

shock is further amplified by an increase in land prices, which then feeds back into more

investment and output, further increases in land prices, and so on. There is also now an added

intertemporal ingredient, as land prices respond not only to current movements in output, but also

to expectations of future movements.

       The large body of work in this “financial-accelerator” genre is surveyed by, among

others, Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1996, 1998). One point worth noting is that in most

cases, the financing imperfections considered in the macro literature are ones that fits in the

costly-external finance genre–i.e., that have reduced forms similar to that given in equation

(2)–while empire-building tendencies have been given less attention. Nevertheless, it is unlikely

that adding empire building into the macro models would dramatically change their most basic

positive implications. After all, whether or not one allows for    > 0, the link between



                                                 34
investment and financial slack–which is the mechanism at the heart of the macro models–is much

the same.

What would probably change with the addition of empire-building preferences, however, are the

welfare implications of the macro models. For example, one might imagine that there could be a

silver-lining aspect to recessions, to the extent that they lead certain firms to curtail wasteful

overinvestment.32



       IV.B. When Banks Face Financing Frictions

       The same external-financing frictions which make life difficult for non-financial firms are

also likely to affect banks. This observation underlies recent research in two related areas: on the

effects of “capital crunches” in banking; and on the so-called “bank lending channel” of

monetary-policy transmission.



       IV.B.1. Capital crunches in banking

       Suppose that banks in a particular region are heavily exposed to local real estate, and that

land prices crash, leading to large loan losses and depleted equity capital for the banks. What

happens to their subsequent ability to make new loans? Clearly, it depends on the extent to

which they are able to promptly rebuild their capital bases with new equity issues. If, for

example, banks face the sort of adverse-selection problems in the equity market described by

Myers and Majluf (1984), it may take a while to repair their balance sheets, and in the meantime,



       32
         Loosely speaking, such a silver lining can arise if, in a recession, firms’ cashflows
decline relative to the rate at which their positive-NPV investment opportunities dry up.

                                                  35
their lending may be sharply reduced, with attendant effects on their borrowers’ investment, the

regional economy, etc. This would be a classic example of a bank capital crunch.

       This mechanism is at the heart of Bernanke’s (1983) account of the Great Depression.

More recently, research interest in bank capital crunches surged in the early 1990's, in the wake

of widespread capital-adequacy problems in the U.S. banking industry, and has continued to

draw motivation from episodes like the Asian financial crises of the late 1990's. Among the

many empirical papers on the topic are Bernanke and Lown (1991) and Peek and Rosengren

(1995, 1997). Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) build a formal theoretical model of a capital crunch.



       IV.B.2. The bank lending channel of monetary policy transmission

       As developed by Bernanke and Blinder (1988) and Stein (1998), the idea behind the bank

lending channel is that central bank open-market operations have independent consequences for

the supply of loans by banks–and hence for the investment of bank-dependent firms–above and

beyond any impact due to standard “money channel” increases in bond-market rates of interest.

The logic goes as follows. When the central bank drains reserves from the banking system, this

obviously compromises banks’ ability to raise money with reservable sources of financing, such

as insured deposits. In a Modigliani-Miller world, this shock to the liability side of banks’

balance sheets would have no independent effect on lending, since a bank losing a dollar of

insured deposits could simply offset this by raising a dollar of nonreservable uninsured debt

finance, e.g., by issuing commercial paper, or medium-term notes.

       However, if banks are subject to adverse-selection problems, they will have difficulty

replacing insured deposits with these other forms of uninsured debt finance, since the latter



                                                36
expose investors to default risk. As a result, contractionary open-market operations which shrink

banks’ deposit bases ultimately translate into declines in bank lending, and in turn into reductions

in the investment of those non-financial firms that depend on banks.

          A wide variety of evidence consistent with these ideas is documented by, among others,

Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Kashyap, Stein and Wilcox (1993), Kashyap and Stein (1995,

2000), Ludvigson (1998), Morgan (1998) and Kishan and Opelia (2000). More complete surveys

include Kashyap and Stein (1994), Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Cecchetti (1995) and Hubbard

(1995).



          IV.C. Cross-Country Differences in Financial Development, Investment and Growth

          Implicit in many of the theories discussed in Section II above is the idea that the

efficiency of corporate investment is ultimately a function of institutional factors such as: the

quality of auditing and disclosure; and the degree to which the legal and regulatory system

enforces contracts and otherwise protects outside investors from abuse by managers. For

example, in the context of an adverse-selection model, one would predict that better accounting

standards and more timely disclosure would reduce the information asymmetry between

managers and outsiders, and thus free up the flow of external finance to positive-NPV projects.

          Alternatively, note that models such as Bolton and Scharfstein (1990) and Hart and

Moore (1998)–in which managers can simply steal all of a firm’s operating cashflows because

these cashflows cannot be verified in a court of law–correspond to an extremely weak

auditing/contract-enforcement technology. Thus taken literally, these models might be most

appropriate for thinking about firms in economies where the legal system offers investors very



                                                   37
little in the way of protection from managerial misbehavior. Again, the obvious prediction that

follows from this observation is that raising external finance for good projects ought to be easier

when investors are better protected.

       A natural way to test such propositions empirically is with cross-country comparisons.

LaPorta et al (1997, 1998) show that there is indeed substantial variation across countries in

measures of legal protection and accounting standards. They also establish the key link between

these institutional factors and “financial development”, demonstrating that countries which score

better on their legal and accounting criteria also have more extensively developed debt and equity

markets.

       Having established this link, the next important empirical question becomes: what are the

consequences of such financial development for investment? The answer, which is beginning to

emerge convincingly in a series of recent papers, is that financial development seems to be quite

important for real activity.33 In particular, King and Levine (1993) and Levine and Zervos (1998)

find that the predetermined component of a country’s financial development is a strong predictor

of its future growth, capital accumulation and productivity improvements.

       More detail on the mechanisms by which financial development exerts these beneficial

effects is provided by Rajan and Zingales (1998), Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), and

Wurgler (2000). The first two papers show that countries with more developed financial systems

do a better job of channeling funds to, and promoting the growth of, externally-dependent

industries and firms–i.e., those with strong investment opportunities but scarce internal


       33
         See Levine (1997) for a more complete survey. Earlier work hypothesizing a causal
relationship between financial development and growth includes Schumpeter (1911), Goldsmith
(1969), McKinnon (1973), and Shaw (1973).

                                                38
resources. In a similar vein, Wurgler (2000) finds that in countries with more developed

financial markets, investment is more sensitive to measures of the quality of investment

opportunities, such as value-added. Thus overall, financial development seems to help growth in

just the way that the theory would lead one to expect: by relaxing external financing constraints,

and thereby allowing capital to flow to the best investment projects.




                                                39
       PART TWO: INVESTMENT INSIDE FIRMS

       V. Theoretical Work on Internal Capital Allocation

       I now turn to the topic of within-firm capital allocation, beginning with the theoretical

work in this area. To organize the discussion, I first give an overview of the primitive

differences between internal and external capital markets, focusing heavily on the control rights

held by the provider of finance in either case. I then go on to examine in more detail the specific

implications of these differences for the efficiency of within-firm investment outcomes. Finally,

I very briefly touch on a related literature, that which seeks to explain observed capital budgeting

practices by appealing to information and agency problems inside firms.



       V.A. Fundamental Differences Between Internal and External Capital Markets

       Consider a particular line of business, denoted by B1, which has both assets in place, as

well as future investment opportunities. B1 is run by manager M1, who, in the spirit of much of

the work surveyed in Section II, may both have empire-building tendencies (i.e., may derive

private benefits from the assets under his control), as well as private information about the value

of either the assets in place or the future investment opportunities. B1 can be financed as a stand-

alone entity in the external capital market–in which case it goes to, e.g., a bank, a venture

capitalist, or the public debt or equity market–or it can be financed in an internal capital market.

In the internal market, M1 always approaches the CEO of the parent firm for funding.



       V.A.1. Simplest case: a benevolent CEO overseeing just one division

        Let us begin with the simplest possible case, in which the CEO acts benevolently on



                                                 40
behalf of her ultimate shareholders (so that the only agency problem is that between M1 and the

CEO) and in which B1 is the only division reporting to the CEO. How do the working of the

internal capital market differ in this case from those of the external capital market?

       A first observation is that when M1 deals with the CEO, he is dealing with a single

centralized provider of finance, as opposed to a (possibly) large group of investors, such as in the

public debt or equity market. Standard free-riding arguments therefore suggest that the CEO

might be expected to devote more effort to monitoring, i.e., to uncovering information about

either B1’s current performance or future prospects. This would be a benefit of internal capital

allocation. On the other hand, as has been pointed out by Dewatripont and Maskin (1995),

Bolton and Scharfstein (1996) and others, there is also a potential downside to centralized

finance and the accompanying lack of free-riding. In particular, the CEO’s inability to

precommit not to renegotiate with M1 can lead to a “soft budget constraint” whereby projects are

not liquidated even following poor managerial performance; this in turn weakens ex ante

incentives for M1.

       While the centralized-finance aspect of an internal capital market is important, it is at best

only a part of the story. After all, if one focuses only on the degree of centralization, there is no

distinction between M1 approaching the CEO of his firm and, say, a single bank lender, or a

single venture capitalist. Motivated by this observation, Gertner, Scharfstein and Stein (1994)

argue that what distinguishes the CEO from these other centralized providers of finance is that

the CEO has total and unconditional control rights in the sense of GHM ( short for Grossman and

Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990) and Hart (1995)). That is, the CEO can unilaterally decide

what to do with B1's physical assets, while the same is not true of a banker if the firm is not



                                                  41
currently in default.

        Gertner, Scharfstein and Stein (1994) argue that these strong control rights have two

consequences. First, the CEO will have greater monitoring incentives than even other centralized

providers of finance; that is, control and monitoring are complements. This is because when the

monitor (i.e. the CEO) also has control rights, she can ensure that any value-enhancing ideas that

occur to her in the course of monitoring are implemented, something which a financier without

control rights cannot do. For example, suppose that the CEO decides that some of B1's assets

should be reconfigured, or put to different uses. With full control rights over these assets, she

can implement such a restructuring directly. In contrast, a bank lender making the same

judgement cannot (outside of default) do anything with B1's assets; the bank is limited to just

making suggestions that M1 may or may not want to take up. As a result, the bank has less

incentive to invest in learning about the business in the first place. This formalizes an old line of

argument, due to Alchian (1969) and Williamson (1975), that the internal capital market brings a

higher quality of information to bear on decisions than the external market.

        Second, however, a direct application of the GHM logic suggests that there will also be

an offsetting cost of the CEO’s strong control rights. The presence of the CEO on top of him in

the chain of command is likely to blunt M1's entrepreneurial incentives, i.e., to discourage him

from taking a variety of costly but non-contractible actions that raise the overall value of the

business. This point is also made by Aghion and Tirole (1997).34


        34
           Aghion and Tirole (1997) further explain why a manager reporting to a CEO is more
likely to be discouraged than one reporting directly to outside shareholders. Although diffuse
shareholders also have complete control rights in a formal (i.e., legal) sense, their de facto control
is likely to be much weaker than a CEO’s, since they are less well-informed. See also Burkart,
Gromb and Panunzi (1997) for a similar argument.

                                                 42
       V.A.2. More interesting case: a benevolent CEO overseeing multiple divisions

       The case in which the CEO oversees only one division is a helpful starting point in

thinking about the fundamental differences in control rights between the internal and external

markets. But this case obviously does not leave much room for thinking about within-firm capital

reallocations per se. So the next step is to consider a situation in which the CEO oversees

multiple lines of business, each with their own managers.

       Stein (1997) argues that, in this case, the key distinction between the CEO and a banker is

that the CEO has greater scope to redistribute resources across the lines of business. To be

concrete, suppose that there are now two businesses, B1 and B2, each of which has adequate

collateral/pledgeable income to raise one unit of financing on its own. A CEO who controls both

businesses can, if she wants, raise two units of financing against the combined collateral, and

give both units to B1. In other words, the CEO can engage in a strong form of winner-picking.35

Note that if the two businesses were separate entities borrowing from a bank, the bank could not

impose the same outcome–if it tried to hold B2 to a zero allocation, M2 would be free to go to

another bank and seek a better offer. In contrast, the CEO’s control rights enable it to keep M2

from seeking competing financing offers. After all, the CEO “owns” the assets of B2 and can

thus forbid M2 to use these assets as collateral in a transaction that the CEO does not approve of.

This idea builds on Hart and Moore’s (1990) observation that “...the sole right possessed by an

owner of an asset is his ability to exclude others from the use of that asset.” (p. 1121).



       35
         A distinct point, due to Gertner, Scharfstein and Stein (1994) is that a CEO overseeing
two related lines of business can, when B1 is in trouble, combine its assets those of B2, and put
M2 in charge of everything–a form of internal restructuring that cannot be as simply
accomplished by a bank lending to two separate firms.

                                                 43
       Whether the CEO ultimately uses her reallocative authority to good or bad ends is of

course the central question to be addressed here. There are arguments on either side, and I take

these up momentarily. But first, note that the very existence of this authority can also have

further incentive effects–either positive or negative–above and beyond any direct consequences

for ex post investment efficiency. On the negative side, as emphasized by Milgrom (1988),

Milgrom and Roberts (1988), and Meyer, Milgrom and Roberts (1992), division managers may

engage in wasteful influence activities in an effort to convince the CEO to give them a larger

share of the capital budget. Alternatively, Brusco and Panunzi (2000) argue that the potential

threat of reallocation away from, say, M2 can weaken his incentives. For if he is not sure he will

get to reinvest all of the profits generated by his line of business–because they might get steered

to B1 instead–he will not want to work as hard to create such profits in the first place.36

       In contrast, Stein (2001) argues that the CEO’s reallocative authority may also have

positive ex ante effects. To the extent that their desire to convince the CEO to grant them a

larger share of the firm’s capital budget leads division managers to act as honest advocates, and

to produce additional legitimate “hard” (i.e., verifiable) information about project prospects,

overall efficiency can in some circumstances be enhanced.37



       V.A.3. The CEO is herself an agent


       36
         See also Rotemberg and Saloner (1994) and Inderst and Laux (2000) for somewhat
related analyses.
       37
         But this advocacy mechanism is a delicate one: the private returns to division managers
from producing hard information–and thereby possibly increasing their capital budgets–are
potentially much greater than the social returns, so there is the danger that they waste too much
time on this activity.

                                                 44
       A final and very important aspect of internal capital allocation is that the party making the

allocation decisions (the CEO) is herself an agent of outside shareholders, so that one cannot

simply assume that she will act benevolently on their behalf. Thus a complete model of the

within-firm allocation process should incorporate at least two layers of agency–one between the

CEO and shareholders, and one between the division managers and the CEO.

       This two-tiered agency feature is not unique to models of internal capital allocation;

consider for example Diamond’s (1984) well-known model of a bank, which explicitly

recognizes the agency problem between the bank and its ultimate investors.38 But, as will

become clear below, the ultimate effect of the top-level agency problem between the principals

and the “supervisor” (i.e., either the bank, or the CEO) can depend crucially on the structure of

control rights in the lower-level agency relationship. For example, in Diamond’s model–in

which the bank does not have the authority to take all the money away from some of its clients in

order to give it to others–diversification across multiple projects emerges as a device which is

helpful in mitigating the top-level agency problem. In contrast, in an internal capital market,

where the CEO has much broader reallocative authority, diversification can in some cases

actually exacerbate top-level agency problems (Scharfstein and Stein (2000)).



       V.B. Implications for the Efficiency of Capital Allocation

       The literature has identified several mechanisms by which the allocation of investment

funds in an internal capital market can lead to either increases or reductions in efficiency, as



       38
         There are also other multi-tier agency models–Tirole (1986) is an early example–which
do not focus on capital allocation issues.

                                                 45
compared to an external-capital-markets benchmark. I consider the bright and dark sides of

internal capital markets in turn.



       V.B.1. The bright side of internal capital markets

       Absent any direct operating synergies, there are two basic financing-related ways that

value can be created by bringing together multiple business under the roof of a single parent

company. First, integration of this sort may allow more total external financing to be raised than

could be raised by the individual businesses operating as stand-alones; this “more-money” effect

is beneficial if there is an underinvestment problem on average. Second, an internal capital

market may do a better job of allocating a given amount of funding across projects, which one

might call a “smarter-money” effect.

       With respect to the more-money effect, Lewellen (1971) argues that coinsurance across

imperfectly correlated divisions increases the debt capacity of integrated firms.39 However,

Berger and Ofek (1995) and Comment and Jarrell (1995) cast doubt on the importance of this

story by documenting that, empirically, integrated firms borrow only a trivial amount more than

their stand-alone counterparts. Alternatively, Hadlock, Rynagaert and Thomas (1998) build a

model in which diversification–by pooling risks and therefore reducing the variance of managers’

inside information–helps to alleviate adverse-selection problems of the Myers-Majluf (1984) type

in the external equity market.40 In support of this hypothesis, they find that equity issues by

       39
         Inderst and Muller (2001) provide a modern treatment of this and related issues,
showing how the existence of an internal capital market shapes the nature of the optimal
financial contract between a firm and its outside investors.
       40
         As a counterpoint to this idea, practitioners often argue that diversified firms have a
harder time raising equity, because their complexity makes them difficult for investors to value

                                                 46
diversified firms have a smaller price impact than equity issues by comparable stand-alone firms.

Again, though, there is little direct evidence as to whether this ultimately translates into more

external finance being raised by diversified firms.

       The smarter-money effect has a long tradition and has been discussed by a number of

authors, including Alchian (1969), Weston (1970), Williamson (1975), and Donaldson (1984). It

is based on two related premises: first, that the CEO in an internal capital market will become

relatively well-informed about the prospects of the firm’s divisions; and second, that the CEO

will use her high-quality information as the basis for making value-enhancing reallocations

across divisions–i.e., will engage in active winner-picking. As discussed above, more recent

theoretical treatments (e.g., Gertner, Scharfstein and Stein (1994), Li and Li (1996), Stein (1997),

and Matsusaka and Nanda (2000)) explicitly link the performance of one or both of these

functions–monitoring and winner-picking–to the strong control rights held by the CEO in an

internal capital market.

       Stein (1997) goes on to suggest that the CEO will be more likely to do a good job of

winner-picking when the firm operates in related lines of business. The logic is one of relative

performance evaluation: if the task is to most efficiently distribute a fixed amount of capital, it is

not important to know the absolute merits of the competing investment projects, all that matters

is their relative merits. And assessing relative value may be easier when comparing projects in

related lines of business.

         The smarter-money effect arises naturally in a setting where the CEO acts in the

interests of outside shareholders. But it can also come through even when the CEO is self-



accurately. See Nanda and Narayanan (1999).

                                                  47
interested. This point is emphasized by Stein (1997), who notes that CEO’s with certain kinds

of empire-building preferences (such as private benefits that are proportional to gross output)

may actually have very good intrinsic incentives for doing intra-firm resource allocation–though

they may want to do more total investment than their principals would like, their desire to have

large and profitable empires can lead them to rank projects in the right order from the principals’

perspective. Although one can think of counterexamples (e.g., a CEO who only wants to invest

in projects which make use of her specific human capital, as in Shleifer and Vishny (1989)), the

general conclusion to be taken away is that CEO self-interest, taken alone, is not necessarily

inimical to efficient capital allocation.



        V.B.2. The dark side of internal capital markets

        Parallel to the discussion of its potential benefits, there are two broad ways in which an

internal capital market can reduce value. First, if one believes that there is a general tendency

towards overinvestment, then the more-money effect–the potential for integrated firms to have

larger capital budgets than their stand-alone peers–is seen as a bad thing. Second, holding fixed

the overall level of investment, there is the concern that the internal capital market does a worse

job of allocating funds to individual divisions or projects.

        Recent theoretical research has focused almost exclusively on the latter possibility, which

makes sense, given the paucity of direct evidence to support the more-money hypothesis. This

work, which includes Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000), Scharfstein and Stein (2000), and

Wulf (1999), goes a level further down into the organization and stresses the agency conflict

between division managers (i.e., M1 and M2 in our earlier notation) and the CEO as being a



                                                 48
central part of the problem. Following the papers on influence activities by Milgrom (1988),

Milgrom and Roberts (1988), and Meyer, Milgrom and Roberts (1992), division managers in

these models are portrayed as rent-seeking agents who try to actively sway the CEO to give them

more in the way of compensation, power, or resources.41

       Although introducing rent-seeking at the division-manager level is a helpful step in

building a model of inefficient within-firm capital allocations, it is by itself not sufficient. For

example, in the model of Meyer, Milgrom and Roberts (1992), division managers try to influence

the CEO to give them more capital by overstating their divisions’ prospects, but the CEO

rationally sees through the hype. The only inefficiency in the model is the fact that division

managers waste their time and effort in the futile attempt to influence the CEO. Alternatively,

think of models where division managers expend effort to increase their bargaining positions vis

a vis the CEO, perhaps by building up their outside options, or by making it harder for a

successor to take over their jobs (Shleifer and Vishny (1989), Edlin and Stiglitz (1995)). Such

models make it clear how rent-seeking division managers might be able to extract larger

compensation packages from the CEO, but they do not say much about why the extra

compensation comes in the form of increased capital allocations, as opposed to just cash.

       Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) address this why-distort-the-capital-budget question

in a model in which the CEO acts on behalf of shareholders–i.e., where the only agency conflict

is the lower-level one between the CEO and division managers. They argue that when divisions

have different investment opportunities, the CEO will want to tilt the capital budget away from

the efficient point, and towards a “socialist” outcome in which the weaker division gets relatively


       41
            See also Bagwell and Zechner (1993) for an application of influence-cost ideas.

                                                  49
more than it would under the first-best. This is because in their setup, the technology is such that

a more equal capital budget increases division managers’ incentives to engage in cooperative,

joint-surplus-maximizing behavior, as opposed to self-interested, rent-seeking forms of behavior.

       Thus loosely speaking, Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) view the capital budget as a

tool that the CEO, acting as a principal, uses in part to design a more effective incentive scheme

to control division-manager rent-seeking. A similar observation can be made about Wulf (1999).

Although her model works somewhat differently, it shares the feature that the CEO is a principal

who uses capital allocation rules as part of an incentive scheme to make rent-seeking division

managers behave better.42

       In contrast, the key assumption in Scharfstein and Stein (2000) is that there are two levels

of agency, with the CEO acting in her own private interests, rather than those of shareholders. In

their framework, managers of weak divisions spend more effort building up their outside options,

which in turn forces the CEO to compensate them more highly in order to retain them. If the

CEO were herself the principal, she would pay this added compensation in the form of cash, and

capital would still be allocated efficiently. But as an agent, she may view it as less personally

costly to tilt the capital budget in the direction of the weaker division; this allows her to save the

firm’s cash to use for other, more privately attractive purposes.

       This model shares with Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) the general implication of

socialism in internal capital allocation, with weaker divisions being cross-subsidized by stronger

ones. Moreover, both models also imply that problems will be most acute when the divisions in

question have widely divergent investment opportunities (as measured, e.g., by industry q). The


       42
            In this regard, these papers bear some similarity to Rotemberg (1993).

                                                  50
most obvious empirical distinction between the two is that Scharfstein and Stein (2000) predict

that socialism will be most pronounced when the CEO has poorly aligned incentives, while

Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000), who cast the CEO as a principal, make no such prediction.



       V.B.3. Pulling it together: when are internal capital markets most likely to add value?

       Rather than viewing the bright-side and dark-side models as competing directly with one

another, a more fruitful way to synthesize the theoretical work in this area is to ask a cross-

sectional question. Specifically: under what conditions is an internal capital market most (or

least) likely to add value relative to an external capital markets benchmark?

       First, an internal capital market should, all else equal, be more valuable in situations

where the external capital market is underdeveloped, either because of weaknesses in the legal

and contracting environment, inadequate accounting and disclosure practices, etc. To see the

logic most clearly, consider an extreme case where outside investors are so poorly protected that

they are unwilling to put up any financing, and hence firms can only invest out of their retained

earnings. In this case, an internal capital market represents the only way to move money from

those lines of business that have surpluses relative to their investment needs to those in the

opposite situation.43

       Second, the dark-side theories reviewed above suggest that the internal capital market is

most likely to run into problems when the firm’s divisions have sharply divergent investment



       43
         Hubbard and Palia (1999) use this reasoning to argue that the conglomerate mergers of
the 1960’s and 70’s in the U.S. made sense at the time that they were done, even though later it
became optimal to undo them–there was a change in the environment, in that external capital
markets became more developed over time.

                                                 51
prospects. Third, these problems may be exacerbated when divisional managers both: i) have a

strong incentive to maximize their own division’s capital allocation as opposed to profits; and ii)

are powerful relative to the CEO–i.e., have valuable specific human capital (either expertise or

internal political clout), and so can threaten to disrupt the firm’s activities.

        As an example of the latter point, consider this bit of folklore about General Electric,

which is widely viewed to be one of the most successful diversified conglomerates. GE

apparently follows a policy of rotating its senior managers across different divisions on a regular

basis. According to the logic above, there are two distinct potential benefits of such a policy.

First, managers’ incentives to lobby for a lot of capital in any given division will be reduced if

they think that they will be leaving the division soon anyway. Second, a job-rotation policy may

prevent managers from accumulating a great deal of specific expertise and political capital in a

given division, thereby reducing their bargaining power relative to that of the CEO.

        This discussion suggests a fundamental tradeoff in organizational design and capital

allocation: that between expertise and parochialism. One way to see this tradeoff is to

think of a CEO who has to allocate a fixed capital budget across four competing projects. The

CEO’s first option is to do the whole job herself–i.e., to assess each project and then make a

decision. Alternatively, she might hire two division managers, each of whom would be given the

responsibility of evaluating two of the four projects in more detail. In this hierarchical case, the

CEO would make a division-level allocation to each of the two managers, and these managers

would then choose how much to give to the individual projects within their divisions. The latter

option has the obvious advantage of more total information production. But it also has the

potential disadvantage that each division manager may be preoccupied with landing his division



                                                   52
a larger share of the overall capital budget, with the adverse consequences discussed above. In

contrast, in the case where the CEO makes all the decisions, there may be less total information

brought to bear, but there is also less parochialism, because the CEO has a broader span of

control and thus does not have a vested interest as to which division gets more capital.



       V.C. How Information and Agency Problems Shape Firms’ Capital Budgeting Practices

       While I have been emphasizing how information and agency problems shape investment

outcomes inside firms, there is a closely related literature that seeks to rationalize observed

capital budgeting practices based on the same primitive frictions. A broad set of anecdotal and

field-based evidence suggests that firms often do not follow the textbook prescription of

allocating capital to projects based on a simple net-present-value (NPV) criterion; instead, they

often rely at least in part on other methods, such as rationing capital to individual division

managers, imposing payback requirements, and so forth.

       These alternative capital budgeting practices can in many cases be understood by

reference to the canonical model laid out above–one in which lower-level managers (e.g.,

division managers) have better information about project prospects than their superiors, but also

have empire-building preferences, and hence cannot be relied on to truthfully report their private

information. In such a setting, capital budgeting procedures can be thought of as part of a

mechanism to elicit truthful revelation of this private information.44 Among the papers to take

this point of view are Harris, Kriebel and Raviv (1982), Antle and Eppen (1985), Harris and


       44
        Often, the optimal mechanism also includes other features, such as auditing of projects
by headquarters (Harris and Raviv (1996, 1998)), or incentive compensation (Bernardo, Cai and
Luo (2001)).

                                                 53
Raviv (1996, 1998) and Bernardo, Cai and Luo (2001).

        For example, internal capital rationing can emerge in the sense that even when the firm as

a whole has plenty of cash, the allocation to a given division will increase relatively little as its

reported prospects improve; this type of underinvestment in strong divisions is needed to

preserve incentive compatibility. And as argued by Bernardo, Cai and Luo, if it is harder to get

managers to be honest about the prospects of longer-horizon projects (because their forecasts

cannot be contradicted by data in the short run), then firms may want to adopt payback-like

criteria that effectively punish distant cashflows more heavily than does the NPV method.45




        45
         See also Thakor (1990) and Berkovitch and Israel (1998) for alternative rationalizations
of the payback criterion.

                                                  54
       VI. Empirical Work on Internal Capital Allocation

       VI.A. The Value Consequences of Diversification

       There is a large empirical literature which, broadly speaking, asks the following question:

what are the consequences of diversification for shareholder value? While this literature does not

get directly at the efficiency of the internal capital market–diversification may impact value for a

variety of other reasons unrelated to investment efficiency, such as operating or organizational

synergies, etc.–it is nonetheless informative. And for the most part, the picture painted is one

that is unfavorable to diversification, especially if one focuses on unrelated diversification and

data after around, say, 1980. For example, the stock market seems to encourage and reward

focus-increasing transactions, but to punish the stocks of acquirors in diversifying mergers.46

       One particular measure of the value effect of diversification that has received a great deal

of attention in recent work is the so-called “diversification discount”. As developed by Lang and

Stulz (1994) and Berger and Ofek (1995), the diversification discount compares the stock price

of a diversified firm to the imputed stand-alone values of its individual segments, where these

imputed values are based on multiples (such as price-to-book, or price-to-sales) of comparable

pure-play firms in the same industries as the diversified firm’s segments. Using data from the

U.S., these authors find substantial mean discounts, on the order of 15%, which they interpret as

evidence of value destruction by diversified firms. This work has been extended to a variety of

other sample periods and countries by Servaes (1996), Lins and Servaes (1999, 2000), Fauver,


       46
         See, e.g., Wernerfelt and Montgomery (1988), Bhagat, Shleifer and Vishny (1990b),
Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990), Kaplan and Weisbach (1992), Liebeskind and Opler (1993),
John and Ofek (1995), Comment and Jarrell (1995), Berger and Ofek (1996, 1999), and Denis,
Denis and Sarin (1997). In contrast, Matsusaka (1993) finds positive event returns for
diversifying acquirors in the 1960’s.

                                                 55
Houston and Naranjo (1998) and Claessens et al (1999), among others, and the results suggest

that the diversification discount is a pervasive phenomenon.47

       However, a number of other papers have taken issue with the idea that the diversification

discount reflects value destruction. Campa and Kedia (1999), Graham, Lemmon and Wolf

(2000), Hyland (1999), Villalonga (1999), and Burch, Nanda and Narayanan (2000) all argue in

one way or another that the discount is tainted by endogeneity bias, because relatively weak firms

are the ones that choose to diversify in the first place.48 Lamont and Polk (2001) show that the

discount also is partly driven by what can be thought of as valuation errors–i.e., that the stocks of

diversified firms have higher expected returns than their pure-play counterparts. A balanced

reading of these papers suggests that taking these caveats into account significantly

reduces–though may not completely eliminate–that part of the discount which one can think of as

reflecting a causal link from diversification to value. Such skepticism about the causal

significance of the diversification discount is also reinforced by the fact that although the stocks

of acquirors tend to drop upon announcement of a diversifying transaction, studies looking at the

combined return to acquirors and targets in such deals generally find it to be either close to zero

or slightly positive (Chevalier 2000).

       While this methodological debate over the correct mean value of the diversification

       47
         Some of these papers have also tried to test a hypothesis discussed above–that internal
capital markets will be relatively more valuable when external capital markets are poorly
developed–by regressing the diversification discount against various country-level measures of
financial development. Taken together, the results from this effort thus far seem inconclusive.
       48
          Fluck and Lynch (1999) offer a theoretical explanation for why weak firms might find it
optimal to merge. It should be noted, however, that there is another less well-explored bias which
cuts in the opposite direction. Even if it occurs more among weak firms, diversification will still
only be chosen by those for whom it is most valuable. This implies that the observed discount
could actually be less than would occur if random firms were forced to merge.

                                                 56
discount is interesting, it should be noted that, from the perspective of testing the theories

discussed in Section V above, the mean value of the discount is not necessarily the most

informative item. After all, taken as a whole, the theoretical work does not lead to a clear-cut

prediction that diversification (and the associated creation of an internal capital market) is on

average good or bad. Rather, the theory has more bite in the cross-section, pointing to the

specific circumstances under which internal capital markets are most likely to destroy value.

Thus the diversification discount may indeed be a useful measure, but perhaps one should pay

less attention to its mean value, and more to its cross-sectional variation.49 As an example in this

vein, Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) and Lamont and Polk (2002) both find that the

discount increases with measures of the diversity of a firm’s investment opportunities. These

results provide indirect support for one of the dark-side theories’ main cross-sectional

implications, namely that greater divergence in investment opportunities leads to less efficient

internal capital allocation.



        VI.B. Evidence on Investment at the Divisional and Plant Level

        VI.B.1. Is there an active internal capital market?

        I turn next to evidence which speaks directly to investment outcomes. The first question

to ask is this: is it in fact true that–as both bright-side and dark-side theories presuppose–that the

internal capital market actively reallocates funds across a firm’s divisions? Operationally, this

question can be rephrased as: holding fixed B1's investment prospects and cashflow, is it the case


        49
          Berger and Ofek (1996) find that firms with higher diversification discounts are more
likely to be taken over and busted up. This suggests that even if there is an endogeneity bias in
the mean value of the discount, there is useful information in its cross-section.

                                                  57
that B1’s investment is influenced by B2’s cashflow?

       The first paper to provide an answer to this question is Lamont (1997). He finds that

when oil prices decline, integrated oil companies cut investment across the board in all of their

divisions. These divisions include not only lines of business that appear totally unrelated to oil

(such as Mobil’s Montgomery Ward department-store business), but also petrochemical

divisions. What is particularly interesting here is that the petrochemical industry is one which

takes oil as an input, and hence whose investment prospects should benefit when oil prices fall.

And indeed, the operating cashflows of oil companies’ non-oil segments generally rise at such

times. The fact that they nonetheless see their investment reduced seems to be very clean

evidence that the cashflow of one of a firms’ divisions affects the investment of its other

divisions.

       Further work, including Houston, James and Marcus (1997) and Shin and Stulz (1998)

has found that Lamont’s (1997) results generalize to other industries. Chevalier (2000) raises a

methodological caveat about some of this work, particularly insofar as the relatedness or

unrelatedness of divisions is established using measures like SIC codes. Chevalier’s point is that

if a single firm owns two divisions in apparently unrelated SIC codes, they may still be related

because of a common factor at the firm level. The example she uses is of a firm based in Texas

that owns both local restaurants and oilfields, which, though they belong to different SIC codes,

are both influenced by the same regional economic conditions. In this case, it would be

unsurprising if the restaurant division’s investment is related to the oil division’s cashflow, as the

latter may contain information about the common component of investment opportunities.

       Nevertheless, while this critique contains an important message about experiment



                                                 58
design–that one should be careful not to measure relatedness too mechanically–it does not appear

that it undermines the basic qualitative message of Lamont’s (1997) original work.50 The bottom

line is that it seems very hard to argue with the simple statement that the internal capital market

actively reallocates funds across divisions.



       VI.B.2. Is it efficient?

       Of course, the harder question is whether these internal reallocations are value-increasing

or value-reducing. That is, compared to the external capital market, does the internal market

move money at the margin from less to more deserving divisions, or is it the other way around?

Before turning to the evidence, note that this question can be framed a couple of different ways.

First, one might ask an “on average” version of the question: across a large sample, does it look

like the internal capital market of the typical firm is doing a good job? This version of the

question is certainly interesting, but as with the mean value of the diversification discount, it is

not one for which a synthesis of the theoretical work yields strong priors one way or another.

Alternatively, one can ask various cross-sectional versions of the question. For example, under

what circumstances does it look like the internal capital market makes the worst allocations?

And are the investment outcomes in these bad scenarios sufficiently value-destroying that they

can plausibly be the leading explanation for large diversification discounts, bustups, etc.?



       VI.B.2.a. On-average statements



       50
         Lamont in fact takes pains to hand-clean the data in such a way as to eliminate
observations which appear to fit the Chevalier restaurants/oilfields characterization.

                                                  59
       Most papers that pose the on-average version of the question (Shin and Stulz (1998),

Scharfstein (1998), Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000), Billett and Mauer (1998)) come to the

conclusion that the internal capital market in the typical diversified firm engages in “socialist”

cross-subsidization, allocating too much to low-q divisions and too little to high-q divisions.51

For example, Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) find that the industry-adjusted investment of

low-q divisions within conglomerates is higher than the industry-adjusted investment of high-q

divisions. Similarly, Scharfstein (1998) shows that the sensitivity of investment to industry q is

much lower for divisions of a conglomerate than it is for stand-alone firms.

       However, as in the case of the diversification discount, this on-average conclusion of

socialism has been challenged on methodological grounds. The concerns have to do with the

endogeneity of the diversification decision, and the resulting possibility that conglomerate

divisions are systematically different from their stand-alone counterparts in the same industry.

To take one concrete example of the sorts of issues that come up, Whited (2001) and Chevalier

(2000) argue that industry q’s may be better measures of the investment opportunities of stand-

alone firms than those of conglomerate divisions. If this is so, it could explain Scharfstein’s

(1998) findings.

       Chevalier (2000) investigates the importance of these effects by looking at the investment

behavior of conglomerate divisions in the years before they merged. In this pre-merger

phase–when the divisions were still stand-alone firms and by definition there could have been no


       51
         A more positive view of the internal capital market emerges in Maksimovic and Phillips
(2000). Using plant-level data from manufacturing firms, they find that when a division that has
high productivity relative to its industry experiences a positive demand shock, this reduces the
growth of the other divisions in the same firm. Thus the internal capital market seems to take
money away from other divisions to feed the strong ones when they most need it.

                                                 60
reallocation–she finds some of the same patterns as Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) and

Scharfstein (1998), albeit in a weaker form. This suggests that correcting for various

econometric biases weakens, though does not necessarily overturn, the evidence of on-average

socialism in these papers.

        Thus overall, someone with relatively neutral priors might say that the weight of the

current evidence favors the view that there is on average some degree of socialist cross-

subsidization in diversified firms, at least at the divisional level.52 At the same time, a skeptic

could reasonably remain skeptical at this point. But again, it is important to recognize that if one

is interested in testing the distinctive predictions of the dark-side theories, then trying to

definitively nail down the average degree of socialism may not be the best way to go. Instead, it

can be more helpful to look at the cross-section.



        VI.B.2.b. The cross-section

        Diversity of investment opportunities

        In addition to simply computing an average measure of cross-subsidization, Rajan,

Servaes and Zingales (2000) also investigate how this measure is correlated with other variables.

Two key findings stand out. First, socialist cross-subsidization (roughly defined as the industry-

adjusted investment of low-q divisions minus the industry-adjusted investment of high-q

divisions) is more pronounced when there is a greater diversity of investment opportunities

within the firm, i.e., when there is a greater spread in the industry q’s of the divisions. This


        52
          It is of course quite possible that the internal capital market does a poor job of allocating
funds at the divisional level, but at the same time, is quite efficient with respect to within-
division allocations–e.g., across manufacturing plants in the same line of business.

                                                  61
pattern is, as noted above, precisely what is predicted by the theoretical models. It is also

particularly noteworthy in light of the methodological critiques of Whited (2001) and Chevalier

(2000). For even if one takes these critiques seriously and worries that there is a bias in the

average estimate of cross-subsidization, there is no clear reason to expect a positive bias in the

correlation between the cross-subsidization measure and the diversity measure.

       The second important fact is that the cross-subsidization measure is significantly

correlated with the diversification discount. That is, firms whose investment behavior looks

more socialistic suffer greater discounts. Again, even if one is skeptical about putting too much

inferential weight on the average values of either the diversification discount or the cross-

subsidization measure, this suggests that there is valuable information in their cross-sectional

variation. And at a minimum, it appears that one can say that in those cases where socialist

tendencies are the strongest, this has a negative effect on firm value.



       CEO incentives

       Using his somewhat different measure of cross-subsidization, Scharfstein (1998) finds

that socialism is more pronounced in those diversified firms in which top management has a

small equity stake. Palia (1999) comes to a similar conclusion, and also shows that there is more

socialism when firms have large (and, he presumes, less effective) boards of directors. These

governance-related patterns are consistent with the two-tier agency model of Scharfstein and

Stein (2000), though not with the CEO-as-principal models of Rajan, Servaes and Zingales

(2000) or Wulf (1999). And once again, these kinds of cross-sectional tests help to address the

econometric issues raised by Whited (2001) and Chevalier (2000): even if one believes that



                                                 62
Scharfstein’s measure of socialism is biased upwards, it is hard to see why it would be spuriously

correlated with top-management ownership.



       Division-manager incentives

       In a similar vein, Palia (1999) also finds that there is more socialist cross-subsidization

when division managers’ compensation is less closely linked to overall firm performance, either

through stock ownership or options. To the extent that one is willing to take division-manager

compensation as exogenous, this fits with a central prediction of all the dark-side theories, since

all of them are predicated in part on an agency problem at the division-manager level.

       Of course, it is more natural to think of division-manager compensation as endogenous.

Though this suggests that one needs to interpret results like Palia’s very cautiously, it may

actually make them all the more striking, since the most obvious endogeneity story is one that

would lead to a bias that works in the opposite direction to these results. In particular, the theory

suggests that a principal would want to offer more high-powered incentive compensation (based

on overall firm performance) to those division managers who have the greatest ability to rent-

seek, or to otherwise engage in distortionary influence activities designed to increase their share

of the capital budget. And indeed, Wulf (2000) presents a variety of empirical evidence

consistent with the hypothesis that division managers’ compensation contracts are designed to

reduce rent-seeking incentives.



       Spinoff firms

       Another way to address the methodological critiques of Whited (1999) and Chevalier



                                                 63
(2000) is to look at the investment behavior of a division before and after it is spun out of a

conglomerate firm. Recall that the heart of the critique is that conglomerate divisions are

somehow endogenously different than stand-alone firms, and that as a result, one cannot use the

investment behavior of the latter as a benchmark for the former. But by focusing on spinoffs,

one isolates a pure change in the degree of integration, while holding fixed the division in

question. This approach is taken by Gertner, Powers and Scharfstein (1999). They find that once

a division is spun off from its parent, its investment becomes markedly more sensitive to industry

q. Most of the effect is driven by the behavior of divisions in low-q industries, which sharply cut

investment after a spinoff. Moreover, the change in investment behavior is most pronounced for

those spinoffs to which the stock market reacts favorably. Overall, this would seem to be quite

convincing evidence that there is inefficient overinvestment in the weak divisions prior to

spinoff.53

        However, an important caveat with this research design is that those divisions that are

spun off from their parents are far from a random sample; spinoffs are likely to occur precisely in

those situations where it becomes clear that integration is destroying value. Thus the results of

Gertner, Powers and Scharfstein (1999) do not really speak to the question of whether there is

socialism on average. Rather they make a somewhat different point: in those particular cases

where integration appears to be a bad idea, the problems are at least in part attributable to

socialist-type inefficiencies in the internal capital market.54

        53
        For related analyses of spinoffs, see also McNeil and Moore (2000) and Burch and
Nanda (1999).
        54
          On a somewhat related note, Peyer and Shivdasani (2001) find that one of the costs of
high leverage is that it also can lead to distortions in the internal capital market–after leveraged
recapitalizations, firms allocate more resources to low-growth, high-cashflow segments.

                                                  64
       Relatedness

       In an interesting counterpoint to much of the recent work in this area–which has tended to

look at instances of unrelated diversification (i.e., conglomerates) and has come to largely

negative conclusions about the efficiency of the internal capital market–Khanna and Tice (2001)

focus on firms that operate in multiple divisions within the same broad industry, retailing. An

example of an integrated firm in this context would be Dayton Hudson, which operates both a

discount department store chain (Target) and a more exclusive chain (Hudson). Khanna and Tice

find that such integrated retailers react quite efficiently when they experience a negative shock to

their discount business, in the form of Wal-Mart entering their markets. In particular, they

document that the subsequent investment decisions of the integrated firms are more responsive to

division profitability than those of the specialized firms that operate only discount businesses.

These results thus have the opposite flavor of the empirical “socialism” findings of Scharfstein

(1998) and Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales (2000). Khanna and Tice interpret them as being

consistent with a comparative static of Stein’s (1997) model, namely that the positive, winner-

picking function of the internal capital market will work best if the firm in question operates in

related lines of business.



       VI.B.3. Where things stand

       Empirical work on investment inside firms is at a very early stage, and many of the most

interesting and important questions remain incompletely resolved. Nevertheless, a few

conclusions can be ventured with some confidence. First, it is clear that the internal capital



                                                 65
market can generate economically significant reallocations of resources across a firm’s operating

segments–i.e., divisions that are part of a larger firm can have markedly different investment

patterns than they would as stand-alones. Second, in those cases where there is a large value loss

associated with integration, this value loss is often due in part to inefficiencies in the internal

capital allocation process. Third, when such inefficiencies do occur, they tend to be socialist in

nature, with weak divisions receiving too much capital, and strong divisions too little. (There is

little evidence to date of the reverse kind of inefficiency, excessive Darwinism, whereby strong

divisions get too much capital, and weak ones too little.) Finally, and most tentatively, socialism

appears to be more of a problem when a firm’s divisions are in unrelated lines of business, and

have widely divergent investment prospects.

        Looking to the future, it would seem that one particularly promising line of research is

that which pushes beyond the divisional level, and looks at investment patterns within operating

segments, e.g. at the plant level. Such work is just getting started, in papers by Maksimovic and

Phillips (2000) and Schoar (2000). Among the many kinds of questions that one might hope to

answer with it are the following: are there cases in which capital is allocated relatively

inefficiently across divisions, but relatively efficiently within divisions? If so, what aspects of

organizational structure appear to be driving the outcome? For example, in a heuristic extension

of the dark-side models discussed above, one might conjecture that this sort of pattern would

result if division-level managers are very powerful in the capital budgeting process, while lower-

level managers (e.g., plant managers) have less influence.




                                                  66
       VII. Conclusions: Implications for the Boundaries of the Firm

       The process of allocating capital to investment projects is made difficult by the existence

of information asymmetries and agency conflicts. Put most simply, the fundamental problem is

that the manager closest to a project is likely to know more about its prospects, but at the same

time may have incentives to misrepresent this information–e.g., to say that the outlook is better

than it really is. This fundamental problem arises both when capital is allocated across firms via

external debt and equity markets, and when capital is allocated within firms via the internal

capital market. Internal and external markets differ in how they address the problem, but it is

important to recognize that they are both trying to accomplish the same objective.

       This observation suggests a particular perspective on Coase’s (1937) enduring question

about what determines the boundaries of the firm: loosely speaking, a collection of assets should

optimally reside under the roof of a single firm to the extent that the firm’s internal capital

market can do a more efficient job of allocating capital to these assets than would the external

capital market, if the assets were located in distinct firms.

       Such a capital-allocation-centric point of view on the boundaries question appears in

recent papers by Bolton and Scharfstein (1998) and Holmstrom and Kaplan (2001).55 Bolton



       55
          Bolton and Scharfstein (1998) provide a nice discussion of how this approach differs
from the GHM property-rights paradigm (Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990),
and Hart (1995)). The common element is the heavy reliance on GHM notions of authority and
control in an incomplete-contracting environment. One important distinction is that in GHM,
everything is driven by the impact of asset ownership on agents’ ex ante incentives. This tends to
imply that assets should be owned on a very individual basis, making the GHM model hard to
reconcile with large firms where virtually none of the employees other than the CEO have clear-
cut control rights (see also Holmstrom and Roberts (1998), and Holmstrom (1999)). Also, the
capital-allocation perspective emphasizes ex post inefficiencies–namely, misallocations of
capital–in addition to the sort of ex ante incentive effects seen in GHM.

                                                  67
and Scharfstein write:

        “...integration fundamentally changes the resource allocation process by increasing
centralized decision making under corporate headquarters...integration can lead to inefficient
outcomes from decision-making processes (in this case the allocation of capital) in contrast to the
efficient outcomes from bargaining that always occur in the Grossman-Hart-Moore paradigm. In
our view, corporate headquarters, agency problems, and the resource allocation process must play
a key role in any realistic theory of the firm.” (p. 111)

       In a similar spirit, Holmstrom and Kaplan give this example of the limits of integration:

       “It would make little sense for shareholders to become directly involved in General
Motors’ choice of car models...But if resources are to shift from car manufacturing to computer
manufacturing, there is little reason to believe that having General Motors start making
computers, an area in which the company currently has little expertise, would make economic
sense. Instead, the market may have a role to play in funneling capital toward the new
companies.”

       While there may yet be no single fully-articulated model of firm boundaries which

captures all the important nuances of this capital-allocation-based perspective, several bits and

pieces of the theory are clearly present in the work surveyed above. For example, one reason

why it may make sense for GM’s CEO to be the one to allocate resources across different lines of

cars and trucks–even though some of these lines could in principle be housed in stand-alone

firms–flows from the complementarity of authority and monitoring incentives. This is the idea

that a CEO’s authority will make her more willing to invest in learning about any given business

that she oversees than would be say, a bank lender, or an atomistic shareholder. A natural

corollary to this idea is that if the CEO is to be given authority over multiple lines of business,

these should be lines of business that can potentially be well-monitored and well-understood by a

single properly-motivated individual.

       Moreover, if the CEO’s authority-based incentives help lead her to become an expert with

respect to multiple lines of business that report to her, this can in turn have beneficial incentive



                                                  68
effects on the agents further down in the hierarchy. Stein (2001) argues that the desire of these

lower-ranking agents (e.g., division managers) to attract a larger share of the overall capital

budget need not always have adverse consequences. In particular, the more expert is the CEO–in

terms of being able to assess the value implications of data presented to her by her

subordinates–the more likely it is that the subordinates’ attempts at advocacy will take the form

of useful information creation as opposed to wasteful and uninformative lobbying.

       In contrast, if the CEO is not able to develop significant expertise across lines of business

(as might be the case in the Holmstrom-Kaplan example of an integrated car/computer company),

the potential bright side of giving authority to the CEO is obviously not exploited. And indeed,

when an ill-informed CEO allocates capital, the outcome can be strictly worse than one in which

capital is allocated by an equally ill-informed capital market. Now the fact that the CEO has the

authority to move resources around inside the firm, but no expertise, suggests that the sorts of

rent-seeking problems identified by Meyer, Milgrom and Roberts (1992), Rajan, Servaes and

Zingales (2000), and Scharfstein and Stein (2000) are most likely to come to the fore. In this

context, the capital market has the advantage that even if it is no better informed, its impersonal

and hence objective nature–there is no single identifiable person vested with so much authority

over resources–makes it much less subject to such rent-seeking distortions.

       In sum, according to this informal theory, the boundaries of the firm are determined by

the following tradeoff between managers vs. markets as allocators of capital. On the one hand,

by giving a CEO control over a set of assets, and the authority to redistribute capital across these

assets, one sets her up with high-powered incentives to become a delegated expert. On the other

hand, the very fact that she has the authority to move capital around makes her vulnerable to rent-



                                                 69
seeking on the part of her subordinates; all the more so because she is herself only an agent of

investors and hence will not necessarily respond to the rent-seeking pressure as a principal might

want her to.

       This managers vs. markets tradeoff can be thought of as loosely analogous to the

question of what types of political issues should be put to a direct vote of the general electorate,

as opposed to being decided by previously-elected representatives (e.g., in Congress). Since

elected officials are vested with legislative powers, they have more incentive to become informed

about the details of the issues before them–their power will allow them to put their information

to good use. It is hard to imagine, for example, that the average citizen would devote as much

time as a Congressman to learning the arcane details of a banking deregulation bill. However,

precisely because they as agents are vested with legislative powers, elected officials are more

subject to lobbying and the potential for corruption than ordinary citizens. The general

electorate, like the capital market, may be less well-informed than the delegated experts, but it is

also less vulnerable to rent-seeking. As with the boundaries of the firm, the goal is to strike a

proper balance.




                                                 70
                                          References

Agaarwal, R.K. and A.A. Samwick (1999), “Empire-builders and Shirkers: Investment, Firm
Performance, and Managerial Incentives”, National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
7335.

Aghion, P. and P. Bolton (1992), “An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial Contracting”,
Review of Economic Studies 59: 473-494.

Aghion, P. and J. Tirole (1997), “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations”, Journal of
Political Economy 105: 1-29.

Akerlof, G. (1970), “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality and the Market Mechanism”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 84: 488-500.

Alchian, A.A. (1969), “Corporate Management and Property Rights”, in: H. Manne, ed.,
Economic Policy and the Regulation of Corporate Securities (American Enterprise Institute,
Washington, D.C.) 337-360.

Almeida, H. and M. Campello (2001), “Financial Constraints and Investment-Cash Flow
Sensitivities: New Theoretical Foundations”, working paper, New York University.

Amihud, Y. and B. Lev (1981), “Risk Reduction as a Managerial Motive for Conglomerate
Mergers”, Bell Journal of Economics 12: 605-617.

Antle, R. and G. Eppen (1995), “Capital Rationing and Organizational Slack in Capital
Budgeting”, Management Science 31: 163-174.

Asquith, P. and D. Mullins (1986), “Equity Issues and Offering Dilution”, Journal of Financial
Economics 15: 61-89.

Avery, C.N. and J.A. Chevalier (1999), “Herding over the Career”, Economics Letters 63: 327-
333.

Bagwell, L.S. and J. Zechner (1993), “Influence Costs and Capital Structure”, Journal of Finance
48: 975-1008.

Baker, M. (2000), “Career Concerns and Staged Investment: Evidence from the Venture Capital
Industry”, working paper, Harvard University.

Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2001), “Market Timing and Capital Structure”, working paper,
Harvard University.

Barro, R.J. (1990), “The Stock Market and Investment”, Review of Financial Studies 3: 115-131.

                                               71
Baumol, W. (1959), Business Behavior, Value, and Growth (Macmillan, New York).

Bebchuk, L.A. and L.A. Stole (1993), “Do Short-Term Objectives Lead to Under- or
Overinvestment in Long-Term Projects”, Journal of Finance 48: 719-729.

Berger, P. and E. Ofek (1995), “Diversification’s Effect on Firm Value”, Journal of Financial
Economics 37: 39-65.

Berger, P. and E. Ofek (1996), “Bust-up Takeovers of Value-destroying Diversified Firms”,
Journal of Finance 51: 1175-1200.

Berger, P. and E. Ofek (1999), “Causes and Effects of Corporate Refocusing Programs”, Review
of Financial Studies 12: 311-345.

Bergman Y.A. and J.L Callen (1991), “Opportunistic Underinvestment in Debt Renegotiation
and Capital Structure”, Journal of Financial Economics 29: 137-171.

Berkovitch, E. and R. Israel (1998), “Why the NPV Criterion Does Not Maximize NPV”,
working paper, Tel Aviv University.

Berkovitch, E. and E.H. Kim (1990), “Financial Contracting and Leverage Induced Over- and
Under-Investment Incentives”, Journal of Finance 45: 765-794.

Berle, A. and G. Means (1932), The Modern Corporation and Private Property (Macmillan, New
York).

Bernanke, B. (1983) “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in Propagation of the Great
Depression”, American Economic Review 73: 257-76.

Bernanke, B. and A. Blinder (1988), “Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand”, American
Economic Review 78: 435-39.

Bernanke, B. and A. Blinder (1992), “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of Monetary
Transmission”, American Economic Review 82: 901-21.

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1989) “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations”,
American Economic Review 79: 14-31.

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1995), “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
Policy Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9: 27-48.

Bernanke, B., M. Gertler and S. Gilchrist (1996), “The Financial Accelerator and the Flight to
Quality”, Review of Economic Studies 78: 1-15.



                                               72
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler and S. Gilchrist (1998), “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative
Business Cycle Framework”, NBER working paper 6455.

Bernanke, B. and C. Lown (1991) “The Credit Crunch”, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 204-39.

Bernardo, A.E., H. Cai and J. Luo (2001) “Capital Budgeting and Compensation with
Asymmetric Information and Moral Hazard”, Journal of Financial Economics

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2000), “Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance and
Managerial Preferences”, working paper, MIT.

Bhagat, S., A. Shleifer and R.W. Vishny (1990), “Hostile Takeovers in the 1980s: The Return to
Corporate Specialization”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics: 1-72.

Billett, M. and D. Mauer (1998), “Cross Subsidies, External Financing Constraints, and the
Contribution of the Internal Capital Market to Firm Value”, working paper, University of Iowa.

Blanchard, O.J., F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A Shleifer (1994), “What Do Firms Do with Cash
Windfalls?”, Journal of Financial Economics 36: 337-360.

Blanchard, O.J., C. Rhee and L.H. Summers (1993), “The Stock Market, Profit and Investment”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108: 115-136.

Bolton, P. and D.S. Scharfstein (1990), “A Theory of Predation Based on Agency Problems in
Financial Contracting”, American Economic Review 80: 93-106.

Bolton, P, and D.S. Scharfstein (1996), “Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors”,
Journal of Political Economy 104: 1-25.

Bolton, P. and D.S. Scharfstein (1998), “Corporate Finance, the Theory of the Firm, and
Organizations”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12: 95-114.

Bond, S. and C. Meghir (1994), “Dynamic Investment Models and the Firm’s Financial Policy”,
Review of Economic Studies 61: 197-222.

Boot, A.W. (1992), “Why Hang on to Losers? Divestitures and Takeovers”, Journal of Finance
47: 1401-1423.

Brusco, S. and F. Panunzi (2000), “Reallocation of Corporate Resources and Managerial
Incentives in Internal Capital Markets”, working paper, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid and
Università Bocconi di Milano.

Burch, T. and V. Nanda (1999), “Divisional Diversity and the Conglomerate Discount: The

                                               73
Evidence from Spin-offs”, working paper, University of Miami.

Burch, T., V. Nanda and M.P. Narayanan (2000), “Industry Structure and the Conglomerate
Discount: Theory and Evidence”, working paper, University of Michigan Business School.

Burkart, M., D. Gromb and F. Panunzi (1997), “Large Shareholders, Monitoring, and the Value
of the Firm”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 693-728.

Calomiris, C.W. and R.G. Hubbard (1995), “Internal Finance and Investment: Evidence from the
Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936-37”, Journal of Business 68: 443-482.

Campa, J. and S. Kedia (1999), “Explaining the Diversification Discount”, working paper,
Harvard Business School.

Carpenter, R.E., S.M. Fazzari and B.C. Petersen (1994) “Inventory Investment, Internal-Finance
Fluctuations, and the Business Cycle”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 75-122.

Cecchetti, S.G. (1995), “Distinguishing Theories of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism”,
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 77: 83-97.

Chevalier, J.A. (1995a), “Do LBO Supermarkets Charge More?: An Empirical Analysis of the
Effects of LBOs on Supermarket Pricing”, Journal of Finance 50: 1095-1112.

Chevalier, J.A. (1995b), “Capital Structure and Product-Market Competition: Empirical
Evidence from the Supermarket Industry”, American Economic Review 85: 415-35.

Chevalier, J.A. (2000), “What Do We Know About Cross-Subsidization? Evidence from the
Investment Policies of Merging Firms”, working paper, University of Chicago GSB.

Chevalier, J.A. and G. Ellison (1999), “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114: 389-432.

Chevalier, J.A. and D.S. Scharfstein (1995), “Liquidity Constraints and the Cyclical Behavior of
Markups”, American Economic Review 85: 390-396.

Chevalier, J.A. and D.S. Scharfstein (1996), “Capital-Market Imperfections and Countercyclical
Markups: Theory and Evidence”, American Economic Review 86: 703-725.

Chirinko, R.S. (1995), “Why Does Liquidity Matter in Investment Equations?”, Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 27: 527-548.

Claessens, S., S. Djankov, J.P.H. Fan and L.H.P. Lang (1999), “The Benefits and Costs of
Internal Markets: Evidence From Asia’s Financial Crisis”, working paper, World Bank.



                                               74
Cleary, S. (1999), “The Relationship between Firm Investment and Financial Status”,
Journal of Finance 54: 673-92.

Coase, R. (1937), “The Nature of the Firm”, Economica 4: 386-405.

Comment, R. and G.A. Jarrell (1995), “Corporate Focus and Stock Returns”, Journal of
Financial Economics 37: 67-87.

DeGeorge, F. and R. Zeckhauser (1993), “The Reverse LBO Decision and Firm Performance:
Theory and Evidence”, Journal of Finance 48: 1323-48.

Demirguc-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic (1998), “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth”, Journal of
Finance 53: 2107-2137.

Denis, D.J., D.K. Denis and A. Sarin (1997), “Agency Problems, Equity Ownership, and
Corporate Diversification”, Journal of Finance 52: 135-160.

Dewatripont, M, I. Jewitt and J. Tirole (1999), “The Economics of Career Concerns, Part I:
Comparing Information Structures”, Review of Economic Studies 66: 183-198.

Dewatripont, M. and E. Maskin (1995), “Credit and Efficiency in Centralized and Decentralized
Economies”, Review of Economic Studies 62: 541-555.

Dewatripont M. and J. Tirole (1994), “A Theory of Debt and Equity: Diversity of Securities and
Manager-Shareholder Congruence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 1027-54.

Diamond, D. (1984), “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring”, Review of Economic
Studies 51: 393-414.

Diamond, D. (1991) “Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 106: 709-37.

Donaldson, G. (1984), Managing Corporate Wealth (Praeger, New York).

Dybvig, P. and J. Zender (1991), “Capital Structure and Dividend Irrelevance with Asymmetric
Information”, Review of Financial Studies 4: 201-219.

Eckstein, O. and A. Sinai (1986), “The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in the Postwar Era”,
in: R.J. Gordon, ed., The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago) 39-105.

Edlin, A.S. and J.E. Stiglitz (1995), “Discouraging Rivals: Managerial Rent Seeking and
Economic Inefficiencies”, American Economic Review 85: 1301-1312.



                                              75
Ehrbeck, T. and R. Waldmann (1996), “Why Are Professional Forecasters Biased? Agency
versus Behavioral Explanations”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 21- 40.

Erickson, T. and T. Whited (2000), “Measurement Error and the Relationship between
Investment and q”, Journal of Political Economy 108: 1027-57.

Falkenstein, E.G. (1996), “Preferences for Stock Characteristics as Revealed by Mutual Fund
Portfolio Holdings”, Journal of Finance 51: 111-35.

Fama, E.F. (1980), “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm”, Journal of Political Economy
88: 288-307.

Fauver, L., J. Houston and A. Naranjo (1998), “Capital Market Development, Legal Systems and
the Value of Corporate Diversification: A Cross-Country Analysis”, working paper, University of
Florida.

Fazzari, S.M., R.G. Hubbard and B.C. Petersen (1988), “Financing Constraints and Corporate
Investment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 141-195.

Fischer, S. and R. Merton (1984), “Macroeconomics and Finance: The Role of the Stock
Market”, Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 21: 57-108.

Fisher, I. (1933), “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”, Econometrica 1: 337-57.

Fluck, Z. (1998), “Optimal Financial Contracting: Debt versus Outside Equity”, Review of
Financial Studies 11: 383-418.

Fluck, Z. and A.W. Lynch (1999), “Why Do Firms Merge and Then Divest? A Theory of
Financial Synergy”, Journal of Business 72: 319-46.

Froot, K. and J.C. Stein (1991), “Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment: An Imperfect
Capital Markets Approach”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 1191-217.

Froot, K., D. Scharfstein, and J.C. Stein (1993), “Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate
Investment and Financing Policies”, Journal of Finance 48: 1629-58.

Froot, K. and P. O’Connell (1997), “On the Pricing of Intermediated Risks: Theory and
Application to Catastrophe Reinsurance”, NBER working paper 6011.

Gale, D. and M. Hellwig (1985), “Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The One-Period
Problem”, Review of Economic Studies 52: 647-663.

Gertner, R. and D. Scharfstein (1991), “A Theory of Workouts and the Effects of Reorganization
Law”, Journal of Finance 46: 1189-1222.

                                              76
Gertner, R., E. Powers and D. Scharfstein (1999), “Learning about Internal Capital Markets from
Corporate Spinoffs”, working paper, MIT.

Gertner, R.H., D.S. Scharfstein and J.C. Stein (1994), “Internal Versus External Capital
Markets”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 1211-1230.

Gilchrist, S. and C.P. Himmelberg (1995), “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for Investment”,
Journal of Monetary Economics 36: 531-572.

Goldsmith, R.W. (1969), Financial Structure and Development (Yale University Press, New
Haven, CT).

Gomes, A. (2000), “Going Public without Governance: Managerial Reputation Effects”, Journal
of Finance 50: 615-646.

Gompers, P.A. (1996), “Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry”, Journal of Financial
Economics 42: 133-156.

Graham, J.R. (1999) “Herding Among Investment Newsletters: Theory and Evidence”
Journal of Finance 54: 237-68.

Graham, J.R., M.L. Lemmon and J. Wolf (2000), “Does Corporate Diversification Destroy
Value”, working paper, Duke University.

Greenwald, B., J.E. Stiglitz and A. Weiss (1984), “Informational Imperfections in the Capital
Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations”, American Economic Review 74: 194-199.

Grinblatt, M., S. Titman and R. Wermers (1995), “Momentum Investment Strategies, Portfolio
Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior”, American Economic Review
85: 1088-1105.

Grossman S. and O. Hart (1982), “Corporate Financial Structure and Managerial Incentives”, in:
J.J. McCall, ed., The Economics of Information and Uncertainty (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL).

Grossman, S. and O. Hart (1988), “One share-One vote and the Market for Corporate Control”,
Journal of Financial Economics 20: 175-202.

Grossman, S.J. and O.D. Hart (1986), “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
Vertical and Lateral Integration”, Journal of Political Economy 94: 691-719.

Hadlock, C., M. Ryngaert and S. Thomas (1998), “Corporate Structure and Equity Offerings: Are
There Benefits to Diversification?”, working paper, Michigan State University.



                                               77
Hadlock, C.J. (1998), “Ownership, Liquidity, and Investment”, RAND Journal of Economics 29:
487-508.

Hall, B.H. (1992), “Investment and Research and Development at the Firm Level: Does the
Source of Funding Matter?”, NBER working paper 4096.

Hansen, R. and C. Crutchley (1990), “Corporate Earnings and Financings: An Empirical
Analysis”, Journal of Business 63: 347-71.

Harris, M., C.H. Kriebel and A. Raviv (1982), “Asymmetric Information, Incentives and
Intrafirm Resource Allocation”, Management Science 28: 604-620.

Harris, M. and A. Raviv (1990), “Capital Structure and the Informational Role of Debt”, Journal
of Finance 45: 321-350.

Harris, M. and A. Raviv (1991), “The Theory of Capital Structure”, Journal of Finance 46: 297-
355.

Harris, M. and A. Raviv (1996), “The Capital Budgeting Process: Incentives and Information”,
Journal of Finance 51: 1139-1174.

Harris, M. and A. Raviv (1998), “Capital Budgeting and Delegation”, Journal of Financial
Economics 50: 259-89.

Hart, O. (1995), Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure (Oxford University Press, London).

Hart, O. and J. Moore (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm”, Journal of Political
Economy 98: 1119-1158.

Hart, O. and J. Moore (1994), “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 841-879.

Hart, O. and J. Moore (1995), “Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard Claims in
Constraining Management”, American Economic Review 85: 567-585.

Hart, O. and J. Moore (1998), “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 1-41.

Heaton, J.B. (1998), “Managerial Optimism and Corporate Finance”, working paper, University
of Chicago.

Himmelberg, C.P. and B. Petersen (1994), “R&D and Internal Finance: A Panel Study of Small
Firms in High-Tech Industries”, Review of Economics & Statistics 76: 38-51.



                                               78
Hirshleifer, D. and A.V. Thakor (1992), “Managerial Conservatism, Project Choice, and Debt”,
Review of Financial Studies 5: 437-470.

Holmström, B. (1979), “Moral Hazard and Observability”, Bell Journal of Economics 10: 74-91.

Holmström, B. (1999a), “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective”, Review of
Economic Studies 66: 169-182.

Holmström, B. (1999b), “The Firm as a Subeconomy”, Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization 15: 74-102.

Holmström, B. and S.N. Kaplan (2001), “Corporate Governance and Merger Activity in the
U.S.: Making Sense of the 1980s and 1990s”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15.

Holmström, B. and J. Ricart i Costa (1986), “Managerial Incentives and Capital Management”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 101: 835-860.

Holmström, B. and J. Roberts (1998), “The Boundaries of the Firm Revisited”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12: 73-94.

Holmström, B. and J. Tirole (1997), “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
Sector”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 663-91.

Holtz-Eakin, D., D. Joulfaian and H.S. Rosen (1994), “Sticking It Out: Entrepreneurial Survival
and Liquidity Constraints”, Journal of Political Economy 102: 53-75.

Hong, H., J.D. Kubik and A. Solomon (2000), “Security Analysts’ Career Concerns and Herding
of Earnings Forecasts”, RAND Journal of Economics 31: 121-144.

Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap and D. Scharfstein (1991), “Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and
Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:
33-60.

Houston, J., C. James and D. Marcus (1997), “Capital Market Frictions and the Role of Internal
Capital Markets in Banking”, Journal of Financial Economics 46: 135-164.

Hubbard, R.G. (1995), “Is There a "Credit Channel" for Monetary Policy?” Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, 77: 63-77.

Hubbard, R.G. (1998), “Capital-Market Imperfections and Investment”, Journal of Economic
Literature 36: 193-225.

Hubbard, R.G. and D. Palia (1999), “A Re-Examination of the Conglomerate Merger Wave in
the 1960s: An Internal Capital Markets View”, Journal of Finance 54: 1131-1152.

                                               79
Hubbard, R.G., A.K. Kashyap and T.M. Whited (1995), “Internal Finance and Firm Investment”,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27: 683-701.

Hyland, D.C. (1999), “Why Firms Diversify: An Empirical Examination”, working paper,
University of Texas at Arlington.

Inderst, R. and C. Laux (2000), “Incentives in Internal Capital Markets: Capital Constraints,
Competition, and Investment Opportunities”, working paper, University College London.

Inderst, R. and H.M. Muller (2001), “Corporate Borrowing and Financing Constraints”, working
paper, University College London.

Jaffee, D.M. and T. Russell (1976), “Imperfect Information, Uncertainty, and Credit Rationing”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 90: 651-666.

Jensen, M.C. (1986), “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers”,
American Economic Review 76: 323-329.

Jensen, M.C. (1993), “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of Internal
Control Systems”, Journal of Finance 48: 831-880.

Jensen, M.C. and W.H. Meckling (1976), “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure”, Journal of Financial Economics 3: 305-360.

John, K. and E. Ofek (1995), “Asset Sales and Increase in Focus”, Journal of Financial
Economics 37: 105-126.

Johnson, S., R. LaPorta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A. Shleifer (2000), “Tunnelling”, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 90: 22-27.

Kaplan, S. (1989), “The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance and Value”,
Journal of Financial Economics 24: 217-254.

Kaplan, S. and M. Weisbach (1992), “The Success of Acquisitions: Evidence from Divestitures”,
Journal of Finance 47: 107-138.

Kaplan, S.N. and L. Zingales (1997), “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
Measures of Financing Constraints?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 159-216.

Kaplan, S.N. and L. Zingales (2000), “Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Are Not Valid
Measures of Financing Constraints”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115: 707-712.

Kashyap, A.K., O.A. Lamont and J.C. Stein (1994), “Credit Conditions and the Cyclical
Behavior of Inventories”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 565-592.

                                                80
Kashyap, A. and J.C. Stein (1994), “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending”, in: N.G. Mankiw, ed.,
Monetary Policy (University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 221-256.

Kashyap, A. and J.C. Stein (1995) “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Bank Balance Sheets”,
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 42: 151-95.

Kashyap, A. and J.C. Stein (2000), “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the
Transmission of Monetary Policy?”, American Economic Review 90: 407-28.

Kashyap, A., J.C. Stein and D. Wilcox (1993), “Monetary Policy and Credit Conditions:
Evidence from the Composition of External Finance”, American Economic Review 83: 78-98.

Khanna, N. and S. Tice (2001), “The Bright Side of Internal Capital Markets”, Journal of Finance
56.

King, R.G. and R. Levine (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108: 717-737.

Kishan, R. and T. Opiela (2000), “Bank Size, Bank Capital, and the Bank Lending Channel”,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32: 121-41.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997), “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy 105:
211-48.

Krasker, W.S. (1986), “Stock Price Movements in Response to Stock Issues under Asymmetric
Information”, Journal of Finance 41: 93-105.

Lakonishok J., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1992), “The Impact of Institutional Trading on Stock
Prices”, Journal of Financial Economics 32: 23-43.

Lamont, O. (1995), “Macroeconomic Forecasts and Microeconomic Forecasters”, NBER
working paper 5284.

Lamont, O. (1997), “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets”,
Journal of Finance 52: 83-109.

Lamont, O. and C. Polk (2001), “The Diversification Discount: Cash Flows vs. Returns”, Journal
of Finance 56.

Lamont, O. and C. Polk (2002), “Does Diversification Destroy Value? Evidence from Industry
Shocks”, Journal of Financial Economics.

Lang, L.H.P., E. Ofek and R. Stulz (1996), “Leverage, Investment, and Firm Growth”, Journal of
Financial Economics 40: 3-30.

                                              81
Lang, L.H.P. and R. Stulz (1994), “Tobin’s q, Corporate Diversification, and Firm Performance”,
Journal of Political Economy 102: 1248-1280.

Lang, L.H.P., R.M. Stulz and R.A. Walkling (1991), “A Test of the Free Cash Flow Hypothesis:
The Case of Bidder Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics 29: 315-335.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997), “Legal Determinants of
External Finance”, Journal of Finance, 52 (3): 1131-50.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1998), “Law and Finance” Journal
of Political Economy 106: 1113-55.

Levine, R. and S. Zervos (1998), “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth”, American
Economic Review 88: 537-558.

Levine, R. (1997), “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda”,
Journal of Economic Literature 35: 688-726.

Lewellen, W.G., C. Loderer and A. Rosenfeld (1985), “Merger Decisions and Executive Stock
Ownership in Acquiring Firms”, Journal of Accounting and Economics 7: 209-231.

Lewellen, W.G. (1971), “A Pure Financial Rationale for the Conglomerate Merger”, Journal of
Finance 26:521-37.

Li, D.D. and S. Li (1996), “A Theory of Corporate Scope and Financial Structure”, Journal of
Finance 51: 691-709.

Liebeskind, J. and T. Opler (1993), “The Causes of Corporate Refocusing”, working paper, Ohio
State University.

Lins, K. and H. Servaes (1999), “International Evidence on the Value of Corporate
Diversification”, Journal of Finance 54: 2215-2239.

Lins, K. and H. Servaes (2000), “Is Corporate Diversification Beneficial in Emerging Markets?”
working paper, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill and London Business School.

Loughran, T, and J. Ritter (1997), “The Operating Performance of Firms Conducting Seasoned
Equity Offerings”, Journal of Finance 52: 1823-50.

Ludvigson, S. (1998), “The Channel of Monetary Transmission to Demand: Evidence from the
Market for Automobile Credit”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 30: 365-83.

Maksimovic, V. and G.M. Phillips (2000), “Do Conglomerate Firms Allocate Assets
Efficiently?”, working paper, University of Maryland.

                                              82
Marris, R. (1964), The Economic Theory of Managerial Capitalism (Free Press, Glencoe, IL).

Masulis, R. and A.N. Korwar (1986), “Seasoned Equity Offerings: An Empirical Investigation”,
Journal of Financial Economics 15: 91-119.

Matsusaka, J. (1993), “Takeover Motives During the Conglomerate Merger Wave”, RAND
Journal of Economics 24: 357-379.

Matsusaka, J. and V. Nanda (2000), “Internal Capital Markets and Corporate Refocusing”,
working paper, University of Southern California and University of Michigan.

McConnell, J.J. and C.J. Muscarella (1985), “Corporate Capital Expenditure Decisions and the
Market Value of the Firm”, Journal of Financial Economics 14: 399-422.

McKinnon, R.I. (1973), Money and Capital in Economic Development (Brookings Institute,
Washington, D.C.).

McNeil, C.R. and W. Moore (2000), “Spinoff Wealth effects and the Dismantling of Internal
Capital Markets”, working paper, University of Miami.

Meyer, J.R. and E. Kuh (1957), The Investment Decision (Harvard University Press, Cambridge).

Meyer, M., P. Milgrom and J. Roberts (1992), “Organizational Prospects, Influence Costs, and
Ownership Changes”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 1: 9-35.

Mikkelson, W. H and M.M. Partch (1986), “Valuation Effects of Security Offerings and the
Issuance Process”, Journal of Financial Economics 15: 31-60.

Milgrom, P. (1988), “Employment Contracts, Influence Activities, and Efficient Organization
Design”, Journal of Political Economy 96: 42-60.

Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1988), “An Economic Approach to Influence Activities in
Organizations”, American Journal of Sociology 94: 154-179.

Miller, M.H. and K. Rock (1985), “Dividend Policy Under Information Asymmetry”, Journal of
Finance 40: 1031-1051.

Modigliani, F. and M. Miller (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and the Theory
of Investment”, American Economic Review 48: 261-297.

Morck, R., Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1990a), “The Stock Market and Investment: Is the Market
a Sideshow?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 157-215.

Morck, R., Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1990b), “Do Managerial Objectives Drive Bad

                                              83
Acquisitions?”, Journal of Finance 45: 31-48.

Morgan, D. (1998), “The Credit Effects of Monetary Policy: Evidence Using Loan
Commitments”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 30: 102-18.

Myers, S.C. (1977), “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing”, Journal of Financial Economics 5:
147-175.

Myers, S C. (1984), “The Capital Structure Puzzle”, Journal of Finance 39: 575-92.

Myers, S.C. (2000), “Outside Equity”, Journal of Finance 55: 1005-1037.

Myers, S.C. and N.C. Majluf (1984), “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when
Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have”, Journal of Financial Economics 13: 187-
222.

Nanda, V. and M.P. Narayanan (1999), “Disentangling Value: Financing Needs, Firm Scope, and
Divestitures”, Journal of Financial Intermediation 8: 174-204.

Narayanan, M.P. (1985), “Managerial Incentives for Short-Term Results”, Journal of Finance 40:
1469-1484.

Nofsinger J. and R. Sias (1999), “Herding and Feedback Trading by Institutional and Individual
Investors”, Journal of Finance 54: 2263-95.

Palia, D. (1999), “Corporate Governance and the Diversification Discount”, working paper,
UCLA.

Peek, J. and E. Rosengren (1995), “The Capital Crunch: Neither a Borrower nor a Lender Be”,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 27: 625-38.

Peek, J. and E. Rosengren (1997), “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The
Case of Japan”, American Economic Review 87: 495-505.

Persons, J. (1994), “Renegotiation and the Impossibility of Optimal Investment”, Review of
Financial Studies 7: 419-449.

Peyer, U. and A. Shivdasani (2001), “Leverage and Internal Capital Markets: Evidence from
Leveraged Recapitalizations”, Journal of Financial Economics 59: 477-515.

Phillips, G.M. (1995), “Increased Debt and Industry Product Markets: An Empirical Analysis”,
Journal of Financial Economics 37: 189-238.

Prendergast, C. and L. Stole (1996), “Impetuous Youngsters and Jaded Old-Timers: Acquiring a

                                                84
Reputation for Learning”, Journal of Political Economy 104: 1105-1134.

Rajan, R., H. Servaes and L. Zingales (2000), “The Cost of Diversity: The Diversification
Discount and Inefficient Investment”, Journal of Finance 55: 35-80.

Rajan, R.G. and L. Zingales (1998), “Financial Dependence and Growth”, American Economic
Review 88: 559-586.

Roll, R. (1986), “The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers”, Journal of Business 59:197-
216.

Rotemberg, J. (1993), “Power in Profit-Maximizing Organizations”, Journal of Economics &
Management Strategy 2:165-98.

Rotemberg, J. and G. Saloner (1994), “Benefits of Narrow Business Strategies”, American
Economic Review 84: 1330-1349.

Schaller, H. (1993), “Asymmetric Information, Liquidity Constraints and Canadian Investment”,
Canadian Journal of Economics 26: 552-74.

Scharfstein, D.S. (1998), “The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets II: Evidence from
Diversified Conglomerates”, NBER Working Paper 6352.

Scharfstein, D.S. and J.C. Stein (1990), “Herd Behavior and Investment”, American Economic
Review 80: 465-479.

Scharfstein, D.S. and J.C. Stein (2000), “The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets: Divisional
Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment”, Journal of Finance 55 : 2537-64.

Schoar, A.S. (2000), “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity”, working paper, MIT.

Schumpeter, J.A. (1911), The Theory of Economic Development (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA).

Servaes, H. (1996), “The Value of Diversification During the Conglomerate Merger Wave”,
Journal of Finance 51: 1201-1225.

Sharpe, S. A. (1994), “Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the Cyclicality of
Employment” American Economic Review 84: 1060-74.

Shaw, E.S. (1973), Financial Deepening in Economic Development (Brookings Institute,
Washington, D.C.).

Shin, H. and R. Stulz (1998), “Are Internal Capital Markets Efficient?”, Quarterly Journal of

                                               85
Economics 113: 531-552.

Shleifer, A. (2000), Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance (Oxford
University Press, Oxford).

Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny (1989), “Management Entrenchment: The Case of Manager-
Specific Investments”, Journal of Financial Economics 25: 123-139.

Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny (1997), “A Survey of Corporate Governance”, Journal of Finance
52: 737-783.

Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny (2001), “Stock Market Driven Acquisitions”, working paper,
Harvard University.

Stein, J.C. (1988), “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia”, Journal of Political Economy
96: 61-80.

Stein, J.C. (1989), “Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Firms: A Model of Myopic Corporate
Behavior”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104: 655-669.

Stein, J.C. (1996), “Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World”, Journal of Business 69:
429-455.

Stein, J.C. (1997), “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources”,
Journal of Finance 52: 111-133.

Stein, J.C. (1998), “An Adverse-Selection Model of Bank Asset and Liability Management with
Implications for the Transmission of Monetary Policy” RAND Journal of Economics 29:
466-86.

Stein, J.C. (2001), “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized vs.
Hierarchical Firms”, working paper, Harvard.

Stickel, S. (1990), “Predicting Individual Analyst Earnings Forecasts”, Journal of Accounting
Research 28: 409-17.

Stiglitz, J.E. and A. Weiss (1981), “Credit Rationing and Markets with Imperfect Information”,
American Economic Review 71: 393-411.

Stiglitz, J.E. and A. Weiss (1983), “Incentive Effects of Terminations: Applications to the Credit
and Labor Markets”, American Economic Review 73: 912-927.

Stulz, R.M. (1990), “Managerial Discretion and Optimal Financing Policies”, Journal of
Financial Economics 26: 3-27.

                                                86
Stulz, R. M. and H. Johnson (1985), “An Analysis of Secured Debt”, Journal of Financial
Economics 14: 501-521.

Teoh, S., I. Welch, and T.J. Wong (1998a), “Earnings Management and the Underperformance of
Seasoned Equity Offerings”, Journal of Financial Economics 50: 63-99.

Teoh, S., I. Welch and T.J. Wong (1998b), “Earnings Management and the Long-Run
Underperformance of Initial Public Offerings”, Journal of Finance 53: 1935-1974.

Thakor, A.V. (1990), “Investment ‘Myopia’ and the Internal Organization of Capital Allocation
Decisions”, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 6: 129-154.

Tirole, J. (1986), “Hierarchies and Bureaucracies: On the Role of Collusion in Organizations”,
Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 2: 181-214.

Tobin J. (1969), “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory”, Journal of Money
Credit & Banking 1: 15-29.

Townsend, R.M. (1979), “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
Verification”, Journal of Economic Theory 21: 265-293.

Trueman, B. (1994), “Analyst Forecasts and Herding Behavior”, Review of Financial Studies 7:
97-124.

Villalonga, B. (1999), “Does Diversification Cause the ‘Diversification Discount’”, working
paper, UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Management.

Weinstein, N. (1980) “Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events”, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 39: 806-820.

Welch, I. (2000), “Herding Among Security Analysis”, Journal of Financial Economics 58:
369-96.

Wermers R. (1999), “Mutual Fund Herding and the Impact on Stock Prices”, Journal of Finance
54: 581-622.

Wernerfelt, B and C.A. Montgomery (1988), “Tobin’s q and the Importance of Focus in Firm
Performance”, American Economic Review 78: 246-254.

Weston, J.F. (1970), “Diversification and Merger Trends”, Business Economics 5:50-57.

Whited, T. (1992), “Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from Panel
Data”, Journal of Finance 47: 1425-60.



                                               87
Whited, T. (2001), “Is it Inefficient Investment that Causes the Diversification Discount?”,
Journal of Finance 56.

Williamson, O.E. (1964), The Economics of Discretionary Behavior: Managerial Objectives in a
Theory of the Firm (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.).

Williamson, O.E. (1975), Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications (Collier
Macmillan Publishers, Inc., New York).

Wulf, J. (1999), “Influence and Inefficiency in the Internal Capital Market: Theory and
Evidence”, working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Wulf, J. (2000), “Internal Capital Markets and Firm-Level Compensation Incentives for Division
Managers”, working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Wurgler, J. (2000), “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital”, Journal of Financial
Economics 58: 187-214.

Zwiebel, J. (1995), “Corporate Conservatism and Relative Compensation”, Journal of Political
Economy 103: 1-25.

Zwiebel, J. (1996), “Dynamic Capital Structure under Management Entrenchment”, American
Economic Review 86: 1197-1215.




                                                88
