                                          




                                             


                                            


                                           !"#$
                                 %&&'''() (& *&'!"#$


                                   +           , -
                                     ./$/ ,**0* * 1 
                                       2)3 4 , /5."!
                                             




                  
        !      ""  # "    !
   $       !%" #&  '(#     !%(# ( 
       )&    * # +   &     
    , & *)*-                 
+  .   / , )


0#     )    )     -     - *   #
1 *  -            0       )
 *   3 60   *
 
       ( !"#$
 5//.
 ( -#4 54 .4 74 "


                                              $%#%


         .8$#   2  9   3  * 6 3  *  *06* 9 )60 3 '
063  '  :  6  ;6(< *   *3 * '    3 *   6* 9   = "/
 *  90 )  9 3  )60 *3 * 9 '2  6* '  3 * 3( 6** 9 3 92 
.87/ 3 .8!/ 0 ** * * **  3 *   6* 9  .87/>*  30 3   *06 3
 * 9 )60* )       0  * 3 * 3 03 (  *   6* 0 00 9
) 69 9  3 06  3  * 9 )60* ) '  .87/ 3 .8!/(  *26 6** * **
 3 *   6* 3  99 0   3  * 9 ' *(   *6*  )*  06*
9 2 ?1   3 926 02 99 0*4 * ' 66 *   ** 9 * 6 01 24  2 
 1 * 2 00 9 *2  9  6  *2 3 99 0*( +  1 * 9 03*
 *   3 *06*  .87/ * **    99 0* =6  6 * *2 9  3 06   3
 * 9 )60* 3  3 *   6*(




 
1 * 9 0 
../. ( $!WK  
04  @/@"7
3    
A(B*)(00( 3
                                           1. Introduction


           From Plessy v. Ferguson1 in 1896 until Brown v. Board of Education2 in 1954,
Southern and Border States legally segregated their school systems by race. Black
schools received fewer resources and black children were taught almost exclusively by
black teachers. Outside the South, migration, housing patterns, and actions by state and
local leaders contributed to similar racial isolation in the schools. With the Brown
decision, the Supreme Court deemed segregated schools “inherently unequal” and
therefore unconstitutional.
           Over the next 30 years, federal courts ordered the implementation of
desegregation plans for many of the largest school districts in the United States. It was
the intent of these court orders to provide equal educational resources to blacks by
eradicating segregation on the basis of race. Indeed, the desegregation of the public
schools was the most significant innovation in the educational system of the post-World
War II U.S. Nevertheless, few economists have studied the effect of desegregation on
integration’s intended beneficiaries, black students.3 The fact that black high school
dropout rates fell from the late 1960’s through the early 1980’s is documented in Figure I.
The contribution of court-ordered integration to this decline is an important open
question.
           In this paper variation in the timing of desegregation plans in large school
districts, the result of judicial enforcement of the Brown decision, is used to estimate
integration’s effect on black high school dropout rates.                 Using the 1970 and 1980

1
    163 U.S. 537 (1896).
2
    347 U.S. 483 (1954).
3
  Boozer, Krueger, and Wolkon (1992) and Card and Krueger (1992) are notable exceptions. St. John
(1975) and Armor (1995) survey the education literature on the effect of desegregation on black
achievement. They conclude that the results of studies, as well as the methods employed therein, vary
significantly.


                                                    3
censuses, high-school-aged blacks in districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1980
are compared to those in districts that desegregated both before and after. Dropout rates
among blacks declined between 1970 and 1980 by two to three percentage points in
districts that desegregated in the interim relative to districts that desegregated both earlier
and later. The results are robust to controls for district and time-varying region effects,
controls for family income, and controls for potential confounds from the selective
migration of blacks. Models that condition on lagged dropout rates produce estimates of
a one percentage point decline in dropout rates as a result of desegregation. The smaller
magnitude of these estimates suggests that mean reversion may account for some of the
decline in dropout rates attributed to the effect of desegregation plans. As I describe in
an appendix, however, under reasonable assumptions, estimates from the difference-in-
differences and lagged dependent variable specifications provide upper and lower bounds
on the effect of desegregation plans on dropout rates.4 Therefore, on balance, the results
reported here are consistent with a one to three percentage point decline in dropout rates
due to desegregation.
           Estimated effects are quite substantial. A one to three percentage point decline in
dropout rates can account for about half of the decline in black dropout rates from 1970
to 1980. These estimates are also relevant to current policy issues. In September of
1999, a federal district judge in North Carolina ended the nearly thirty-year-old busing
order in Charlotte.5 In June of 1999, on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the busing order
in Boston, white families filed suit claiming that racially based assignment plans in the
Boston school system were unconstitutional.6 The Boston School Committee then voted
to end the use of race as a criterion for the assignment of students to schools. These and
other decisions are made without the benefit of a comprehensive definitive study of the
effect the original desegregation efforts had on black achievement.
           The effects of desegregation are not only of interest to economists because of
policy concerns.          The forced integration of the public schools also provides an
opportunity to evaluate how peers and school inputs affect students’ educational
outcomes. As a result of desegregation plans, large numbers of students lost control over

4
    Imbens, Liebman, and Eissa (1997) make a similar point.
5
  57 F. Supp. 2d. 228 (1999).
6
  379 F. Supp. 410 (1974), 1999 U.S. Dist. Lexis 12941 (1999).


                                                      4
the choice of both peers in school and the quality of the schools they attended. While the
net effect of desegregation on student educational outcomes is interesting because of the
inherent historical importance of integration, this reduced-form estimate is also of interest
because it provides a well-identified empirical estimate of two economically important
structural parameters.
       There are large and growing literatures on both peer and school quality effects on
economic outcomes. Theoretical work by Benabou (1993) on residential segregation, by
Epple and Romano (1998) on private school tuition vouchers, and by Becker and Murphy
(1992) on learning on the job, assumes that economic agents affect each other’s
productivity. Empirical evidence on peer effects is mixed, however. Case and Katz
(1991) present evidence that a teenager’s neighborhood peers affect various outcomes.
The authors note, however, that this association need not be causal. Unobserved factors
that determine a child’s residential location also determine economic outcomes. Evans,
Oates, and Schwab (1992) show that estimates of neighborhood peer effects that account
for endogenous neighborhood choice are close to zero, while similar estimates that
presume exogenous residential location yield large peer effect estimates. Cutler and
Glaeser (1997) use an instrumental variables strategy and find evidence of significant
neighborhood peer effects.
       Empirical evidence on the effect of school quality on scholastic achievement and
economic success is also mixed. Hanushek (1986) argues that there is little evidence that
increased spending or improvements in crude measures of school quality have any effect
on student performance. Krueger (1999) and Angrist and Lavy (1999) show direct
evidence that class size impacts student test scores. Card and Krueger (1992) present
direct evidence of a positive relationship between school quality and earnings, although
Heckman, Layne-Farrar and Todd (1996) argue that the estimated relationship is driven
by false assumptions. These studies notwithstanding, endogenous choice of residential
location and educational expenditures generally makes the task of identifying the causal
effect of school quality on economic outcomes difficult.
       Desegregation provides a source of plausibly exogenous variation in both the
peers and the resources at the schools students attend. Data limitations make it difficult
to identify each effect separately, though a number of authors have noted that much of the



                                             5
gap between black and white school inputs was closed before the desegregation plans of
the 1970’s were implemented.7 Moreover, my examination of the characteristics of
predominantly black and white schools in 1970 suggests that peer effects explain some
portion of the overall decline in dropout rates attributed to desegregation. Together these
findings imply that the benefits of integration could not be obtained simply by increasing
observed school quality.
           The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, I present a brief history of
school desegregation and discuss the literature on the effectiveness of desegregation
plans. Section 3 lays out the identification strategy. Section 4 describes the data. In
Section 5, I present the results and examine potential threats to validity. In Section 6, I
examine peer and school quality effects separately. Section 7 concludes.




                                              2. Background


           There was no nationally organized campaign that desegregated the public schools
in the U.S. Rather, a series of court cases brought chiefly by private civil rights groups
led to the court orders that were the most effective stimulus to desegregation. Political
forces dictated that the enforcement of the Brown decision occurred mainly in the courts.
What is germane here is that the courts’ role in the process necessitated law enforcement
on a case-by-case basis. As a result, the timing of integration varied at the school district
level.
           Although desegregation began first in the South, tabulations of the timing of
major desegregation plans in the largest school districts in the country reveal significant
inter- and intra-regional variation. Table I lists the sample of large school districts
considered in this study.8 School districts are listed chronologically by the year in which
they instituted a major desegregation plan. There is a perhaps surprising amount of
variation in the timing of desegregation plans not explained by regional differences. Of
the 22 districts that implemented desegregation plans in the 1960’s, seven are located

7
    See, for example, Card and Krueger (1992) or Margo (1990).
8
 I discuss the sampling procedure and data more specifically in Section IV. The sample of districts used is the
same as in Welch and Light (1987).


                                                        6
outside of the South. Similarly, of the 77 districts that implemented plans in the 1970’s,
35 are located outside of the South.


2.1. Legal History


            A 1955 Supreme Court ruling, often called Brown II9, gave the federal district
courts responsibility for determining whether districts were segregated and for evaluating
plans to remedy segregation. Litigation followed, mostly with the intent of allowing
individual black students access to white schools, but very little integration occurred
before the mid-1960’s. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 gave the Department of Health,
Education and Welfare (HEW) power to cut federal funding to school districts that
discriminated on the basis of race. The law also authorized the Department of Justice to
join school integration suits it deemed in the national interest. Many rural Southern
school districts desegregated soon after the passage of the law.10
            Some larger districts, where desegregation was more complex, allowed students
the option of transferring schools within the district. In 1968, with its Green v. New Kent
County, Virginia11 decision, the Supreme Court outlawed plans that did not effectively
integrate the schools, ordering the end to the use of so-called “freedom of choice” plans.
The decision stimulated new litigation throughout the South. After Green, desegregation
plans were more likely to include the pairing of nearby schools, or the redrawing of
attendance zone boundaries.        It was not until 1971, with the Swann v. Charlotte-
Mecklenburg County12 decision, that the Supreme Court approved busing of students
outside of their neighborhood for the purpose of racial integration. The use of busing
made desegregation feasible in many of the larger school districts of the North and West,
where residential segregation was more severe.
            Proving that school or state officials intentionally segregated the schools was
necessary to win a legal battle, but finding such evidence was significantly more difficult
outside of the South. In the absence of laws requiring separate school systems by race,
plaintiffs had to sift through transcripts of school board meetings and interview school

9
    349 U.S. 294 (1955).
10
     Orfield (1978) p. 279.
11
     391 U.S. 430 (1968).



                                               7
officials to produce evidence of intent to segregate. In 1973, the Court made it easier to
warrant a desegregation order outside of the South when it ruled in Keyes v. School
District No. 1, Denver, Colorado13 that the plaintiff only needed to show segregative
action in one school or neighborhood in the school district.
         In 1974, the Court restricted remedies to include only school districts where
plaintiffs could prove intentional segregation. The Milliken v. Bradley14 ruling outlawed
the inclusion of suburbs of Detroit in the city’s busing plan.
         By 1986, some school districts had been under court order for twenty years. In
that year, a Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals declared the schools of Norfolk, Virginia
integrated, ending the court order issued in 1971.15 Decisions by the Supreme Court in
1991 and 1992 clarified what school districts could do once court orders were lifted,
allowing districts to return to neighborhood schools.16


2.2. The Effectiveness of Desegregation Plans


         Much research has focused on the effect of desegregation plans on the racial
composition of school districts.               Coleman (1975) suggested that court-ordered
desegregation plans increased the speed of white migration out of cities. Subsequent
research confirmed Coleman’s claim, but also found that induced white migration was
not extensive enough to offset fully the effect of desegregation plans on the integration of
schools. In particular, Welch and Light (1987) show that desegregation plans of the
1960’s, 1970’s and 1980’s decreased the index of dissimilarity in school districts by
about 20 percentage points.17 Rossell and Armor (1996) show that, net of effects on
white enrollment, desegregation plans led to a 10 to 20 percentage point increase in the
fraction of white students at the typical black student’s school. There is reasonably
strong evidence that desegregation plans led to a decrease in the segregation of public
school districts. Through the reassignment of students to different schools, desegregation

12
   402 U.S. 1 (1971).
13
   413 U.S. 189 (1973).
14
   418 U.S. 717 (1974).
15
   784 F. 2d. 521 (4th Circuit 1986).
16
   498 U.S. 237 (1991), 503 U.S. 467 (1992).




                                                   8
plans may have also improved the quality of educational resources available to black
students.


2.3 The Role of Legal Precedent


         Causes of the timing of desegregation are crucial to the identification strategy that
will be explained in the following section. Desegregation plans were principally the
ultimate result of court proceedings that were initiated by private civil rights groups. A
concern that will arise is that these groups focused their energy and resources on school
districts where desegregation would provide the greatest local benefit. If this were the
case, then the timing of desegregation was at least in part a function of time-varying
determinants of student achievement.
         This argument overlooks the role of precedent in the U.S. legal process. Legal
precedence played a major role in the determination of where to focus the resources of
national civil rights groups, who where the primary force behind most legal challenges.
Any agent working to benefit students nationally through desegregation must consider
the long-standing effects of a legal failure early in the process. Thus, such national civil
rights organizations chose to bring suit early in school districts where they felt there was
a higher probability of victory, rather than in school districts where desegregation would
benefit the largest number of students.
         As is shown more formally in Appendix 2, when precedent has a strong effect on
subsequent probability of success—as was the case with desegregation—an agent acting
to desegregate the nation’s schools should choose to weight the probability of success
almost to the exclusion of any local benefits of desegregation when choosing where to
bring legal challenges. The role of precedence suggests that any strategy to identify the
effect of desegregation on dropout rates should focus on controlling for the idiosyncratic
district characteristics that made legal victory more likely and thus led some districts to
be desegregated earlier, while others were desegregated later.



17
  The index of dissimilarity can be thought of as the number of students that would have to move from their
present school to fully integrate the district, relative to the number of students that would have to change schools
to go from a fully segregated district to a fully integrated district.


                                                         9
                                      3. Identification


       Desegregation plans affect black dropout rates through three main channels.
First, the reassignment of students within the school district affects the set of peers with
which students attend school. New student assignment plans may cause parents to
withdraw their children from the public schools, or to move out of the district altogether.
Net of effects on the total enrollment and the racial composition of the district,
desegregation plans alter the set of peers with which black children attend school.
       Second, desegregation plans may move black students to better schools. If whites
attended better schools than blacks did before integration, then on average desegregation
should improve the quality of schools that blacks attend. Though total support for
schools may decline as a result of desegregation-induced migration, integration may still
lead to a change in the average quality of schools to which black students are assigned.
       Third, there may be other effects of desegregation plans on black educational
outcomes. Parents may become more involved in their children’s education as a result of
increased information, or in order to reap the benefits of the fight they have recently won.
The legal victory that usually accompanies a desegregation plan may also make black
children feel enfranchised.     Any analysis of the effect of desegregation plans will
estimate the net effect of these three changes.
       The estimation of the net effect of desegregation plans on black educational
outcomes is not completely straightforward, however. A comparison of integrated and
segregated school systems at any point in time confounds the effect of the desegregation
plans with the effect of factors that led to the imposition of the plan in the first place. The
analysis to follow focuses on a sample of large school districts, 86 percent of which
implemented desegregation plans between 1961 and 1982. Variation in the timing of the
imposition of these plans is used to identify the effect of desegregation plans on black
educational outcomes.
       In its simplest form the identification strategy is to use a difference-in-differences
estimator.    An example should help to clarify.            Consider two school districts:
Birmingham, Alabama, which desegregated in 1970, and St. Louis, Missouri, which



                                              10
desegregated in 1980. High-school-aged blacks are compared in the 1970 and 1980
censuses. In 1970, 17-year-olds in both cities had attended segregated schools all their
lives. In 1980, 17-year olds in Birmingham had attended integrated schools since 2nd
grade, while those in St. Louis had attended segregated schools throughout their
education. The experiences in St. Louis are used to represent what would have happened
in Birmingham in the absence of desegregation. A comparison of the change in the
dropout rate in Birmingham relative to the change in the dropout rate in St. Louis is an
estimate of the effect of desegregation.
            In the full analysis, the treatment group comprises districts that implemented
desegregation plans between 1970 and 1979. In these districts, high school students in
April of 1980 attended at least one year of school after the implementation of a
desegregation plan, while high school students in April of 1970 attended segregated
schools throughout their education.18 The change in dropout rates in these districts is
compared to that in districts that desegregated before 1970 and after 1979. In the control
districts, no desegregation plan was implemented between the time the 1970 and 1980
censuses were conducted. The analysis focuses on districts where there was ever a
desegregation plan because these districts should be more comparable, but expanding the
control group to encompass all districts that did not desegregate in the 1970’s produces
similar results.
            The change in dropout rates is observed in districts that desegregated between
1970 and 1979, but it is unclear whether this change is due to desegregation or due to
other factors that vary over time. Assuming that these other potential determinants of
dropout status affect all school districts similarly, the change in dropout rates in the
districts that desegregated both before 1970 and after 1980 is an estimate of what would
have happened to dropout rates in districts that desegregated in the 1970’s in the absence
of desegregation. Suppose that the dropout rates of high-school-aged blacks can be
written19


(1)                             E[Di|t,g] = βt + γg + δTi


18
     Census data refer to April 1st of the census year.
19
     The notation that follows borrows heavily from Angrist and Krueger (1998).



                                                           11
where Di is an indicator of dropout status of individual i, βt is an effect for year t common
to all school districts, γg is a time-constant effect that is allowed to vary by the decade of
desegregation, indexed by g, Ti is an indicator for living in 1980 in a district that
desegregated between 1970 and 1980, and δ is the effect of desegregation on dropout
rates. The dropout status of high-school-aged blacks can now be written


(2)                    Di = βt + γg + δTi + εi


where εi is an error term such that E[εi|t,g] = 0. The simplest difference-in-differences
comparison is


(3)                    {E[Di| g=treatment, t=1980] - E[Di| g=treatment, t=1970]}
                       - {E[Di| g=control, t=1980] - E[Di| g=control, t=1970]} = δ.


Since Ti is equal to the product of a dummy that equals 1 for observations in 1980 and an
indicator for districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1979, δ can be estimated with
a simple regression of the model in (2).          Suppose, however, that the timing of
desegregation is correlated with time-varying determinants of dropout status.            The
regression framework allows convenient control for a vector of individual characteristics,
Xi, by estimation of the equation,


(4)                    Di = Xi´β0 + β t + γg + δTi + εi


where β0 is a vector of coefficients that includes a constant. Validity of the estimate of δ
now only requires that, conditional on Xi, inclusion in the treatment group is uncorrelated
with unobserved time-varying determinants of dropout status.
       Notice also that because there are many observations per school district, district
effects can be included instead of the treatment main effect, γg. Since the treatment group
is defined in terms of districts, the district indicators completely characterize the time-



                                             12
constant effect specific to treatment districts and are thus more general. The model can
now be written as,


                                                       S −1
(5)                            Di = Xi´β0 + β t +      ås =1
                                                                disαs + δTi + εi

where dis indicates that i resides in school district s and S denotes the total number of
school districts in the sample.
            The difference-in-differences estimator eliminates bias from any association
between treatment and time-invariant characteristics of districts. But if desegregation is
correlated with low past completion rates, i.e. a lagged dependent variable, then
difference-in-differences estimates will exaggerate the effect of treatment.20 A more
general model would allow for fixed district effects and control for lagged district-level
dropout rates. The model can be written as follows:


                                                         S −1
(6)                            Dit = Xit´β0 + β t +      å
                                                         s =1
                                                                    dis αs + δTit + γE[Dit-1|s] + εit .

Equation (6) is unidentified as written. Taking first differences and aggregating to the
school district level yields


(7)                            yst – yst-1 = (Xst – Xst-1)´β0 + β t + δTst + γ(yst-1 - yst-2) + εst - εst-1


where yst is the school district level dropout rate in year t. The model in equation (7) can
be estimated using yst-2 as an instrument for (yst-1 - yst-2).
            In practice school districts cannot be identified in 1960, and thus the model with
fixed effects that controls for lagged dropout rates cannot be estimated.21 Therefore,
estimates are reported that control for lagged dependent outcomes directly, without
differencing or district effects. The model estimated in this case becomes,


(8)                            Dit = Xit´β0 + δLDgi + γE[Dit-1|s] + εit


20
     See, for example, Ashenfelter and Card (1985), and Appendix I.
21
     The public use 1960 census does not identify geographic areas smaller than states.


                                                               13
where gi is an indicator for treatment districts.            The estimate of δLD measures the
conditional mean difference in dropout rates between treatment and control districts in
1980, controlling for dropout rates in 1970.
        If the timing of desegregation plans is a function of either time-invariant district
characteristics or lagged district-level dropout rates, then under reasonably plausible
assumptions the differencing and lagged dependent variables estimates will provide an
upper and lower bound of the true effect of desegregation on black dropout rates.
Specifically, suppose selection into treatment is an increasing function of fixed
determinants of dropout rates such that,


                                      ì1 if α s > y
                                Tst = í
                                      î0 otherwise


where y is a constant. Call δˆLD the estimator that controls for lagged dependent variables
and estimates the treatment effect. Then, as is shown formally in Appendix 1,
                                                Cov(α s , Tst ) æ    σ α2 ö
                                plim δ LD = δ +
                                      ˆ                         ç1 −       ÷ ≥ δ
                                                 Var(Tst ) çè σ α2 + σ ε2 ÷ø
                                                      ~


      ~
where Tst is the residual from a regression of Tst on lagged dropout rates. Alternatively,

suppose treatment is positively selected on lagged dropout rates, y st −1 , such that,


                                      ì1 if y st −1 > y
                                Tst = í
                                      î 0 otherwise


Call δˆDD the difference-in-difference estimator of the treatment effect.


                                plim δˆDD   = δ − Ε[ε st −1 y st −1 > y ] ≤ δ




                                                 14
If treatment is positively selected either on lagged outcomes or on fixed determinants of
lagged outcomes then, plim δˆDD ≤ δ ≤ plim δˆLD . Thus, the two estimators should bracket
the causal effect of interest.22




                                                   4. Data


            In a report commissioned by the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Welch and
Light (1987) evaluated the effect of desegregation plans on integration. They sampled
125 school districts for this purpose. This sample represents less than one percent of U.S.
school districts, but about 20 percent of total enrollment and about half of minority
enrollment in 1968.23 The analysis to follow focuses on this sample of very large school
districts. Table I lists the districts included in the study and when they implemented a
desegregation plan. Column 3 shows whether the district is assigned to the treatment or
control group.
            I match 15-, 16- and 17-year-olds from the 1970 and 1980 censuses to the 125
districts based on individuals’ county group or SMSA of residence. County group is the
smallest geographic identifier available on public use census data files in 1970 and
1980.24 Assigning individuals to districts is not straightforward, however, because the
physical area described by county groups changed from 1970 to 1980. Maps provided by
the census bureau are used to determine the smallest geographic area identifiable in both
years.
            Three different census samples cover the 125 geographic areas: the 1970 one-
percent Metro sample, the 1980 one-percent Metro sample and the 1980 five-percent
State sample. All three samples identify county groups, although the county groups in
the State sample are slightly different because they do not cross state lines. The 1970
five-percent State sample does not identify any geographic area smaller than a state. The
1980 five-percent State sample identifies county groups and only SMSA’s that do not
cross state lines. Where possible, I use the 1980 State sample because of the larger

22
     The claim is derived more rigorously in Appendix I.
23
     Welch and Light (1987), p. 34.



                                                      15
sample size, but in many cases it is impossible to match the area identified in 1970 with
the county groups or SMSA’s identified in the 1980 State sample. Since the Metro
samples are one-fifth the size of the State sample, observations are weighted to reflect the
portion of the population they represent.




                                                     5. Results


            As can be seen in the means presented in Table II, the high school dropout rate of
blacks in districts that did not desegregate in the 1970’s remained unchanged over that
time period. In contrast, districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1980 experienced
a decline in black dropout rates of 3.6 percentage points. The simplest difference-in-
differences estimate as specified in equation (3) compares the change in dropout rates
from 1970 to 1980 in districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1979 (-3.6 percentage
points) to the change in dropout rates in districts that desegregated both before the 1970
census and after the 1980 census (0.2 percentage points). The relative change (-3.8
percentage points) is an estimate of the effect of desegregation plans on black dropout
rates.
            An alternative method of obtaining the simple difference-in-differences estimate
is by estimation of equation (2). This method is useful because it allows convenient
control for permanent characteristics that could potentially explain differential trends in
dropout rates.           Estimates in Table III show that neither changes in demographic
characteristics nor changes in the effect of these characteristics on dropout rates can
explain the decline in black dropout rates between 1970 and 1980 among districts that
implemented a desegregation plan in the interim.
            A nice feature of the ‘experiment’ is that there did not seem to be an appreciable
shift in black dropout rates between 1970 and 1980 among districts that did not
desegregate in the interim. As measured by the coefficient on the indicator for being an
observation from 1980, the change in dropout rates from 1970 to 1980 among districts
that did not desegregate during the decade is never significantly different from zero. The

24
     These groupings are very similar to PUMA’s in the 1990 census.



                                                          16
results of a natural experiment are always more convincing when they are not measured
amidst unexplained trends in the dependent variable.
       The specification of the simple difference-in-differences model allows controls
for fixed characteristics only at the treatment group level. There is significant variation
in dropout rates across districts. Because the data include many observations per district,
the model can be estimated controlling for district-level fixed differences in dropout
rates. These fixed effects fully characterize the differences in dropout rates that existed
in 1970. Estimates that allow pre-existing dropout rates to vary by school district, instead
of only at the decade of desegregation level, produce nearly identical point estimates.
These estimates, shown in Columns 4–6 of Table III, produce estimates that range from 3
– 3.4 percentage points, but are significantly more precise than those from the simple
difference-in-differences model.




5.1. Regional Variation in Dropout Rates and in the Timing of Desegregation


       The legal process that led to court-ordered desegregation plans proceeded
differently in and out of the South. Additionally, there is significant regional variation in
dropout rates. If not properly controlled for, region-specific trends in dropout rates may
be attributed to the effect of desegregation plans. Such worries turn out to be unfounded
as shown by the results from various specifications. Controls for permanent and time-
varying region effects leave the results virtually unaffected (3.0 – 3.5 percentage point
declines). Estimates that allow state-specific trends in dropout rates suggest a smaller
decline (2 – 2.8 percentage points) in black dropout rates associated with desegregation.
Alternatively, regressions run separately for each region, presented in Table IV, reveal
that the estimated effect of desegregation plans on black dropout rates is remarkably
consistent across regions. Estimates range from two to three percentage points in the
Northeast to four to five percentage points in the West. The estimated effects in and out
of the South are virtually the same, a 3 percentage point decline.




                                             17
5.2. Two Control Groups


       Another useful feature of the research design is that there are two obvious
comparison groups that can be used to check the robustness of the estimates. If there are
secular trends in the timing of desegregation plans that are correlated with determinants
of dropout rates, then the estimates presented in Tables III and IV are biased. For
instance, schools that desegregated later may have been less in need of compensatory
intervention for black students. Natural convergence would then be spuriously attributed
to the effect of desegregation.       However, if such determinants of the timing of
desegregation plans operated monotonically, then regressions that compare districts that
desegregated in the 1970’s to districts that desegregated in the 1960’s and 1980’s
separately should yield more convincing estimates.
       Another concern is that desegregation plans may not take effect immediately.
Districts that desegregated in the late 1960’s may not have felt the full effect of
desegregation by 1970.       These districts would have experienced some effect of
desegregation between 1970 and 1980, leading to an underestimate of the effect of
desegregation plans on the districts that desegregated in the 1970’s.
       Estimates that compare the districts that desegregated in the 1970’s separately to
districts that desegregated earlier and later, presented in Table V, suggest that the
estimates from the standard specifications are reasonable.              Estimated effects of
desegregation plans on black dropout rates are slightly larger when comparing to districts
that desegregated in the 1980’s (3.2 – 3.9 percentage point declines compared to 2.3 – 3.0
percentage point declines), which lends weak support to each of the above concerns.
However, the estimates do not differ significantly either from each other or from the
estimates of the standard specifications in Table III.


5.3. Changing Demographics


       Demographic characteristics may have changed differently in the districts that
desegregated in the 1970’s. For instance, if family income among high-school-aged



                                             18
blacks increased more in these districts, then one would expect to see larger declines in
dropout rates even if desegregation had no effect.           Changing gender and age
compositions could similarly explain the relative decline in dropout rates in the districts
that desegregated in the 1970’s. Additionally, the economic characteristics of black
families may have remained relatively constant in all school districts, but the effect of
family income on dropout rates may have changed over time. If, for instance, family
income among blacks is permanently higher in districts that desegregated between 1970
and 1979 and the relationship between family income and dropout rates became stronger
over time, imperfect controls for this shift would lead to spuriously negative estimates of
desegregation on dropout rates.
       The regression results presented in Columns 5 and 6 of Table III address these
worries by controlling for the age, gender and family income of high-school-aged blacks
and by allowing the effects of these characteristics on dropout rates to vary over time.
Again, the estimated decline in black high school dropout rates due to desegregation
plans remains consistently near three percentage points.


5.4. Selective Migration


       Large-scale integration may have induced migration of blacks and whites.
Assignment of observations to districts in the analysis thus far has been based on
residence on April 1st of the current year. Validity of the estimates presumes that
migration into and out of districts is not affected by desegregation plans. At the very
least the analysis assumes that desegregation-induced migrants do not have different
dropout propensities from the rest of the population in the absence of desegregation.
While much has been written on desegregation-induced white migration—often termed
“white flight”—little has been discussed about the parallel phenomenon for black
families.
       One might still worry that families of potential dropouts avoided desegregating
areas when they moved, or that families of good students sought desegregating districts.




                                            19
The former concern is likely to be more relevant as movers tended to be from lower-
income families and had higher dropout rates.25
         The data allow three empirical checks of whether selective migration did in fact
bias the previous estimates. In both 1970 and 1980 there are questions on the public use
census files asking whether individuals have moved during the previous five years. In
Table VI, estimates are presented from models similar to those in Table III but with a
discrete dependent variable that indicates whether the individual has moved from the
county group where he lived five years ago.                      These results do not suggest that
desegregation had any effect on migration. Columns 1–3 in Table VII present estimates
from models that again use dropout status as the dependent variable, but control for
whether the individual have moved from his county group of five years ago. Estimates of
the effect of desegregation are unchanged from those in Table III.
         While the analogous question is not asked in the 1970 census, there is a question
asked of half of the 1980 sample that indicates individuals’ county group of residence in
1975. Columns 4–6 of Table VII report estimates of models from Table III using county
group in 1975 to assign districts to the 1980 data.                       Estimates of the effect of
desegregation on black high school dropout rates are larger but more imprecise due to
smaller sample sizes. Differential migration patterns into desegregating districts in the
period from 1975 to 1980 do not seem to explain the estimated effects from the standard
specifications in Table III.
         The questions available on the public use census files address migration into
districts, as opposed to migration out of districts. Welch and Light (1987) and Rossell
and Armor (1996) show that the implementation of desegregation plans led to an increase
in the speed of migration of whites out of urban school districts. If there is a similar
phenomenon among blacks, the previous estimates are compromised.                               In fact, the
problem is not as serious as it may seem because the districts referred to in this analysis
are larger in physical area than actual school districts. In practice, districts as measured
by county groups include many of the suburban areas to which migrants may have fled.
Moreover, the data show no indication that desegregation plans led to a decrease in the

25
  The dropout rate in the sample among those who had moved from their county group of residence from five
years ago is 18.3 percent, while that of non-movers is 11.7 percent. The average family income of movers is
$11,608, while that of non-movers is $13,298.


                                                     20
population of high-school-aged blacks in districts. Estimates in Table VIII, together with
those presented in Tables VI and VII, suggest that desegregation had little effect on
migration in or out of districts.


5.5. Mean Reversion


        Perhaps the most troubling concern with estimates in Table III is that mean
reversion may explain the decline in dropout rates attributed to desegregation. The
difference-in-differences strategy presumes that the timing of desegregation is dependent
on permanent characteristics of districts. If that is the case, differencing over time
eliminates the resulting permanent differences in dropout rates between districts that
desegregated in the 1960’s, 1970’s and 1980’s. On the other hand, the fact that dropout
rates in 1970 were higher in districts that would desegregate in the 1970’s than in other
districts may lead to biased estimates. If the timing of desegregation was not determined
by the fixed characteristics that led to permanently higher dropout rates, but rather on
unusually high dropout rates in 1970, then the ensuing decline in dropout rates among
desegregating districts may have been due to reversion to long-term means and not due to
desegregation.
        If the timing of desegregation was determined largely by recent lagged outcomes
and not by permanent differences in dropout rates, then a more appropriate specification
controls for 1970 dropout rates and compares dropout rates in 1980 of districts that
desegregated in the ensuing decade to the dropout rates of those that would not.
Estimates that control for lagged district-level dropout rates are presented in Table IX.
The basic specification that controls for lagged outcomes associates a 2.2 percentage
point decline in dropout rates with desegregation. Models that also control for age,
region, gender and family income yield estimates of a smaller decline (0.9 – 1.4
percentage point). Estimated effects of desegregation on dropout rates are negative, but
smaller in magnitude than those estimated by difference-in-differences models. The
smaller magnitudes suggest that mean reversion may account for a large portion of the
treatment effect estimated by the difference-in-differences estimator.




                                            21
            Controlling for lagged dependent variables assumes a linear relationship between
dropout rates in 1970 and 1980 in the absence of changing desegregation status. An
alternative specification matches districts based on 1970 dropout rates non-
parametrically. For instance, the estimates in Columns 5–7 of Table IX are from a model
in which the sample is separated based on deciles of the 1970 district-level dropout rate
distribution computed separately by age.                      Dropout rates from 1980 of districts that
desegregated in the 1970’s are compared with dropout rates in 1980 of all other districts
within each of these thirty strata, conditional on various characteristics. Estimates of full-
sample coefficients are averages of the thirty coefficients weighted by the number of
treatment observations in the stratum.26                     Matching estimates yield slightly smaller
negative estimates of desegregation plans on black dropout rates.
            Given that specifications that control for lagged dropout rates produce less
negative estimates and that 1970 dropout rates are higher in districts that desegregated in
the 1970’s, it is possible that mean reversion can account for some of the difference-in-
differences treatment effects. However, it is not clear that the estimators that control for
1970 dropout rates are more appropriate than the difference-in-differences estimator. If
the timing of desegregation is selected on fixed characteristics, estimates that control for
lagged outcomes will be biased in the direction of the permanent difference in dropout
rates. Since dropout rates of districts that would desegregate in the 1970’s are higher in
1970 than those of other school districts, estimates that control for dropout rates in 1970
will be biased positively. The claim is explained more rigorously in Appendix 1, but the
implication is that under certain assumptions the lagged outcome and difference-in-
differences estimators provide an upper and lower bound of the causal effect of
desegregation plans on dropout rates. In particular, it is shown that if treatment is
selected either on fixed (permanent) characteristics or on lagged outcomes then these two
estimates will bracket the true value of the coefficient of interest—in this case the effect
of desegregation on dropout rates.
            An alternative view of the fixed effect model is that it is a version of the lagged
dependent variable model with the coefficient on the lagged dropout rate fixed at unity.
The argument above claims that if either model is misspecified, the estimate of the effect

26
     See Angrist and Lavy (1998) or Acemoglu and Angrist (1998) for an explanation of this estimator.



                                                           22
of lagged dropout rates on current dropout rates will be inconsistent. Another way to
state the argument is that if the fixed effects model is estimated when the lagged
dependent variable model is the correct one, setting the coefficient on the lagged dropout
rate at unity is incorrect. And, if the lagged dependent variable model is specified when
the fixed effect model is correct, the coefficient on the lagged dropout rate should be
unity, but it is not estimated to be unity.
        The coefficient on the lagged dropout rate is inconsistently estimated because the
estimation compares the overlapping tails of two distributions. The district drawn from
the distribution with the higher mean will on average revert to a higher outcome in the
second period. Thus, unconditional on the distribution from which the district dropout
rate was drawn—whether the district desegregated in the 1970’s—the 1970 dropout rate
does not predict the 1980 dropout rate with a coefficient of unity. In fact, some of the
fixed difference between the dropout rates of the districts that desegregated in the 1970’s
and all other districts will be attributed to desegregation.
        In reality, the true model for the determination of the timing of desegregation is
probably somewhere between the lagged dropout rate model and the fixed effect model.
As the discussion from Section 2 of the role of legal precedence illustrates, the timing of
desegregation was the result of a complex process played out principally in the courts.
Private civil rights groups played a major role in initiating legal challenges, which
eventually led to the court orders that would effectuate desegregation. Concerns of the
importance of legal precedence ensured that any agent of social change did not
concentrate solely on the private benefits to the students in a school district when
choosing a location for a legal challenge. The likelihood of legal victory—based on
idiosyncratic characteristics of school districts—surely played a significant role in the
determination of where to bring suit first. As a result, the timing of desegregation was
based at least in part on idiosyncratic characteristics of school districts—most notably
whether evidence of the intent to segregate was readily available. Thus, the true model of
the timing of desegregation should consider both recent dropout rates and permanent
school district characteristics.
        The econometric argument above suggests that the two estimates bracket the true
effect of desegregation. Thus, specifications that assume some mix of the two models



                                              23
should yield estimates between those upper and lower bounds. One way to test this
prediction is to estimate a specification that is implied by the discussion of the role of
legal precedence—a partially differenced equation that constrains the effect of the lagged
dropout rate to be various values ranging from 0 to 1.
        Consider the econometric specification for the lagged dependent model that is
expressed in equation (8). Table X presents estimates of this equation that constrain γ to
be various values ranging from 0 to 1. When γ is held at unity, the model is essentially
the same as the fixed-effect model. The fixed-effect specification corresponds to a model
in which the timing of desegregation is determined solely by permanent school district
characteristics.   This model is realistic in a world where precedence is extremely
important. When γ is held closer to zero, the model estimated is closer to the lagged
dependent variable model. The lagged dropout model specification corresponds to a
model in which the timing of desegregation is determined linearly by recent dropout
rates. This model is realistic in a world where precedence is unimportant.
        The estimates in Table X follow the pattern predicted by the bracketing argument.
Estimates change monotonically from about one percentage point to about three
percentage points as γ moves from zero to unity. If the timing of desegregation is
dependent on a mix of recent dropout rates and permanent school district characteristics,
then it seems that the causal effect of desegregation on black high school dropout rates
falls somewhere between a one percentage point decline and a three percentage point
decline.


5.6. The Effect of Desegregation Plans’ Characteristics


        While the ultimate goal of every desegregation plan was at some level the same,
the methods each employed varied. Some plans redrew attendance zone boundaries in
the district. Others assigned all children to the school closest to their home. Still others
created schools, called magnets, that specialized in certain disciplines to attract students.
More can be learned about the way desegregation plans affected black educational
outcomes by examining differential effects of different plans.




                                             24
       An important distinguishing characteristic of a desegregation plan is whether it
allows students any choice about which school to attend. Table XI presents difference-
in-differences estimates from models that allow the effect of a desegregation plan to vary
by whether the plan allowed choice. The results suggest that plans that assigned students
to schools were associated with a larger decline in the dropout rates of blacks than plans
that allowed choice.


5.7. Estimated Effects for Whites


        There is reasonably consistent evidence that desegregation plans led to
significant declines in high school dropout rates of blacks.        The analysis thus far
presumes that changes in unobservable characteristics of districts were not different in the
districts that desegregated in the 1970’s. One way to check this assumption is to perform
the same analysis on whites. Additionally, the effect of desegregation plans on white
dropout rates is interesting in its own right. Just as black students are placed in schools
with white students, white students are placed in schools with black students. Just as
black students are assigned to better schools, white students are assigned to worse
schools.
       Estimates of the standard specifications for high-school-aged whites are reported
in Table XII. Whereas blacks experienced a decline in dropout rates as a result of
desegregation plans, there did not seem to be any similar effect on whites. Estimated
effects of desegregation plans on white dropout rates are all positive but insignificantly
different from zero. Standard errors of the estimated effects are fairly small, but point
estimates are too small to distinguish from zero.
       As mentioned earlier, one might worry that desegregation-induced migration out
of districts would bias the estimates. In fact, if desegregation caused white families with
good students to leave the district then dropout rates among the remaining high-school-
aged whites would be higher. Remember, however, that districts as defined in the
analysis are larger in physical area than school districts. They include the suburban areas
to which whites likely moved to avoid desegregation.          So, white migration is not
necessarily a large problem for the analysis.       Indeed, examination of the effect of



                                            25
desegregation plans on the population of high-school-aged whites in the district shows no
evidence of desegregation-induced migration from districts as defined in this analysis.
       The results for whites have two important implications. First, they lend credence
to the results for blacks. If the results for whites had suggested that desegregation plans
led to a decline in dropout rates of whites, one might think that district-specific trends in
unobservables were driving the decline in black dropout rates. Second, it seems that
desegregation plans did not have large effects on white dropout rates. Since black
students are in the minority even in large school districts, whites should have, on average,
experienced smaller changes in their set of peers and in the quality of schools they
attended. Thus, it is not surprising that the effects of desegregation were smaller in
magnitude on whites than on blacks. However, using the median point estimates from
the standard specifications for blacks and whites, the analysis suggests that overall
dropout rates declined as a result of desegregation plans.




                            6. School Quality or Peer Effects?


       Given the apparent negative impact of desegregation on black dropout rates, a
natural question is whether the improvement in black educational outcomes was a result
of improved school quality or of interactions between blacks and whites. As mentioned
in the introduction, the net effect of desegregation plans is interesting on its own, but
desegregation also provides an opportunity to study the existence of human capital
spillovers in schools and the effectiveness of school quality. In light of data limitations,
however, it is not a simple task to identify each effect separately.
       If school-level data on peers and resources were available, finer measures of the
timing of desegregation plans could be used to identify peer and school quality effects on
educational outcomes. Information that is available provides evidence that at least some
of the effect of desegregation plans worked through their effect on the composition of
students’ peers in school. Data collected by the U.S. Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare (HEW) in 1970 provide school-level full-time teacher and student
enrollment counts by race for the largest school districts in the nation. With this data the



                                              26
pupil-teacher ratio and the proportion of black students and teachers in each school can
be computed.
       One might suspect that in segregated school districts black students attended
schools with higher pupil-teacher ratios.         Coleman (1966) shows that, perhaps
surprisingly, there were few large observable differences between the schools that black
and white children attended in the mid-1960’s. His findings are consistent with those of
Card and Krueger (1992) who show that the convergence in observable school quality
began well before the Brown decision in 1954, and that by the mid-1960’s the schools
that black and white students attended were observationally almost indistinguishable.
       Indeed, the HEW data from 1970 suggest that, in districts that would desegregate
in the ensuing decade, blacks did not attend schools with higher pupil-teacher ratios. If
anything, schools that had proportionally more black students had lower pupil-teacher
ratios. As seen in Table XIII, the average pupil-teacher ratio in schools with more than
75 percent black students was 26.7 while the average pupil-teacher ratio in schools with
less than 25 percent black students was 27.9. The data do not seem to be consistent with
the view that predominantly black schools had larger pupil-teacher ratios.
       One observable dimension along which predominantly black and white schools
did differ in 1970 was the characteristics of teachers. In school districts that were to
desegregate in the next decade, predominantly black schools were much more likely to
have black teachers. In schools with a more than 75-percent-black student body 56.5
percent of teachers were black. In schools with a less than 25-percent-black student body
7.9 percent of teachers were black. This relationship is striking. A regression of the
fraction of black teachers in a school on the fraction of black students in a school yields a
coefficient of 0.53 with a standard error of less than 0.01. This slope indicates that a 10
percentage point increase in the fraction of black students in a school was associated with
a 5.3 percentage point increase in the fraction of black teachers in the school. What is
also striking is that the relationship holds within school districts. Estimation of the same
model including fixed school district effects shows that a 10 percentage point increase in
the fraction of black students in a school was associated with a 4.5 percentage point
increase in the fraction of black teachers in the school.




                                             27
         That black students in segregated school districts were more likely to be taught by
black teachers is of interest for two reasons. First, black teachers may have had more or
less education and experience than white teachers. Second, conditional on the skill level
of the teacher his race may have an effect on his students. What evidence exists suggests
that the latter effect is likely to be that a black teacher has a positive effect on black
students.27 Since desegregation likely caused black students to be less likely to be taught
by black teachers, this effect cannot explain the decline in black dropout rates attributed
                                  28
to desegregation plans.                As for the former point, a comparison of black and white
teachers in the March 1970 Current Population Survey (CPS), presented in Table XIV,
shows that black teachers on average had 2.5 fewer years of potential experience and 1.5
fewer years of education.29 What does this imply about the effect of desegregation on the
average experience and education level of the typical black student’s teacher?
         Some simple notation will make the relevant calculation more clear. Let EB and
EW be the population average level of education or experience of black and white
teachers, respectively. Also, let NBs denote the enrollment of black students at school s
and let τBs denote the fraction of black teachers at school s. The fraction of black teachers
at the typical black student’s school is


                             åN τ      Bs    Bs
                              s
                                                  ≡τB.
                             åN    s
                                            Bs



In segregated school districts the average education (or experience) level of the typical
black student’s teacher is


                             QS = τ B E B + (1 − τ B ) EW
assuming all teachers are either black or white. If school districts are fully integrated
then the typical black student’s teacher would have

27
   See Ehrenberg and Brewer (1994). Coleman (1966) finds little effect of the proportion of white teachers on
the test scores of students.
28
   Freeman (1977) claims that desegregation led to a decline in demand for black teachers, but that a coincidental
increase in black voting power offset this decline such that the relative employment of blacks in teaching
remained stable.




                                                         28
                            QI = τ P E B + (1 − τ P ) EW

years of education (or experience), where τP denotes the fraction of teachers in the
population who are black. Using data from the 1970 census and from the 1970 HEW
enrollment survey, I can calculate QI – QS as an estimate of the effect of desegregation on
the education (or experience) level of the typical black student’s teacher.
         As measured in the census, the average education levels of white and black
teachers in 1970 were 15.9 and 15.6 years respectively. Similarly, white and black
teachers in 1970 respectively had 16.4 and 15.5 years of potential experience. In school
districts that would desegregate in the 1970’s, the typical black student went to a school
with 80 percent black teachers, while 29 percent of teachers in the population were black.
These estimates imply that in these segregated school districts the typical black student
was taught by teachers with 15.7 years of education and 15.7 years of experience. The
estimates also imply that if these school districts were fully integrated the typical black
student would be taught by teachers with 15.8 years of education and 16.1 years of
experience.
         Desegregation could have at most increased the educational attainment by 0.1
years and the experience level by 0.4 years of the typical black student’s teacher. If these
changes in the quality of schools that black students attended were to explain the decline
in black dropout rates due to desegregation the combined elasticity of dropout rates with
respect to teachers’ education and experience levels would have to be near –9.
         It seems reasonable to assume that changes in the characteristics of black
students’ teachers cannot explain the decline in black dropout rates in school districts that
desegregated in the 1970’s. The evidence suggests that pupil-teacher ratios were not
larger in predominantly black schools. Similarly, previous work has shown that there
were no marked differences in the term length and teacher salaries at schools that blacks
and whites attended by the mid-1960’s. Desegregation may have led to an improvement
along other dimensions of the quality of schools that blacks attended.                            One might
consider a student’s peers one of those dimensions.

29
  The same relationship is true amongst teachers who lived in the SMSA’s in which the school districts that
desegregated in the 1970’s are located.


                                                      29
        Did the effect of desegregation plans on black dropout rates work through the
plans’ effect on the peer composition or the quality of the schools blacks attended? It
seems that peer effects played at least some role. It may seem surprising that sitting in
class next to a white student would induce a black student to finish high school. Race is a
powerful proxy for socioeconomic status, however. It seems less surprising that a child
whose parents are high school dropouts is more likely to stay in school because he
attends school with children whose parents are high school graduates. This argument
suggests that socioeconomic integration regardless of race may be at least as important as
racial integration.




                                      7. Conclusions


        Despite desegregation’s prominent role in post-World War II education policy,
few economists have studied its impact on the educational outcomes of the affected
students. Comparisons of the educational attainment of black students from segregated
and integrated school systems confound the effect of desegregation with the determinants
of desegregation itself. The analysis in this paper has exploited variation in the timing of
desegregation plans to identify the effect of these plans on the high school dropout rates
of blacks. Specifically, the change in black dropout rates from 1970 to 1980 in districts
that desegregated in the interim is compared to the change in black dropout rates in
districts that desegregated in the 1960’s and the early 1980’s. Using data from the 1970
and 1980 censuses, estimates control for time-varying region effects and for changes in
family income across districts.
        The results suggest that desegregation plans led to a one to three percentage point
decline in the dropout rates of blacks, and that desegregation had little or no effect on the
dropout rates of whites. Estimates from models that control for lagged dropout rates
indicate that mean reversion may account for some of the apparent decline in dropout
rates attributed to desegregation. It is shown, however, that under certain reasonable
assumptions, the difference-in-differences and lagged dropout rate specifications should
provide estimates that bracket the causal effect of desegregation on dropout rates.



                                             30
         The choice of econometric specification is largely dependent on the mechanism
that determined the timing of desegregation. Most desegregation plans came as a result
of court orders in legal proceedings brought by private civil rights groups. A simple
model of legal precedence points out that these national organizations did not just
consider the local benefits that would accrue to students when choosing where to bring a
legal challenge. In addition, these civil rights organizations paid close attention to the
likelihood that a legal challenge would result in victory. They tried hard to avoid cases
that were likely to result in legal failure early on, even if the potential local benefit was
large. Thus, the timing of desegregation was a function both of recent black dropout
rates—a signal of the potential local benefit of desegregation—and of permanent district
characteristics—signals of the likelihood of a legal victory.
         Specifications that assume that the timing of desegregation was determined by a
mix of lagged dropout rates and permanent district characteristics imply that
desegregation led to a decline in black dropout rates between 1 and 3 percentage points in
magnitude. A similar analysis shows not evidence that desegregation had any effect on
white dropout rates.
         Desegregation also provides an opportunity to study the effect of peers and school
quality on the educational outcomes of students. The production function of a school has
long been of interest to economists. Under most circumstances, the peers and quality of
resources at a child’s school are subject to his or his parents’ choice. Subsequently, the
estimation of peer and school quality effects is difficult in practice. Desegregation plans
took away the ability to choose a child’s peers and school resources. Accordingly,
desegregation allows for estimation of the net effect of these two characteristics of
schools. Data limitations make separate estimation of peer and school quality effects
difficult, although examination of the conditions in segregated schools in 1970 suggests
that peer effects had some role in the decline in dropout rates attributed to desegregation
plans.
         Further investigation of the mechanisms by which desegregation plans affected
the educational outcomes of black students is clearly warranted. Other natural avenues
for future work include an examination of the effect of desegregation plans on wages
later in life, and an analysis of the termination of desegregation plans.



                                              31
                                         References

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist, “Consequences of Employment Protection? The Case of
      the Americans with Disabilities Act,” NBER Working Paper No. 6670 (July 1998).

Angrist, Joshua D. and Victor Lavy, “Does Teacher Training Affect Pupil Learning? Evidence
        from Matched Comparisons in Jerusalem Public Schools,” NBER Working Paper No.
        6781 (November 1998).

Angrist, Joshua D. and Victor Lavy, “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class
        Size on Scholastic Achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (May 1999) pp. 533-
        575.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics,” MIT
        Department of Economics Working Paper (October 1998).

Armor, David J., Forced Justice: School Desegregation and the Law, Oxford University Press
       (New York: 1995).

Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to Estimate
       the Effect of Training Programs,” Review of Economics and Statistics (November 1985)
       pp. 648-660.

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy, “The Division of Labor, Coordination Costs, and
       Knowledge,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (November 1992) pp. 1137-1160.

Benabou, Roland, “Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production,” Quarterly Journal
      of Economics (August 1993) pp. 619-652.

Boozer, Michael A., Alan B. Krueger, and Shari Wolkon, “Race and School Quality Since Brown
       v. Board of Education,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics,
       Martin N. Bailey and Clifford Winston, Eds. (1992) pp. 269-326.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct
       Assessment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (February 1992) pp. 151-200.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, “School Resources and Student Outcomes: An Overview of
       the Literature and New Evidence from North and South Carolina,” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives (Fall 1996) pp. 31-50.

Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and
       Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths,” NBER Working Paper No. 3705 (May 1991).

Coleman, James S., Equality of Educational Opportunity, U. S. Department of Health, Education,
      and Welfare (Washington D. C.: 1966).

Coleman, James S., “Trends in School Segregation, 1968-1973,” The Urban Institute
      (Washington, D.C.: August 1975).



                                              32
Clotfelter, Charles T., “Are Whites Still Fleeing? Racial Patterns and Enrollment Shifts in
        Urban Public Schools, 1987-1996,” NBER Working Paper No. 7290 (August 1999).

Clotfelter, Charles T., “Public School Segregation in Metropolitan Areas,” NBER Working Paper
        No. 6779 (November 1998).

Crain, Robert and Rita Mahard, “The Effect of Research Methodology of Desegregation-
       Achievement Studies: A Meta-Analysis,” American Journal of Sociology (Vol. 88 No. 5,
       1983) pp. 839-854.

Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser, “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics (August 1997) pp. 827-872.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Dominic J. Brewer, “Do School and Teacher Characteristics Matter?
       Evidence from High School and Beyond,” Economics of Education Review (Vol. 13 No.
       1, 1994) pp. 1-17.

Epple, Dennis and Richard E. Romano, “Competition Between Private and Public Schools,
        Vouchers, and Peer-Group Effects,” American Economic Review (March 1998) pp. 33-
        62.

Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates and Robert M. Schwab, “Measuring Peer Group Effects: A
       Study of Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy (October 1992) pp. 966-991.

Fancher, Betsy, “Voices From the South: Black Students Talk About Their Experiences in
       Desegregated Schools,” Southern Regional Council (August 1970).

Finch, Minnie, The NAACP: Its Fight for Justice, The Scarecrow Press, Inc. (Metuchen, N.J.:
        1981).

Hanushek, Eric A., “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public Schools,”
      Journal of Economic Literature (September 1986) pp. 1141-1177.

Heckman, James J., Robert J. LaLonde, and Jeffrey A. Smith, “The Economics and Econometrics
      of Active Labor Market Programs,” Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, Orley
      Ashenfelter and David Card Eds. (Amsterdam: 1999).

Heckman James, Anne Layne-Farrar and Petra Todd, “Does Measured School Quality Really
      Matter? An Examination of the Earnings-Quality Relationship,” Does Money Matter?
      The Effect of School Resources on Student Achievement and Adult Success, Gary
      Burtless, Ed., Brookings Institution Press (Washington, D.C.: 1996) pp. 192-289.

Hill, Roscoe and Malcom Feeley, Eds., Affirmative School Integration, Sage Publications
        (Beverly Hills, CA: 1968).

Hoxby, Caroline, “The Effects of Class Size and Composition on Student Achievement: New
       Evidence from Natural Population Variation,” mimeo (July 1996).

Imbens, Guido, Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Nada Eissa, “The Econometrics of Difference in
       Differences,” mimeo (January 1997).



                                              33
Jones, Leon, From Brown to Boston: Desegregation in Education, 1954-1974: Vols. I & II, The
        Scarecrow Press (Metuchen, N. J.: 1979).

Keynes, Edward and Randall K. Miller, The Court vs. Congress: Prayer, Busing, and Abortion,
       Duke University Press (Durham, NC: 1989).

Krueger, Alan B., “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics (May 1999) pp. 497-532.

Manski, Charles F. “Academic Ability, Earnings, and the Decision to Become a Teacher:
       Evidence from the National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972,”
       Public Sector Payrolls, David A. Wise Ed. (1987).

Margo, Robert A., Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950, University of Chicago Press
       (Chicago: 1990).

Miller, LaMar P. Ed., Brown Plus Thirty: Perspectives on Desegregation, Metropolitan Center
        for Educational Research, Development and Training, (New York: 1986).

Orfield, Gary, Must We Bus? Segregated Schools and National Policy, The Brookings Institution
        (Washington, D. C.: 1978).

Orfield, Gary, Public School Desegregation in the United States, 1968-1980, Joint Center for
        Political Studies (Washington, D. C.: 1983).

Orfield, Gary and Susan Eaton, Dismantling Desegregation: The Quiet Reversal of Brown v.
        Board of Education, The New Press (New York: 1996).

Peltzman, Sam, “The Political Economy of the Decline of American Public Education,” Journal
       of Law and Economics (April 1993) pp. 331-370.

Peltzman, Sam, “Political Economy of Public Education: Non-College-Bound Students,” Journal
       of Law and Economics (April 1996) pp. 73-120.

Rodgers, Harrell R., Jr. and Charles S. Bullock, III, Law and Social Change: Civil Rights Laws
       and Their Consequences, McGraw-Hill Book Company (New York: 1972).

Rossell, Christine and David Armor, “The Effectiveness of School Desegregation Plans, 1968-
        1991,” American Politics Quarterly (July 1996) pp. 267-302.

U. S. Bureau of the Census, Public Use Samples of Basic Records From the 1970 Census:
        Description and Technical Documentation (Washington, D. C.: 1972).

U. S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Population and Housing, 1980 (United States): Public Use
        Microdata Samples Technical Documentation (Washington, D. C.: 1983).

U. S. Commission on Civil Rights, “Racial Isolation in the Public Schools,” (1967).

U. S. Commission on Civil Rights, “Southern School Desegregation, 1966-67,” (July 1967).




                                               34
U. S. Commission on Civil Rights, “School Desegregation: The Courts and Suburban Migration,”
        (December 1975).

U. S. Commission on Civil Rights, “Fulfilling the Letter and Spirit of the Law: Desegregation of
        the Nation’s Public Schools,” (August 1976).

U. S. Commission on Civil Rights, “Desegregation of the Nation’s Public Schools: A Status
        Report,” (February 1979).

U. S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Office for Civil Rights, Directory of Public
        Elementary and Secondary Schools in Selected Districts; Enrollment and Staff by
        Racial/Ethnic Group (Fall 1970).

Welch, Finis and Audrey Light, “New Evidence on School Desegregation,” U. S. Commission on
       Civil Rights Clearinghouse Publication 92 (June 1987).

Wilder, Margaret G., “Black Assimilation in the Urban Environment; The Impact of Migration
        and Mobility,” R & E Research Associates, Inc. (Palo Alto, CA: 1979).

Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen, “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political
        Economy (October 1979) pp. S7-S36.




                                               35
                               FIGURE I: FRACTION OF 15-18-YEAR OLDS NOT ENROLLED IN SCHOOL, BY RACE


 0.16



 0.14



 0.12



   0.1



 0.08



 0.06
                                                                                                                                                White
                                                                                                                                                Black
 0.04



 0.02



     0
           69     70      71     72      73     74      75      76     77      78     79      80     81      82     83      84     85      86      87     88      89




Note: Figure shows the fraction of 15-17 year olds not enrolled in school and 18-year-olds not enrolled in school and not high school graduates. Data are from the October
Current Population Survey. Each data point represents the midpoint of a three-year moving average.
TABLE I: LIST OF SCHOOL DISTRICTS IN THE SAMPLE

                                                                                    Grade of Desegregation
                                                              Year of                                                Treatment or
School District                                            Desegregation              1970            1980             Control
NEW ORLEANS PARISH                               LA            1961                   Elem           Before            Control
NEWARK                                           NJ             1961                  Elem           Before             Control
HARFORD COUNTY                                   MD             1965                  JHS            Before             Control
OAKLAND                                          CA             1966                   HS            Before             Control
HARTFORD                                         CT             1966                   HS            Before             Control
GRAND RAPIDS                                     MI             1968                   HS             Elem              Control
TACOMA                                           WA             1968                   HS             Elem              Control
RICHMOND                                         CA             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
BREVARD COUNTY                                   FL             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
LEE COUNTY                                       FL             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
PINELLAS COUNTY                                  FL             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
POLK COUNTY                                      FL             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
VOLUSIA COUNTY                                   FL             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
CADDO PARISH                                     LA             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
CALCASIEU PARISH                                 LA             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
RAPIDES PARISH                                   LA             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
TERREBONNE PARISH                                LA             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
CUMBERLAND COUNTY                                NC             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
NEW HANOVER COUNTY                               NC             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
SAN ANTONIO                                      TX             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
PITTSYLVANIA COUNTY                              VA             1969                   HS             Elem              Control
BIRMINGHAM                                       AL             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
PASADENA                                         CA             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
STAMFORD                                         CT             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
BROWARD COUNTY                                   FL             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
DADE COUNTY                                      FL             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
PALM BEACH COUNTY                                FL             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
EAST BATON ROUGE PARISH                          LA             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
ROCHESTER                                        NY             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
GASTON COUNTY                                    NC             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
MECKLENBURG COUNTY                               NC             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
CHARLESTON COUNTY                                SC             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
GREENVILLE COUNTY                                SC             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
RICHLAND COUNTY                                  SC             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
HOUSTON                                          TX             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
NORFOLK                                          VA             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
ROANOKE                                          VA             1970                  After           Elem             Treatment
JEFFERSON COUNTY                                 AL             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
MOBILE                                           AL             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
LITTLE ROCK                                      AK             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
SAN FRANCISCO                                    CA             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
Note: Table lists school districts in the Welch and Light (1987) study, which are also the districts used in this study. Districts are chosen
based on the following criteria, as described in Welch and Light (1987). Every district with 50,000 or more students in 1968 and 20 to 90
percent minority representation are included. Districts with 15,000 or more students in 1968 and ten to 90 percent minority representation
were chosen with sampling probabilities proportional to their size and regional representation. The remaining districts—those with fewer
than 15,000 students in 1968, less than ten percent minority representation—were excluded from the sample.
           Grade of Desegregation columns identify the grade a 17-year-old in 1970 (1980) was in when the school district desegregated.
           Year of Desegregation column reports the year the district’s major desegregation plan was implemented according to Welch and
Light (1987).
TABLE I (CONT.)

                                                                                    Grade of Desegregation
                                                              Year of                                                Treatment or
School District                                            Desegregation              1970            1980             Control
DUVAL COUNTY                                     FL            1971                   After           Elem            Treatment
HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY                              FL             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
MUSCOGEE COUNTY                                  GA             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
FORT WAYNE                                       IN             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
WICHITA                                          KS             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
JEFFERSON PARISH                                 LA             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
TULSA                                            OK             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
NASHVILLE                                        TN             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
DALLAS                                           TX             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
ARLINGTON COUNTY                                 VA             1971                  After           Elem             Treatment
ORANGE COUNTY                                    FL             1972                  After           Elem             Treatment
FAYETTE COUNTY                                   KY             1972                  After           Elem             Treatment
LANSING                                          MI             1972                  After           Elem             Treatment
CLARK COUNTY                                     NV             1972                  After           Elem             Treatment
OKLAHOMA CITY                                    OK             1972                  After           Elem             Treatment
AMARILLO                                         TX             1972                  After           Elem             Treatment
ATLANTA                                          GA             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
ROCKFORD                                         IL             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
INDIANAPOLIS                                     IN             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
PRINCE GEORGE'S COUNTY                           MD             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
CINCINNATI                                       OH             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
LAWTON                                           OK             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
MEMPHIS                                          TN             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
FORT WORTH                                        TX            1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
WACO                                             TX             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
RALEIGH COUNTY                                   WV             1973                  After           JHS              Treatment
DENVER                                           CO             1974                  After           JHS              Treatment
BALTIMORE                                        MD             1974                  After           JHS              Treatment
BOSTON                                           MA             1974                  After           JHS              Treatment
SPRINGFIELD                                      MA             1974                  After           JHS              Treatment
MINNEAPOLIS                                      MN             1974                  After           JHS              Treatment
PORTLAND                                         OR             1974                  After           JHS              Treatment
JEFFERSON COUNTY                                 KY             1975                  After           JHS              Treatment
DETROIT                                          MI             1975                  After           JHS              Treatment
SACRAMENTO                                       CA             1976                  After            HS              Treatment
NEW BEDFORD                                      MA             1976                  After            HS              Treatment
OMAHA                                            NB             1976                  After            HS              Treatment
JERSEY CITY                                      NJ             1976                  After            HS              Treatment
DAYTON                                           OH             1976                  After            HS              Treatment
MILWAUKEE                                        WI             1976                  After            HS              Treatment
Note: Table lists school districts in the Welch and Light (1987) study, which are also the districts used in this study. Districts are chosen
based on the following criteria, as described in Welch and Light (1987). Every district with 50,000 or more students in 1968 and 20 to 90
percent minority representation are included. Districts with 15,000 or more students in 1968 and ten to 90 percent minority representation
were chosen with sampling probabilities proportional to their size and regional representation. The remaining districts—those with fewer
than 15,000 students in 1968, less than ten percent minority representation—were excluded from the sample.
           Grade of Desegregation columns identify the grade a 17-year-old in 1970 (1980) was in when the school district desegregated.
           Year of Desegregation column reports the year the district’s major desegregation plan was implemented according to Welch and
Light (1987).




                                                                  38
TABLE I (CONT.)

                                                                                    Grade of Desegregation
                                                              Year of                                                Treatment or
School District                                            Desegregation              1970            1980             Control
SAN DIEGO                                        CA            1977                   After            HS             Treatment
KANSAS CITY                                      KS             1977                  After            HS              Treatment
KANSAS CITY                                      MO             1977                  After            HS              Treatment
AKRON                                            OH             1977                  After            HS              Treatment
FRESNO                                           CA             1978                  After            HS              Treatment
LOS ANGELES                                      CA             1978                  After            HS              Treatment
SAN BERNARDINO                                   CA             1978                  After            HS              Treatment
NEW CASTLE COUNTY                                DE             1978                  After            HS              Treatment
PHILADELPHIA                                     PA             1978                  After            HS              Treatment
EL PASO                                          TX             1978                  After            HS              Treatment
LUBBOCK                                          TX             1978                  After            HS              Treatment
SEATTLE                                          WA             1978                  After            HS              Treatment
TUCSON                                           AZ             1979                  After            HS              Treatment
CLEVELAND                                        OH             1979                  After            HS              Treatment
COLUMBUS                                         OH             1979                  After            HS              Treatment
LONG BEACH                                       CA             1980                  After           After             Control
DOUGHERTY COUNTY                                 GA             1980                  After           After             Control
ST. LOUIS                                        MO             1980                  After           After             Control
BUFFALO                                          NY             1980                  After           After             Control
TOLEDO                                           OH             1980                  After           After             Control
PITTSBURGH                                       PA             1980                  After           After             Control
AUSTIN                                           TX             1980                  After           After             Control
SAN JOSE                                         CA             1981                  After           After             Control
SOUTH BEND                                       IN             1981                  After           After             Control
CHICAGO                                          IL             1982                  After           After             Control
ECTOR COUNTY                                     TX             1982                  After           After             Control
MESA                                             AZ             None
MODESTO                                          CA             None
VALLEJO                                          CA             None
PUEBLO                                           CO             None
GARY                                             IN             None
SAGINAW                                          MI             None
ALBUQUERQUE                                      NM             None
LAS CRUCES                                       NM             None
NEW YORK                                         NY             None
LORAIN                                           OH             None
Note: Table lists school districts in the Welch and Light (1987) study, which are also the districts used in this study. Districts are chosen
based on the following criteria, as described in Welch and Light (1987). Every district with 50,000 or more students in 1968 and 20 to 90
percent minority representation are included. Districts with 15,000 or more students in 1968 and ten to 90 percent minority representation
were chosen with sampling probabilities proportional to their size and regional representation. The remaining districts—those with fewer
than 15,000 students in 1968, less than ten percent minority representation—were excluded from the sample.
           Grade of Desegregation columns identify the grade a 17-year-old in 1970 (1980) was in when the school district desegregated.
           Year of Desegregation column reports the year the district’s major desegregation plan was implemented according to Welch and
Light (1987).




                                                                  39
TABLE II: MEANS OF SELECTED VARIABLES BY TREATMENT-CONTROL STATUS
                                                                        1970                                             1980
 Variables                         Full Sample             Full      Desegregated       Control             Full       Desegregated      Control
                                                                      1970-1979                                         1970-1979

 Dropout                               .120                .135           .143           .116              .110             .107           .118
                                      (.325)              (.342)         (.351)         (.321)            (.313)           (.309)         (.323)

 Female                                .50                  .50            .50            .50               .50              .50            .51
                                      (.50)                (.50)          (.50)          (.50)             (.50)            (.50)          (.50)

 Age 16                                .33                  .32            .33            .31               .33              .33            .33
                                      (.47)                (.47)          (.47)          (.46)             (.47)            (.47)          (.47)

 Age 17                                .32                  .32            .32            .24               .33              .33            .34
                                      (.47)                (.46)          (.47)          (.43)             (.47)            (.47)          (.47)

 Northeast                             .11                  .12            .10            .17               .11              .09            .16
                                      (.32)                (.33)          (.30)          (.37)             (.31)            (.28)          (.36)

 Midwest                               .29                  .31            .25            .44               .28              .22            .42
                                      (.45)                (.46)          (.43)          (.50)             (.45)            (.41)          (.49)

 South                                 .48                  .44            .50            .32               .50              .55            .36
                                      (.50)                (.50)          (.50)          (.47)             (.50)            (.50)          (.48)

 West                                  .11                  .11            .12            .08               .11              .13            .07
                                      (.31)                (.31)          (.33)          (.26)             (.32)            (.34)          (.26)

 Family Income                        13,218              7,815          7,870           7,695            16,924           17,117         16,439
                                     (11,598)            (5,621)        (5,703)         (5,435)          (13,090)         (13,087)       (13,087)

 Poverty                               171                 157            157             158               181             184            175
                                      (128)               (115)          (115)           (115)             (135)           (135)          (134)

 Year of Desegregation               1973.8              1973.8          1973.8         1973.8            1973.7          1973.6          1974.0
                                      (5.1)               (5.2)           (3.1)          (8.2)             (5.0)           (3.1)           (8.0)

 No. Obs.                            53,331               7,256          5,019           2,237            46,075          31,827          14,248
 (unweighted count)
Note: Data are weighted using population weights. Desegregated 1970-1979 group is 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old blacks who live in districts that
desegregated between 1970 and 1979. Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-old blacks in districts that desegregated between 1961
and 1982. Dropout is an indicator for not being enrolled in school. Poverty measures what percentage of the poverty line the individual’s
family income is.




                                                                       40
TABLE III: DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF DESEGREGATION ON DROPOUT RATES OF BLACKS
                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)

 Desegregated       -.038          -.035         -.035         -.034         -.030         -.030         -.028         -.021
 1970-1979          (.011)         (.011)        (.009)        (.005)        (.005)        (.005)        (.010)        (.007)
 *1980
 Desegregated        .027           .026          .023                                                    .044
 1970-1979          (.008)         (.008)        (.007)                                                  (.008)
 1980                .001          -.003         -.004         -.004          .014          .023          .008          .001
                    (.008)         (.008)        (.007)        (.003)        (.039)        (.038)        (.015)        (.010)
 Age 16                             .048          .048          .048          .048          .048          .048          .048
                                   (.004)        (.004)        (.004)        (.004)        (.004)        (.004)        (.004)
 Age 17                             .166          .166          .166          .162          .162          .162          .162
                                   (.006)        (.006)        (.006)        (.006)        (.006)        (.006)        (.006)
 Female                                                                       .011          .022          .011          .011
                                                                             (.004)        (.008)        (.004)        (.004)
 Female                                                                                    -.018
 *1980                                                                                     (.009)
 Poverty/103                                                                 -.198         -.025         -.196         -.194
                                                                             (.031)        (.048)        (.030)        (.030)
 Poverty/103                                                                               -.239
 *1980                                                                                     (.058)
 Family                                                                      -.028         -.038         -.031         -.033
 Income/106                                                                  (.028)        (.013)        (.028)        (.028)
 Family                                                                                     .042
 Income/106                                                                                (.013)
 *1980
 Northeast                                       -.060
                                                 (.030)
 Northeast                                                                   -.019         -.017
 *1980                                                                       (.039)        (.039)
 Midwest                                         -.059
                                                 (.030)
 Midwest                                                                     -.014         -.014
 *1980                                                                       (.039)        (.039)
 South                                           -.046
                                                 (.030)
 South                                                                       -.008         -.008
 *1980                                                                       (.038)        (.038)
 West                                            -.084
                                                 (.030)
 West                                                                        -.007         -.004
 *1980                                                                       (.040)        (.039)
 District             No            No            No            Yes           Yes           Yes            No           Yes
 Effects
 State                No            No            No            No            No             No           Yes           Yes
 Effects
 State *1980          No            No            No            No            No             No           Yes           Yes
 Effects
  R2                   .002         .048         .049           .056            .061           .062            .060          .064
 No. Obs.             53,331       53,331      53,331          53,331         52,416          52,416          52,416        52,416
Note: Data are weighted using population weights. Desegregated 1970-1979 group is 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old blacks who live in
districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1979. Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-old blacks in districts that
desegregated between 1961 and 1982. Standard error estimates are corrected for district*year correlation in the error term.




                                                                41
TABLE IV: MODELS RUN SEPARATELY BY REGION: DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF DESEGREGATION ON DROPOUT RATES OF BLACKS
                                Northeast                      Midwest                          West                              South                   Exclude South
                          (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)               (7)              (8)           (9)           (10)
  Desegregated            -.031         -.021           -.025          -.027            -.048          -.042             -.028             -.029         -.033         -.029
  1970-1979              (.026)        (.007)           (.012)        (.009)           (.024)          (.010)            (.015)           (.010)        (.015)        (.005)
  *1980
  Desegregated            .020                           .014                           .052                              .024                           .019
  1970-1979              (.018)                         (.008)                         (.015)                            (.011)                         (.011)


  1980                   -.013          .008             -.002         .019             .020            .003              .004             .012          -.001         .009
                         (.026)        (.020)           (.006)        (.013)           (.015)          (.013)            (.011)           (.011)        (.011)        (.010)

  Age 16                  .063          .064             .050          .050             .025            .026              .045             .045          .049          .050
                         (.010)        (.010)           (.007)        (.007)           (.006)          (.006)            (.006)           (.006)        (.005)        (.005)

  Age 17                  .182          .183             .172          .172             .122            .123              .158             .159          .164          .165
                         (.016)        (.016)           (.009)        (.010)           (.012)          (.012)            (.008)           (.008)        (.008)        (.008)

  Female                  .007          .022             .019          .028             .010            .004              .009             .027          .013          .017
                         (.007)        (.012)           (.009)        (.017)           (.009)          (.020)            (.006)           (.012)        (.006)        (.012)

  Female                                -.026                         -.015                             .011                              -.030                        -.007
  *1980                                (.015)                         (.019)                           (.020)                             (.013)                      (.012)

  Poverty/103            -.227         -.248             -.148         .015             -.130          -.083             -.268             .024          -.170         -.056
                         (.063)        (.117)           (.006)        (.046)           (.037)          (.097)            (.049)           (.116)        (.031)        (.047)

  Poverty/103                          -.038                           -.290                           -.046                               -.323                       -.179
  *1980                                (.136)                         (.059)                           (.100)                             (.133)                      (.058)

  Family                  .047          .193             -.035         -.284            -.031          -.218             -.010             -.743         -.018        -.190
  Income/105             (.060)        (.318)           (.046)        (.159)           (.035)          (.253)            (.047)           (.255)        (.031)        (.138)

  Family                               -.104                           .353                             .190                               .777                        .232
  Income/106                           (.326)                         (.161)                           (.256)                             (.261)                      (.140)
  *1980

  District Effects        No             Yes             No            Yes               No             Yes               No               Yes           No           Yes
  R2                     .063           .069            .059           .063             .046           .058              .052              .061         .057          .064
  No. Obs.               6,100          6,100          15,691         15,691            6,567          6,567            23, 885           23,885       28,531        28,531
 Note: Data are weighted using population weights. Desegregated 1970-1979 group is 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old blacks who live in districts that desegregated between 1970 and
 1979. Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-old blacks in districts that desegregated between 1961 and 1982. Standard error estimates are corrected for district*year
 correlation in the error term.




                                                                 42
TABLE V: SPECIFICATIONS WITH ALTERNATIVE CONTROL GROUPS: DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES ESTIMATES OF THE
EFFECT OF DESEGREGATION ON DROPOUT RATES OF BLACKS
                                   Control Desegregated                              Control Desegregated
                                        After 1980                                       Before 1970
                                 (1)                  (2)                          (3)                  (4)
 Desegregated                   -.039                -.032                        -.030                -.023
 1970-1979                     (.007)               (.007)                       (.005)               (.005)
 *1980
 1980                           .001                   .006                       -.008                  -.003
                               (.006)                 (.006)                     (.002)                 (.004)

 Age 16                         .046                   .045                       .048                   .047
                               (.005)                 (.004)                     (.005)                 (.004)

 Age 17                         .165                   .160                       .168                   .165
                               (.007)                 (.007)                     (.006)                 (.006)

 Female                                                .008                                              .013
                                                      (.004)                                            (.004)

 Poverty/103                                          -.198                                              -.200
                                                      (.034)                                            (.033)

 Family                                               -.026                                              -.028
 Income/106                                           (.031)                                            (.030)

 District Effects              Yes                    Yes                         Yes                    Yes
 R2                            .057                   .065                        .057                   .063
 No. Obs.                     44,694                 43,888                      45,843                 44,684
Note: Data are weighted using population weights. Desegregated 1970-1979 group is 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old
blacks who live in districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1979. Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-
old blacks in districts that desegregated between 1961 and 1982. In Columns 1 and 2, the Control group is 15-, 16,
and 17-year-old blacks in districts that desegregated after the Treatment districts (after 1979). In Columns 3 and 4,
the Control group is 15-, 16, and 17-year-old blacks in districts that desegregated before the Treatment districts
(before 1970). Standard error estimates are corrected for district*year correlation in the error term.




                                                               43
TABLE VI: DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF
DESEGREGATION ON MIGRATION
                          (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)

 Desegregated           -.003              -.004             -.005              -.005
 1970-1979              (.016)             (.012)            (.006)             (.005)
 *1980
 Desegregated            .012               .006
 1970-1979              (.013)             (.010)

 1980                   -.029              -.030             -.022              -.017
                        (.014)             (.010)            (.005)             (.070)

 Age 16                                     .008              .007               .007
                                           (.003)            (.003)             (.003)

 Age 17                                     .004             -.001              -.001
                                           (.003)            (.003)             (.003)

 Female                                                       .003               .003
                                                             (.003)             (.003)

 Poverty/103                                                  .020               .017
                                                             (.029)             (.029)

 Family                                                      -.055              -.051
 Income/106                                                  (.030)             (.030)

 Northeast                                 -.000
                                           (.020)

 Northeast                                                                      -.007
 *1980                                                                          (.070)

 Midwest                                   -.004
                                           (.019)

 Midwest                                                                        -.005
 *1980                                                                          (.069)

 South                                      .014
                                           (.019)

 South                                                                           .002
 *1980                                                                          (.069)

 West                                       .045
                                           (.022)

 West                                                                           -.030
 *1980                                                                          (.070)

 District                 No                No                Yes                Yes
 Effects
 R2                      .005              .010               .028              .028
 No. Obs.               53,331            53,331             52,416            52,416
Note: Data are weighted using population weights. Desegregated 1970-1979 group is 15-,
16-, and 17-year-old blacks who live in districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1979.
Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-old blacks in districts that desegregated
between 1961 and 1982. Standard error estimates are corrected for district*year correlation
in the error term.




                                           44
TABLE VII: DIFFERENCE –IN-DIFFERENCES ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF DESEGREGATION ON DROPOUT RATES CONTROLLING FOR MIGRATION

                                        Control For Moving                                        Use Residence in 1975 for 1980
                              (1)               (2)                 (3)                     (4)                (5)               (6)

  Desegregated              -.035              -.034               -.027                  -.045               -.048               -.039
  1970-1979                 (.011)             (.005)              (.005)                 (.015)              (.010)              (.009)
  *1980
  Desegregated               .025                                                          .025
  1970-1979                 (.008)                                                        (.008)

  1980                      -.001              -.002               -.002                   .018                .032                .039
                            (.008)             (.003)              (.004)                 (.012)              (.008)              (.007)

  Age 16                     .048               .048                .048                   .050                .052                .051
                            (.004)             (.004)              (.004)                 (.006)              (.006)              (.006)

  Age 17                     .165               .165                .162                   .174                .175                .170
                            (.006)             (.006)              (.006)                 (.008)              (.008)              (.008)

  Moved                      .061               .061                .038
                            (.012)             (.012)              (.011)

  Female                                                            .011                                                           .016
                                                                   (.004)                                                         (.006)

  Poverty/103                                                      -.197                                                          -.140
                                                                   (.031)                                                         (.040)

  Family                                                           -.269                                                          -.129
  Income/106                                                       (.280)                                                         (.044)

  District Effects            No                Yes                Yes                      No                 Yes                Yes
  R2                         .050               .058               .062                    .049                .060               .064
  No. Obs.                  53,331             53,331             52,416                  21,669              21,669             21,222
 Note: Data are weighted using population weights. Desegregated 1970-1979 group is 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old blacks who live in districts
 that desegregated between 1970 and 1979. Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-old blacks in districts that desegregated between
 1961 and 1982. Columns 4-6 present regressions where the district of residence for 1980 observations is defined as the district of residence
 in 1975. Standard error estimates are corrected for district*year correlation in the error term.




                                                                    45
TABLE VIII: ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF DESEGREGATION PLANS ON DISTRICT ENROLLMENT BY RACE

                                       1970               1980                1980-1970             Difference-in-Differences

Black Enrollment

Desegregated in 70’s                  20,484             18,789                 -1,695
                                                                                                                410
Desegregated in 60’s, 80’s            21,369             19,264                 -2,105                        (8,872)


White Enrollment

Desegregated in 70’s                  78,083             71,741                 -6,342
                                                                                                               2,935
Desegregated in 60’s, 80’s            78,920             69,643                 -9,277                       (25,534)


Note: Estimated enrollment counts are based on weighted counts of 15-, 16-, and 17-year-olds from the 1970 and 1980 censuses.
Standard errors of the difference-in-differences estimated effect of desegregation plan on enrollment are reported in parentheses.




                                                               46
TABLE IX: SPECIFICATIONS THAT CONTROL FOR LAGGED DROPOUT RATES: ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF DESEGREGATION ON DROPOUT RATES

                                                 Lagged Dropout Rate                                                 Matching
                                  (1)             (2)           (3)                (4)                  (5)            (6)               (7)

 Desegregated                   -.022            -.012           -.014            -.009               -.009            -.011           -.007
 1970-1979                      (.006)           (.007)          (.007)           (.006)              (.004)           (.007)          (.007)

 Lagged Dropout Rate             .548             .108            .086             .055
                                (.058)           (.048)          (.048)           (.045)

 Age 16                                           .043            .045             .045
                                                 (.005)          (.005)           (.005)

 Age 17                                           .148            .152             .154
                                                 (.012)          (.011)           (.010)

 Northeast                                                        .045             .066                                -.004           -.000
                                                                 (.026)           (.016)                               (.008)          (.008)

 Midwest                                                          .045             .069                                 .003            .013
                                                                 (.025)           (.016)                               (.009)          (.009)

 South                                                            .058             .074                                 .020            .021
                                                                 (.026)           (.014)                               (.009)          (.009)

 West                                                             .021             .044                                 .002            .007
                                                                 (.027)           (.015)                               (.005)          (.006)

 Female                                                                            .004                                                 .003
                                                                                  (.003)                                               (.003)

 Poverty/103                                                                      -.276                                                -.268
                                                                                  (.035)                                               (.027)

 Family Income/106                                                                 .054                                                 .047
                                                                                  (.031)                                               (.028)

 R2                             .029             .050             .051            .061
 No. Obs.                      44,590           44,590           44,590          43,912               44,590           44,590          43,912
Note: Regressions are weighted using population weights. Note: Data are weighted to reflect the census population. Desegregated 1970-1979 group
is 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old blacks who live in districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1979. Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-
old blacks in districts that desegregated between 1961 and 1982. Columns 1 and 2 present estimates comparing the conditional mean difference in
dropout rates between Treatment and Control districts in 1980, controlling for 1970 district-level dropout rates. Columns 3 and 4 present estimates
of a matching model described in the paper. Standard error estimates are corrected for district*year correlation in the error term.




                                                                        47
TABLE X: ALTERNATIVE SPECIFICATIONS TO CONTROL FOR LAGGED DROPOUT RATES
                     Coefficient on Past Dropout Rate
                           γ = .25                  γ = .50                   γ = .75                   γ = 1.00

Desegregated               -.013                     -.018                     -.024                     -.029
1970-1979                  (.006)                    (.006)                    (.007)                    (.009)

Age 16                      .035                      .022                      .009                     -.004
                           (.004)                    (.005)                    (.007)                    (.009)

Age 17                      .123                      .083                      .044                      .005
                           (.007)                    (.007)                    (.008)                    (.010)

Northeast                   .088                      .016                      .144                      .172
                           (.027)                    (.041)                    (.056)                    (.071)

Midwest                     .091                      .119                      .147                      .175
                           (.028)                    (.043)                    (.058)                    (.073)

South                       .094                      .120                      .146                      .172
                           (.025)                    (.040)                    (.054)                    (.069)

West                        .071                      .105                      .139                      .174
                           (.027)                    (.042)                    (.057)                    (.072)

Female                      .004                      .004                      .004                      .004
                           (.003)                    (.004)                    (.004)                    (.004)

Poverty/103                -.273                     -.269                      .265                     -.261
                           (.035)                    (.036)                    (.037)                    (.377)

Family                      .534                      .522                      .511                      .500
Income/106                 (.305)                    (.305)                    (.307)                    (.377)

R2                          .040                      .025                     .016                       .012
No. Obs.                   43,912                    43,912                   43,912                     43,912
Note: The table shows estimates of the effect of desegregation on black high school dropout rates. Each column shows
estimates based on a different specification. The specifications vary only in that they restrict the effect of the lagged dropout
rate in the district to be different values between zero and unity. When γ is set at unity, the specification closely resembles the
difference-in-difference specification. When γ is closer to zero, the specification more closely resembles the unrestricted
lagged dropout rate specification. Standard errors, corrected for district-by-year correlation, are reported in parentheses.




                                                                48
TABLE XI: DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF VOLUNTARY DESEGREGATION PLANS ON DROPOUT RATES OF BLACKS
                            (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)
 Desegregated             -.041            -.043            -.040            -.039            -.032            -.034            -.035
 1970-1979                (.011)           (.011)           (.011)           (.010)           (.010)           (.009)           (.009)
 *1980
 Desegregated              .018             .028             .029             .024             .016             .020             .021
 1970-1979                (.008)           (.011)           (.011)           (.010)           (.010)           (.009)           (.009)
 *1980
 *Voluntary Plan
 Desegregated              .027             .021             .020             .023             .024             .023             .024
 1970-1979                (.008)           (.008)           (.009)           (.009)           (.008)           (.007)           (.007)

 Voluntary Plan                            -.011            -.010             .002             .006             .005             .004
                                           (.007)           (.007)           (.008)           (.007)           (.007)           (.007)

 Post                      .002             .001            -.004            -.004             .001            -.046            -.034
                          (.008)           (.007)           (.008)           (.007)           (.007)           (.047)           (.047)

 Age 16                                                      .048             .048             .047             .047             .047
                                                            (.004)           (.004)           (.004)           (.004)           (.004)
 Age 17                                                      .166             .166             .161             .161             .161
                                                            (.006)           (.006)           (.006)           (.006)           (.006)
 Female                                                                                        .011             .011             .022
                                                                                              (.004)           (.004)           (.008)
 Female                                                                                                                         -.018
 *1980                                                                                                                          (.009)
 Poverty/103                                                                                  -.198            -.200            -.027
                                                                                              (.031)           (.031)           (.048)
 Poverty/103                                                                                                                    -.243
 *1980                                                                                                                          (.058)
 Family                                                                                       -.025            -.024            -.372
 Income/106                                                                                   (.029)           (.029)           (.125)
 Family                                                                                                                          .417
 Income/106                                                                                                                     (.128)
 *1980
 Northeast                                                                   -.067            -.049            -.057            -.057
                                                                             (.030)           (.030)           (.043)           (.043)
 Northeast                                                                                                      .032             .033
 *1980                                                                                                         (.048)           (.048)
 Midwest                                                                     -.061            -.042            -.058            -.057
                                                                             (.030)           (.030)           (.043)           (.043)
 Midwest                                                                                                        .046             .046
 *1980                                                                                                         (.047)           (.047)
 South                                                                       -.047            -.036            -.056            -.055
                                                                             (.030)           (.030)           (.043)           (.043)
 South                                                                                                          .053             .052
 *1980                                                                                                         (.047)           (.047)
 West                                                                        -.086            -.069            -.090            -.090
                                                                             (.030)           (.030)           (.043)           (.044)
 West                                                                                                           .054             .056
 *1980                                                                                                         (.048)           (.048)
 R2                        .002            .003             .048             .050             .056             .056             .056
 No. Obs.                 53,331          53,331           53,331           53,331           52,416           52,416           52,416
Note: Regressions are weighted using population weights. Desegregated 1970-1979 group is 17-year-old blacks who live in districts that
desegregated between 1970 and 1979, 16-year-old blacks who live in districts that desegregated between 1971 and 1980, and 15-year-old
blacks who live in districts that desegregated between 1972 and 1981. Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-old blacks in
districts that desegregated between 1961 and 1982. Standard error estimates are corrected for district*year correlation in the error term.




                                                                          49
TABLE XII: DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF DESEGREGATION ON DROPOUT RATES OF WHITES
                        (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)

 Desegregated          .005            .006            .006            .007           .007            .002            .002
 1970-1979            (.011)          (.011)          (.009)          (.004)         (.004)          (.003)          (.003)
 *1980
 Desegregated          .013            .012            .004
 1970-1979            (.007)          (.007)          (.006)

 1980                  .024            .021            .019            .017           .039            .026            .059
                      (.009)          (.009)          (.007)          (.003)         (.004)          (.018)          (.019)
 Age 16                                .049            .049            .049           .050            .050            .050
                                      (.003)          (.003)          (.003)         (.003)          (.003)          (.003)
 Age 17                                .138            .138            .137           .136            .135            .136
                                      (.005)          (.005)          (.005)         (.005)          (.005)          (.005)
 Female                                                                               .010            .010            .014
                                                                                     (.002)          (.002)          (.003)
 Female                                                                                                              -.009
 *1980                                                                                                               (.004)
 Poverty/103                                                                         -.302           -.302           -.250
                                                                                     (.019)          (.018)          (.022)
 Poverty/103                                                                                                         -.135
 *1980                                                                                                               (.029)
 Family                                                                              -.118           -.118           -.122
 Income/106                                                                          (.013)          (.013)          (.028)
 Family                                                                                                               .049
 Income/106                                                                                                          (.029)
 *1980
 Northeast                                            -.045
                                                      (.022)
 Northeast                                                                                           -.005           -.006
 *1980                                                                                               (.018)          (.018)
 Midwest                                              -.042
                                                      (.021)
 Midwest                                                                                              .014            .016
 *1980                                                                                               (.018)          (.018)
 South                                                -.002
                                                      (.021)
 South                                                                                                .014            .013
 *1980                                                                                               (.018)          (.018)
 West                                                 -.026
                                                      (.022)
 West                                                                                                 .035            .035
 *1980                                                                                               (.018)          (.018)
 District              No              No              No              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 Effects
 R2                   .003            .040            .043            .049           .083            .083            .084
 No. Obs.            203,063         203,063         203,063         203,063        200,379         200,379         200,379
Note: Data are weighted using population weights. Desegregated 1970-1979 group is 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old whites who live in
districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1979. Control group is all other 15-, 16, and 17-year-old whites in districts that
desegregated between 1961 and 1982. Standard error estimates are corrected for district*year correlation in the error term.




                                                               50
TABLE XIII: CHARACTERISTICS OF BLACK AND WHITE SCHOOLS IN 1970
                                            < 25 Percent                    25-75 Percent                   > 75 Percent
                                          Black Enrolment                  Black Enrollment               Black Enrollment

 Pupil-Teacher Ratio                             27.9                             23.9                           26.7
                                                (12.9)                           (10.6)                          (6.5)

 Fraction Black Teachers                         .079                             .241                           .565
                                                (.113)                           (.172)                         (.243)

 Number of Schools                              3381                              667                           1079

Note: The unit of observation is a school. Data are from the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare’s Directory of Public
Elementary and Secondary Schools in Selected Districts. Sample statistics only include districts that desegregated between 1970 and
1979. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.




TABLE XIV: CHARACTERISTICS OF BLACK AND WHITE TEACHERS IN 1970
                                                Black Teachers                   White Teachers

 Years of Completed Education                        15.6                               15.9
                                                     (2.1)                              (1.8)

 Potential Experience                                15.5                                16.4
                                                    (11.7)                              (14.5)

 No. Obs.                                            1,404                              13,558
Note: Data are from the 1970 Census. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.




                                                                 51
APPENDIX TABLE I: PROBIT ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF DESEGREGATION ON DROPOUT RATES OF BLACKS
                          (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)

 Desegregated           -.028              -.026              -.026              -.021             -.025              -.025
 1970-1979              (.010)             (.009)             (.008)             (.008)            (.008)             (.007)
 *1980
 Desegregated            .024               .023               .019               .017              .019               .020
 1970-1979              (.007)             (.007)             (.006)             (.006)            (.005)             (.005)

 1980                   -.006              -.011              -.011              -.005             -.043              -.026
                        (.007)             (.007)             (.007)             (.006)            (.036)             (.035)

 Age 16                                     .069               .068               .067              .067               .067
                                           (.006)             (.006)             (.006)            (.006)             (.005)
 Age 17                                     .185               .185               .181              .181               .180
                                           (.007)             (.007)             (.007)            (.007)             (.007)
 Female                                                                           .011              .011               .022
                                                                                 (.004)            (.004)             (.007)
 Female                                                                                                               -.019
 *1980                                                                                                                (.007)
 Poverty/103                                                                     -.176             -.179              -.033
                                                                                 (.033)            (.032)             (.042)
 Poverty/103                                                                                                          -.241
 *1980                                                                                                                (.054)
 Family                                                                          -.055             -.053              -.031
 Income/106                                                                      (.032)            (.032)             (.011)
 Family                                                                                                                .034
 Income/106                                                                                                           (.012)
 *1980
 Northeast                                                    -.042              -.030             -.034              -.035
                                                              (.018)             (.019)            (.023)             (.023)
 Northeast                                                                                          .032               .034
 *1980                                                                                             (.040)             (.040)
 Midwest                                                      -.044              -.029             -.039              -.039
                                                              (.018)             (.019)            (.024)             (.024)
 Midwest                                                                                            .044               .045
 *1980                                                                                             (.041)             (.041)
 South                                                        -.032              -.025             -.039              -.037
                                                              (.020)             (.021)            (.026)             (.026)
 South                                                                                              .048               .047
 *1980                                                                                             (.039)             (.039)
 West                                                         -.057              -.047             -.055              -.056
                                                              (.015)             (.016)            (.019)             (.019)
 West                                                                                               .049               .051
 *1980                                                                                             (.046)             (.047)


Note: Marginal effects at the mean of explanatory variables are reported. Data are weighted using population weights. Desegregated
1970-1979 group is 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old blacks who live in districts that desegregated between 1970 and 1979. Control group is
all other 15-, 16-, and 17-year-old blacks in districts that desegregated between 1961 and 1982. Standard error estimates are corrected
for district*year correlation in the error term.




                                                                  52
            Appendix 1: Differences v. Lagged Dependent Variables Models


        This section shows that if selection into treatment is based either on lagged
outcomes or on fixed characteristics, the difference-in-differences estimator and an
estimator that controls for a lagged dependent variable provide estimates that bracket the
causal effect of interest.
        Assume there is no secular trend in dropout rates so that we can write the dropout
rate in school district s at time t as,


                         y st = α s + δ Tst + ε st


where Tst is an indicator for being treated (living in 1980 in a district that desegregated in
the 1970’s).
        Treatment is selected either on fixed characteristics such that,


                               ì1 if α s > y
                         Tst = í
                               î0 otherwise


or on lagged values of y such that,


                               ì 1 if y st −1 > y
                         Tst = í
                               î0 otherwise


where y is a constant.

        Define δˆLD as the estimator that controls linearly for a lagged dependent variable.

Define δˆDD as the difference-in-differences estimator.




                                                     53
A1.1. The Lagged Dependent Variable Estimator, δˆLD :


                                                 ~
                                     Cov( y st , Tst )
                         plim δ LD =
                               ˆ
                                             ~
                                      Var (Tst )


                                                   ~                     ~
                                       Cov(α s + δ Tst + δ Tˆst + ε st , Tst )
                                     =                  ~
                                                  Var(Tst )


      ~
where Tst is the residual from a regression of Tst on y st −1 , and Tˆst is the predicted value

from a regression of Tst on y st −1 . Therefore,


                                                       ~
                                      Cov(α s + ε st , Tst )
                      plim δ LD = δ +
                            ˆ
                                               ~             .
                                          Var(Tst )


If treatment is selected on fixed characteristics,


                                            Cov(α s + ε st , Tst − k − φ (α s + ε st −1 ))
                         plim δˆLD   =δ +                          ~
                                                             Var(Tst )


                                   Cov(Tst , y st −1 )
where k is a constant and φ =                          . Expanding the equation,
                                    Var( y st −1 )



                                         Cov(α s , Tst ) Cov(Tst , y st −1 ) æ σ α2 ö
                      plim δˆLD   =δ +                  −                    ç     ~ ÷
                                                          Var( y st −1 ) çè Var(Tst ) ÷ø
                                               ~
                                          Var(Tst )




assuming no serial correlation in ε. In the analysis in this paper, t and t-1 are ten years
apart. Thus, the assumption of no serial correlation in ε seems reasonable. Simplifying,




                                                    54
                                           Cov(α s , Tst )   æ      σ2 ö
                       plim δˆLD   =δ +          ~           çç1 − 2 α 2 ÷÷
                                            Var(Tst )         è σα +σε ø


which implies that if treatment is positively selected on fixed characteristics,
plim δˆLD   ≥ δ . In other words, if treatment is positively (negatively) selected on fixed
characteristics, the estimator that controls for lagged outcomes produces positively
(negatively) biased estimates of the treatment effect.


A1.2. The Difference-in-Differences Estimator, δˆDD :


                                          Cov( y st − y st −1 , Tst )
                          plim δˆDD   =
                                               Var(Tst )


                                          Cov(δ Tst + ε st − ε st −1 , Tst )
                                      =
                                                  Var(Tst )


                                                Cov(ε st − ε st −1 , Tst )
                                      =δ +
                                                    Var(Tst )


                                                Cov(ε st −1 , Tst )
                                      =δ −
                                                  Var(Tst )


assuming no serial correlation in ε.

          If treatment is positively selected on lagged outcomes, plim δˆDD ≤ δ . In other
words, if treatment is positively (negatively) selected on lagged outcomes, the difference-
in-differences estimator produces negatively (positively) biased estimates of the treatment
effect.
          Therefore, if treatment is selected positively either on fixed characteristics or on a
lagged dependent variable,
                                    plim δˆDD ≤ δ ≤ plim δˆLD .



                                                        55
If treatment is selected negatively either on fixed characteristics or on a lagged dependent
variable,
                               plim δˆLD ≤ δ ≤ plim δˆDD .




                                              56
                      Appendix 2: A Simple Model of Legal Precedent


        The following model is meant to illustrate the role of legal precedent in the
decision of an agent seeking to promote social change through the courts. The        agent’s
objective is to effect some change in a set of distinct local areas. To achieve this end, the
agent brings legal challenges in each of these areas, one at a time. The model points out
that the agent will pay close attention to precedent when choosing the timing of legal
challenges. In the absence of precedent, it is clear that the agent will choose to bring suit
first in the area with the largest potential benefit from success. He will then bring suit in
the area with the second largest benefit, and so on until he is finished.
        Precedent creates a spillover, where the national benefits and costs of bringing a
suit are no longer the same as the local benefits and costs. The agent will internalize the
spillovers created by the setting of precedent and, as a result, will weigh the probability
of success more heavily than the benefit from success when choosing where to bring a
legal challenge early on. When precedent is important in the legal system, and when the
number of cases remaining to be brought is large, the agent can virtually ignore the
potential benefits from success, and base his decision solely on the probability of success.
        In the model, the agent chooses to bring a legal challenge in one location in each
time period. The benefits of success vary by location, and the agent seeks to maximize
the expected discounted sum of benefits. The legal challenge either succeeds or fails
with some probability that depends both on the facts of the case specific to the locality
and on the history of legal successes and failures up to the point of the current legal
challenge. This second factor represents the role of precedent in the judicial system.
        To illustrate the point more formally, consider an agent seeking to bring suit in
two distinct locations, denoted A and B. The agent can bring forward only one legal
challenge per time period. The agent wins the legal challenge with some probability,
which depends on the characteristics of the location and the history of legal successes and
failures. Specifically, let each location have an inherent probability of legal success,
denoted Pi , i ∈ ( A, B) . Since no precedent has been set when the agent brings the first

legal challenge Pi t =1 = Pi .




                                              57
        At t = 2 , precedent has been set by the outcome of the case filed in the first
period. Thus, the probability of success in the second case brought depends on the
outcome of the first case. For ease of exposition, assume that the agent must decide the
order of cases at t = 0 . Thus, the likelihood of success in the second period depends
directly on the ex-ante likelihood of success of the case brought in the first period.
Consequently, we can write the probability of success of the second case


                 Pi t = 2 ≡ Pi 2 = Pi + φ ( Pj ), j ≠ i


where φ (.) is an increasing, non-negative function that represents the effect of precedent.




A2.1. When will the agent choose to file suit in location A first?




        Each district has a potential benefit from legal success. For the purposes of this
model, let each location be of a different size, denoted N i . The larger the location, the
more students will benefit from a legal victory.               The agent seeks to maximize the
expected number of student-years under court order. Thus, the agent will choose to file
suit in location A first if


                 2 PA N A + [PB + φ (PA )]N B ≥ 2 PB N B + [PA + φ (PB )]N A
                                              ⇔
                           PA N A + φ (PA )N B ≥ PB N B + φ (PB )N A


By making this an equality, we can take the total derivative and find an indifference
relationship between the local benefit ( N i ), and the likelihood of success ( Pi ). The total
derivative becomes


[PA − φ (PB )]dN A + [N A + N Bφ ′(PA )]dPA + [PB − φ (PA )]dN B − [N B + N Aφ ′(PB )]dPB   =0



                                                          58
Holding, N B , PB constant we get


                    dN A N A + N Bφ ′(PA )
                −       =
                    dPA    PA − φ (PB )


       We can compare how the agent trades off N A and PA in a world without
precedent. Here, the agent chooses location A first if


                PA N A ≥ PB N B


Thus, the total derivative yields


                    dN A N A
                −       =
                    dPA   PA


Let us compare the agent’s tradeoff in a world with precedent to the agent’s tradeoff in a
world without precedent. The difference in the marginal rate of substitution between
local benefit and the probability of success is


                N A + N Bφ ′(PA ) N A PA N Bφ ′(PA ) + N Aφ (PB )
                                 −    =
                  PA − φ (PB )     PA      PA − PAφ (PB )
                                              2




                    N Bφ ′(PA ) + ( N A / PA )φ (PB )
                =
                             PA − φ (PB )


There is some location for which φ (Pi ) = 0 . Otherwise, the existence of precedent in the
legal system would increase the probability of success in every case after the first period.
In this case, let that be location B. The ratio can now be written




                                                    59
                dN A                      dN A                   N Bφ ′(PA )
                                      −                      =
                dPA    no precedent
                                          dPA    precedent
                                                                    PA




The magnitude of the above expression measures the amount that precedent adds to the
agent’s valuation of the probability of success, relative to the local benefit. The amount
by which the marginal rate of substitution increases is a measure of how much precedent
adds to the agent’s valuation of Pi relative to N i .

       A measure of the importance of precedent in the legal system is the size of φ ′(.) .
When φ ′(.) is large, cases that are more likely to be successful increase the probability of
success in subsequent trials by large amounts relative to cases that are unlikely to be
successful. This effect is weighted by N B ; the larger the potential benefit to legal
success in location B, the larger the incentive to increase the probability of success there,
by winning the case in location A first.




A2.2. Additional Locations, Additional Time Periods


       Adding more locations to the model requires the addition of structure to the
model, but the result should be intuitively clear. The effect of precedent on subsequent
legal challenges magnifies as the number of cases to be tried increases. When there are
two locations, precedent creates a distinction between the global and local marginal
benefits of choosing a higher Pi . This distinction becomes greater as the effect of
precedent is allowed to compound over the course of many cases. When there are three
locations, choosing a high Pi in the first period increases the probability of success in the
second period. The increased likelihood of victory in the second period is a benefit in
and of itself. Additionally, the increased likelihood of victory in the second period
increases the ex-ante likelihood of victory in the third period.


                                                             60
       Thus, in a legal system where precedent is important and in a situation where the
agent wants to eventually bring suit in a large number of locations, the value of a high Pi

will greatly outweigh the value of a high N i . In other words, the agent seeking to pursue
social change through the courts will virtually ignore the local benefit of success in the
early stages of the process, and will choose to file suit in a location with a high
probability of success.




                                            61
