                                 %! &   




                                                
                             


                                             
                                            


                                          !"#$'()*
                                  +$,,---."#,$$,-'()*


                              %   /   
                                    01213+ 4 
                                      .#5160('
                                            




                              
            !"      


#$%  &   ' ! "%  ( )      *  
      ) *! $ +     !    *)# *) 
   
# " ""#$$"3+
  
%!"#$"'()*
 6110
 "/105/16


                                               $%#%


        3+3# "-+3+#"4+.7"8$"#"""
3""73""89$"#-57+4$3 7+#+$3"8
#"9$"8"4"$#3" :7"+4$"45 3+
387#$" 3; 7878"+3" +$$ ##$$"3+""#
3+3# "5-+$3 3"3++$$"3+$"7
$.$$#<; . "-+




                                           
3+  "8  3""3                $"83""3
%"92210                                                    47"8"""
<00)'2"3+"                                      %" 5 '1(1=<162*
-                                                    %
#>                                            ? >3"""
                                                   1

1.     Introduction

       Standards and technical regulations have assumed increased importance in the trade-

policy agenda. Possibly, this is because they have become quanitatively more important and

burdensome, or possibly they are simply relatively more important as traditional trade barriers

such as tariffs and quotas decline in importance. In either event, there seems to be a case for

closer examination and more formal modeling of standards as they impact on trade and national

welfare.

       Standards and technical regulations are often portrayed as barriers to trade that restrict

competition in the local economy by raising costs to foreign suppliers. The idea that standards

can constitute an anti-competitive and protectionist device seems obvious. Yet it is clear that they

may also have benefits, not just to domestic consumers but also to foreign suppliers. If a

standard certifies a product as safe, healthy, compatible with complementary inputs such as the

power supply, etc., such certification can raise consumer demand for the imports, possibly

resulting in increased profits to foreign firms in spite of higher costs.

       The purpose of this paper is to suggest approaches to formally modeling standards in

ways that are potentially implementable on real data. For all the ideas developed here, we

present numerical results from simple simulation models (i.e., with minimum dimensionality and

simple made-up data). The advantage of this approach is that (a) we see that the idea is at least

potentially operational, and (b) clearly see the effect of a standard in a model where all

extraneous influences are eliminated. With respect to the latter, we will use very simple

numerical general-equilibrium models in which countries have identical relative productivities

(technologies) across sectors, identical relative factor endowments, and constant returns to scale
                                                  2

so as to eliminate traditional comparative-advantage motives for trade. We assume a sector with

imperfectly competitive firms, possibly a valid representation of many manufacturing sectors,

but not necessarily for agriculture (although in the latter case, often the exporting firms as

opposed to farmers are indeed quite few in number). But regardless of the validity or generality

of this approach, the techniques for modeling the standards themselves can be applied to any

applied-general equilibrium model. One advantage of the imperfect-competition approach is that

it quickly identifies conflicts or complementarities between producer and consumer interests,

both within and between countries.

       Sections 2, 3, and 4 use a two-good, two-factor, two-country, general-equilibrium model

in which countries have identical relative productivities across sectors and relative factors

endowments.1 But in general we assume that one country is considerably larger than the other,

either because of endowment size or (sector neutral) technical superiority, trying to capture one

notion of rich/big versus poor/small countries. Each country has a fixed number of imperfectly

competitive firms in the X sector.

       In section 2, we show how to model a purely cost-increasing standards; that is, there is no

beneficial effect from the standard. Not surprisingly, a standard imposed by one country tends to

benefit producer interests at the expense of consumer interests. An important result, but possibly

also not surprising, is that the small country cannot win a “standards’ war” in which both

countries impose cost-increasing standards on imports, analogous to a tariff war in traditional

trade theory. Both producers and consumers may lose in the small country. Thus an


       1
         By identical “relative” technologies or productivities across sectors we mean that there is
no Ricardian comparative advantage. One country could be uniformly more advanced in all
sectors.
                                                 3

international code that restricts the use of purely “harassment” standards (e.g., multiple

inspection requirements) aids the small/poor country and may even win support from small-

country import-competing producers.

       Section 3 considers a standard imposed only by the big/rich country. In addition to

imposing a cost on exporters from the small/poor country however, the standard also creates an

increased willingness-to-pay by the large/rich country’s consumers for the small-country’s good.

We model this as sliding the large-country consumer’s indifference curve along a budget line so

that, for example, at constant prices the consumer now chooses 2.5 units of each country’s good

instead of four units of the large-country’s good and 1 unit of the small-country’s good. Of

course, prices do change in response to the standard. Simulation results illustrate the tradeoff

between the cost and willingness to pay from the point of view of small-country firms and

consumers.

       Section 4 is identical to section 3 except that we assume that the standard creates a fixed

cost for the small country’s firms. For example, a new design might be required, but once this is

created the marginal cost of production is unchanged. The interesting thing about this case is

that, when there are multiple firms, there may be multiple equilibria. With a coordination

problem (or free-rider problem) among firms, there may be one equilibrium in which no firm

exports, and one in which there are substantial exports. Thus standards of this type create a role

for the government in the non-standard-imposing country to oppose the standard or to coordinate

compliance and compliance costs.

       Section 5 presents an analysis in which a standard can change the complementarity or

substitutability between products. This is a rather tricky problem, so we use a closed-economy
                                                    4

model in which there are two sets of firms. Much of the problem lies not so much with the idea

of changing the shape of isoquants, as with there interpretation of welfare changes. In a

traditional Dixit-Stiglitz formulation for example, poor substitutability is a source of welfare

gains (love of variety), so reducing substitutability reduces welfare other things equal. This is

balanced in our model with variable markups (unlike the usual large-group monopolistic-

competition model) by a pro-competitive effect arising from increased substitutability. Great

care is needed in interpreting the former effect.

       We examine two cases in section 5, the first one being a standard which increases

substitutability between goods. We are thinking here of IBM and Apples as being made so that

they run the same software so that they appear to be better substitutes from the consumer’s point

of view. A result in this case is that producer and consumer interests may conflict, with

consumer’s wanting a common standard and producers opposing it since the standard is pro-

competitive.

       In the second case, we consider a standard which makes products better complements,

and we try to carefully state how this is different from making them poorer substitutes. Here we

are thinking about a computer and a telephone, for example. If they can be made to work

together, the consumer’s willingness to pay for one of each might increase, while the demand

price for one of either individually might not change. The result here is that both consumers and

producers may benefit from increased complementarity. Thus standards which make different

products work together might receive stronger political support than ones which make products

more similar.

       In section 6, we consider the idea that standards may act as a market-segmentation device,
                                                  5

which prevents arbitrage and parallel trade in oligopolistic markets. In the automobile industry,

for example, country-specific emission, safety and damageability standards prevent non-auto

firms and consumers from arbitraging products from one market to another. In many situations

this might not be an issue for developing countries. But there are instances in which a country

could either be helped or hurt by restrictions on arbitrage. If arbitrage is not possible, a

small/poor country could benefit if optimal pricing by a pharmaceutical company dictated a

lower price in that country (knowing that the product could not be shipped back to the high-

income country). But in other cases optimal pricing, possibly in the presence of high distribution

costs, might imply higher prices in the small market.

       All of the models we develop are coded in Rutherford’s MPS/GE solver, now a

subsystem of GAMS. Programs are attached. These illustrate that all of the models used here

are potentially implementable. However, great data difficulties remain before actual

implementation. If standards are in place in observed data, the researcher needs to estimate a

“shadow value” for the restriction, and this could be either positive or negative depending on

whether or not an increased willingness to pay outweighs any increased costs from meeting the

standard. But this can be done, just as many researchers have estimated the shadow rents from

quotas, domestic content restrictions, and so forth.
                                                 6

2.     Standards as Real Trade Costs

       In this section, we adopt a very simple “first pass”, and assume that standards are simply

trade costs. We implicitly assume that firms of one country make or have made some investment

in their own country’s standard, but must incur a second investment to serve the foreign market.

The standards of the two countries are simply different, neither is better or worse than the other.

Any exports to a country must meet the importing country’s standard to be permitted to enter.

An example that might come close is 110 volt versus 220 volt systems for small electrical

appliances.

       The model assume two goods, X and Y, two factors, labor and capital (L and K), and two

countries home and foreign (h and f). Throughout the paper, we will think of country h as a

large/rich developed country, and f as a smaller/poorer developing country. But, as noted in the

introduction, we will assume no comparative advantage in the X versus the Y sector so as to

focus on the essentials (country h may have a equal absolute advantage in both sectors). The Y

sector produces a homogeneous good with constant returns to scale and perfect competition,

while the X sector produces differentiated goods with imperfectly competitive firms. In order to

see opposing or complementary effects on producers versus consumers, we assume a relatively

“short run” analysis in which the number of X firms is fixed in each country.

       Let Xji be the supply by a single firm in country j to the market in country i. Welfare in

country i is given by
                  1/2     1/2                                    1/              1
(1)     Ui      Yi      UXi          UXi       A nh Xh i  nf Xf i        
                                                                                1       
where nh and nf are the number of firms (varieties) in countries h and f respectively. σ is the

elasticity of substitution between any two X goods (in this section we do not assume any
                                                                 7

“nesting”: two goods from country i have the same substitutabilitiy as one good from i and one

good from j). The production function for Y in country i is given by
                           1
(2)     Yi        L i y Ki y

Production functions for X are identical across firms and countries. The production by a

representative firm in country i is given by
                           1
(3)     Xi        Lix Kix

L and K are in inelastic supply, so factor-market clearing requires that factor demands add up to

total factor supplies in country i.

(4)     Li         Li y  n i Li x                Ki     Ki y  n i Ki x

        Firms in the X sector are imperfectly competitive. Let pij denote the price for X of a firm

producing in market i selling in market j. Firms set markups mij according to the formula

(5)     pii ( 1    mii )       mci ( wi , r i )        pij ( 1   mij )     ( 1  sj ) mci ( wi , r i )

where mci is the marginal cost of producing a variety Xi (an identical function across countries),

and w and r are the prices of labor (L) and capital (K). sj is the cost of meeting country j’s

standard when exporting from country i. Denote the elasticity of substitution among X varieties

as σ. The Cournot markup formula for the markup of an individual firm located in market i and

selling in market j is given by (Lopez-de-Silanes, Markusen, and Rutherford, 1993).



                      1                1      n i Xij      1
(6)     mij              1
                                       n i Xij  n j Xjj n i


In the case of homogeneous goods where the elasticity of substitution is infinite, this reduces to

the well-known equation that a firm’s markup is its market share.
                                                 8

       This model can be implemented numerically as a complementarity problem: a set of

inequalities with associated non-negative variables. There are 31 non-linear inequalities in this

model. These are as follows:

Cost functions (complementary variables: outputs)                                   Number

       Y sector output in each country                                                     2

       X sector output in each country                                                     2

       Cost of supplying market i from market j                                            4

       Production of utility for consumers in each country                                 2

       Production of utility for “entrepreneurs” in each country                           2

Market clearing equations (complementary variables: prices)

       Market for good Y                                                                   1

       Total output of X in each country                                                   2

       Supply of X from country i to country j                                             4

       Labor market clearing in each country                                               2

       Capital market clearing in each country                                             2

Income balance equations (complementary variable: the price of utility)

       Income balance for consumers in each country                                        2

       Income balance for entrepreneurs in each country                                    2

Auxiliary equations (complementary variable: markups)

       Markup equation for producer in market i serving market j                           4

       These inequalities are solved numerically using Rutherford’s MPS/GE for various values

of the parameters, and the code is given in Appendix 1.
                                                  9

       Figures 1-3 give results from simulations of this model. Country h has 4/5 of world

income and country f has 1/5. We can think this as endowment size differences and/or total

factor productivity differences. Figures 1A and 2B give the effect of a standard sh on the profits

and consumer real income (welfare) in country h (panel A) and in country f (panel B). Consumer

welfare refers to total factor income divided by the consumer price index. Profits are markup

revenues divided by the same price index (firm owners have the same tastes as factor owners).

The cost of the standard on the horizontal axes is an ad valorem proportion on marginal

production costs. Consumers in both countries are worse off by the standard, almost to the same

extent in the two countries. Not surprisingly, profits increase substantially for firms in the large

country and fall for the small-country firms. Thus the standard serves the political interest of the

large-country firms at the expense of everyone else.2

       Figures 2A and 2B show the effects of a standard imposed by the small country f. Effects

on the large country h are shown in the top panel A and for the small country f in the bottom

panel B. Results in the top panel are qualitatively similar to Figure 1, but far less significant

quantitatively. The small country cannot hurt the large country very much. An interesting result

occurs in the bottom panel, where the small-country’s standard actually hurts its own firms up to

the level of about 0.2. This appears to be a general-equilibrium effect, in that the small-countries

restriction on imports from the large country causes the latter’s firms to supply more to their own



       2
         We have not shown aggregate welfare effects in the two countries to avoid reducing
clutter and/or adding more diagrams. In the benchmarking of the model (Appendix 1), profits are
10% of total income (but this is not of course a constant). The large country does not benefit in
aggregate from its own standard (Figure 1A). A 25% rise in profits cannot compensate for a 5%
fall in consumer real income. In the simulations, neither country benefits from neither standard
in aggregate.
                                                   10

market, “crowding out” imports from the small country.3 For low levels of the restriction, this

effect reduces profits of the small country’s firms by more than it increases their profits from

protection at home.

        Figures 3A and 3B show what happens when both countries impose the same ad valorem

restrictive standard. Consumers in both countries are hurt, but they are hurt far more in the small

country f (panel B) than in the large country h (panel A). Profits increase for firms in the large

country even though they face an import barriers into country f. Profits for firms in the small

country f fall up until a bilateral barrier of 0.2 and then begin to rise, but only recover their free-

trade level at about a 0.5 barrier.

        The message from Figures 3A and 3B is clearly that the small/poor country cannot win a

“standards war”. Such a war can only benefit firms in the large country. Conversely, an

agreement to limit purely cost-increasing standards helps the small country most (although it

helps large-country consumers as well). This result fits well with results on “tariff wars”.




        3
         This is a general-equilibrium effect that is missed in partial-equilibrium models. As
output for supply to the small market falls for the large-country’s firms, factor prices fall for the
X industry in country h. Thus marginal revenue (initially unchanged) exceeds marginal cost for
sales to the h firms own market, and supply will increase. This doesn’t happen in well known
“strategic trade-policy” models with constant costs.
                                                 11

3.     Standards which affect willingness to pay

       In many situations, it is surely not the case that standards are simply a cost-raising

measure with no offsetting positive value. Surely consumers (through importers and

wholesalers) put “certification value” on such things as health and safety standards. The

difficulty is that one could imagine a whole portfolio of models to deal with these issues. Models

could involve asymmetric information, markets-for-lemons problems and so forth. The purpose

of this paper is to suggest simple and implementable ways to incorporate standards into

numerical general-equilibrium models. Thus here we will take a very simple approach in which

we model the “certification value” as an increased willingness to pay by consumers. The added

amount that American consumers would be willing to pay for Mexican tomatoes if they are

certified as healthy and safe by US standards is what we refer to as willingness to pay.

       Unfortunately, that is not the end of the issue, since there are many ways to formally

model an increased willingness to pay. What we are doing is altering the utility function, shifting

an twisting an indifference curve between the domestic and imported product in some way.

Obviously, there are essentially infinitely many ways to do this. Considerable care is needed, in

that different alternatives have quite different implications for welfare measures.

       Figures 4A and 4B illustrate two possibilities. In Figure 4A, an increased willingness to

pay for Xf is modeled as simply a change in the ratio of Xf to Xh demanded at a constant price

ratio, holding utility constant. UX0 represents the same utility level in the Figure. In Figure 4B,

an increased willingness to pay is modeled by the shift shown in UX0 (again, the two curves give

the same utility level). Consumers can now get the same utility level from less Xf or alternatively

are willing to pay more for (get more utility from) the same level of Xf. Note that there is a
                                                 12

welfare difference between these two alternatives. With respect to Figure 4B, there is a new

indifference curve tangent to the original budget line through X1 to the north west of X1 (if the

elasticity of substitution between the two goods is greater than one) thus making it appear that

the standards leads to a similar sliding along the original budget line as in Figure 4A. But if we

did this this in Figure 4B, the new indifference curve on the original budget line would

correspond to a higher level of utility, not the same level of utility as in Figure 4A.. Figure 4B

could be thought of analogous to a technical improvement, while Figure 4A is not. It is certainly

not clear which procedure is correct, but the modeler must remember that they are not the same.

       In this section, we model increased willingness to pay as in Figure 4A, while we will use

the procedure in Figure 4B in the next section. There is no good justification for this other than

we want to show modelers how to do each in the simulation programs. Appendix 2 gives the

model for Figure 4A, while Appendix 3 gives the model use the procedure in Figure 4B.

       We retain the same model and calibration (Table 2) of the previous section. Assume that

only the large/rich country imposes a standard. Figures 5A and 5B show the effects on the

profits of the small country f firms and on consumer real income respectively. The numbers on

the “Willingness to Pay” axis are the share of X purchases by large country h’s consumers that

would go to the small country f’s good if the prices of the two were the same. That is, the axis

measures the large country h’s demand share Xf/(Xh + Xf) at equal prices for the two goods (of

course, equilibrium prices do not stay the same as we recalibrate country h’s preferences.

       The results in Figures 5A and 5B are not very surprising. They do make it clear that there

is no conflict between the interests of small-country producers and consumers when it come to

the standard imposed by the large-country. Effects on consumers are much smaller than on
                                                13

producers, which also makes sense. In any case, while there is no great insights here, we hope

that this section nevertheless makes a contribution in terms of clarifying some issues and

showing how these ideas can be implemented in an applied general-equilibrium model.
                                                 14

4.      Standards impose a fixed cost of entry: multiple equilibria

        In many cases, it does not seem reasonable to assume that a standard imposes a constant

ad valorem cost. It may require a redesign cost, after which the good can be produced at the old

marginal cost. The new design created by this fixed cost can in turn be purely private, or it may

be a non-excludable public good. The latter case is particularly interesting, and leads to different

theoretical, modeling, and policy issues. One of these is the possibility of multiple equilibria,

which will be the focus of this section. At a given fixed (e.g., redesign) cost needed to meet the

large-country’s standard, there may be two equilibria, one with zero exports from the small

country and one with positive exports (and likely a third inbetween).

        In this section, we use the same model and calibration (Table 2) of the previous two

section. Appendix 3 shown how to model the standard as a fixed cost using MPS/GE. There is

an “endogenous tax rate” on exports from country f, and this tax rate is set be a constraint

equation. A fixed rate is divided by the activity level of the exports, which is equal to one in the

initial calibration. As exports go to zero, the ad valorem equivalent of the fixed cost goes to

infinity.

        Table 1 shows results for the model, where the benchmark values in the top row are all

normalized to one. The fixed rate, denoted “cost” is initially zero, and willingness to pay (“wtp”)

equals 1.0. We report consumer real income (cons), profits of the local firms (profit), and

aggregate welfare or real income (welf). The willingess to pay is modeled as in Figure 4B, where

the numerical value in Table 1 is the ratio X1/X0 in Figure 4B.

        The second set of numbers raises “cost” to 0.1, so this would be an ad valorem rate of

10% at the initial activity level of 1.0 for exports to country h. There is no increased willingness
                                                  15

to pay. We see that there are two equilibria, the first with positive exports and one with no

exports. The former is roughly like results in Figures 1-3 except that the export activity level

falls below one, meaning that the ad valorem equivalent is greater than 10%. The no-exports

equilibrium is very different. Country h firms get a large profit boost, while large-country

consumers, small-country consumers, and small-country firms are worse off. Note that aggregate

welfare falls in the large country h as well as in the small country f.

       The next two sets of results raise the wtp first to 1.1 and then to 1.25 in the last

simulation. There are multiple equilibria in both cases. The no-export equilibria is the same in

all cases, but we have reproduced the numbers anyway for easy comparison with the “interior”

equilibrium with positive exports. For a wtp of 1.1, and a cost of 0.1, it is interesting to note that

these values are close to offsetting in the results for the interior equilibrium for consumers and

firms in both countries.

       The final set of numbers with a wtp of 1.25 indicate that the standard significantly

improves the welfare of country f’s firms and consumers in the interior equilibrium. But the bad

outcome remains a possibility. This kind of situation clearly calls for a more active policy in the

small/poor country, in aiding industry to adapt to foreign standards.
                                                                  16

5.      Standards Alter the Substitutability / Complementarity between Products

        In this section, we will present a simple closed-economy general-equilibrium model in

order to examine how standards might affect the relationship between different product types.

Suppose that there are two goods, X and Y, and two factors, L and K. X goods come in two types

or standards, X1 and X2, these being imperfect substitutes. There may be several firms producing

each standard, and the output of standard Xi by firm j is denoted Xji. There is a representative

consumer who derives utility from Y and a CES composite of X1 and X2, denoted UX.
                                                                        1/               1
(7)     U          Y 1 / 2 UX 1 / 2                    UX       A X1  X2                          Xi   M Xji
                                                                                        1               j

where σ is the elasticity of substitution between goods of different standards. The production

function for Y is given by
                          1
(8)     Y         Ly Ky

Production functions for X are identical across firms within and between types.
                              1
(9)     Xij       Lijx Kijx

L and K are in inelastic supply, so factor-market clearing requires that factor demands add up to

total factor supplies.

(10)    L          Ly  M M Lijx                            K      K y  M M Kijx
                                  i      j                                  i   j

        Firms in the X sector are imperfectly competitive. Firms of standard j set a markup mj

according to the formula

(11)    pxj ( 1    mj )               mcxj ( w , r )

where pxj is the price of standard j, and mcxj is the marginal cost of producing xj (identical across

standards), and w and r are the prices of labor (L) and capital (K). Let σw denote the elasticity of

substitution within a firm type (e.g., between the products of two type-1 firms) and σb the
                                                  17

elasticity of substitution between firm types (i.e., between the products of a type-1 and a type-2

firm). The Cournot markup formula for the markup of an individual type-j firm is given by

(Lopez-de-Silanes, Markusen, and Rutherford, 1993).



                 1         1      1 1                  1     Xj   1
(12)    mj                              1
                 w        b     w nj                b Xi  Xj nj


where nj is the number of type-j firms. In our case, goods of given standard are perfect

substitutes, so σw is infinite. This simplifies the formula to



                 1 1               1 sj                            Xj
(13)    mj              1                            sj
                 b nj             b nj                         Xi  X j


                  1             1     1          sj                  sj 1
(14)    mj                1       sj                       1
                  b            b    nj         nj                  nj b


where sj is the share of all type-j firms in total X output. Thus sj /nj is the overall X market share

of one type-j firm. The markup is increasing in a firm’s market share, and decreasing in the

elasticity of substitution between standards.

       Consider first the situation in which a standard improves the substitutibility between

products X1 and X2 (e.g., PC and MAC computers). The situation as we will model it is shown in

Figures 6A and 6B. Two indifference curves for a given level of UX, denoted UX0, are shown in

Figure 6A. The curve without the standard has a low elasticity of substitution, while that with a

standard has a higher elasticity of substitution. In order for the two curves to correspond to the

same value of UX (point X0 gives the same value of output UX), the constant term A in the
                                                          18

second equation of (1) must be adjusted to offset the change in β (equal to 1/(1-σ)). If β is

increased from β0 to β1, the intercept A must be recalculated as follows.



                             0 0           0 0 1 / 0        1 / 0            1/1              0    0
(15)    UX 0      A0 ( X1 )             ( X2 )           A0 2          X0   A1 2       X0   X0   X1   X2

implying,
                   (1 / 0   1 / 1)
(16)    A1     A0 2

This compensating change in A to offset the change in β (σ) means that the output UX0 can still

be produced from equal inputs of X1 and X2 (XO). Nevertheless, we might also believe that in a

wide range of specific cases, the standard may also affect the cost of production or alternatively

the consumers’ willingness to pay. Thus the standard may also move the UX0 isoquant in or out

as shown in Figure 6B. Holding UX0 constant, movement of this isoquant inward can be thought

of

as reduced costs of production. Alternatively, we can think of this as an increased willingness to

pay: the consumer is willing to pay the same amount derived from a smaller quantity of inputs.

       In either case, this can be represented by a further change in A. So let us think of the

standard has having an effect on β (σ) and A. The change in A comes in two parts: the first is a

compensating change to the change in β (σ) so that output UX0 can still be produced from equal

inputs of X1 and X2 (XO). Then a subsequent change in A shifts the UX0 isoquant in or out as in

Figure 6B. From this point on, we will refer to only this second change as the change in cost,

and/or change in willingness to pay.

       An important point in this model is that the increased elasticity of substitution between
                                                 19

X1 and X2 leads to a pro-competitive effect via a decrease in markups. Referring back to

equation (14), we see that an increase in β (σ) leads to a fall in the markup (s/n must be less than

one). s is constant at 1/2 (the two product groups are symmetric), and here we are holding the

number of firms (n) fixed. With no change in willingness to pay, this should imply an increase in

consumer welfare and a fall in producer profit. General intuition suggests that overall welfare

should rise with the increase in β (σ).

       In alternative situations, we might expect that standards should make products better

complements Two products might have quite different functions, but if a common standard

allows them to work together, then consumers may be more inclined to buy both. If telephones

(the phone system) and computers can be made to work together, they become compelements.

This situation is modeled in Figures 7A and 7B. UX0 with no standard has a relatively high

elasticity of substitution. If the two products can be made to work together (e.g., the

compatibility of the phone system and computers allowed for the development of the internet),

then they become complements. Specifically, assume that the consumer’s willingness to pay for

either a phone or a computer (not both) does not change. Thus the endpoints of the UX0 isoquant

in Figure 6A do not change. But the consumer may now be willing to pay more for both

products together. In Figure 7A, the point on the 450 line with the standard (X1) lies inside the

original no-standard point X0. Let α < 1, denote the ratio X1/X0 in Figure 7A (note this ratio is

only value on the 450 line, it goes to zero near the axes). A given α implies a recalibrated

elasticity of substitution. The intercept of the production function A does not change (the with

and without standards isoquants go through the same points on the axes). For a given α, the new
                                                                  20

value of β (σ) is found by solving the following equation.
                        1 / 0                      1/1                        0    0
(17)    UX 0       A2            X0          A2            X 0           X0   X1   X2



         1 / 0    1 / 1                 1                 1
(18)    2         2                         ln 2              ln 2  ln 
                                          0                1

                                      1
                  1         ln                                       1
(19)    1                                            1
                  0        ln 2                                  1       1


Thus a higher α (X1/X0) implies a lower β (σ) in Figure 7A.

       As in our previous example, the standard may also change the consumer’s willingness to

pay or the costs of production. Thus we might again want to consider changes in A, shifting the

quantities of X1 and X2 necessary to acheive level UX0. This is shown in Figure 7B. The UX2

isoquant corresponds to no change in A.

       Referring back to the markup equation (14), we see that the increased complementarity

should raise the equilibrium markup. Thus the changes shown in Figures 7A and 7B with no

change in willingness to pay, should improve producer profit. We would also expect an increase

in consumer welfare, although a very strong markup effect might reverse this. Baring the latter,

it may be here that the consumer and producers’ interests coincide in favor of the standard, unlike

in the substitutes case with no change in willingness to pay.

       Figures 3-5 present simulation results for this closed economy general-equilibrium model

for increased substitutability (Figure 1). On one axis, we plot the elasticity of substitution

between X1 and X2. The “no-standard” value is assumed to equal 0.5: the goods are poor

substitutes in the absence of the standard. The other axis plots willingess to pay, parameter A in
                                                   21

(13), where the no-standard value is 1.0. Alternatively, we can think of this as an inverse cost

measure, where the standard increases production costs. In the Figures, we allow for the

possibility that the standard increases cost (decreases willingness to pay), such as isoquant UX1 in

Figure 6B. The model is calibrated so that there are five firms of each type active.

        Figure 8A plots consumer welfare (real factor income) over a grid of values for σ and A.

We see a sharp increase in consumer welfare as σ increase from 0.5, but that this effect tapers off

at about σ = 3. Consumer welfare, on the other hand, is close to linear in willingness to pay, or

cost decreases. Figure 8B shows firm profits and, as we might have conjectured from the markup

equations, profits decrease as the elasticity of substitution increases. But as in the case in

consumer-welfare diagram, this effect largely disappears after a value of σ = 3. There is very

little effect of willingness to pay on firm profits.

        Figure 5 plots total welfare, the sum of consumer welfare (factor income) and profits

(N.B., the vertical axes of Figures 8A and 8B are indices, therefore they cannot be added together

to get the vertical axis in Figure 8C). Total welfare is very insensitive the the elasticity of

substitution. The conclusion is that increasing the substitutability of products is largely a

distributional issue between consumer welfare and firm profits. This could change in a model

with free entry as we shall note below.

        Figures 9ABC show the case where standards improve complementarity as in Figure

7AB. One axis maps the ratio X0/X1 as shown in Figure 7A. Lower values of this ratio

correspond a more “bowed-in” isoquant and thus to lower values of σ . The other axis is

willingness to pay (A) or inverse cost. It does not seem sensible for this ratio to be “very small”,
                                                  22

since this implies an increased willingness to pay even for one good alone, and it is not clear why

this should be the case. Thus we run this parameter over a more limited range in this simulation.

Results in Figure 9A show that consumer welfare increases with a fall in X0/X1 and an increase

in willingness to pay. The interesting result in for profits in Figure 9B, in which we see that

profits also improve with lower values of X0/X1. This is due to the fact that these lower values

correspond to lower elasticities of substitution between types, and thus allow higher equilibrium

markups. Figure 9C plots total welfare and not surprisingly this increases with decreases in

X0/X1 and increases in willingness to pay. When standards make goods better complements, we

conclude that consumer and producer interests may coincide.

        It is often the case that in models with imperfect competition, results will depend greatly

on whether or not there is free entry and exit of firms. Recognizing this, we added scale

economies in the form of fixed costs to the X sector, and allowed free entry and exit of firms to

occur until profits are zero in the X sector. We will not go into detail here, but merely report the

differences this makes. In the case of increased substitutability, free entry and exit increases the

change in welfare due to an increase in the elasticity of substitution from 0.5 to 10.0 by about

400%. The lower markups due to the increased elasticity cause about 40% of firms to exit, and

this leads to an efficiency gain of higher output per firm that outweighs a mitigating effect of exit

on markups. Referring back to Figure 8C, we must point out the the absolute effect is small, the

400% being an increase of 4% instead of 1%.

        In the case of increased complementarity, free entry and exit reduces the change in

welfare due to a decrease in X0/X1 (decrease in s). The 20% decrease in X0/X1 in our simulations

results in a welfare gain that is about 96% as large in the case of free entry and exit as it is in case
                                                 23

of a fixed number of firms. This is due to entry of additional firms induced by the lower

elasticity of substitutions. While this difference between free entry and no entry looks small

compared to the case of increased substitutability, the absolute changes are larger in the

complementarity case (consistent with Figures 9ABC), the 96% being an increase of about

10.9% versus 11.3%. In summary then, the assumption of free entry and exit magnifies the

favorable effects of increased substitutability, and reduces the effects in the case of increase

complementarity.
                                                 24

6.     Standards and international arbitrage

      Standards have consequences for the demand and the costs of trading products and

services. In particular, standards can effect the scope for international arbitrage, which has

implications for international consumption distortions, entry of new products and the efficiency

of production in imperfectly competitive markets.

      Different national standards can effect the costs of arbitrage in different ways. More

specifically, differences can raise the variable or the fixed cost of arbitrage. The cost can apply to

all trade with the commodity or only to arbitrage activities. The exact cost structure depends on

border controls, test procedures and the need to adapt foreign varieties to the local market.

Moreover, the effect on individual arbitrage by consumers and commercial arbitrage by parallel

traders is potentially different. For sufficiently high costs, however, arbitrage is completely

blocked irrespective of the type of arbitrage we are considering.

      Throughout this section we focus on the arbitrage costs of different standards. In contrast to

the previous sections, this section analyzes models in which the costs of different standards do

not apply to the manufacturing firms production and distribution of the goods.

      Before we study the effects of different standards it should be noted that arbitrage in

international markets can be modeled in at least three ways, all of which are applied in the

following analysis. One alternative is to derive an equilibrium condition for prices and impose

this constraint on the solution. Under this assumption, arbitrage determines the equilibrium but

does not occur in equilibrium. To the extent that arbitrage is a costly activity, this approach does

not fully take into account the costs associated with price convergence. Another alternative is,

therefore, to model arbitrage as an explicit activity. Arbitrage firms or parallel importers buy the
                                                  25

goods in markets with low prices and ship them to markets with high prices. Under the

assumption of free entry in the arbitrage sector, international price differentials will be bounded

by the average cost of arbitrage. A final alternative is to focus on two extreme cases with fully

integrated and perfectly segmented markets. The former case corresponding to a common

standard in all markets and the latter case representing an equilibrium with different national

standards. This is a particularly convenient way to model different national standards as a

prohibitive cost for arbitrage.

      In some cases commercial arbitrage is explicitly prohibited. For instance, parallel importers

are generally not allowed to exploit international price differentials for patented, copyrighted or

trade marked products between developing countries and the European Union. In other cases,

individual arbitrage is prohibitively costly due to increasing returns to scale in the transportation

technology, which makes it reasonable to focus on parallel trade.

      The modeling approach should, therefore, be determined by the type of arbitrage and the

costs associated with different arbitrage activities.



(i) Standards and international consumption distortions

      First, we focus on the interaction between standards and “individual arbitrage”, which

refers to consumers buying the goods directly from a foreign market.

      We have previously noted that standards can raise the fixed as well as the variable cost of

arbitrage. There is no reason to rule out either of the barriers to arbitrage a priori. In many cases

standards can be thought of as a mix of fixed and variable arbitrage costs of importing a good to

a market with a different local standard. Testing procedures and border controls are mainly fixed
                                                     26

costs. Increasing returns to scale in the transportation technology adds to this cost structure.

Adapting the product to the local market may result in variable as well as fixed arbitrage costs.

Both variable and fixed arbitrage costs of different standards can be incorporated in a derived

individual arbitrage condition.

       Consider a model with two goods X and Y, and two countries H and F. The price of Y is

normalized to 1. The price of X is pH in country H and pF in country F. A representative consumer

in market H has a utility function U(X,Y) and income I. Good X has different standards in country

H and F and importing X from country F to country H is associated with a variable arbitrage cost

t and a fixed arbitrage cost T.

       The arbitrage condition for country H can be stated in the following way: the utility of

buying the local standard of X at local prices must be at least as high as the utility of buying the

foreign standard at foreign prices, including all arbitrage costs associated with the different

standard. More formally, the individual arbitrage condition for good X in country H is



(20)            v ( pH , I )  v ( p F  t , I T )



where v(p,I) is the indirect utility function for the representative consumer in market H. For

instance, consider a CES utility function



(21)            U (X,Y )       ( X b  Y b )1/b ,  1/(1 b) .



       Maximizing utility with respect to income gives the indirect utility function
                                                       27

                                               1
                                       ) 1 ) 1
                                (1p       )
(22)            v(p,I )     I                      .
                                       p


       We can now proceed to study the effects of fixed and variable costs associated with

different nationals standards. Evaluating (20) at the fixed cost T gives the arbitrage condition for

country H at pure fixed costs.

       Figure 10 illustrates the arbitrage condition graphically. The domestic consumption bundle

is A at price pH and income I in country H. For some fixed cost T and price pF in country F a

representative consumer in country H is indifferent between A and buying the goods in F at the

foreign consumption bundle A’. It follows that condition (20) is satisfied for any price at least as

high as pF in country F. Moreover, arbitrage may be unprofitable despite a very high price in the

domestic market. At price pF in country F and a fixed cost higher than Tlim arbitrage is not

profitable for consumers in market H at any price in the domestic market.

       Next, evaluating (20) at the variable cost t is straightforward. It implies that the

conventional arbitrage condition pH  pF  t must hold. The consumer is indifferent between pH

and pF at income I, if and only if the variable transportation cost results in an optimal choice at A

both at domestic and foreign prices.

       The previous results can be used to study the welfare effects of a consumption distortion

caused by different national standards in an international monopoly. If arbitrage is permitted, it

imposes a restriction on the international price differential but no arbitrage will actually occur in

equilibrium. Sector Y is assumed to be perfectly competitive with marginal cost equal to one. X

is produced at marginal cost mcj in market j=H, F. Xj (pj ) is the consumption of X in market j.
                                                  28

There is a single manufacturing firm in sector X, which is selling the product in market F and H.

The cost of different standards apply to individual arbitrage only and the manufacturing firm can

distribute two different standards of X without additional costs. Since trade is costless for the

manufacturing firm and the marginal cost is fixed, production can be located in country H or F

without any implications for the equilibrium. The monopolist in sector X sets prices pH and pF to

maximize



(23)               M Xj ( pj ) ( pj mc )
                   j H,F




subject to (20).

       Figures 11A – D present the simulation of this partial-equilibrium model with fixed and

variable arbitrage costs of different national standards. It is assumed that the elasticity of

substitution is H 2 in market H and F 3 in market F and the marginal cost is equal in both

markets, i.e. mcH = mcF = 0.50.

       In the perfectly segmented equilibrium with prohibitively costly arbitrage the monopolist

would set prices pH =1.366 and pF = 1. Figure 11A plots the price differential pH - pF for different

variable and fixed arbitrage costs when individual arbitrage is permitted. For T=0, the price

differential increases linearly in the variable arbitrage cost to t=0.366, where arbitrage is

unprofitable at segmented prices. A fixed arbitrage cost T, on the other hand, makes arbitrage

unprofitable at rather low values. For any T > 0.14, segmented prices satisfy the individual

arbitrage condition. A rather small fixed arbitrage cost of different national standards could,

therefore, support the assumption of segmented international markets. Figure 11B illustrates the
                                                 29

welfare effects. Total welfare is calculated as a welfare index, which is set to 100 in the

segmented equilibrium. The simulation shows that total welfare including monopoly profits is

some 2 percent higher in the integrated equilibrium than in a segmented equilibrium with

prohibitively costly different national standards. The main reason for the increase in total welfare

is that equalized prices in country H and F results in a reduction of the international consumption

distortion caused by different local prices in the segmented equilibrium. However, it is also

interesting to note that the benefits are asymmetrically distributed in country H and F. Figure

11C-D show the difference in consumer welfare in country F and country H. Despite a moderate

increase in total welfare, we see a sharp decline in consumer welfare in country F, i.e. the low-

price country, as the arbitrage costs of different national standards are reduced. Figure 11D

shows that consumer welfare in country F falls approximately 6 percent as the arbitrage cost of

different standards are reduced. Correspondingly, the consumer welfare in country H increases

more than 9 percent as illustrated in Figure 11C. Reducing the arbitrage cost of different

standards reduces the consumption distortion caused by different prices and result in higher total

welfare, but the winners are the consumers in high-price countries while consumers in low-price

countries and entrepreneurs are losing.

      The welfare effects in low-price countries can, however, be quite different when the cost of

the different standards apply not only to the arbitrage activity but also to the output decision of

the monopolist. If different national standards raise the real production and distribution cost for

the manufacturing firm, it can change the optimal output for the manufacturing firm. One

important difference between a fixed and variable trade cost of different national standards is that

the latter (but not the former) change the marginal incentives of the monopolist. This effect can
                                                  30

be studied in our model.

      Let the variable cost of different standards apply to both arbitrage and output by the

monopolist. We consider first production of good X in country F, with exports to country H.

Then we consider production of good X in country H, with exports to country F. It is assumed

that the arbitrage cost and the real trade cost of different standards is the same for individual

consumers and the manufacturing firm. The marginal cost in market j is t + mcj when the

monopolist is exporting the product to market j (assuming a symmetric cost from H to F and F to

H). It is assumed that the individual arbitrage condition holds in equilibrium. In other words,

arbitrage is a constraint on the international price differential in sector X, but no arbitrage occurs

in equilibrium.

      Figures 12A – D illustrate the simulations. Figure 12A shows the prices in market H and F

when the monopolist is exporting from the market F to H. If the variable trade cost increases, the

higher marginal cost in market H results in a higher optimal price in this market. The higher price

in market H results in a higher (not lower) price in market F due to the arbitrage activity for low

variable costs. For very high variable costs the revenues in market H is a small share of the total

profit of the monopolist and the arbitrage condition has less impact on the price in market F, and

eventually the price in market F is falling. Welfare in market F has a u-shaped form as illustrated

in Figure 12C. Consumers in market F prefer no difference in national standards, i.e. no variable

cost (t=0), to standards that result in a moderate variable cost. For consumers in market H the

integrated equilibrium (with t=0) dominates any other equilibrium for consumers in market H.

Next, Figure 12B shows the prices in market H and F when the monopolist is exporting from

market H to F. A higher marginal cost in market F (including the trade cost) results in a higher
                                                  31

optimal price in market F. For low variable costs the arbitrage condition binds but the effect on

the price in market H is less strong. For high variable costs the arbitrage condition is not binding.

For very high variable costs the price in market F is even higher than the price in market H.

Again consumers in market H prefer the integrated equilibrium. Moreover, figure 12 d shows

that consumers in market F prefer the integrated equilibrium to any difference in national

standards.



(ii) Standards and parallel trade

     One important alternative to individual arbitrage is commercial arbitrage, i.e. arbitrage

undertaken by firms. Commercial arbitrage in products protected by intellectual property rights –

trademarks, patents and copyrights – is often referred to as “parallel imports” or “gray market

imports” when the trade occurs without the intellectual property right holder’s consent.

Although, commercial arbitrage is a wider term than parallel imports we will use the terms

synonymously in the subsequent analysis.

     The most important reason for commercial arbitrage as an alternative to individual arbitrage

is increasing returns to scale in the trade activity. A fixed cost of different national standards can

make individual arbitrage prohibitively costly, but still feasible for commercial arbitrage firms.

      We extend the partial-equilibrium model from the previous subsection to allow for

commercial arbitrage. The model still has two goods X and Y, and two countries H and F. The

price of X is pH in country H and pF in country F. It is assumed that H is the high-price country

and F is the low-price country in equilibrium. The costs of different standards apply to arbitrage

activities but do not apply to the production and distribution by the manufacturing firm. A
                                                  32

monopolist produces X for markets H and F at marginal cost mcj in market j=H, F. Without loss

of generality it is assumed that production is located in H. The monopolist chooses outputs for

market H and F. Then n arbitrage firms non-cooperatively choose to ship a quantity xa from the

high-price market to the low-price market. In its shipment decision each arbitrage firm takes the

other arbitrage firms’ quantities as given.

       The commercial arbitrage condition for country H can be stated in the following way: the

price differential between market H and market F must be less than or equal to the average cost

for an arbitrage firm to import the product from market F. More explicitly, the commercial

arbitrage condition for good X in country H is



                                T
(24)             | pH p F |         t
                                xa


where xa is the quantity shipped from market F to market H by the arbitrage firm. T is the fixed

arbitrage cost and t is the variable arbitrage cost. In other words, condition (24) is a free entry

condition for the arbitrage activity. Arbitrage firms enter until there is no excess profit in

equilibrium.

       In the following analysis we focus on a pure fixed arbitrage cost of different national

standards and no variable arbitrage cost, i.e. t=0. Assuming that all arbitrage firms are identical

the total arbitrage quantity is


                            ( p H pF ) n
(25)             Xa
                         dp H / dX dpF / dX
                                                   33
                        a
subject to Xj ( pj ) Xj ( p H , pF )  0 , which follows from the n first order conditions of the

                                                                    a
arbitrage firms. Let the exported quantity from F be denoted XF           X a and the identical

                                        a
imported quantity in H be denoted XH        X a . The monopolist in sector X set prices pH and pF to

maximize



                                   a
(26)             M ( Xj ( pj ) Xj ( pH , p F ) ) ( pj mc )
                j H,F




        Figure 13A – C shows the results of the simulation of this partial-equilibrium model. It is

assumed that the elasticity of substitution is H 2 in market H and F 3 in market F and the

marginal cost is equal in both markets, i.e. mcH = mcF = 0.50. Both markets have a large but

identical number of consumers. The fixed arbitrage cost T is redefined to be in per-capita terms

for the arbitrage firms, i.e. T = TF/S, where TF is the fixed arbitrage cost of the standard and S is

the number of consumers. TF is prohibitive to an individual consumer. The variable arbitrage

cost is zero (t=0).

       The optimal prices in the segmented equilibrium without arbitrage is pH =1.366 and pF = 1.

Figure 13A shows how prices in market F and H changes when more arbitrage firms enter the

market. The price in market H falls sharply when the first arbitrage firm enters the market.

Correspondingly, the price in market F is raised as soon as arbitrage firms start to enter. The

price in both markets converges to pH =pF =1.117 as the number of arbitrage firms goes to

infinity. This correspond to the integrated equilibrium price with costless individual arbitrage.

       Figure 13B illustrates how the price differential between market H and F depends on the
                                                   34

fixed arbitrage cost of the standard. The fixed arbitrage cost determines the number of arbitrage

firms. For a high fixed arbitrage cost, less arbitrage firms find it profitable to enter.

Consequently, the price differential between market H and F increases in the fixed arbitrage cost

of the standard. The profit of the monopolist is increasing in the fixed arbitrage cost of the

standard.

      The total welfare effects depend on the size of the fixed arbitrage cost. Figure 13C

illustrates the total welfare index (set to 100 in the segmented equilibrium). The total welfare

(including monopoly profits) is approximately 2 percent higher in the integrated equilibrium.

Total welfare falls as the fixed cost increases. The main reason is a larger price differential

between market H and F, which results in an international consumption distortion identical to the

distortion in the previous section (6.i).



(iii) Standards and marketing of new products

      Different national standards can be used to facilitate the introduction of products in

markets with large variation in preferences or income. More specifically, different local standards

may be used to promote investment in marketing and (partial) entry of products in low-income

markets. A monopolist may find it profitable to introduce a new product in a low-income country

as long as the supply in this market does not spill-over to a high-income market but unprofitable

if he is forced to charge the same price to consumers in both high- and low-income markets.

Under such conditions different national standards can be used to prevent arbitrage and facilitate

marketing of new products in low-income or low-valuation markets.

      The interaction between arbitrage and entry can be modeled as a discrete choice to enter a
                                                                 35

market or stay out. It can alternatively be modeled as a problem of partial entry, e.g. investment

in marketing. We modify our international monopoly model along the lines of this latter

modeling approach. The monopolist incurs a cost c ( j ) to inform a fraction j of the consumers

in market j about product X, where c ( j ) > 0 , c ( j ) < 0 . The resulting demand for product X



(27)            Dj ( j , p j )      j Xj ( pj )



and the monopolist maximizes



(28)             M       Dj ( pj ) ( p j mc )       c ( j ) .
                j H,F




        In the segmented equilibrium, prices are independent of the level of information in

market H and F. The first order conditions with respect to j is



(29)            j ( pj )         c ( j )   0



where j ( pj ) is the per capita revenue in market j from informed consumers. Segmented prices

maximizes j ( pj ) and (29) implies that information is maximized at these prices. A direct

consequence of this result is that arbitrage, i.e. a reduced price differential, reduces the

information in both markets. In other words, different national standards and market

segmentation can promote entry and investment across different markets.

       Figures 14A – B illustrate the results of the simulations for this model. We have simplified
                                                   36

the demand in market j to be Dj ( j , pj )   j ( aj p j ) , where aH 3 , a F 2 . In the segmented

equilibrium without arbitrage the optimal prices are pH =1.5 and pF = 1. For any variable arbitrage

cost t>0.5 segmented prices are robust to arbitrage. The optimal levels of information in the

segmented equilibrium are H 0.562 , F 0.25 . The effect of arbitrage on the information in

market H and market F is illustrated in Figure 14A. Compared to the segmented equilibrium the

information in market F is some 13 percent lower in the equilibrium without different national

standards (i.e. t=0). Correspondingly, the information in market H is approximately 1 percent

lower. In other words, the monopolist finds it less profitable to invest in marketing in the low-

price country when it is forced to charge the same price in both markets. Figure 14B shows the

effect on total welfare. We compare the total welfare when the information in both markets is

fixed to the segmented level with the welfare at endogenous information levels. Total welfare

including monopoly profits is measured as an index which is equal to 100 in the segmented

equilibrium. The result shows that the negative effect of less provision of information at very low

variable costs dominates the positive effect of the reduced international price differential.

Welfare in the integrated equilibrium is 0.3 percent lower compared to the perfectly segmented

equilibrium. Welfare is approximately 0.7 percent higher at intermediate variable arbitrage costs,

due to a relatively small negative effect on information but moderate positive effect on the price

differential.



(iv) Standards and production efficiency under increasing returns to scale

      So far we have considered optimal pricing by a monopoly (similar results hold for any

fixed number of manufacturing firms) and we have concluded that different national standards
                                                       37

can result in international consumption distortions but also enhance entry of products in low-

income markets. Another important effect of standards, however, is the effect on production

efficiency and the number of firms active in equilibrium. We have previously illustrated that a

reduced arbitrage cost of different standard may lead to a reduced international price differential

in imperfectly competitive industries. Consequently, market integration may reduce the profits of

firms, which potentially can lead to exit and more efficient production. This effect can be

illustrated in a very simple model.

       Consider again a model with two goods X and Y, and two countries H and F. The X sector

is imperfectly competitive but entry and exit is free, n firms incur a fixed cost C and non-

cooperatively choose quantities for market F and H. The marginal cost of production is assumed

to be mc in both markets and for all firms. There are no trade costs and the costs of different

standards do not apply to manufacturing firms.

       First, it is assumed that different national standards makes arbitrage prohibitively costly

and result in perfectly segmented markets and the first order condition for firm i in the X sector is


                 d pj ( X j )
(30)                            xji ( pj ( Xj ) mc )   0
                    d xji



for market j=F,H, where xji is the quantity chosen by firm i in market j. The number of firms is

determined by the free entry condition



(31)             M ( pj ( n xj ) mc ) xj           C0
                j H,F
                                                   38

where n is the complementary variable and xj the non-cooperative equilibrium quantity with n

firms.

         With a common standards in all markets it is assumed that markets are perfectly integrated

and the first order condition for firm i in sector X is reduced to



                  dp ( X )
(32)                       xi ( p ( X ) mc )   0
                    dxi

where p(X) is the inverse demand function for the integrated market and xi is the quantity chosen

by firm i for the integrated market. The number of firms is determined by the free entry condition



(33)              ( p ( n x ) mc ) x   C0



where n is the complementary variable.

         Figures 15A-D report the results of the simulations of this model. We have simplified the

demand in market j to be Dj ( pj )     ( aj p j ) , where aH 3 , a F 2 . The fixed cost of

manufacturing ranges from 0.0 to 1.0. In the equilibrium with a fixed cost equal to 0 the price is

defined to be equal to the marginal cost, i.e. p=mc. Figure 15A illustrates equilibrium prices.

Prices are increasing in the fixed cost of production as less and less firms find it profitable to

enter the market. In the segmented equilibrium, prices (PRICEHS and PRICEFS) are more and

more dispersed as the fixed cost increases. A smaller number of firms gives each remaining firm

more market power and the scope for price differentiation increases. The integrated price

(PRICEHI) is lower than the segmented price in market H but higher than the segmented price in
                                                  39

market F. We have also computed the integrated equilibrium price for the same number of firms

as in the segmented equilibrium (PRICEC). This price is lower than the integrated price as more

firms are active in equilibrium, but the difference is very small.

      Figure 15B shows the effect on total welfare. Welfare is measured as an index set to 100

for the segmented equilibrium at every level of the fixed cost, i.e. it is reindex to 100 in the

segmented equilibrium for every C. The total welfare in the integrated equilibrium is higher than

the total welfare in the segmented equilibrium for any given fixed cost. The difference between

total welfare in the segmented and integrated equilibrium is increasing in the fixed cost

(WELF_T). Total welfare is almost 5 percent higher in the integrated equilibrium than in the

segmented equilibrium when the fixed cost is close to one. The total welfare difference between

the integrated and segmented equilibrium is the sum of the reduced international consumption

distortion and more efficient production when some firms exit the market. The positive effect of

the reduced international consumption distortion is measured as the increase in welfare in an

integrated equilibrium without exit (WELF_P). Approximately 2/3 of the welfare gain can be

attributed to a reduced international consumption distortion and 1/3 to more efficient production.

      Figures 15C and D show that the benefits from market integration is not distributed

equally. Consumers in market F are better off in the segmented equilibrium and consumers in

market H are better off in the integrated equilibrium.
                                                 40

7.     Summary

       The purpose of this paper is to consider approaches to formally modeling standards and

technical regulations governing trade. A criterion for the analysis is that they be potentially

implementable in applied general-equilibrium models with real data.

       The simplest approach to standards is that, when they differ between countries, they

constitute a real trade cost for exports trying to penetrate the foreign market. Our results in this

case indicate that incompatible standards are particularly harmful for small/poor countries who

cannot win a “standards war”.

       Obviously, this situation is often too simple, and in particular standards can prove

beneficial to exporters by certifying their products as safe, healthy, compatible with local

complementary goods (e.g., the electrical supply) and so forth. In section 3, we therefor add to

our analysis by showing alternative ways to model increased willingness to pay be local

consumers for imported products meeting the local standard. We suggest that this must be done

with care, particularly because different methods of modeling willingness to pay will leave to

different welfare effects.

       Section 4 extends section 3 by noting that standards may be more a fixed cost than a

variable cost such as a once-and-for-all redesign cost. If this cost is a quasi “public good” across

firms, then there may be multiple equilibria. In one, firms export while in another, local firms do

not export. We illustrate that the welfare differences between these two outcomes may be large,

creating an important coordination role for public policy.

       Section 5 notes how standards can alter the substitutability or complementarity between

local and foreign products. As in section 3, we note that this has to be modeled carefully so as
                                                41

not to produce misleading welfare results. Our examples indicate that consumers and

imperfectly- competitive firms will have opposing interests when standards increase

substitutability, but have reinforcing interests when standards increase complementarity.

       Section 6 analyzes how standards alter the ability of consumers and independent (from

the manufacturer) firms to conduct arbitrage and parallel trade. We assume that the original

manufacturer has no costs in meeting different standards (and indeed sometimes creates them

precisely to defeat arbitrage) while other firms and consumers do. Plausible assumptions predict

that the manufacturer may set a lower price in a foreign (e.g., developing) country than in its

home country if it can segment the two markets via different standards. The ability of

independent firms to arbitrage may increase total world welfare but may worsen the welfare in

the developing country as the original manufacturer raises prices there to prevent arbitrage, or

engages in less informative advertising.

       In all sections, we develop simple numerical models to compute solutions, illustrating

that our approaches are implementable. Significant obstacles to full implementation with real

data remain, however, since the beneficial effects of standards, and indeed often the costs, are

largely unobservable in published data.
Table 1: Standard in country h imposes a fixed cost for entering
        the export market in country f (creates multiple equilibria)


                                   Country h                  Country f


                              cons h   profit h   welf h   cons f   profit f   welf f


Benchmark
cost = 0                       1.000     1.000    1.000    1.000     1.000     1.000
wtp = 1.0




        eq. with exports       0.989     1.060    0.996    0.987     0.843     0.973
cost = 0.1
wtp = 1.0
        eq. with no exports    0.923     1.540    0.985    0.958     0.649     0.927




        eq. with exports       0.997     1.019    0.999    1.001     0.980     0.999
cost = 0.1
wtp = 1.10
        eq. with no exports    0.923     1.540    0.985    0.958     0.649     0.927




        eq. with exports       1.008     0.977    1.005    1.023     1.260     1.041
cost = 0.1
wtp = 1.25
        eq. with no exports    0.923     1.540    0.985    0.958     0.649     0.927
         Table 2: Calibration for the models of sections 2-4.

           YH     YF     XH    XHH    XHF     XF    XFF    XFH    WHC    WFC    WHE    WFE   CONH    CONF   ENTH   ENTF    ROW
                                                                                                                           SUM
CY        200     50                                              -180    -45    -20    -5                                   0
                                                                                                                             0
CXH                     160    -128   -32                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                             0
CXHH                           160                                -144           -16                                         0
                                                                                                                             0
CXHF                                   40                                 -36           -4                                   0
                                                                                                                             0
CXF                                           40     -8     -32                                                              0
                                                                                                                             0
CXFF                                                 10                    -9           -1                                   0
                                                                                                                             0
CXFH                                                        40     -36            -4                                         0
                                                                                                                             0
UTILH                                                              360           40           -360           -40             0
                                                                                                                             0
UTILF                                                                     90            10            -90           -10      0
                                                                                                                             0
LH        -160           -40                                                                  200                            0
                                                                                                                             0
KH         -40          -120                                                                  160                            0
                                                                                                                             0
LF               -40                         -10                                                       50                    0
                                                                                                                             0
KF               -10                         -30                                                       40                    0
                                                                                                                             0
MKHH                            -32                                                                           32             0
                                                                                                                             0
MKHF                                   -8                                                                      8             0
                                                                                                                             0
MKFF                                                 -2                                                               2      0
                                                                                                                             0
MKFH                                                         -8                                                       8      0
                                                                                                                             0
COLUMN      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0      0      0      0
SUM


A column sum of zero indicates "zero profits" or more relevant here, product exhaustion (because entrepreneurs earn
      profits) for an acitivity. Revenues received from sales are exhausted in payments to factors and markup revenues

A row sum of zero indicates market clearing; e.g., supply equals demand for that good or factor, or that markup revenues
       are some agent's income.
                                   Figure 1A: Effect of a large-country standard on the large country
                                  1.25
Indices of profits and consumer




                                  1.15
           real income




                                                                                                        PROFH
                                                                                                        WCONH


                                  1.05




                                  0.95
                                         0     0.1      0.2       0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6
                                                 Standard cost to small-country firms



                                     Figure 1B: Effect of a large-country standard on the small country
                                  1.05

                                     1
Indices of profit and consumer




                                  0.95

                                   0.9

                                  0.85
          real income




                                   0.8                                                                    PROFF
                                                                                                          WCONF
                                  0.75

                                   0.7

                                  0.65

                                   0.6
                                         0     0.1      0.2       0.3      0.4       0.5      0.6

                                                Standard cost to small-country firms
                                           Figure 2A: Effect of a small-country standard on the large country
                                        1.01
Indices of profits and consumer real




                                          1


                                        0.99
               income




                                                                                                                PROFH
                                        0.98                                                                    WCONH


                                        0.97


                                        0.96


                                        0.95
                                               0     0.1        0.2        0.3        0.4         0.5   0.6

                                                           Standard cost to large-country firms




                                           Figure 2B: Effect of a small-country standard on the small country
                                        1.06
 Indices of profits and consumer real




                                        1.04

                                        1.02

                                          1                                                                     PROFF
                income




                                                                                                                WCONF
                                        0.98

                                        0.96

                                        0.94

                                        0.92

                                         0.9
                                               0     0.1        0.2        0.3        0.4         0.5   0.6
                                                           Standard cost to large-country firms
                                                  Figure 3A: Effect of bilateral costs on the large country
                                        1.3
Indices of profit and consumer




                                       1.25

                                        1.2

                                       1.15
            surplus




                                                                                                                    PROFH
                                        1.1
                                                                                                                    WCONH
                                       1.05

                                         1

                                       0.95

                                        0.9
                                              0        0.1         0.2        0.3         0.4         0.5     0.6

                                                             Standard cost to both countries' firms




                                                  Figure 3B: Effect of bilateral costs on the small country
                                       1.02
Indicies of profit and consumer real




                                       0.97
               income




                                                                                                                    PROFF
                                       0.92
                                                                                                                    WCONF



                                       0.87




                                       0.82
                                              0        0.1         0.2        0.3        0.4          0.5   0.6
                                                             Standard cost to both countries' firms
     Figure 4A: Standard increases willingness
     to pay for Xf, version 1
Xf
                              UX0 with standard




        X1

                                              UX0 with no
                     0
                     X                        standard


                                                            Xh



     Figure 4B: Standard increases willingness
     to pay for Xf, version 2
Xf
                              UX0 with no
                              standard



                         X1


                                            UX0 with
                                            standard

                X0


                                                            Xh
             Figure 5A: Effect of a large-country standard on firm profits in the small
                                              country


Profits

          1.25

          1.15

          1.05

           0.95

           0.85

           0.75




                                                                                                                                                     0.50
           0.65




                                                                                                                                                   0.47
                  0.30




                                                                                                                                                  0.44
                         0.27




                                                                                                                                          0.41
                                0.24




                                                                                                                                   0.38
                                       0.21




                                                                                                                            0.35
                                              0.18




                                                                                                                     0.32
                                                     0.15

                                                            0.12




                                                                                                              0.29
                                                                   0.09




                                                                                                       0.26
                                                                                                                               Willingness to pay for
                                                                          0.06




            Standard costs to
                                                                                                0.23
                                                                                 0.03


                                                                                         0.20
                                                                                                                               small country's goods
                                                                                        0.00

            small country's firms



          Figure 5B: Effect of a large-country standard on consumer welfare in the
                                        small country

 Consumer
 welfare

          1.03

          1.02

          1.01

             1

          0.99

           0.98
                                                                                                                                                     0.50




           0.97
                                                                                                                                                   0.47
                  0.3




                                                                                                                                                  0.44
                         0.27




                                                                                                                                           0.41
                                0.24




                                                                                                                                   0.38
                                       0.21




                                                                                                                            0.35
                                              0.18




                                                                                                                     0.32
                                                     0.15

                                                            0.12




                                                                                                              0.29
                                                                   0.09




                                                                                                       0.26




                                                                                                                               Willingness to pay for
                                                                          0.06




            Standard costs to
                                                                                                0.23
                                                                                 0.03


                                                                                        0.20




            small country's firms                                                                                              small country's goods
                                                                                          0
 Figure 6A: Standards improve the
 substitutability between products
X2

                         UX0 with no
                         standard




                                          UX0 with standard
                                          (increased
                          X0
                                          substitutability)




             450
                                                           X1



     Figure 6B: Standards also alter cost or
     willingness to pay
X2
                        UX0 with no
                        standard
                                       UX1, UX2, UX3 are
                                       in order of decreasing
                               450     cost, increased
                                       willingness to pay



       UX3



                    2
                                              UX1
                   UX
                                                            X1
     Figure 7A: Standards improve the
     complementarity between products
X2

                     UX0 with no
                     standard




                           X0
                                          UX0 with standard
                                          (increased
                                          complementarity)
       X1


            450
                                                               X1



     Figure 7B: Standards also alter cost or
     willingness to pay
X2
                    UX0 with no
                    standard


                                450



                                      UX1, UX2, UX3 are
                                      in order of decreasing
                                      cost, increased
                                      willingness to pay
      UX3

              2                                UX1
            UX                                                 X1
                Figure 8A: Consumer welfare, standards improve substitutibility

                                                                                                                                                        Consumer welfare (no
                                                                                                                                                        standard = 100)

                                                                                                                                                                                  122

                                                                                                                                                                                  118

                                                                                                                                                                                 114

                                                                                                                                                                                 110

                                                                                                                                                                                 106

                                                                                                                                                                                 102

                                                                                                                                                                                 98

                                                                                                                                                                                 94
           10




                                                                                                                                                                         1.15
                9




                                                                                                                                                                 1.125
                    8




                                                                                                                                                         1.1
                         7




                                                                                                                                                1.075
                             6




                                                                                                                                         1.05
                                                                                                                                1.025
                                     5




                                                                                                                       1
                                             4

                                                                                                              0.975
                                                     3
                                                                                                     0.95
Elasticity of substitution                                   2
                                                                                           0.925



                                                                     1
                                                                                  0.9




(no standard = 0.5)                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                              Willingness to pay or (inverse)
                                                                                                                              cost (no standard = 1)



                        Figure 8B: Firm profits, standards improve substitutibility
                                                                                                                                                           Firm profits (no
                                                                                                                                                           standard = 100)

                                                                                                                                                                                  110

                                                                                                                                                                                  100

                                                                                                                                                                                  90

                                                                                                                                                                                  80

                                                                                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                 30
      10
                                                                                                                                                                         1.150




           9
                                                                                                                                                                 1.125




                8
                                                                                                                                                         1.100




                    7
                                                                                                                                                1.075




                         6
                                                                                                                                        1.050
                                                                                                                               1.025




                                 5
                                                                                                                      1.000




                                         4
                                                                                                            0.975




                                                 3
                                                                                                   0.950




                                                         2
                                                                                        0.925




Elasticity of substitution                                       1                                                             Willingness to pay or (inverse)
                                                                               0.900




                                                                         0.5
(no standard = 0.5)                                                                                                            cost (no standard = 1)
                  Figure 8C: Total welfare, standards improve substitutibility
                                                                                                                Total welfare (no
                                                                                                                standard = 100)

                                                                                                                                    109


                                                                                                                                    106


                                                                                                                                   103


                                                                                                                                   100


                                                                                                                                   97


                                                                                                                                   94
     10




                                                                                                                            1.15
          9




                                                                                                                    1.125
              8




                                                                                                              1.1
                  7




                                                                                                      1.075
                      6




                                                                                               1.05
                                                                                       1.025
                          5
                              4                                                  1
                                                                         0.975


                                  3
                                                                  0.95




                                      2
                                                          0.925




Elasticity of substitution                1                                          Willingness to pay or (inverse)
                                                    0.9




                                              0.5
(no standard = 0.5)                                                                  cost (no standard = 1)
                   Figure 9A: Consumer welfare, standards improve complementarity

                                                                                                                                       Consumer welfare (no
                                                                                                                                       standard = 100)
                                                                                                                                                                      115

                                                                                                                                                                      112.5

                                                                                                                                                                  110

                                                                                                                                                                  107.5

                                                                                                                                                                  105

                                                                                                                                                                  102.5

                                                                                                                                                                  100

                                                                                                                                                                  97.5

                                                                                                                                                                 95
   0.8
          0.82




                                                                                                                                                          1.05
                   0.84




                                                                                                                                                  1.04
                            0.86




                                                                                                                                           1.03
                                                                                                                                    1.02
                                    0.88




                                                                                                                             1.01
                                               0.9




                                                                                                                         1
                                                      0.92




                                                                                                                0.99
                                                              0.94




                                                                                                         0.98
                                                                      0.96




                                                                                                  0.97
 Ratio of X to X
                        1               0
                                                                                           0.96                  Willingness to pay or (inverse)
                                                                             0.98




                                                                                    0.95
                                                                                    1




 (no standard = 1)                                                                                               cost (no standard = 1)




                             Figure 9B: Firm Profits, standards improve complementarity

                                                                                                                                            Firm profits (no
                                                                                                                                            standard = 100)

                                                                                                                                                                  130

                                                                                                                                                                  125

                                                                                                                                                                 120

                                                                                                                                                                 115

                                                                                                                                                                 110

                                                                                                                                                                 105

                                                                                                                                                                 100

                                                                                                                                                                 95
    0.8
            0.82




                                                                                                                                                         1.05
                    0.84




                                                                                                                                                  1.04
                             0.86




                                                                                                                                           1.03
                                                                                                                                    1.02
                                        0.88




                                                                                                                             1.01
                                                0.9




                                                                                                                        1
                                                       0.92




                                                                                                                0.99
                                                               0.94




                                                                                                         0.98
                                                                      0.96




                    1               0                                                             0.97
Ratio of X to X                                                                            0.96                        Willingness to pay or (inverse)
                                                                             0.98




                                                                                    0.95
                                                                                    1




(no standard = 1)                                                                                                      cost (no standard = 1)
                             Figure 9C: Total welfare, standards improve complementarity

                                                                                                                                              Total welfare (no
                                                                                                                                              standard = 100)

                                                                                                                                                             115

                                                                                                                                                             112.5

                                                                                                                                                            110
                                                                                                                                                            107.5

                                                                                                                                                            105
                                                                                                                                                            102.5
                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                                                                                                                            97.5
                                                                                                                                                            95
     0.8
           0.82




                                                                                                                                                     1.05
                      0.84




                                                                                                                                              1.04
                             0.86




                                                                                                                                       1.03
                                                                                                                                1.02
                                        0.88




                                                                                                                         1.01
                                               0.9




                                                                                                                     1
                                                     0.92




                                                                                                             0.99
                                                            0.94




                                                                                                      0.98
                                                                   0.96




                  1                 0                                                          0.97                 Willingness to pay or (inverse)
Ratio of X to X                                                                         0.96
                                                                          0.98




                                                                                 0.95                               cost (no standard = 1)
                                                                                 1




(no standard = 1)
Figure 10. Individual arbitrage conditions

       Y
   I

           B
 I-T

                 A

I-T lim

                               A’

                     B’   PH
                                             PF
                                    PF

   0                                              X
            Figure 11A. Price differential in an international monopoly


   Price diff
   in sector
       X

      0.4

     0.35

      0.3

     0.25

       0.2

      0.15                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                  0.35
       0.1                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                              0.25
      0.05
                                                                                           0.2
            0                                                                            0.15
                                                                                      0.1
                0.14
                       0.12                                                         0.05
                              0.10
                                      0.08
                                              0.06                              0    Variable arbitrage cost
Fixed arbitrage cost of standard                       0.04
                                                               0.02
                                                                       0.00               of standard




        Figure 11B. Global welfare in an international monopoly
 Welfare
  index


    102.5

     102

    101.5

      101

    100.5

      100                                                                                       0
                                                                                              0.05
      99.5                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                          0.15
        99
                                                                                       0.2
      98.5                                                                           0.25
                0.14                                                               0.3
                       0.12
                              0.10                                              0.35
                                     0.08                                            Variable arbitrage cost
                                             0.06                             0.4
                                                      0.04
                                                              0.02                        of standard
                   Fixed arbitrage cost of standard                   0.00
                                   Figure 11C. Welfare of consumers in H
         Welfare
         index in
         market F


         110

         108

         106

         104

         102

         100

           98
           96                                                                                                         0.02

           94                                                                                                  0.06
                0.4
                         0.35                                                                         0.10
                                  0.3
                                         0.25
                                                0.2
                                                       0.15                               0.14
                                                              0.1                                            Fixed arbitrage cost of
         Variable arbitrage cost of standard                          0.05
                                                                               0                                    standard




                                       Figure 11D. Welfare of consumers in F


Welfare
index in
market F 100

          99

          98

          97

          96

          95                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                   0.35
           94                                                                                                    0.3
                                                                                                               0.25
           93
                                                                                                            0.2
           92                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                               Variable arbitrage cost
                      0.14                                                                                            of standard
                                0.12                                                                 0.05
                                        0.10
                                                0.08
                                                       0.06                                      0
    Fixed arbitrage cost of standard                           0.04
                                                                        0.02
                                                                                   0.00
                             Figure 12A. Prices in a monopoly with trade and
                              arbitrage costs (production in F, exports to H)

                       2.2

                        2
Price in H and F




                       1.8
                                                                                   PRICEH
                       1.6
                                                                                   PRICEF
                       1.4

                       1.2

                        1
                             0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9           1
                                        Variable trade and arbitrage cost t



                             Figure 12B. Prices in a monopoly with trade and
                              arbitrage costs (production in H, exports to F)

                       2.6
                       2.4
                       2.2
    Price in H and F




                         2
                                                                                   PRICEH
                       1.8
                                                                                   PRICEF
                       1.6
                       1.4
                       1.2
                         1
                             0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9           1
                                         Variable trade and arbitrage cost t
                                           Figure 12C. Consumer welfare in F for a monopoly with
                                                      variable trade and arbitrage cost
                                                       (production in F, exports to H)                              CONSF

                            1.35


                           1.345


                            1.34


                           1.335
        Consumer welfare




                            1.33


                           1.325


                            1.32


                           1.315


                            1.31


                           1.305
                                       0        0.2    0.4          0.6          0.8               1    1.2   1.4
                                                              Variable trade and arbitrage cost t




                                   Figure 12D. Consumer welfare in F for a monopoly with variable
                                                      trade and arbitrage cost
                                                                                                                       CONSF
                                                (production in H, exports from H to F)
                           1.4


                       1.35


                           1.3
Consumer welfare




                       1.25


                           1.2


                       1.15


                           1.1


                       1.05


                            1
                                   0           0.2    0.4         0.6           0.8            1       1.2    1.4
                                                             Variable arbitrage and trade cost t
                                     Figure 13A. Standards and parallel imports                     PRICEH
                                                                                                    PRICEF
                          1.40


                          1.35


                          1.30
Price in H and F




                          1.25


                          1.20


                          1.15


                          1.10


                          1.05


                          1.00
                                 0           2               4                    6            8           10
                                                        Number of parallel importers




                                       Figure 13B. Standards and parallel imports

                          0.40

                          0.35

                          0.30
      Pricediff H and F




                          0.25

                          0.20

                          0.15

                          0.10

                          0.05

                          0.00
                              0.00    0.01       0.01              0.02               0.02   0.03   0.03
                                                         Fixed arbitrage cost of standard
                                     Figure 13C. Welfare effects of standards
                                               and parallel imports

                        102.50


                        102.00


                        101.50
Welfare index (total)




                        101.00


                        100.50


                        100.00


                         99.50
                              0.00    0.01     0.01             0.02            0.02     0.03   0.03
                                                      Fixed arbitrage cost of standard
                                                                                                                              THETA
                                                        Figure 14A. Standards and information in
                                                                                                                              F
                      0.26
                                                               an international monopoly                              0.563


                                                                                                                      0.562
                      0.25

                                                                                                                      0.561




                                                                                                                              Information in market H
Information in market F




                      0.24

                                                                                                                      0.56
                      0.23
                                                                                                                      0.559

                      0.22
                                                                                                                      0.558

                      0.21
                                                                                                                      0.557


                            0.2                                                                                       0.556
                                              0        0.1                0.2              0.3           0.4    0.5
                                                                   Variable arbitrage cost of standard




                                                  Figure 14B. Welfare with endogenous information
                                           102

                                          101.5

                                           101
                          Welfare index




                                          100.5

                                           100

                                           99.5

                                            99

                                           98.5
                                                  0          0.1            0.2             0.3          0.4   0.5
                                                                   Variable arbitrage cost of standard
                                                                                                               WELFARE
                                                                                                               WELF_FIX_THETA
                                          Figure 15A. Arbitrage and production efficiency
                                    1.6
                                                        - effects on prices

                                    1.4

                                    1.2
                 Price in H and F




                                     1

                                    0.8

                                    0.6

                                    0.4

                                    0.2

                                     0
                                          0      0.1    0.2    0.3       0.4    0.5      0.6       0.7    0.8    0.9   1
                                                                     Fixed cost in manufacturing
                                                                                                                           PRICEHS
                                                                                                                           PRICEHI
                                                                                                                           PRICEFS
                                                                                                                           PRICEC


                                                  Figure 15B. Arbitrage and production efficiency
                                              - relative welfare compared to segmented equilibrium
                            106

                            105

                            104

                            103
Welfare index (total)




                            102

                            101

                            100

                                    99

                                    98

                                    97
                                          0     0.1    0.2    0.3       0.4    0.5      0.6      0.7     0.8    0.9    1
                                                              Fixed cost in manufacturing production
                                                                                                                       WELF_T
                                                                                                                       WELF_P
                                             Figure 15C. Aritrage and production efficiency
                                     - welfare relative to segmented equlibrium for consumers in H

                           3.5

                            3

                           2.5
Welfare of conumers in H




                            2
                                                                                                               CONSHS
                                                                                                               CONSHI
                           1.5

                            1

                           0.5

                            0
                                 1       2    3     4         5       6       7         8     9     10    11
                                                        Fixed cost in manufacturing




                                         Figure 15D. Arbitrage and production efficiency
                                 - welfare relative to segmented equlibrium for consumers in F

                           1.2

                            1
  Consumer welfare in F




                           0.8

                                                                                                               CONSFS
                           0.6
                                                                                                               CONSFI
                           0.4

                           0.2

                            0
                                 0      0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4     0.5     0.6        0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                          Fixed cost in manufacturing
