                                  (     




                                                     
                                                        


                                           !"
                                         "#  !$#
                                             %$ &'#


                                         ( !$ )#!*+,-
                                 .)//000&#! !/))#!/0*+,-


                            1                            
                              2343 %.# 5##
                                "&!6#7  382+*
                                     #




                           
          ! "          
  #    $  %       


&'#  () ( *  ( ' +            " 
  " !    #', !  "           &
      
'# ! 6 $#6 #6
  %!6 #5#6 !    
   !"7 "#  !$# 6 %$         &'#
  ( !$ )#!   *+,-
# 8332
   1387 12+7 -*


                                             $%#%


        .#!# . &## "%. 6%  &  0. # . '6 &# %'6#6  #! ' 9!6#:
#   ;;#!# % !#7 ;!" 6 %5 ! ) .5# <# 6;;#!# 5#0 !#!6 0.%.
#" . '6 = ! . '6  > &# # #6  #.#! ! ) ' ! .# " ;! "  '$  '$
!6# 0. 5#"#7 .# #5! "#7 '& ! 6 ."!. % 6# . ))#! )! 56#  ; !"'
;!"#0 !$ ; ! '?@ .## <#   #")' ?  0 % !?7 0 # &! " 6#' 6
% ! % "# 0.# # !# # #6 #)!#'? 6 0.# .#? !# '$#6   "# ; !"      $#?
% %#)  9% ")!5# #!#:7 '       %!6 % ")!5# 65# (# )! 56# ##!'
!#' 6  #7  )!%'!7 0.#!#  % !? % &##; &? !##  %'6#  #6 #" ; !
0.%.7 0.# 5#0#6 &? #';7 .# % !? 6 #   !#%#5#  ) 5# )? ;;




   !"                                           "#  !$#
#)!"# ; %  "%                                          #)!"# ; %  "%
5#!? ; (##! !                                     5#!? ;  ' !6
 6 7  A 48                                                '6#!7  *3+3B384A
6                                                          6  
. !"CD'0 %                                          D"#"!$#C% ' !6 #6

%$ &'#
#)!"# ; %  "%
5#!? ;  ' !6
   '6#!  *3+3B384A
D%$! &'#C% ' !6 #6
                                INTRODUCTION

  Considerable controversy exists over what issues should and should not be included
in multilateral trade negotiations. Some US and European groups, for example,
want environmental and labor standards included with trade negotiations. Other
groups from these same countries want to link trade with investment liberalization
and intellectual-property protection. Some developing countries want competition
policy included with any negotiations on investment liberalization. Not surprisingly,
a linked negotiation desired by one group is often opposed by some other group; some
writers oppose any linkage (especially trade with environment/labor standards) “on
principle”. The latter see any European or US attempt to link trade and environ-
ment in negotiations with developing countries as morally wrong and simply assume
that the developing countries must be worse o¤ with such a linkage (an assumption
generally shared by those developing countries).
  How is one is to assess the various arguments for and against linking? Two possible
approaches suggest themselves as useful ways to analyze this issue formally. One is to
investigate how treaties linking trade policies with other non-trade policy issues might
(or might not) constrain non-cooperative policy-setting behavior more than would
trade treaties alone. Much of the existing work on linked treaties takes this approach.
The conclusions are decidedly mixed. Spagnolo (2000) argues that linking provides for
more e¢cient enforcement of agreements by permitting more severe punishments for
breaking the agreement. By contrast, Bagwell and Staiger (1999) argue that linking
negotiations on trade with ones on domestic standards provides no bene…ts that can’t
be obtained without linking. Conconi and Perroni (2000) show that linking may help
or hinder creation of a multilateral joint agreement on trade and the environment.
  The alternative is to investigate how linking or not linking a¤ects the actual treaty
negotiation process and so the sorts of agreements that are (or are not) reached. Here,


                                           2
there are no formal analyses of the issues although Copeland and Taylor (1995) and
Abrego et al. (1997) suggest potential bene…ts from linking trade and environmental
treaties. It is this latter approach that we adopt in this paper, providing a bargaining-
theoretic framework for understanding who gains and loses by linking issues.1 The
framework that we employ is purposely simple, considering a situation in which there
are two countries/trading blocs negotiating over two issues. The key distinguishing
feature of the two issues is that one of them is more important to country 1 than
to country 2 while the opposite is true for the other issue. This feature generates a
pattern of “comparative interest” for the two countries in the two issues. This notion
is analogous to Ricardian comparative advantage; it is somewhat more complicated in
that negative payo¤s from a given issue are an important part of the problem. With
multiple issues, negotiations can involve either joint negotiations over both issues –
linking – or some form of separate negotiations on the issues – unlinking. We solve
for the bargaining outcome in the linked setting versus various unlinked settings and
examine which party gains (and which, if either, loses) from a given structure and on
what this outcome depends.
  Our analysis shows that a change in the bargaining structure from one in which
issues are negotiated in isolation to one in which they are negotiated jointly generates
gains for both countries under a wide range of circumstances. These include situations
in which one country cannot receive a positive payo¤ from one issue. This result
means that a country should not necessarily refuse to add an issue to the agenda
just because it cannot receive any positive payo¤ from that issue when viewed in
isolation. Adding this issue may allow the country to extract su¢cient concessions
from its negotiating partner on the other issue as to make the country better o¤
overall. It is only if an issue yields the country an exceptionally large negative payo¤,
   1
       Our analysis draws on but also advances previous theoretical work on multiple issue bargaining
(see especially, Busch and Horstmann (1997, 1999) and Inderst (2000)).



                                                   3
when viewed in isolation, that it pays the country not to link issues.
  The reason that both parties gain, in general, from linking in this situation is
much the same as the reason that trade bene…ts both countries in a Ricardian trade
model. Just as trade allows each country to exchange the good in which it has a
comparative advantage for the good in which it does not, linking allows each country
to trade concessions on the issue in which the country has a comparative disinterest for
concessions from its opponent on the issue in which it has a comparative interest. This
e¢cient trading of concessions is not possible if the issues are bargained independently.
As a result, just as with Ricardian trade, both parties gain from this e¢cient trading
process (via linking). Not linking only bene…ts a country if an issue yields a su¢ciently
large negative payo¤. In this case, not linking provides the country with a credible
commitment not to settle on this issue. This commitment is lost under linking.
  We also examine an alternative notion of unlinked negotiations in which the coun-
tries bargain issues sequentially, not bargaining on the second issue until an agreement
on the …rst has been reached and implemented. Under this notion of unlinking, an
unlinked negotiation in which the issue that is bargained …rst is the one in which a
country has a comparative interest can be preferred by that country to a linked nego-
tiation. In this case, unlinking alters the relative bargaining costs of the two countries
in a such a way that the one country gains even relative to the linked bargain. By
contrast, the other country loses even in comparison to the completely separate ne-
gotiations. Among other things, this outcome points to the fact that, in discussing
linking versus not linking, one must be careful to consider what exactly is meant by
not linking.
  These results carry a clear policy message. If the alternative to linked negotiations
is simultaneous but separate negotiations, then countries can generally bene…t from
linking. In this case, it may well not pay a country to refuse to include an issue
in negotiations simply because the country cannot receive a positive payo¤ from


                                            4
that issue (viewed in isolation). Inclusion of the issue allows for e¢cient trading of
concessions that can bene…t all parties. If the alternative to linking is sequentially
separate negotiations – reach an agreement on trade …rst and only later negotiate
agricultural subsidies or the environment – then not linking may well bene…t a country
if it can negotiate …rst on the issue in which it has a comparative interest. The
country’s negotiating partner should press for linked negotiations in this case.
  In the remainder of the paper, we analyse these matters in detail. The speci…cs
of the bargaining model are set out in the next section. Section 3 analyses the
equilibrium for the cases of no linking and complete linking. Equilibria with sequential
unlinking are analysed in Section 4. Section 5 provides applications of the analysis
in two di¤erent trade settings. Section 6 concludes. Various proofs are collected in
appendices.

                    A STYLIZED MODEL OF NEGOTIATIONS

  Consider a situation in which there are two surpluses, S1 and S2 , to be allocated
between two individuals, 1 and 2. The value of S2 is normalized to 1 while the value
of S1 is assumed equal to s with s > 0. The utility functions for agents 1 and 2 are
given by



                                  U1 = b1 sx + (1 ¡ c2 ¡ y)                                   (1)

                                  U2 = (s ¡ c1 ¡ sx) + b2 y;                                  (2)

respectively, with x 2 [0; 1] giving agent 1’s share of S1 and y 2 [0; 1] giving agent
2’s share of S2 .2 The preference parameters b1 ; b2 give, respectively, agent 1 and 2’s
valuations of S1 relative to S2 . It is assumed that b1 ; b2 > 1, implying that agent
   2
       In these functions, units of measurement for S1 and S2 are also chosen so that 2’s marginal
utility from S1 and 1’s marginal utility from S2 are both one.

                                                 5
1’s marginal utility from S1 is greater than from S2 (1 prefers S1 to S2 ) while the
opposite is true for agent 2 (2 prefers S2 to S1 ). The parameters c1 ; c2 ¸ 0 represent
costs of creating S1 and S2 . It is assumed that agent i bears the cost of creating the
surplus that i likes less (agent 1 bears the cost of creating S2 and agent 2 the cost of
creating S1 ). The reason for this speci…cation is twofold. First, it guarantees that,
both on preference grounds and cost grounds, agent 1(2) prefers S1 to S2 (S2 to S1 ).
Second, it allows for the possibility that agent 1, for instance, might obtain negative
utility from the creation of a positive utility for agent 2. This outcome occurs if agent
2 gets more than the amount 1 ¡ c2 of S2 .
  This speci…cation is meant to capture several features of trade negotiations. First,
in any negotiation, certain policies are more important to certain countries and less
important to others. In the Canada/U.S. trade negotiations, for instance, Canada
attached greater value to free trade than did the U.S.; the U.S., on the other hand,
attached far greater value to reform of foreign investment rules than did Canada.
Second, it’s possible that a country can make a su¢cient concession on same trade
policy that, in the absence of any other changes, the country is worse o¤.3 Such is
presumably the case for developing countries conceding to strong intellectual property
protections under the WTO. The above speci…cation captures both of these features
and allows us to analyse the ways in which trade negotiations are a¤ected by them.
  Both objects are allocated via a bargaining process. Bargaining is modelled as a
non-cooperative, alternating o¤ers game a la Rubinstein (1982). Both agents know
the values of S1 and S2 as well as the utility functions. Bargaining costs are modelled
as delay costs, with each agent discounting the future at a common, known rate ±.
The equilibrium notion is subgame perfect Nash.
  Because there are two surpluses to be divided, a complete speci…cation of the
   3
       Naturally, such a concession would only arise if the country in question were o¤ered other
concessions by its trading partners.



                                                 6
game requires a speci…cation of the bargaining agenda (the order in which issues are
bargained) and a rule for implementing agreements. The agenda and implementation
rule determine the sense in which issues are linked (or not linked). Initially, we
consider linked an unlinked structures in their starkest forms. Speci…cally, the linked
structure requires agents to bargain over the two surpluses together in the sense
that an o¤er under the linked structure is a pair [x; y] de…ning an allocation of both
surpluses. All o¤ers must be of this form and an o¤er must either be accepted in its
entirety or rejected completely. An o¤er is implemented (allocations are made) as soon
as it is accepted. Until an agreement is reached (or if no agreement is ever reached),
the status quo point remains in e¤ect with the utility for each agent normalized to
zero in this case.
  Under the unlinked structure the agents operate two bargaining games, one for the
division of S1 (game G1 ) and one for the division of S2 (game G2 ) that are entirely
separate in the sense that they operate simultaneously and there is no possibility
of trade-o¤s across games. Formally, under the unlinked structure, an o¤er in G1
is a value x and an o¤er in G2 is a value y. An o¤er in G1 cannot be conditioned
on the history in G2 and vice versa; the same is true for an accept/reject decision.
An agreement in either game is implemented as soon as it is reached in that game
and independent of events in the other game. As with the linked structure, until an
agreement is reached in a game (or if no agreement is ever reached) the status quo
point remains in e¤ect with the utility for each agent normalized to zero.
  The sense in which these two structures represent the extremes forms of linked
and unlinked bargaining structures is as follows. The linked structure permits the
agents to fully exploit the bene…ts from trading-o¤ concessions on their less preferred
surplus for concessions by their opponent on the more preferred surplus. The trading
of concessions cannot be limited by the agents making o¤ers on only one of the objects
or by accepting and implementing only part of an o¤er. The unlinked structure, by


                                          7
contrast, allows no trading of concessions (nor any exploitation of the bene…ts from
so doing) as each surplus is bargained over separately and implemented separately.
  In a subsequent section, we explore alternative notions of linking and unlinking
issues involving bargaining structures that incorporate partial restrictions on the
agents’ abilities to trade concessions. These agendas allow linked bargaining but
with partial o¤ers (o¤ers on only one of the two surpluses) that can be implemented
immediately should they be accepted. We also discuss ways to interpret these di¤erent
structures in terms of actual trade negotiations.

                                          ANALYSIS

  In what follows, we …rst analyze the bargained outcome under the unlinked struc-
ture and then under the linked structure. Finally we compare the two and determine
conditions under which linking is (or is not) Pareto improving.4

The Unlinked Bargaining Structure

  The unlinked bargaining structure is equivalent to two separate Rubinstein bar-
gaining games (G1 and G2 ) with agent preferences in G1 given by U11 = b1 sx and
U21 = s ¡ c1 ¡ sx and those in G2 given by U12 = 1 ¡ c2 ¡ y and U22 = b2 y. It is
well known that these games have unique subgame perfect equilibria and that, as
± ! 1, the equilibrium utilities converge to the Nash bargaining solution over the
   4
       The analysis here shares some similarities with work by Horn and Wolinsky (1988) and Jun
(1989) in a labor union context. These papers examine whether two distinct sets of workers would
prefer to bargain with a single employer as a joint union or two separate unions. Because each
worker group only cares about wages to that group, joint versus separate negotiations comes down
to a matter of how each structure a¤ects a given groups threat point in bargaining. Here, by contrast,
an agent’s choice between linked and unlinked agendas comes down to the way that each agenda
allows trade-o¤s across issues and how each a¤ects an agent’s bargaining costs.



                                                  8
utility frontier for the given game. To facilitate comparisons between utilities under
the linked and unlinked structures, we study only these limiting equilibria and the
corresponding utilities implied by the appropriate Nash bargaining solution.
  For the bargaining game G1 , the Nash bargaining solution is de…ned by



                                             max
                                              1 1
                                                  U11 U21                                   (3)
                                             u1 ;u2

                              s.t. U11 = sb1 ¡ b1 (U21 + c1 ).

Similarly, for G2 ; the Nash bargaining solution is



                                             max
                                              2 2
                                                  U12 U22                                   (4)
                                             u1 ;u2

                               s.t. U22 = b2 ¡ b2 (U12 + c2 ).                              (5)

The frontiers for these problems are represented in Figure 1 for the case c1 = c2 = 0
and in Figure 2 for c1 > s; c2 > 1.
  In the bargain over S1 , the limiting SPE yields utility for agent 1 of U11 = max[0; b1 (s¡c
                                                                                            2
                                                                                               1)
                                                                                                  ]
and utility for agent 2 of U21 = max[0; s¡c
                                         2
                                            1
                                              ]. The reader can check that these are util-
ities implied by the Nash bargaining solution in (3) above. In the bargain over S2 ,
the limiting allocation yields utilities of U12 = max[0; 1¡c
                                                          2
                                                             2
                                                               ] and U22 = max[0; b2 (1¡c
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         2)
                                                                                            ].
Again, these are the utilities from the Nash bargaining solution in (4) above. If c1 · s
and c2 · 1, then total utility for agent 1 under the unlinked agenda is then U11 +U12 ´
U1u = (sb1 ¡ b1 c1 + 1 ¡ c2 )=2 and for agent 2 it is U21 + U22 ´ U2u = (b2 ¡ b2 c2 +s ¡ c1 )=2.
Utility for the other cost con…gurations can be derived similarly.

The Linked Structure and the Gains from Linking

  Under the linked bargaining structure it can be shown that the bargaining game is
equivalent to one in which each player’s o¤er is a utility pair drawn from the utility

                                               9
possibility frontier, UL . This frontier is de…ned by the problem



                         max U1 = b1 sx + 1 ¡ c2 ¡ y
                          x;y

                          s.t. U2 = s ¡ c1 ¡ sx + b2 y = U,

and is illustrated in Figure 3 for the case c1 ; c2 = 0 and in Figure 4 for the case
c1 ; c2 6= 0. The linked bargaining game has a unique SPE whose limiting value as
± ! 1 is the Nash bargaining solution over UL .
  Because the utility frontier for S1 is everywhere steeper than that for S2 , a point
on UL must have at least one agent obtaining all of the surplus preferred by that
agent (i.e., either agent 1 must at least have all of S1 or agent 2 at least have all
of S2 ). When both surpluses allocated under the unlinked structure (which occurs
if s > c1 and 1 > c2 ), neither agent obtains all of either surplus. As a result, the
utility point under the unlinked structure must be strictly inside the utility frontier.
In this case the linked bargain must make at least one of the agents better o¤. The
only question, then, is whether both are made better o¤. The following proposition
provides conditions under which both agents are strictly better o¤ from linking. The
proof of the proposition is in the Appendix.

Proposition 1 If s > c1 > 0 and 1 > c2 > 0, then the linked bargain yields strictly
higher utility for both agents relative to the unlinked bargain.

This result is illustrated in Figure 4 below.
  Several points about this result are worth noting. First, it’s important for the result
that b1 ; b2 6= 1; that is, it’s important that the agents have comparative interests in
di¤erent surpluses. Were b1 ; b2 = 1, then the unlinked bargain would also give a point
on the UL . Speci…cally, it would give the point U1 = U2 = (1 + s ¡ c2 ¡ c1 )=2. Since
the slope of the utility frontier is 1 in this case, the linked and unlinked bargains

                                           10
give the same outcome. That b1 ; b2 6= 1 (there are di¤ering interests) means that the
unlinked bargain puts the agents strictly interior to the utility space of the linked
bargain. In this case, linking produces utility gains for both agents by allowing an
e¢cient allocation of the goods (as long as the transfer costs are not too large).
  In a similar vein, it is important that c1 ; c2 6= 0. Positive costs mean that the
unlinked bargain produces an additional misallocation due to agent i having to give
j some of the surplus that i prefers simply to induce j to participate at all in the
unlinked bargain. More concretely, consider the bargain over S2 in the unlinked case.
In this bargain, agent 1 has zero cost of making a countero¤er unless he obtains at
least c2 units of S2 . This fact gives 1 extra bargaining power (relative to the case
in which c1 = 0 ) and so 1 extracts more S2 (the good that 2 prefers). The linked
agenda allows 2 to compensate 1 for the cost c2 through S1 (and similarly allows 1
to compensate 2 for c1 through S2 ) and so provides an additional e¢ciency gain.
  To see the importance of positive costs, suppose that at least one of c1 ; c2 is 0. As
the following proposition shows, in this case it’s possible that only one of the agents
is made strictly better o¤ by linking (the other will be indi¤erent).5

Proposition 2 If c2 = 0 and s > b2 ¡c1 then agent 1’s utility strictly increases under
the linked bargain while agent 2’s utility is unchanged; if c1 = 0 and 1 > sb1 ¡ c2 then
2’s utility strictly increases while 1’s utility is unchanged.

An implication of this proposition is that, if S1 is small enough (see Figure 7) then
2 extracts all of the gains from linking even when c1 = c2 = 0; similarly, if S1 is
large enough, 1 extracts all of the gains from linking even when both costs are zero.
This result is illustrated in Figure 8 for the case in which agent 2 captures all of the
surplus. The reader can easily check that, for S1 = 1, both agents must gain from
linking when c1 = c2 = 0.
  5
      This result is a generalization of a result in Inderst (2000).


                                                    11
  To see the intuition for this result, consider the case of c1 = c2 = 0. In this case,
the unlinked bargain produces an ine¢cient outcome because it allocates some of
both objects to both agents. In general, this bargain provides too little of S1 to
agent 1 and too little of S2 to agent 2. When S1 is small, though, this is not the
case in the following sense: agent 1’s utility in the unlinked bargain can be achieved
through an e¢cient allocation in the linked bargain by giving 1 all of S1 and some
share of S2 (this is the essence of the condition on c2 in the proposition). In terms
of utility, then, agent 1 is not under allocated S1 in the unlinked bargain; only S2 is
under allocated to agent 2. As a result, the e¢ciency gains from linking are purely in
terms of correcting the under allocation of S2 to agent 2; e¤ectively, agent 1 obtains
no e¢ciency bene…ts from linking. For this reason, 2 obtains all of the gains from
linking.
  By contrast, when S1 = 1, the utilities under the unlinked bargain can only be
achieved under the linked bargain if both agent 1 obtains less than all of S1 and
agent 2 obtains less than all of S2 . In this case, both goods are under allocated to
both agents. As a consequence, both agents have e¢ciency bene…ts from linking and
both agents’ utilities increase in the linked game.6
   6
       Another way to look at this result is the following: 1) E¢cient allocation of goods requires that
agent 1 only be allocated a share of S2 if 2 obtains none of S1 and that agent 2 only be allocated a
share of S1 if 1 obtains none of S2 . 2) Any interior point in the utility space UL can be thought of
as equivalent to an allocation in which this e¢cient rule is followed but some of either S1 or S2 (or
both) is not allocated. In particular, we can think of the utility levels under the unlinked bargain
in this fashion. 3) The notion of small here is that, for agent 1 to obtain utility under the linked
bargain equal to that under the unlinked bargain, 1 must obtain all of S1 and some share of S2 (this
is the essence of the condition on c2 in the proposition). The implication of point 3 is that, when S1
is small, the unlinked bargain yields 1 a utility point in UL that can only be equivalent to e¢cient
rule allocations (point 2) in which all of S1 is allocated. Some of S2 is not allocated only to achieve
agent 2’s utility outcome from the unlinked bargain. In this sense, the ine¢ciency in the unlinked
bargain falls fully on agent 2 and so all of the e¢ciency gains from linking accrue to agent 2 through


                                                    12
  A corollary of Propositions 1 and 2 is that, as long as c1 ; c2 are not too large,
neither agent is made worse o¤ by using the linked bargain. Speci…cally,

Corollary 1 If s > c1 ¸ 0 and 1 > c2 ¸ 0, then neither agent is worse o¤ under the
linked bargain than under the unlinked bargain.

  When the costs of creating a given surplus are large (c1 > s and/or c2 > 1), the
linked structure may no longer be preferred by both agents to the unlinked one. To
see the reason, consider the situation in which that c2 > 1 while c1 < s. In this case
the unlinked structure results in S2 not being allocated, with a cost saving to agent
1 of c2 . With the linked structure agent 1 gives up the ability to refuse to allocate
S2 . While agent 1 can be compensated for c2 through a larger share of S1 in the
linked structure (the bene…t of the linked structure over the unlinked one), c2 may
be su¢ciently large that agent 1 is still made worse o¤ by linking. The following
proposition de…nes conditions under which such is the case.7

Proposition 3 Suppose that c2 > 1 and 0 < c1 < s < 2c2 =b1 ¡ c1 . If, in addition,
c1 (b1 ¡1=b2 ) < c2 ¡1 < :5(s+c1 )(b1 ¡1=b2 ), then agent 1 prefers the unlinked structure
to the linked while agent 2 prefers the linked structure to the unlinked.

  The situation described in the proposition is depicted in Figure 10. Note in the
…gure that the utility frontier for the linked structure intersects the U1 -axis below the
intersection point of the utility frontier for the unlinked structure. This outcome is
the implication of the condition c1 (b1 ¡1=b2 ) < c2 ¡1 and means that, as measured by
the maximum payo¤ attainable by agent 1, linking is detrimental to 1. Note also that
the e¢cient allocation of S2 . Because of this fact, agent 2 captures all of the e¢ciency gains.
  By contrast, when c1 = c2 = 0 and S1 = 1, the unlinked bargain utility levels are equivalent to
e¢cient rule allocations in which some of both S1 and S2 are not allocated. As a result, both agents
bear the e¢ciency costs of not linking and so both captures some of the e¢ciency gains from linking.
   7
     An analogous result can be derived for linking making agent 2 worse o¤.

                                                 13
the utility pair under the unlinked structure lies inside the utility frontier of the linked
structure. Under the assumption that s is small relative to c2 (s < 2c2 =b1 ¡ c1 ), this
utility outcome is implied by the condition c2 ¡1 < :5(s+c1 )(b1 ¡1=b2 ) and means that
at least one of the agents must gain from linking. Combined, these three conditions
mean that the bargaining solution for the linked structure yields agent 1 less utility
and agent 2 more utility than under the unlinked structure. Intuitively, what happens
in this case is that s is su¢ciently small relative to c2 that the linked structure can
provide agent 1 with the same utility level as the unlinked structure only if linking
allocates all of S1 and some share of S2 to agent 1. As in the previous proposition, the
only gain to linking for 1 in this case is that he can e¢ciently compensate agent 2 for
c1 through S2 . This e¢ciency gain is given by the expression c1 (b1 ¡ 1=b2 ). The gross
surplus that 1 loses from linking is given by 1 ¡ c2 . With 1 ¡ c2 + c1 (b1 ¡ 1=b2 ) < 0,
agent 1 loses from linking.
  Basically, in situations such as the above (i.e., c2 large), unlinking provides agent 1
with a credible commitment not to allocate S2 by allowing 1 to delay agreement on S2
inde…nitely. By linking, agent 1 gives up this commitment in that delaying agreement
inde…nitely delays agreement on both surpluses. The result is that, in spite of the
e¢ciency gains from linking, agent 1 can be made worse o¤ by the linked structure.8
This outcome occurs when the issue in which agent 1 has a comparative interest is
small relative to the cost associated with the issue in which 1 has a comparative
disinterest.

                  AN ALTERNATIVE UNLINKED STRUCTURE

  As noted earlier, the two bargaining structures above place linked and unlinked bar-
gaining in particularly stark contrast. Unlinked bargaining allows no e¢cient trade-o¤
   8
       The reader should note that c2 > 1 is not su¢cient for linking to make agent 1 worse o¤. Figure
9 provides an example in which 1 gains even though c2 > 1.


                                                   14
of surpluses while linked bargaining permits full exploitation of such trade-o¤s. Other
bargaining structures are possible, even in this simple setting, that permit alternative
characterizations of linked/unlinked bargaining. We examine these structures here
and provide a comparison with the above results on the gains from linking.9
  The additional bargaining structures available in this setting are ones in which
issues can be bargained sequentially and implementation of an agreement on one issue
linked in various ways to whether or not agreement has been reached on the other
issue. Essentially, three additional structures are available: 1) The agents bargain
only on S1 and once agreement has been reached on S1 bargain on S2 . The agreement
on S1 is binding (in the sense that it can’t later be re-opened) and is implemented at
a …xed date whether or not agreement is ever reached on S2 . 2) The agents bargain
only on S2 and once agreement has been reached on S2 bargain on S1 . The agreement
on S2 is binding (in the sense that it can’t later be re-opened) and is implemented at
a …xed date whether or not agreement is ever reached on S1 . 3) The agents bargain
only on S1 (S2 ) and once agreement is reached on that surplus bargain on S2 (S1 ).
The agreement on S1 (S2 ) is binding but is only implemented once agreement has
been reached on S2 (S1 ). Fershtman (1990) has shown that, unless the two surpluses
are of very di¤erent sizes, procedure 3 generates the same outcome as the linked
bargain as ± ! 1. In this case, then, there are basically two other structures (1 and 2
above), each with a sequential (implement as agreement is reached) implementation
rule.
  These two structures provide an alternative notion of unlinked bargaining (In what
follows, we refer to these structures as sequentially unlinked structures.). In partic-
ular, the issues are unlinked in two senses. First, implementation of any agreement
on the …rst issue is independent of whether or not agreement is ever reached on the
second issue. This is as in the unlinked structure above and in contrast to the linked
  9
      The analysis in this section draws heavily on previous work by Busch and Horstmann.


                                                15
structure. Second, because of this implementation rule, bargaining on the second
issue is una¤ected by any agreement on the …rst. Again, this is as in the unlinked
structure above. This structure is di¤erent from the unlinked structure above because
bargaining on the second issue only commences once agreement has been reached on
the …rst. As a result, the bargained outcome on the …rst issue depends on the agree-
ment that will be reached on the second issue. This fact means that there is some
scope for e¢cient trade-o¤s under this structure not available under the above un-
linked structure. As a result, these sequentially unlinked structures yield di¤erent
outcomes from the previous unlinked structure.
  Under this sequential notion, unlinked trade negotiations are ones that delay nego-
tiation on certain issues until agreements on others have been reached. For instance,
negotiations on agricultural subsidies are delayed until agreement has already been
reached on intellectual property issues. Alternatively, negotiations on environmental
issues are delayed until agreement had been reached on free trade. What are the
bene…ts of structuring negotiations in this way?
  To answer this question we need to determine the bargained outcome under the
sequential structure and compare utilities to those under the linked an unlinked struc-
tures? To get some sense of the comparisons, consider the case in which c1 = c2 = 0.
Consider …rst the structure S1 then S2 . Once agreement is reached on S1 , the bargain
on S2 has no impact on the utility that agents receive from the S1 agreement: the
agreement is binding and the allocation of S1 is made upon agreement. As a result,
the bargain on S2 is as under the unlinked structure, with the limiting allocation
being y = 1=2 and the limiting utilities from S2 being U1 = 1=2; U2 = b2 =2.
  The bargain on S1 is di¤erent from the unlinked structure since bargaining is se-
quential rather than simultaneous: bargaining doesn’t begin on S2 until agreement
is reached on S1 . The sequential structure of bargaining is important because fail-
ure to reach agreement on S1 delays agreement on (and consumption of) S2 . Thus,


                                          16
both agents bear a utility cost from continued bargaining on S1 that re‡ects both
their valuations of S1 and S2 . Under the unlinked structure, because bargaining is
simultaneous, the utility cost of continued bargaining on S1 re‡ects only the agents’
valuations of S1 . Formally, letting (x¤s ; x¤¤
                                             s ) be the o¤ers on S1 by agents 1 and 2

respectively in this sequential game, the conditions de…ning equilibrium are:10



                     s(1 ¡ x¤s ) = s(1 ¡ x¤¤                   ¤¤
                                          s ) ¡ (1 ¡ ±)[s(1 ¡ xs ) + ±b2 )                    (6)

                        b1 sx¤¤
                             s  = b1 sx¤s ¡ (1 ¡ ±)(b1 sx¤s + ±).                             (7)

Bargaining costs for this agenda are (1 ¡ ±)[(s(1 ¡ x¤¤
                                                     s ) + ±b2 ) for agent 2 and (1 ¡

±)(b1 sx¤s + ±) for agent 1. By contrast, under an unlinked structure, bargaining costs
would be (1 ¡ ±)s(1 ¡ x¤¤ ) and (1 ¡ ±)b1 sx¤ for 2 and 1 respectively.
  As before, the limiting equilibrium is given by an appropriately de…ned Nash bar-
gaining solution. From the above, this solution is given by the condition

                                                     b1 xs + 1
                                        b1 ¸                      ,                           (8)
                                                  s(1 ¡ xs ) + b2
where the inequality allows for the fact that the solution may be a corner solution in
                                           1
which xs = 1. Indeed, if b2 > s +          b1
                                              ,   the outcome is a corner solution. In this case,
  10
       The structure of o¤ers and countero¤ers assumed here is that, if bargaining on S1 ends with
agent 1 accepting an o¤er from agent 2, then agent 1 makes the …rst o¤er on S2 . Similarly, if
bargaining on S1 ends with 2 accepting an o¤er from 1, then 2 makes the …rst o¤er on S2 . This
means that the conditions for an equilibrium are:



                          1 ¡ x¤ + ±b2 =(1 + ±) = ±[1 ¡ x¤¤ + ± 2 b2 =(1 + ±)]

                             b1 x¤¤ + ±=(1 + ±) = ±[b1 x¤ + ± 2 =(1 + ±)],

where we’ve used the fact that the o¤er 1 makes on S2 gives 2 the share ±=(1 + ±) and the share
demand that 2 makes gives 2 1=(1 + ±).

                                                      17
the utility allocation is a point on the frontier of the utility possibility set, UL , with
U1s1 = sb1 + :5; U2s1 = :5b2 .
  How does this outcome compare to that of the linked and unlinked structures?
For this case, the linked structure outcome has agent 1 getting all of S1 and agent 2
all of S2 , yielding utilities U1l = sb1 ; U2l = b2 . The unlinked structure gives utilities
U1u = :5sb1 + :5; U2u = :5b2 + :5s. Clearly, agent 1 prefers the sequentially unlinked
structure to the linked structure (U1s1 > U1l > U1u ) while agent 2 …nds the sequentially
unlinked structure worst of all (U2s1 < U2u < U2l ).
  A similar analysis can be performed for the structure S2 then S1 . As long as
       1        1
b1 >   s
           +   b2
                  ,   the outcome again will be on the utility frontier with agent 2 getting
all of S2 and half of S1 . The utilities for the two agents for this structure are U1s2 =
:5sb1 ; U2s2 = b2 + :5s. In this case, agent 2 prefers this sequentially unlinked structure
to all others while agent 1 …nds this structure worse than even the unlinked structure.
So we have

                                                                   1       1             1
Proposition 4 Suppose that i) c1 = c2 = 0 and ii) b1 >             s
                                                                       +     ;b
                                                                           b2 2
                                                                                  > s+   b1
                                                                                            ,   then
agent 1(2) prefers the sequentially unlinked structure S1 then S2 (S2 then S1 ) to all
other bargaining structures. Agent 2(1) …nds the sequentially unlinked structure S1
then S2 (S2 then S1 ) worse than the unlinked structure.

  The intuition for this result can be found in the way that the various structures
a¤ect the agents’ relative bargaining costs. Under the linked structure, agent 1 …nds
it costly to hold out for a positive share of S2 since doing so delays agreement on
(and consumption of) S1 , the surplus 1 prefers. Similarly, 2 …nds it costly to hold
out for a positive share of S1 since doing so delays agreement on (and consumption
of) S2 , the surplus 2 prefers. The result is that each agent obtains all of the surplus
that that agent prefers and none of the other surplus.
  In the sequentially unlinked structure S1 then S2 , 1 has already obtained his al-

                                                 18
location of S1 before bargaining on S2 begins. As a result, it is now cheap for 1 to
hold out for a share of S2 since doing so doesn’t delay consumption of S1 . In essence,
1’s bargaining costs on S2 are now low relative to 2’s and so 1 obtains a positive
share of S2 . In the prior bargain over S1 , the agents’ relative bargaining costs are
not much changed from the linked bargain: it’s relatively costly for 1 to concede
some of S1 since this surplus is the one that 1 prefers and 2’s holding out for a large
share of S1 continues to delay agreement on S2 . Overall, then, the sequentially un-
linked agenda S1 then S2 lowers 1’s bargaining costs relative to 2’s and so puts one
in a favorable bargaining position relative to the linked structure. Two is damaged
both relative to the linked structure and the unlinked structure since 2 continues to
concede on S1 because not doing so delays agreement on S2 (which is not so in the
unlinked structure). Analogous arguments explain 2’s preference (and 1’s dislike) for
the structure S2 then S1 .
  When c1 ; c2 > 0, the sequentially unlinked structure inherits some of the same
ine¢ciency properties that the unlinked structure has. Speci…cally, an agent is com-
pensated for the cost of creating a given surplus directly from that surplus rather than
indirectly from the surplus that the agent prefers more. If costs are large enough, this
ine¢ciency can reverse the above rankings. Just as an example, if c2 ¸ 1, then the
sequentially unlinked structure in which S1 is bargained …rst yields exactly the same
allocation as the unlinked structure. The same is true of the sequential structure in
which S2 is bargained …rst when c1 ¸ s. As has already been seen, in such cases
the linked structure can dominate the unlinked structure and as a result, various
sequentially unlinked structures.11
  11
       As an example, consider the case of c2 = 1 and c1 = s, with s = 1. Here linking bene…ts both
parties. See also Figure 11.




                                                 19
                     DISCUSSION AND APPLICATIONS

  There are three basic messages contained in the above analysis: i) a linked structure
permits agents to make e¢cient trades across issues not available in an unlinked
structure. As a result, when both agents wish to settle both issue, there are gains to
both from linking. ii) When some agent can never bene…t directly from settling an
issue, unlinking provides that agent a credible means of committing to not settling
the issue. This credible commitment is unavailable under linking and so unlinking
can (although need not) make that agent better o¤. iii) Sequential unlinking alters
the relative bargaining costs of the agents, with an agent bene…tting by bargaining
…rst over his preferred issue. This change in bargaining cost can result in an agent
preferring sequential unlinking to linking.
  While we believe the above insights apply in quite general settings, we have, in
fact, proven their relevance only for a highly stylized bargaining model. As a conse-
quence, we think it is useful at this point to explore the extent to which our stylized
model applies directly in a trade setting. Doing so allows us not only to demonstrate
the relevance of even this stylized model but also to understand what are fruitful
directions for generalizing the model (and so the results).
  Two features of our stylized model seem potentially problematic for economic ap-
plications. One is that utility frontiers are linear/piecewise linear. Typically, analyses
of economic policy questions don’t assume transferable utility and so won’t result in
linear utility frontiers. The other is that there is strong independence across issues
in the sense that the allocation of one surplus a¤ects neither the size nor an agen-
t’s evaluation of the other surplus. Such independence seems an unlikely possibility,
especially in general equilibrium settings.
  Of the two, the former seems less important, in the sense that linearity of the
frontiers is only relevant to the extent that it guarantees that one frontier is every-


                                           20
where steeper than the other. As long as this assumption is satis…ed, whether the
frontiers are linear or non-linear is inconsequential to the results of our analysis. The
independence assumption is a much stronger restriction and, as will be seen below,
imposes signi…cant limitations on the sorts of models that can satisfy it. In what
follows, we provide two models that satisfy both assumptions. The …rst is a trade
and environment model, the second a trade and foreign investment model.

Trade and the Environment

  The model here is motivated by the trade and environment model of Copeland and
Taylor (1995).12 The trade side of the model is a standard Heckscher-Ohlin model,
with two goods (X and Y ), two factors (K and L) and two countries (1 and 2).
Country 1 (e.g., US) exports X and is large relative to country 2 (e.g., Mexico). The
initial equilibrium is tari¤ ridden, with each country having identical tari¤s against
imports from the other country. The trade policy to be negotiated is a mutual tari¤
reduction of some amount (reciprocal trade enhancement).
  As for the environmental side, it is assumed that consumption (and not produc-
tion) activities create pollution that spills over to the other country. For simplicity,
we assume speci…cally that pollution ‡ows from Country 2 to Country 1 but not vice
versa (e.g., wind blows or water ‡ows from South to North). Disutility of pollution
is additively separable from consumption (as in Copeland and Taylor). A pollution
abatement technology exists in Country 2. This technology is identical to the “con-
sumption technology” (national utility function) in the sense that it uses goods (or
indirectly factors) in the same proportions as consumption. The cost of pollution
abatement is borne solely by Country 2 and is …nanced by a proportionate consump-
tion tax.13 It is assumed that the bene…t to Country 2 from abatement is su¢ciently
 12
      We thank Scott Taylor for suggesting this application.
 13
      There are two relevant assumptions here. One is that pollution abatement essentially involves


                                                 21
small that the initial situation is one in which Country 2 does no abatement. The
environmental policy to be negotiated is a level of pollution abatement, de…ned here
as the amount of measurable inputs allocated to abatement by Country 2.
  It can be checked that this model satis…es the independence assumptions of our
stylized bargaining model. Key to this outcome are the assumptions that the disutil-
ity of pollution is additively separable from the utility of consumption and that the
abatement technology is identical to the consumption technology. The latter guaran-
tees that the abatement activity has no consequences for general equilibrium prices
and demands and so no impact on the bene…ts from trade liberalization. Increased
abatement activity just shifts consumption demand between the private and public
sectors. The former guarantees that the trade regime has no impact on the bene-
…ts from pollution reduction. The cost of pollution reduction is just the foregone
consumption in Country 2, the amount of which is independent of the trade regime.
  Figure 11 provides the relevant utility frontiers for a situation in which Country 1
is ten times the size of Country 2 and the initial tari¤ level in both countries is 50%.
Note that the example is such that Country 2 never gains from pollution abatement
while Country 1 never gains from mutual tari¤ reductions. As a consequence both
the unlinked bargain and the sequentially unlinked bargain implement the status quo
point (no change in tari¤s and no abatement). The linked bargain implements free
trade and abatement of pollution by Country 2. Both countries are better o¤ under
the linked structure than at the status quo point and so better o¤ than under any
unlinked structure.
the government of Country 2 shifting some consumption from private to public consumption (abate-
ment). The other is that the government of Country 1 cannot commit to paying for Country 2
pollution abatement directly.




                                              22
Trade and Investment rules

  The second model is a standard trade model with imperfect competition. It is
assumed that there are 2 countries (1 and 2), 3 goods (X; Y; and Z) and 1 factor (L).
Good Z is the numeraire and is produced in a perfectly competitive industry with a
constant returns to scale technology such that 1 unit of Z requires 1 unit of L. Goods
X and Y are produced in both countries under conditions of imperfect competition,
with …xed cost/constant marginal cost production technologies. Markets for both
goods are segmented internationally (there is international price discrimination) and
there is Cournot competition in all markets. The numbers of …rms in each country
and in each market are …xed exogenously. Consumers in both countries have identical
preferences given by the utility function U = cz + acx ¡ (b=2)c2x + dcy ¡ (e=2)c2y , where
cj is the consumption of good j. These preferences imply that demands for both X
and Y are linear demands and depend only on their own prices.
  In the X market, it is assumed that there is a common tari¤ set by both countries
and the trade negotiation is on a mutual tari¤ reduction. In the Y market, country
1 provides production subsidies for domestic producers but no subsidy for a foreign
branch plant. Country 2 has no subsidies for either domestic or foreign production.
The foreign investment negotiation is over policy of subsidy removal/reduction for
domestic producers in country 1.
  Again, one can check that this model satis…es the independence assumption of our
bargaining model. In this case, independence comes from the additive separability of
preferences and the assumption that there are no general equilibrium e¤ects in the
factor market (the price of L is always 1).




                                           23
                      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

  In this paper we have explored the potential bene…ts (and costs) of linking agree-
ments on trade with agreements on other, non-trade issues. Our analysis suggests
that linking may well be a virtue rather than a vice. By linking, a country can extract
concessions from its negotiating partners on an issue of importance to that country
in exchange for concessions on issues of importance to its partners. This e¢cient
trading of concessions can be bene…cial to a country even in circumstances in which
the linked issue, when viewed in isolation, has negative marginal value to the country.
  The U.S.-Canada free trade negotiations and later the NAFTA negotiations may
provide an example of just this point. The U.S. wanted to provide tough provisions on
services and investment while Canada preferred to stick with goods only. If Canada
and Mexico had not agreed to include services and investment, our guess is that the
negotiations would have failed since there was little support (rightly or wrongly) in
the U.S. for trade in goods, especially with Mexico. By agreeing to include issues in
which Mexico and Canada perceived (rightly or wrongly) that they had nothing to
gain, these two countries improved their welfare through trade concessions that were
worth more than what they gave up on services and investment.
  When linking is not bene…cial to a country it is either because the linked issue has
very large (relative to other issues) negative value or because the country can gain
by bargaining issues sequentially. In this latter case, sequential bargaining beginning
with the issue of importance to the country alters relative bargaining costs in a way
that makes the country better o¤. This result may explain why the EU wishes to delay
negotiations on agriculture or why developing countries prefer to delay environmental
agreements until after agreements on free trade have been reached.
  We note in closing that an unanswered question here is how the bargaining struc-




                                          24
ture is determined. One possible answer is that it too is subject to negotiation.14
Alternatively, it may be that these structures have been institutionalized through
various international arrangements or organizations. In this case, the analysis above
will be useful for understanding these institutions and for determining who gains and
loses from them. These matters are the subject of on-going research.




 14
      This is the approach taken in Busch and Horstmann (1999).

                                               25
                                       REFERENCES

 [1] Abrego, L.E., C. Perroni, J. Whalley and R. Wigle (1997), “Trade and Environment:
         Bargaining Outcomes from Linked Negotiations”, NBER Working Paper 6216.

 [2] Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger (1999), “Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty and
         International Economic Institutions”, mimeo.

 [3] Busch, L.-A. and I. Horstmann (1997), “Bargaining Frictions, Bargaining Procedures
         and Implied Costs in Multiple-Issue Bargaining”, Economica 64, 669-80.

 [4] ________ (1999), “Endogenous Incomplete Contracts: A Bargaining Approach”,
         Canadian Journal of Economics 32, 956-75.

 [5] Conconi, P. and C. Perroni (2000), “Issue Linkage and Issue Tie-In in Multilateral
         Negotiations”, mimeo.

 [6] Copeland, B. and S. Taylor (1995), “Trade and Transboundary Pollution”, American
         Economic Review 85, 716-37.

 [7] Fershtman, C. (1990), “The Importance of the Agenda in Bargaining”, Games and
         Economic Behavior 2, 224-38.

 [8] Horn, H. and A. Wolinsky (1988), “Worker Substitutability and Patterns of Unioni-
         sation”, Economic Journal 98, 484-97.

 [9] Inderst, R. (2000), “Multi-Issue Bargaining with Endogenous Agenda”, Games and
         Economic Behavior 30, 64-82.

[10] Jun, B. H. (1989), “Non-Cooperative Bargaining and Union Formation”, Review of
         Economic Studies 56, 59-76.

[11] Nash, J. (1950), “The Bargaining Problem”, Econometrica 18, 155-62.

                                            26
[12] Rubinstein, A. (1982), “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model”, Econometrica
         50, 97-110.

[13] Shaked, A. and J. Sutton (1984). “Involuntary Unemployment as a Perfect Equilib-
         rium in a Bargaining Model”, Econometrica 52, 1351-64.

[14] Spagnolo, G. (2000), “Issue Linkage, Delegation, and International Policy Coopera-
         tion”, mimeo.




                                            27
                                     APPENDIX

  For Propositions 1 and 2, the structure of the proofs is as follows. Given the
assumption s > c1 and 1 > c2 , both surpluses are allocated under the unlinked
structure. This allocation is necessarily ine¢cient (lies in the interior of the utility
possibility set) since neither agent obtains all of the surplus preferred by that agent.
As a result, at least one of the 2 agents must gain from linking. To prove that both
gain (at least weakly) from linking, we show that i) no point on UL yielding agent 2
less utility than under the unlinked structure can be a Nash bargaining solution over
UL and ii) no point yielding agent 1 less utility than under the unlinked structure can
be a Nash bargaining solution over UL . To demonstrate these points, we consider the
point on UL that gives agent 2 the same utility as under the unlinked structure. We
then compare the ratio of the agents utilities at this point to the slope of the utility
frontier and show that this ratio is greater or equal to (the absolute value of) the
slope of UL at this point. This fact implies that the Nash bargaining solution over UL
must give agent 2 at least as much utility as the unlinked structure. Analogously, we
…x the point on UL that gives agent 1 the same utility as under the unlinked structure
and compare the ratio of utilities to the slope at this point. Again we show that this
ratio is less or equal to (the absolute value of) the slope of UL at this point, implying
that the Nash bargaining solution over UL must give agent 1 at least as much utility
as the unlinked structure.
  As a preliminary to proving the propositions, we provide the simple algebra for
determining the points in UL that yield utility equal to that from the unlinked struc-
ture. Suppose that agent 2’s utility is to be set at U2u = [b2 (1 ¡ c2 ) + s ¡ c1 ]=2 (2’s
utility in the unlinked game). Note that, were 2 to obtain all of S2 and 1 all of S1 ,
then 2’s utility would be U2 = b2 ¡ c1 . If [b2 (1 ¡ c2 ) + s ¡ c1 ]=2 < b2 ¡ c1 , then 2’s
unlinked utility can be achieved by an allocation that gives 1 all of S1 and some share


                                            28
of S2 . The previous inequality is satis…ed if 1 ¡ c2 < 2 ¡ (s + c1 )=b2 . Agent 1’s utility
in this case can be found by solving for the value of y that yields agent 2 his unlinked
utility. This value is de…ned by the equation b2 y ¡ c1 = [b2 (1 ¡ c2 ) + s ¡ c1 ]=2; or
      1 ¡ c2 s + c1
y=           +       . Substituting this value of y into agent 1’s utility function yields
        2       2b2
             1 ¡ c2 s + c1
U10 = b1 s +        ¡        . Since 1 has all of S1 and some S2 , we are on that part of
               2        2b2
the utility frontier that is to the left of the kink. The slope there is ¡1=b2 ; 2 gains
under the linked structure if U10 =U2u > 1=b2 .
  If, by contrast, 1 ¡ c2 > 2 ¡ (s + c1 )=b2 , then agent 2 must get all of S2 and some
share of S1 in order to achieve his unlinked utility. Now we solve for the value of x
that gives agent 2 this utility level. In this case the reference utility point is to the
right of the kink, so that the slope of the utility frontier is ¡b1 .
  For the case in which we want to …x agent 1’s utility at his unlinked level, U1u =
[b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + 1 ¡ c2 ]=2, we proceed similarly. In particular, suppose we give all of S2
to agent 2 and all of S1 to agent 1. Then 1’s utility is U1 = sb1 ¡ c2 . If [b1 (s ¡ c1 ) +
1 ¡ c2 ]=2 < sb1 ¡ c2 , then we can give 1 his unlinked utility by giving 2 all of S2
                                                                        1 + c2
and some share of S1 . This inequality is satis…ed if s ¡ c1 < 2s ¡            . Agent 2’s
                                                                          b1
utility in this case can be found by solving for the value of x that yields 1 his unlinked
utility. This value is de…ned by the equation [b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + 1 ¡ c2 ]=2 = sb1 x ¡ c2 ; or
      b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + 1 + c2
x=                          . Substituting this value of x into 2’s utility function yields
              2sb1
             s ¡ c1     1 + c2
U20 = b2 +           ¡         . Since 2 has all of S2 and part of S1 , we are on the part
                2         2b1
of the utility frontier that is to the right of the kink. The slope there is b1 ; 1 gains
                                                                       1 + c2
under linking if U1u =U20 < b1 . The case in which s ¡ c1 > 2s ¡              is determined
                                                                         b1
analogously.
  Proof of Propositions 1 and 2:
  Under separate negotiations, U1u = [b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + 1 ¡ c2 ]=2 and U2u = [b2 (1 ¡ c2 ) + s ¡
c1 ]=2. Fixing agent 2’s utility at U2u = [b2 (1 ¡ c2 ) + s ¡ c1 ]=2, if 1 ¡ c2 < 2 ¡ (s + c1 )=b2 ,



                                                29
then agent 1 gets all of S1 and some share of S2 . Agent 1’s utility is given by
             1 ¡ c2 s + c1
U10 = b1 s +       +       . Also, the slope of the utility frontier at this point is 1=b2 .
               2       2b2
                                              1               2b1 s + 1 ¡ c2 ¡ (s + c1 )=b2
From above, what we need to check is that        · U10 =U2u =                               .
                                              b2                   b2 (1 ¡ c2 ) + s ¡ c1
This inequality is satis…ed strictly if 2s(b1 b2 ¡ 1) > 0, which it is since b1 ; b2 > 1. In
this case, then, agent 2 strictly gains from linking.
   If 1 ¡ c2 > 2 ¡ (s + c1 )=b2 , then agent 1 gets none of S2 and only some share
                                                     b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + b1 b2 (1 + c2 )
of S1 . Agent 1’s utility is given by U10 =                                         ¡ c2 . Also,
                                                                   2
the slope of the utility frontier is b1 . Now we need to check that b1 · U10 =U2u =
b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + b2 b1 (1 + c2 ) ¡ 2c2
                                     . This inequality is satis…ed if 2c2 (b1 b2 ¡ 1) ¸ 0. If
       b2 (1 ¡ c2 ) + s ¡ c1
c2 > 0 then the inequality is satis…ed strictly since b1 ; b2 > 1; if c2 = 0 then there is
strict equality and agent 2 achieves the same utility as in the unlinked case. Since at
least one agent must gain from linking, in this case agent 1 gets all of the gains. Note
that, in this case, the condition 1 ¡ c2 > 2 ¡ (s + c1 )=b2 specializes to s > b2 ¡ c1 , the
condition of Proposition 2.
                                                                                                1 + c2
  Now, …xing agent 1’s utility at U1u = [b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + 1 ¡ c2 ]=2, if s ¡ c1 < 2s ¡                   ,
                                                                                                  b1
then agent 2 gets all of S2 and some share of S1 .15                     Agent 2’s utility is given by
           s ¡ c1 1 + c2
U20 = b2 +        ¡         . Also, the slope of the utility frontier at this point is b1 .
             2         2b1
                                                                   b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + 1 ¡ c2
From above, we need to check here that b1 ¸ U1u =U20 =                                      .
                                                               2b2 ¡ (1 + c2 )=b1 + s ¡ c1
This inequality is satis…ed if 2(b1 b2 ¡ 1) > 0, which it is since b1 ; b2 > 1. In this case,
agent 1 strictly gains from linking.
                     1 + c2
   If s ¡ c1 > 2s ¡         , then agent 2 gets none of S1 and only some share of S2 . In
                       b1
                                              b1 b2 (s + c1 ) + b2 (1 ¡ c2 )
this case, 2’s utility is given by U20 =                                     ¡ c1 . Also, the slope
                                                             2
of the utility frontier at this point is 1=b2 . From above, we need to check here again
                                  b1 (s ¡ c1 ) + 1 ¡ c2
that 1=b2 ¸ U1u =U20 =                                           . This inequality is satis…ed if
                          b1 b2 (s + c1 ) + b2 (1 ¡ c2 ) ¡ 2c1
  15
       As with the case of s = 1, if k1 > 2(1 ¡ sb ) + skb2 , then it must be that this inequality is satis…ed.
                       sk2
If k1 < 2(1 ¡ sb ) +    b ,   then either ineqaulity may be satis…ed.


                                                       30
2c1 (b1 b2 ¡ 1) ¸ 0. If c1 6= 0, then this inequality is satis…ed strictly (since b1 ; b2 > 1)
and agent 1 is strictly better o¤; if c1 = 0, then there is strict equality and agent
1 achieves the same utility as under the unlinked structure (agent 2 gets all of the
                                                      1 + c2
gains). In this latter case, the condition s¡c1 > 2s¡        specializes to 1 > sb1 ¡c2 ,
                                                        b1
the condition of Proposition 2.                                                       ¤
  Proof of Proposition 3:
  Under the assumptions of the proposition, only S1 is allocated under the unlinked
structure. The utilities of agents 1 and 2 are U1u = b1 (s ¡ c1 )=2 and U2u = (s ¡ c1 )=2
respectively. With c2 > 1, it may not be e¢cient to allocate both surpluses; as a
result, the point (U1u ; U2u ) need not lie in the interior of the utility possibility set. To
check this, we need only check whether there is a point on UL that yields agent 1
utility U1u and agent 2 utility greater than U2u .
  Consider an allocation that gives all of S1 and a share 1 ¡ y 0 of S2 to agent 1 and
that yields 1 utility of U1u . The value of y 0 under this allocation is the solution to the
equation b1 s + 1 ¡ c2 ¡ y 0 = b1 (s ¡ c1 )=2 and is given by y 0 = b1 (s + c1 )=2 + 1 ¡ c2 .
If y 0 2 (0; 1), then this allocation gives the point on UL yielding agent 1 the same
utility as under the unlinked structure. The value of y 0 lies on (0; 1) if s + 2=b1 >
2c2 =b1 ¡ c1 > s. The second inequality is satis…ed by our assumption on s; the
assumption that c1 (b1 ¡ 1=b2 ) < c2 ¡ 1 < :5(s + c1 )(b1 ¡ 1=b2 ) implies that the …rst
inequality is satis…ed. Agent 2’s utility at this point is U20 = b2 y 0 ¡ c1 and this utility
is larger than U2u as long as (1 ¡ c2 ) + :5(s + c1 )(b1 ¡ 1=b2 ) > 0. Therefore, under
the conditions of the proposition, the point (U1u ; U2u ) lies in the in the interior of the
utility set and so the linked structure must make at least one agent better o¤.
  To conclude the proof, we need only show that agent 1 is made worse o¤. Since
the point on UL yielding 1 the same utility as under the unlinked structure lies to the
left of the kink, 1 is worse o¤ if 1=b2 < U1u =U20 . This inequality is satis…ed as long as
1 ¡ c2 + c1 (b1 ¡ 1=b2 ) < 0.                                                              ¤


                                             31
 Figure 1: Two symmetric games; player i
 has a comparative interest in game i



U1                       no costs c (ci = 0)

sb1
        Game 1: slope = -b1



 1
                       Game 2: slope = -1/b2



            s          b2               U2


 Notation: U1 = sb1 - b1U2     game 1
           U2 = b2 - b2U1      game 2
Figure 2: Two symmetric games; player i
has a comparative interest in game i



                   U1
                                        large costs
                         sb1              (c1 > s)
         Game 1                           (c2 > 1)



                                        b2
-c1       s - c1                              U2

              1 - c2           Game 2


                   -c2



      Notation: U1 = sb1 - b1(U2 + c1)
                U2 = b2 - b2(U1 + c2)
Figure 3: Two symmetric games: player i
receives strictly positive payoffs in both games




 U1                 Payoff frontier in the linked game


                              Equilibrium in the
                              Linked game


        Game 1




                          Game 2


                                                   U2
                 Total payoffs from the
                 two unlinked games
Figure 4: Two symmetric games: linking can be
Pareto improving even if a player receives a
negative payoff on one issue


       U1

                           Payoff frontier in the linked game

                                           Equilibrium in the
                                           Linked game



          Game 1




                                    Game 2
                                                                          U2

                       Total payoffs from the two
                       unlinked games

 N.B. Compared to Figure 2, the total payoffs from the two unliked
 games is the same, but the payoffs in the linked game are larger .
 Here it pays to take a negative payoff from one issue in order to gain
 more on your comparative-interest issue
Figure 5: When is linking not Pareto
improving?


                         U1



    Game 2

                                              U2
 "Negative
 comparative interest"             Game 1




                              U1
    Game 1                         Payoff frontier in
                                   the linked game




                                              U2

    Game of
    comparative
    disinterest is too
    costly                               Game 2
 Figure 6: Geometric interpretation and proof of Proposition 1

                                     U1
                                            sb1 + 1 - c2

                                                    sb1 + 1 - c2 - c1/b2
       1 - c2
                                                                      X2 locus
                                          sb1
                                                                           X1 locus
        b1c1
                                                            XX

                                           Game 1




  sb1 - b1c1


                     1 - c2                                  Game 2

                                                                            U2
                      - c1

                              - c2

Minimum payoff to player 1 in                   U1* = [sb1 + 1 - c2 - c1/b2]/2
the linked game:

Sum of payoffs to player 1                      U1' = [sb1 + 1 - c2 - c1b1]/2
in the two unlinked games

Minimum Difference                              U1* - U1' = c1(b1 - 1/b2)/2 >= 0
    Figure 7: Game 1 is "small" if the game
    1 triangle fits inside the game 2 triangle


             U1   Game 2                             Game 1
                  triangle                           triangle


                                [(sb1 - c2), (b2 - c1)]
(b2 - c1)/b2




(sb1 - c2)

                                                          U2




       "smallness" is satisfied for game 1 here if:
       (sb1 - c2) < (b2 - c1)/b2
Figure 8: Game 1 is small. All gains from
linkage captured by player 2


U1               Payoff frontier in the linked game



                                    Equilibrium in the
                                    Linked game
      Game 2




            Game 1
                                                 U2
                  Total payoffs from the
                  two unlinked games
Figure 9: A strictly negative payoff for U1
in game 2 is not sufficient for linking
worsen 1's welfare




U1
            Payoff frontier in the linked game




                                 Equilibrium in
                                 the
                                 Linked game



            Game 1                               U2

                Game 2


      Total payoffs from the two unlinked games
      (player 1 refuses to play game 2)
Figure 10: Linking worsens player 1's welfare (a
strictly negative payoff for U1 in game 2 seems to
be a necessary condition)




 U1                     Payoff frontier in the linked
                        game

                        Equilibrium in the
                        Linked game




              Game 1                                U2

                 Game 2




        Total payoffs from the two unlinked games
        (player 1 refuses to play game 2)
      Figure 11: Outcomes in the numerical general-equilibrium
      model: Game 1 - environment, Game 2 - trade


 U1 = 10.00                                                          Nash bargaining solution:
                                   12
                                         U1
 U2 = -7.50
                                                                         U1 = 9.23
                                   10                                    U2 = 13.77


                                     8


                                     6


     Game 1:                         4
     Environment
                                     2
                                                                                       U2
                                     0
        -10             -5               0            5    10       15         20           25

                                    -2
                                                                              U1 = -0.77
Interpretation of the numbers: percentage                 Game 2:             U2 = 21.27
deviations from tariff-ridden, no-abatement utility
                                                          Trade
levels
