                                   -" . / 




                           
                        


                                            !
                                          "#$%& ' () 


                                          " &*+,'&0120
                                  !%%'334445& &+3','&340120


                              -   6         7 
                                    8987,,:!(%%(
                                      ,5&#+;7810
                                           (




                       
                          
          !      
             "  #         
 $  %     %%  &'   " ( ) 
  *% +                ,   
! -  %    


.'/ %0   $ + *        &  
    &% '1  %      &  .  &   
  
&,% %&(:%  &(%), %&(:% 
!  <%),#'',&)#(%&:
 !,#"#$%& ' () 
  -" &*+,'& 0120
(88


                                              $%#%


        &%!  %<%),#,'',&)#(%&<,') =:&,%#%&(:%  &,&%!$>(%'),
#%&(:%+"%+,%%!?(% (+5 %!,++&+,%#(%&$@))#,%,,#'),%@))#,%,
=& %!  (A "=#%!,%4!)%!,++&+,%@))#:: %%4%!%!
:  4 =%!#(%&,<,') =#:)+#(%&;%!'),%@))#,%,('' &%,&$
#==&%,#(:! &! '=()4"=#%!,%%!=,: =%=#%&,% ,): '%% ;
,:!#(%&$!, )#% 44,$%<%);%!&!,5%&# (:,'%,)B,% 
,'',&);%! &+,B,%  ='& #(:% !,:!,+#5 %!:,;#(%&$'& #(:%%$!,:&,#
,&*#)$;,#%! %)$5:,(##(,)'),%,&5: + &'& #(:%




 !                                                    "#$%& ' () 
6 &# :! ) =(5): ):$                                      <: 
  &%$ =7:!+,                                          11 (%!7:!+,; (%188
&5 &;72082                                              !:,+ ;C8C82
>,D(:!#(                                                 "'%& ' () D)<: : 
1       Introduction


Are the U.S. textile and apparel industries examples of creative destruction or are they just
plain destructing?
     The answer matters. It matters for the livelihoods of the over 1.5 million Americans who
still work in these industries. It matters for the policy makers who negotiate the trade policy
that sets the rules for textiles and apparel trade{ trade that comprises about ten percent of all
world trade in manufactures. And it matters to those who hold these industries up as examples
of the changing nature of production in U.S. manufacturing, for the answer speaks to the impact
of outsourcing (in the case of apparel) and capitalization (in the case of textiles) on industry
outcomes.
     Answering this question means de ning creative destruction and plain destruction. We have
a pretty good idea what the latter means on several dimensions of industrial change. It means
plants close, employment shrinks, output declines, and productivity stagnates. Policy toward
declining industries is usually focused on easing the pains of adjustment. Smart public policy
for a declining industry usually does not advocate promoting entry.
     De ning creative destruction is trickier. The phrase dates back to Joseph Schumpeter
(Schumpeter (1942)). He wrote of an economic structure, \incessantly destroying the old one,
incessantly creating a new one. The process of Creative Destruction is the essential fact about
capitalism." But just what does this mean for an industry's plants, employment, output and
productivity? The answer is not spelled out.1 In terms of jobs, we take creative destruction to
mean that although many jobs may be disappearing, new and hopefully better jobs are simul-
taneously replacing some of those lost. In terms of establishments, it means that even as exit
occurs, there is substantial simultaneous entry. In terms of productivity, it means that the least
eÆcient rms exit while survivors become more productive and clever new rms enter the mar-
ket. Public policy can be crafted to facilitate or at least not hamper creative destruction. Policy
prescriptions are about opposite those for declining industries. Rather than easing adjustment,
policy may be directed at enhancing adjustment.
     The aggregate-level evidence suggests these industries are just plain destructing. Thousands
of plants have closed. Hundreds of thousands of jobs have been lost. Real wages have declined.
Import competition has sti ened. By many metrics, the U.S. textile and apparel industries
appear to be classic examples of declining industries. In an evolving international economy,
comparative advantage is a dynamic notion, and it may be that the U.S. can no longer compete
in these industries.
    1
    In this paper, we consider the process of creative destruction within the textile and apparel industries, although
we recognize that the notion is often applied in a wider context. i.e. We'll look at plant-level outcomes within an
industry while some might instead examine industry-level outcomes within an entire economy.



                                                          1
    A more hopeful interpretation of the aggregate evidence is that the decline shown in the
aggregate statistics is just part of the process of creative destruction.2 Investigating whether
there is in fact creative destruction occurring behind the rather sobering aggregate statistics
requires dis-aggregated data.
    In this paper we use plant-level data from the U.S. Census over a 20-25 year span to inves-
tigate these competing views of the textile and apparel industries.
    We consider these two industries in tandem for several reasons. Public policy often en-
compasses both. For the last 25 years, the arguably single largest piece of international trade
protection, the Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA) was focused on these industries. Legislated in
1973 on the heels of the Short-term Agreement on Cotton and Textiles (STA) and the subse-
quent Long-term Agreement on Cotton and Textiles (LTA), the MFA was set to be the really
long term agreement governing global trade in textiles. In the 1993 Uruguay Round of the
GATT, though, it was agreed that in 1995 the MFA would begin a ten year phase-out. While
the MFA is suÆciently complicated that quantifying exactly its impact on the U.S. textile and
apparel industries is impossible, the past 30 years have certainly witnessed substantial protection
in these industries, and only in the last 5 years (years that post-date our sample) have trade
restraints begun to be systematically lowered.
    The MFA is not the only reason these two industries are so frequently linked. The largest
consumer of textile industry products made in the U.S. is the U.S. apparel industry, and textile
industry products are the largest input to the apparel manufacturing process. Because of this
relationship, the competitive forces facing either industry, and the success or failure of each
industry's response, a ects the other.
    One such force with which both industries contend is the steady increase of globalization.
Since the early 1980's, the developing and newly industrialized economies (NIC's) have become
economically larger and more open. With this increased openness has come intensi ed import
competition for U.S. rms. Competition from newly industrializing countries is particularly erce
for textiles and apparel; these industries have historically been driving forces for economies un-
dergoing industrialization because of their labor intensiveness and relatively simple technologies
that can be operated eÆciently at small scale. Increases in openness from developing and NIC's
has also brought enhanced outsourcing possibilities for U.S. manufacturers. The global economy
   2
     Schumpeter himself warned against drawing conclusions about an industry based on a snapshot of aggregate
data. Using language more orid than that permitted economists today, he warned that:
       [S]ince we are dealing with an organic process, analysis of what happens in any part of it{ say in an
       individual concern or industry{ may indeed clarify details of mechanism but is inconclusive beyond
       that. Every piece of business strategy acquires its true signi cance only against the background of
       that process and within the situation created by it. It must be seen in its role in the perennial gale
       of creative destruction; it cannot be understood irrespective of it or, in fact, on the hypothesis that
       there is a perennial lull.



                                                      2
simply gures into the business plans of rms in both of these industries today in a way it did
not in the early 1970's.
    These two industries have also faced changes in the way their products are manufactured.
In the apparel industry, there has been a shift toward a quick-response production structure, so
that a piece of apparel can go from design to cutting to sewing to delivery in a fraction of the
time such processes used to take, minimizing the inventories of work-in-progress that plants have
on hand. But there has not been extensive mechanization of the production process in apparel;
while the cutting of fabric has been mostly computer controlled since the early 1980's, apparel
production remains relatively labor-intensive as the imsy nature of fabric makes automation
in this industry trickier than in other industries. Probably the biggest change in the way that
apparel is manufactured relates to the tremendous growth of outsourcing, especially during
the 1990's. This increase in apparel outsourcing also directly impacts the textile industry since
much of the outsourced apparel production still relies on (now exported) textiles from U.S.-based
mills.3
    In the textile industry, the biggest change in the way products are manufactured relates
more directly to a shift in technology. In almost all stages of textile production, from yarn
spinning and slashing to fabric formation and nishing, new technologies have become available
and have been widely adopted by U.S. rms. In 1976, there were about 275,000 shuttle looms
in the U.S. textile industry. By 1997, there were about 10,000. In their place, large, highly
capital-intensive plants using shuttle-less looms have become the norm. Other technical changes
within the plant include wider looms, the increased use of robotics to move material within the
plant, and substantially higher extrusion rates for man-made bers. Another change in textiles
involves the introduction of new products. Polartec and Gore Tex are two examples of consumer
textiles that did not exist in 1970. There are many other new high-tech textiles for industrial
use. Thanks partly to this increased mechanization of production and the introduction of new
products, the U.S. textile industry has been successful at exporting a substantial and increasing
amount of output over the last two decades, even as it has faced increasing imports.
    The broad picture is one in which two industries shared a common fate in terms of the
impacts of globalization but each industry responded in its own way. The apparel industry has
moved much of the lower-skilled portions of the industry outside of the U.S. The textile industry
has responded by substantial capitalization and investment in newer technology. In light of these
varied responses, we investigate whether these industries have undergone a process of creative
destruction or whether they have simply adjusted to their fates as declining industries.
    We do not preclude the possibility that despite the common threads binding these two
industries, one may decline while the other may re-invent itself. In fact, though, we nd little
   3
     Between 1995 and 1999, the value of textile and apparel imports falling under production-sharing provisions
of U.S. trade law increased by 60%. This increase doesn't include the growth in outsourcing to NAFTA or CBI
nations, which has also been substantial.


                                                       3
evidence of this sort of a split. Rather, we nd that while the aggregate data in both industries
look bleak, the plant-level data paint a much more Bruegel-like picture. There is a lot going
on in these industries and while making sense of it all is challenging, careful analysis of the
data suggests that the U.S. textile and apparel industries provide pretty good examples of
creative destruction. In the face of intensi ed international competition, these industries have
tremendous entry, much job creation, and surviving rms are becoming much more productive.
    The organization of this paper is as follows. In the next section, Section 2, we provide
some background on the U.S. textile and apparel industries. This section discusses some of the
recent transformations these industries have undergone, what sort of products are produced,
and some of the most salient changes in policy and technology. In section 3, we introduce the
data on which we rely{ the Census' Longitudinal Research Database. In Section 4, we examine
implications of creative destruction for plants, jobs, and productivity. Section 5 concludes.

2     The U.S. Textile and Apparel Industries: Some Background


The purpose of this section is to provide background on some of the more economically salient
changes the textile and apparel industries have undergone in the last 25 years.4
    U.S. industrial statistics treat the textile and apparel industries as separate \2-digit" industries{
SIC 22 and 23 respectively. Each of these industries contain a diverse set of goods, goods that
are produced by a wide variety of production processes and are sold to a broad array of nal
demanders. Plants falling within the textiles industry include those that bleach, dye or textur-
ize fabrics for other plants on a commission basis; those that weave thread or yarn into fabrics
sold to apparel manufacturers or makers of industrial machinery; and those that knit yarns into
outer-wear sold directly to retailers. The traditional process for fabric formation includes three
steps, which are often performed by di erent plants. The rst step is picking bers from bales
to attain desired blends, and spinning the bers into thread or yarn. The second step is weaving
or knitting the thread or yarn into fabric, and the nal step is chemical processing to nish the
fabric. More advanced, non-woven fabrics are produced instead by mechanically, thermally or
chemically bonding or interlocking bers, laments or yarns. In spite of the variety of products
and production processes included in this category, the textiles sub-industries have undergone
some of the same broad changes, including technology growth embodied in new machinery or
new products.
    The over-arching change in the textiles industry has been the move toward greater capital-
ization. Production has become a very capital-intensive process and this has induced signi cant
    4
      The interested reader is referred to Abernathy, Dunlop, Hammond, and Weil (1999){ a very insightful overview
of the recent transformations that have taken place in these industries. Another careful and detailed, but slightly
more dated, study of these industries is William Cline's \The Future of World Trade in Textiles and Apparel."
(Cline (1989)). Cline's study is much more focused on the role of international competition.

                                                        4
recent investment. Indeed, from 1972 to 1992, the capital stock per employee in textiles has
risen over 50 percent in real terms.
    The apparel industry contains plants producing an equally wide variety of goods with a
plethora of production processes. In addition to clothing items like shirts and trousers, this
category includes apparel belts, embroideries, house-furnishings and automotive trimmings. The
traditional apparel production process involves rst designing the product and choosing fabrics,
then pattern making, grading, cutting, sewing and pressing. Purchasers of apparel goods include
retailers, but increasingly, apparel rms are retailing their own goods through outlet chains and
catalogs.
    In the apparel industry, production-related changes have arisen less from technical advance
than from changes in the optimal organization of production. While there have been important
technical advances in this industry, including the computerization of tasks such as product
design and the placement of patterns on fabric to minimize waste, technical changes have been
less important in apparel than in the textiles industry.
    Over our sample period, however, there have been extensive changes in the organization of
the apparel production process. One change, which we shall examine further in the following
section, has been the increase in outsourcing abroad by U.S. manufacturers. Special exemptions
available for goods that have been assembled abroad from U.S.-made components have been
encouraging producers to move the assembly part of the production process to countries with
cheaper labor over the last three decades.
    In the last quarter of our sample period, another important change in apparel production
has been driven by the demands of apparel retailers moving toward \lean retailing" practices.5
\Lean retailing," spearheaded by large retailers, involves decreasing retail inventories by keeping
careful (computerized) track of inventory levels and sales of every single item carried, and re-
stocking speci c items as needed by size and color. To make lean retailing work, however,
retailers require that manufacturers be able to respond to their orders for re-stocks within days
or weeks, rather than months or even once per season as had been the norm. The pressure for
change these demands put on apparel manufacturers is hard to overstate. Manufacturers could
accommodate the retailer demands for quick response times by either drastically increasing their
own inventories, a costly move in terms of the inventory risk involved,6 or by changing their
production process to speed the production of a complete apparel item. The production processes
widely used by apparel manufacturers at the beginning of our time period, the progressive bundle
and straight-line systems, involves breaking up each item's assembly into a large number of highly
   5
     These practices, and their e ects on manufacturers described below, are also important forces in some of the
textiles sub-industries that produce goods that go directly to retailers, for example, some knits as well as domestic
goods such as sheets and pillow-cases and towels.
   6
     Lean retailing raised the risk associated with even the initial level of inventories, since retailers would re-order
only the speci c colors and sizes of goods in demand, rather than the whole line of a product. This is discussed
in Abernathy, Dunlop, Hammond, and Weil (1999).

                                                           5
specialized tasks. While the rate of output for these systems is high, it can take a long time for
an individual item to pass through all stages of the production process, making it diÆcult for
  rms to respond quickly to orders for speci c goods. Many manufacturers found it necessary to
switch to a modular production system, breaking up production into fewer steps and requiring
each worker to perform a wider variety of tasks. Modular production allows manufacturers to
respond to retailer demands for quick response times without assuming unbearable amounts of
inventory risk.7
    As noted in the introduction, international competition now gures into the business plans
of rms in these industries in a way that it did not 30 years ago. In an attempt to quantify some
aspects of globalization in these industries, Table 1 presents some data on U.S. total imports of
textiles and apparel as well as a measure of outsourcing. These are quantity-based measures of
import competition and export performance.8 In textiles, the real value of imports was relatively
constant from 1972-1982. Beginning around 1983, imports began a steady increase, and they
have tripled in real terms from 1982-1994.9 The increase in U.S. imports came from both
developed and developing countries with only a slightly greater amount of the increase coming
from the latter. The U.S. textile industry has, throughout this period, exported to the rest of
the world. In 1980, exports almost equaled imports. Since then, while exports have continued
to increase, imports have grown faster, and the U.S. now imports about twice as much textiles
as it exports.
    In apparel, the picture is quite di erent. The absolute volume of exports is surprisingly high{
apparel and textile exports are of comparable value throughout much of this period. Imports,
on the other hand, have exploded, increasing almost ten-fold in real terms from 1972 to 1997.
Whereas the increase in textile imports came from developed and developing countries, the
increase in apparel imports is mostly from the developing countries. The import and export
  gures in Table 1 are in terms of real values. If instead one measures imports by physical
   7
     For a much more detailed description of these changes see Abernathy, Dunlop, Hammond, and Weil (1999).
   8
     The data in Table 1 are compiled from multiple sources. The import and export data in the literature are
remarkably varied and seems to depend on which SIC revision is used, which, if any, de ators are used, and
whether one uses USITC data among other things. Because of this variation, we want to be clear on how the
data in Table 1 were constructed. The imports and exports data are from the Feenstra database available on
www.nber.org. We used the le sic58 94.asc.zip. This data, though, uses the 1972 SIC revision. In order to make
the data comparable to our LRD data, the Feenstra data were translated into the 1987 SIC revision using the
concordances available with the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database available at www.nber.org. Also,
the Feenstra data stops in 1994. See (Feenstra (1996)) for details. Data for 1995-97 are from the U.S. Department
of Commerce, International Trade Administration. Finally, the data were converted from nominal to real gures
using the SIC-speci c price de ators available on the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. A Stata
program to create the import and export data in Table 1 is available on request. The data for Item 807 imports for
1972-1980 are from Research Department, International Ladies Garment Workers Union, and those for 1987-1995
are from the U.S. Department of Commerce.
   9
     The data for 1995 onward are from a di erent source than that for 1972-1994 and this accounts for the
downward blip in apparel and textile imports in 1995.


                                                        6
quantities (typically in million square meter equivalents in these industries), the message is
the same.(OTA (1999)) Import competition, as measured by either value or physical units, has
increased substantially with the apparel industry the harder hit.
    There are strong arguments that one should measure import competition by prices, not
quantities. Analysis of the Bureau of Labor Statistics import price indices for textiles and
apparel shows that from 1982 to 1992, the prices of apparel rose only about half as quickly
as those of textiles, suggesting again that import competition (judged by prices this time) was
more intense in apparel than in textiles.
    While total imports of textiles and apparel increased from 1987 to 1997, the nature of these
imports changed dramatically over this brief period. As indicated in Table 1, about 5 percent of
apparel and textile imports were what is referred to as Section 807 imports in 1987. These are
goods that are essentially re-imported after their components were rst exported and assembled
abroad, and duty is only paid on the value-added. The vast majority of this trade is with
either Mexico or the Caribbean Basin countries. These imports are one (imperfect) measure
of outsourcing.10 In only 10 years, Section 807 imports (now covered under tari provision
9802.00)11 of U.S. manufactured goods that were assembled abroad increased over ve-fold and
these imports now account for about a fth of all textile and apparel imports. Section 807 trade
with Mexico rose especially quickly after the passage of the NAFTA.
    This trade (now renamed) is expected to increase even more with the May 2000 passage of
the Caribbean Basic Economic Recovery Act (CBERA). This act, which began to phase into
e ect in October 2000 essentially extends NAFTA-like treatment to Caribbean Basin nations in
terms of textile and apparel trade. In sum, outsourcing abroad (by this measure) appears to be
large, increasing, and fairly recent.
    In light of the intensi ed international competition as well as the changes in technology (in
the case of textiles) and industry organization (in the case of apparel), we seek to examine how
plants have responded. As posed at the outset, have these industries become declining industries
  10
     One might think that there would be well-established data on outsourcing. There is not. As noted by the
U.S. International Trade Commission:
       OÆcial U.S. statistics are becoming increasingly unable to quantify the magnitude and scope of
       production-sharing activity since a signi cant and growing portion of imports from production-
       sharing operations does not enter under Chapter 98 provisions because goods are eligible for duty-free
       treatment under other agreements or tari -preference programs.
(Rodriguez-Archila (2000)). This is particularly true in textiles and apparel where much of the outsourcing
involves either NAFTA or Caribbean Basis countries.
  11
     The domestic content of U.S. imports entered under this provision is exempt from both duties and the Customs
merchandise processing fee (the so-called user fee). Articles that are imported free of duty, either under a Most-
Favored-Nation agreement or under a variety of trade preference programs, have a greatly reduced incentive
to enter under the 9802/807 production-sharing provisions. While imports of duty-free articles continue to use
provision 9802 because of exemption from the user fee, the value of 9802 imports may understate the amount of
imports using U.S. components in their production.

                                                        7
or are they examples of the sort of creative destruction Schumpeter imagined? To address this
issue, it is necessary to turn to plant-level data. We next describe our data sources.

3    Data: The LRD


The data we use come from the U.S. Census' Longitudinal Research Database (LRD), a panel
data set constructed from reports that the Census collects directly from U.S. manufacturing
establishments.
    The data set is made up of two di erent surveys. The Census of Manufacturers is conducted
every 5 years, and includes all U.S. manufacturing establishments with some minimal number
of employees. These establishments are sent a short form survey requesting basic information
about their operations and organization for the preceding year. For plants with fewer than the
minimum number of employees, which are not required to le a report, the Census Bureau uses
instead Social Security and other Internal Revenue Service records to construct some of the
variables for these plants, called \administrative records", and imputes the rest. The second
survey is the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM), which covers a sub-sample of plants in
operation and is conducted annually. For this sample, plants with more than 250 employees,
and those making up a signi cant portion of the shipments in their industries, are selected
with certainty, while smaller plants are selected with some probability. The ASM sample is
designed to cover as much of the productive activity in the industries as possible, not to present
a representative sample of plants, and the selection criteria for the samples have varied across
industries and over time. Additionally, every ve years a new ASM sample is chosen, and to
minimize the reporting burden on small plants, those that were covered in one sample are less
likely to be covered in the subsequent one.
    Our panel spans the years 1972-1995, and contains ve Census years (years ending in \2"
or \7"). Most of our analysis focuses on the census-year data. The data contain both balance
sheet (stock) and revenue statement ( ow) variables, including information on levels of factors
of production (such as employment payrolls, worker hours, and costs of fuels, electricity and
materials) and on the products produced. In addition, unique establishment-speci c identi ca-
tion numbers allow us to link plants across years. These identi cation numbers are invariant
to changes in plant ownership; plants that are acquired by other rms, or plants whose form of
organization changes retain the same identi cation number throughout.




                                                8
4        What Actually Happened? Plants, Jobs, and Productivity in

         the U.S. Textile and Apparel Industries


In this section, we document the changes the textile and apparel industries have undergone. We
examine what has actually happened to plant entry and exit, job creation and destruction, and
productivity in the textile and apparel industries using establishment-level data. To the extent
possible, our approach is to rst provide the sort of publicly available aggregate evidence on the
topic at hand, draw preliminary conclusions on whether this evidence is suggestive of a declining
industry or one undergoing creative destruction, and then turn to the plant-level data. There,
we investigate whether the plant-level data further substantiates the message of the aggregate
data or whether they contribute to a new and di erent perspective.
4.1      Establishments


We begin with an examination of the number of plants in the textile and apparel industries.
Declining industries, as well as those undergoing creative destruction, exhibit substantial exit.
The di erence between the two is that in industries undergoing creative destruction, the exit is,
at least in part, countered with simultaneous entry.
     Table 2 provides count data on the number of plants in the census years. The rst column
includes all plants in the data set. Plants that appear only as Administrative Records (ARs)
are included here. (Recall, these plants are small plants that are not required by the Census to
  le a report. Rather, the Census gets some information from administrative data such as IRS
data and imputes the rest.) We will typically exclude AR data from our subsequent analyses.
One reason for this is that the unique code that identi es a plant over time, and hence allows us
to create our panel, seems to disappear and re-appear fairly randomly from the AR data. This
is not true entry and exit, but rather mostly an artifact of reporting errors. Including the ARs
in our entry and exit gures would arti cially in ate estimates of entry and exit.
     More reliable data excludes the plants that appear only as administrative records, and these
counts are given in the \No AR" columns.12 Regardless of whether one includes or excludes the
AR-only plants, the number of plants is declining in apparel and textiles.
     In apparel, the decline is modest when tiny plants are included but quite substantial once
we've deleted AR-only plants. This indicates much net exit by all but the smallest plants. Some
of this exit represents plants that are going out of the business entirely while some of this exit
represents plants that exit manufacturing but remain in the business as jobbers. The fact that
    12
    We report the gures including the ARs in this table for two reasons. First aggregate published statistics
often do not delete the AR-only rms and by providing AR counts, our data may be more compatible with other
published sources. Second, by reporting both, readers can obtain an estimate of how many very small plants
there are in the industries.


                                                     9
the smallest rms show less net exit also captures the notion that many of the entrants may be
very small plants. With the less reliably reported data excluded, there is an approximately 25
percent decline in the number of apparel plants.
    In textiles, there is a similar picture. Even including the AR-only plants, there is net exit
on the order of 20 percent over the 20 year sample period. When the administrative records
data are excluded, we nd that there are only about two-thirds as many textile plants in 1992
as there were in 1972.
    The fact that the relative declines are larger when only examining the non-AR plants is
doubly sobering. Not only is the number of plants declining, but it is the larger more established
plants that are showing greater net exit. While the pattern of net plant exit we nd in the
textiles and apparel industries doesn't hold across manufacturing overall (which includes such
newer industries as computer chips, telecommunications equipment and semiconductors), it is
echoed in many of the \older" manufacturing industries.13 We conclude that the industry-level
evidence on plant counts is quite supportive of the view that these industries are simply declining
industries.
    To examine the case for creative destruction, one needs to look behind the net declines in
Table 2 and examine the data on simultaneous entry and exit. Table 3 does this. For each of
the ve year intervals and using only non-AR data,14 we compute the gross rate of entry and of
exit. The former is de ned as the number of new plants divided by the number of initial plants
in a 5 year interval while the latter is the number of exiting plants divided by the number of
initial plants. The results are surprising and are especially so for apparel.
    In textiles, a quarter of all plants were entrants between 1972 and 1977 while a third were
exiters.15 Although these numbers uctuate, they are broadly representative of the sort of gross
changes in the number of plants in textiles. In apparel, the numbers are more striking. For
example, between 1972 and 1977, the number of (non-AR) plants was virtually constant. Still,
almost half of all plants in this period were entrants and almost half exited so that the net
change was negligible.
    It would be easy to examine the industry-level gures for the rst 15 or so years of our
sample and conclude that the e ect of the MFA was to protect existing plants, and preclude any
Schumpeterian creative destruction. It would also be dead wrong, although one needs plant-
level data to ascertain this. In general, underlying the net exit of plants in these industries are
  13
     Over the last 30 years, plant numbers have fallen in other manufacturing industries such as Food Products;
Tobacco; Leather; Stone, Clay and Glass; and Primary Metals.
  14
     Hereafter, all tables will only include non-AR data unless otherwise stated.
  15
     We use the simple appearance or disappearance of a plant to indicate entry or exit. An alternative method of
measuring entry and exit involves the use of \coverage codes." Because these codes are not especially reliable for
our industries toward the end of our sample, we do not use them. Had we used coverage codes, we almost surely
would obtain lower entry and exit rates, hence our estimates can be considered upper bounds on entry and exit
rates.


                                                       10
large and somewhat steady rates of both entry and exit. Relative to manufacturing as a whole,
these industries probably exhibit much greater than average entry (and exit) rates.16 It is also
apparent that the waves of particularly large net exit are explained more by a fall in gross entry
than by an increase in the gross exit rate. That is, when the number of plants in these industries
most declined, it was more due to a shortage of entrants than a surfeit of exits. Examining this
pattern at the 3-digit SIC level, we nd that the average variance in entry rates within SIC
sub-industries exceeds the average variance in rates of exit.
    A statistical implication of this table is that when we later try to estimate how entrants and
exiters di er, we are dealing with large samples. A policy implication is that interventions to
slow industry decline need to focus not just on supporting existing plants but also on encouraging
entry. Indeed, even though these industries faced vastly intensi ed international competition,
the exit rates at the start of the sample were almost unchanged two decades later! A nal
implication of this table concerns product variety. We do not observe the attributes of the
products that plants actually produce. A common modeling assumption is that plants produce
di erentiated varieties. This assumption may be less objectionable in textiles and apparel than
in some other industries. To the extent that the assumption captures some of reality, there are a
lot of new varieties being introduced (and lost), and this too seems a part of creative destruction.
4.2    Jobs


One reason we care about the entry and exit of new plants is that these statistics fore-shadow
job dynamics. When plants exit, they no longer have the potential for creating new jobs (and
lose those existing at closure) while plant entry holds out hope of future job creation. The
aggregate-level data on jobs are presented in Table 4. The picture is bleak. From 1972 to 1992,
employment in apparel declined almost 30 percent while in textiles employment declined over
35 percent. The absolute number of lost jobs on net, 720,000, exceeds (to pick an example that
should resonate with an academic audience) the total employment of faculty in 2 and 4 year
colleges and universities in the U.S. By almost any reasonable metric, these are the sort of huge
declines that be t a declining industry.
    Examining the number of production and non-production workers at the average plant in-
dicates that it is production workers who have borne the brunt of these job losses. In apparel,
the mean number of non-production workers has been constant at 13. The mean number of
production workers, on the other hand, has fallen from 77 to 62. In textiles, where the average
plant size is larger, the pattern is the same. Mean non-production workers is unchanged over
the sample at 23 while the average number of production workers has fallen from 165 to 139.
  16
     The \probably" is due to the fact that we do not use coverage codes in computing entry and exit. Baldwin
(1999) reports that the average entry rate over 5 year periods for the U.S. was on the order of 11.3 percent. Even
accounting for di erences in measurement criteria, the entry rates for textiles and apparel appear quite large
relative to this average.

                                                       11
    The reasons for the declines in production workers varies across the industries and are closely
related to the gures for mean real capital stock per employee. In apparel, outsourcing probably
explains the concurrent decline in production (and not non-production) workers and capital
stock. Some production jobs are being outsourced, and this is accompanied by decreasing
capital intensivity. Management jobs are impacted less by outsourcing and this is consistent
with the unchanging average non-production employment. In textiles, machines are replacing
some production workers. Capital per employee rises from $26,562 to $37,222, while the number
of production workers falls. In summary, though, the aggregate-level evidence on net job loss is
clear. There were 720,000 fewer jobs in 1992 than there were in 1972.
    As noted in the discussion of establishments, a di erence between creative destruction and
just plain destruction is that in both cases jobs decline, but with creative destruction, many new
jobs are simultaneously being created. This presages the important di erence between the net
change in jobs and the gross change in jobs. If there is no concurrent job creation, the two are
identical. On the other hand, if four jobs are created for each ve lost, gross and net changes
are very di erent. In order to quantify these notions, we adopt the by now standard de nitions
of Davis and Haltiwanger (1992).
    We denote the employment at plant i in census year t as x . We then de ne the average
employment at the plant as:
                                                                                 it




                                              1
                                       x = (x + x 1 ):                                         (1)
                                         it
                                              2               i;t          i;t



Summing across all plants gives the average industry employment, X : Hence,
                                                  X x :
                                                                                      t



                                            X =    t                      it                    (2)
                                                                 i



The growth rate of employment at a plant, g , is given by:
                                                         it




                                             = x xx 1
                                             git
                                                           it             i;t
                                                                                                (3)
                                                                     it



This formulation has the nice property that it easily accommodates births (g= 2) and deaths
(g= -2) of plants.
   We begin to address the concurrent roles of job creation and destruction in Table 5. Entries
in Table 5 give the averageP fraction    of existing jobs that were created or destroyed between
census years. That is, 1=T =1 P (x x 1)=X where there are T=4 census years.
                              T
                              t     i   it         i;t                t


   In each ve year period between censes, a certain fraction of all the jobs existing in that
 ve year period were created during the period. In textiles, 17, 13, 21, and 25 percent of the
production worker jobs were created in each of the four ve-year periods, so averaged over ve
year periods, 19 percent of all the existing production jobs were created in previous 5 years. This
                                                              12
is the rst entry on the rst row of Table 5. Computing the same gure for apparel, we nd
that 30 percent of apparel jobs were created in the typical 5-year period. For non-production
workers, the gures are higher{ on average 28 percent of jobs were created over the ve-year
intervals in textiles and 42 percent in apparel. The analogous gures for job loss are given in
the row titled \Gross Job Loss." For example, among production worker jobs in apparel, on
average, 42 percent of all the jobs that existed during a ve year interval were lost over the
course of that interval. The row titled \Sum of Gross Job Flows" is an especially important
one. Figures in that row give the percent of existing jobs that were either created or destroyed
in the ve year interval. The bottom row gives the net change. For example, for production
worker jobs in textiles, between census years, on average 19 percent of all jobs were created and
30 percent were destroyed, so the average net change was an 11 percent decline.
    In trying to understand the employment changes in these industries, Table 5 has several
key messages. First, job churning, as measured by the sum of job creation and job destruction
is substantial in both industries but larger for apparel. In textiles, in each ve year period,
half of all production jobs are either created or destroyed. In apparel, the gure is 73 percent.
When we examine only the net job ows, textiles and apparel are the same. Second, somewhat
surprisingly, job churning is greater for non-production workers in both industries. One might
have expected that with the growth in outsourcing, non-production jobs would be relatively
stable while production jobs would be the ones disappearing. This is not the case. Both job
creation and job destruction rates are higher for non-production workers than for production
workers in textiles and apparel. The fairly minimal average decline in the number of non-
production jobs in these industries (8 and 7 percent) hides tremendous simultaneous creation
and destruction. Third, entrants account for a disproportionate amount of new jobs while exiters
do the same for lost jobs. This is especially apparent in apparel, where about three fourths of
all job loss is accounted for by plant exit. Fourth, it is di erences in entrants and exiters that
account for the di erences across industries. If we were to con ne our analysis to continuing
plants, average rates of gross job ows in the apparel and textile industries would look almost
identical. Lastly, we note that one of the forces behind the coincident entry and exit of plants
is the growth of certain sub-industries or product classes within textiles and apparel that is
occurring even though the industry as a whole is shrinking. In textiles, the Carpets and Rugs,
and Knitting Mills sub-industries were growing in terms of employment over the years 1972 -
1992.17 In apparel, non-clothing product classes such as gloves and mittens, hats and caps, and
apparel belts were growing in terms of employment and plants. Even so, looking within each
sub-industry we still nd substantial rates of both gross job in ows and out ows.
    (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996)) list annual rates of gross job growth and loss as
well as gross and net job ows for the years 1973-88 for all U.S. two-digit manufacturing indus-
  17
     It is interesting to note that these are two industries that sell output directly to nal consumers and to other
producers outside of the apparel industry.



                                                        13
tries.18 These gures are not directly comparable to the 5-year averages we report, but are still
informative. Compared to U.S. manufacturing overall, the patterns found in textiles are fairly
representative. The rate of job growth and loss in textiles is slightly below the average for U.S.
manufacturing but is not an obvious outlier. Apparel, on the other hand, is an outlier. Of the
20 2-digit industries, apparel has one of the three largest rates of job growth and loss as well as
gross and net job ows.
     The broader question being addressed is whether job patterns be t an industry undergoing
creative destruction. We believe the answer is \yes." For each industry and for each type of
worker, gross job ows swamp the net job ows. Depending on industry and worker type, the
sum of gross job ows is from 5 to 13 times as large as the net decline, and this is due to the
surprisingly strong job creation taking place{ job creation that does not seem to t the usual
de nition of a declining industry.
     An important part of the process of creative destruction in these industries concerns how
production is being re-organized, and this reorganization also has implications for job (as well
as capital) ows. Toward this end, we have also examined job growth rates and investment rates
for plants that we classify as mainly \outsourcers" or \insourcers" compared to plants that don't
fall into these categories. \Outsourcers" are (approximately) the top quintile of plants in terms
of the value of work they contract out as a percent of their total sales (about 2% of sales for
textiles and 5% for apparel.) \Insourcers" are plants whose main product class (a 5-digit SIC
code) is some variety of contract work. The results, presented in Table 6, are striking.
     Consider rst the textiles industry. Plants that are classi ed as either outsourcers or in-
sourcers are \down-sizing" at a much more rapid pace than are other plants. The di erence
between outsourcers and other plants is especially stark in their growth rates of non-production
worker employment and capital stocks; outsourcers shrink by about 25% over each ve year
interval in their employment of these inputs, while non-outsourcing plants only cut back their
non-production worker employment by 7% and their capital stock by 10%. In the apparel in-
dustry, while both outsourcing and insourcing plants appear to be \down-sizing" more rapidly
as well, the di erence is much more pronounced between insourcing plants and others. Apparel
industry insourcers are shrinking in terms of both labor and capital stock at a rate of about
25% every 5 years, while non-insourcing plants are shrinking by less than 6% in all categories
of inputs. The reasons behind their striking rates of reduction in input use, however, likely
di er between the outsourcing and insourcing plants. \Outsourcers" are nding it worthwhile
to outsource more and more of their production abroad. Many of these plants are exiting man-
ufacturing altogether, becoming wholly importers and contractors. \Insourcers", on the other
hand, are losing business to foreign rms that face lower labor costs and to assembly plants that
U.S. rms are opening up abroad.
 18
      See Table 3.1 in (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996)).



                                                       14
4.3     Productivity


As noted in the introduction, import competition has intensi ed in textiles and apparel. Tech-
nology, too, has changed. In this section, we investigate how productivity has evolved in response
to these and other changes. One of the oft-cited bene ts of international competition is that it
forces domestic rms to become more productive.19 An oft-cited cost of international competi-
tion is that, in some cases, a country may lag behind the productivity of its competitors losing
its competitive advantage over time, and with this comes lost jobs, closed plants, and declining
wages.20
     The implications for the evolution of industry-level productivity in declining industries are
straightforward in a closed economy. Declining industries exhibit productivity growth below the
domestic average. In an open economy, the metric is global. Declining industries exhibit slower
productivity growth than their international competition. Unfortunately, we do not have reliable
measures of productivity growth in textiles and apparel around the globe. While we can, and
will, measure productivity growth in the U.S., we are unable to evaluate whether these changes
suggest a declining industry in a more global context. Rather, we simply examine whether the
textile and apparel industries have lagged behind other U.S. manufacturing industries.
     We are able, though, to investigate several aspects of creative destruction as evidenced from
productivity dynamics. Creative destruction implies that: i) as plants exit, it is the least eÆcient
that are most likely to go out of business; ii) surviving rms learn to become more productive;
iii) the net e ect of entry is to enhance industry productivity; and iv) that among surviving
plants, more productive plants grow while their less productive competitors lose market share.
In this section, we investigate all of these implications of creative destruction.
4.3.1    Measuring Productivity


Before presenting results, we must rst address measurement issues. Unlike plant entry and
exit, and employment, productivity is not directly observable. Examining productivity, then,
means coming to terms with a way to measure it. In this sub-section, we discuss two ways to
measure productivity{ a traditional and easy-to-use way and a state-of-the-art way.
    The traditional method of measuring productivity at the plant level is to compute value-
added per worker. This method has at least ve attributes to recommend it. First, it is
exceedingly simple to calculate. Both value-added and the number of workers are reported in
the plant-level data so measurement is a trivial exercise. Second, it is a measure that, by itself,
  19
     We repeat this assertion without endorsing it. As micro-economists, it is not immediately obvious to us why
this should be so in an industry with competitive domestic markets.
  20
     Some might view this as a bene t citing instead the resources freed up from the industries in which the
country was no longer competitive.


                                                      15
means something. That is, it is not an index number but rather a dollar-based value that is
readily interpreted. Third, this is how many government statistics measure productivity, so this
measure makes comparisons of, say, the apparel and textiles industries to manufacturing at-large
very straightforward. Fourth, this measure is not dependent on choices regarding functional form
and econometric issues that are likely to have an arbitrary element to them. Fifth, it is a pretty
intuitive measure. More output per worker seems like it ought to be a good thing if one doesn't
think too hard about it.
    The problems with value-added per worker as a measure of productivity arise if one does
start to think a bit harder. In the presence of other inputs, focusing productivity measurement
on just labor can be misleading. An extreme example illustrates this point. Suppose it was
possible to purchase a machine that allowed a single person to run an entire textile plant,
but that this machine cost several billion dollars. Output per worker would be huge, but as
a business decision, purchasing the machine would be stupid. One needs to account for the
other inputs into the production process and this quickly leads one to measures of total factor
productivity. There is another, more subtle, problem with using output per worker to measure
productivity. The use of output per worker as a productivity measure strongly biases one toward
  nding a trade-o between productivity changes and employment changes, and this fosters a
problematic political dynamic. (This trade-o between \productivity" and employment, for
example is highlighted in Cline's study of the textile and apparel industries.) Holding output
constant, the only way plant-level productivity (by this measure) will increase is if workers
are laid o . With more accurate measures of productivity, it is easier to have both jobs and
increased productivity. The current state-of-the-art in measuring productivity was developed
by Olley and Pakes (Olley and Pakes (1996)). These methods were then adapted and improved
by Levinsohn and Petrin (Levinsohn and Petrin (2000)). We use the Levinsohn and Petrin
(hereafter LP) methodology for estimating plant-level productivity. We proceed by giving a
very brief description of this methodology (as well as some problems with simpler estimation
methods) and refer the interested reader to the Appendix and to the original papers for more
detail.
    If one is going to estimate, rather than simply compute, total factor productivity, the sim-
plest way to do so is to estimate a production function using Ordinary Least Squares and use
the residual from such a regression as the measure of productivity. The problem with this
oft-adopted approach was pointed out over 50 years ago in Marschak and Andrews (1944). In
essence, Marschak and Andrews noted that plants that have a large positive productivity shock
may respond by using more inputs. To the extent that this happens, Ordinary Least Squares
estimates of production functions will yield biased estimates and, by implication, biased esti-
mates of productivity. The usual \ x" to this econometric endogeneity is to use an Instrumental
Variables estimator. This approach would require an instrument that was correlated with plant-
level input choices and orthogonal to the productivity shock. With plant-level (as opposed to
industry-level) data, there probably are no valid instruments. This very basic problem went
                                               16
mostly unsolved until 1996 when, using data from the LRD and focusing on the telecommu-
nications industry, Olley and Pakes made use of an imaginative blend of economic theory and
semi-parametric econometric methods to solve the endogeneity problem. Levinsohn and Petrin
followed with some simpli cations and amendments that seem to allow the original Olley and
Pakes insights to work better with a wider variety of data sets. A brief description of exactly
how we estimate productivity is given in Appendix A. In that Appendix, we describe how we
estimate productivity in the apparel and textiles industries. Readers wanting more detail should
consult Levinsohn and Petrin (2000).
4.3.2    Aggregate Productivity


Table 7 provides the aggregate-level evidence on productivity. That table lists the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) Total Factor Productivity (TFP) index for manufacturing overall21 as
well as productivity indices speci c to textiles and apparel. For each industry, we list the BLS
TFP index as well as two indices that we compute. These are the LP econometrically estimated
measure and, for the sake of comparison, a normalized measure of value-added per worker (in
constant 1987 dollars.) For all indices, industry-level productivity is computed as an output
share-weighted average of the plant-level productivities. We normalize each index to equal 1.00
in 1972 and compute each index for each census year.
    There are four main messages in the industry-level productivity gures. The rst message
speaks to a comparison between the econometrically measured LP estimate and the value-added
per worker measure. We nd that the traditional measure of industry productivity, value-added
per worker, gives an enormously misleading picture of productivity in these industries. By this
traditional metric, productivity about doubled in textiles and more than doubled in apparel.
The reasons for the large discrepancies between measures is di erent in the two industries. In
textiles, the capital per worker increased about 50 percent over this period. Accounting for the
fact that capital is not free will make the econometric estimate of productivity (which accounts
for all inputs) smaller than the productivity measure based just on labor. This is what is
largely behind the overstated productivity gains when one uses the output per worker measure.
In apparel, capital per worker is falling, yet the measure of productivity that accounts for all
inputs is much smaller than the value-added per worker measure. The reason has to do with
the decreasing returns to scale in apparel. (In results not reported here, we nd returns to scale
are about .90 in apparel.) In apparel, plants are becoming smaller over time (both in terms
of capital and in terms of labor.) With decreasing returns to scale and shrinking plant size,
the average product of labor, which is what the value-added per worker measure captures, will
increase.
  21
     The BLS indices are from the BLS web site, www.bls.gov, and are taken from the table titled \Multifactor
Productivity in U.S. Manufacturing and in 20 Manufacturing Industries, 1949-99." The table is dated September,
2000.


                                                     17
    Henceforth we focus on the LP estimates of productivity. The second message of the table is
that even using a measure of productivity that accounts for all factors (either the TFP measure
or our own estimates), productivity has risen in these industries. Based on our own estimates,
productivity in textiles has risen substantially from 1972 to 1992{ almost a 70 percent increase,
while in apparel the increase is a more modest 26 percent increase. Given the technological
advances in textiles and the relative lack thereof in apparel, the fact that productivity improve-
ments were greater in textiles seems intuitive. The third message in the Table is that, with only
one exception (1987 to 1992 in apparel), industry-level productivity never actually fell. Given
the pervasive turnover and exit in these industries, this is perhaps surprising.
    The fourth message from Table 7 concerns the comparison between the LP estimates and
the BLS TFP measures. Both measures take into account all the factors of production. The LP
estimates do not impose as much structure on the data in that they do not directly impose the
underlying economic restrictions that justify the correctness of the TFP measure. Nonetheless,
the two measures give broadly similar pictures of productivity, and we nd this reassuring.
    The aggregate-level data in Table 7 does not allow one to pass judgment on whether the
industry-level evidence is consistent with the notion that the textile and apparel industries
are declining industries. To begin to address this question, we need to compare productivity
estimates for textiles and apparel with those for U.S. manufacturing overall. In the rst column
of Table 7, we report the average across all of manufacturing for the BLS TFP measure. With
this as a benchmark, productivity in both textiles and apparel has surpassed the average for
manufacturing. This is true for every census year in both industries for both the LP and BLS
TFP measures.
4.3.3   Micro-Foundations of Productivity Growth: The case for creative destruc-
        tion


When Schumpeter wrote of an economic structure \incessantly destroying the old one, inces-
santly creating a new one," he could well have been thinking about the evolution of productivity
dynamics. What does creative destruction imply about productivity dynamics? It implies that
although many plants are simultaneously entering and exiting, the net impact of this churning
is to increase productivity. Is this the case? Industry productivity, as typically de ned, can
increase either because surviving plants are actually becoming more productive or because mar-
ket shares are being reallocated from less productive to more productive plants even when no
single plant is becoming more productive. The former explanation seems more in line with an
industry re-inventing itself. The latter explanation, on the other hand, is a bounded process in
which plants aren't actually changing, but rather the market is rewarding the more productive
and penalizing the less productive. In order to assess the case for creative destruction, it is
necessary to examine the micro-foundations of the industry-level productivity growth reported

                                               18
in Table 7.
    In order to investigate these questions and others, it is necessary to decompose the industry-
level productivity gures and exploit the plant-level productivity estimates.22 Doing so requires
some notation.
    We de ne industry-level productivity, as a weighted average of plant-level productivities.
Hence, average annual industry productivity (reported already in Table 7) is given by:

                                                               =
                                                                   X s !^
                                                                       N

                                                                                                                            (4)
                                                           t                     it    it

                                                                   i   =1
where s is plant i's weight in year t and !^ is the estimate of plant-level productivity. In
keeping with the output-share weighted average used in Table 7, we use output shares as the
         it                                                        it




weights in our decomposition. Our decomposition is given by:

                        =
                               X s ^! + X !^ s + X s ^!
                                          i;t    1     it                        i;t     1      it                it   it


                               X
                               2  i


                              + s !^
                                      X
                                      C


                                        s
                                          2
                                            !^
                                                   2               i    C                                 i   C


                                                                                                                            (5)
                                          it    it                 i;t       1     i;t      1
                                  i2  B               i   2    D




     Here, !^ is the deviation of eachPplant's productivity from the initial-year industry mean. The
  rst term in the decomposition, 2 s 1^! represents the part of industry-level produc-
tivity growth due to within plant productivity growth. If the only reason industry productivity
                                           i    C    i;t                it




grew was that every single plant was becoming uniformly more productive, this term would
capture all of the increase in productivity. Industry productivity might also increase, however,
because output shares are being reallocated from less productive plants to more productive
ones. This e ect is often termed the reallocation e ect, and it is captured by the second term
in (12). The third term is harder to interpret. This term is a covariance term. It does not
neatly t into the rationalization versus real productivity taxonomy as it clearly contains both
plant level productivity changes (^! ) and reallocation (s ). Our economic interpretation of
this covariance term is that it is a measure of just how inter-related changes in plant-level pro-
                                                it                                                   it




ductivity and changes in market share really are. To the extent that it is non-zero, one simply
cannot separately consider productivity changes in the absence of reallocation. The fourth and
  fth terms, respectively, capture the contribution of entry and exit. By construction, entry's
contribution is positive and exits' is negative, but their sum is ambivalently signed. Entry and
exit taken together might increase or decrease aggregate productivity.
  22
     There is an extensive literature on the best way to decompose industry-level productivity growth. See, for
example, Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (1998) and Levinsohn and Petrin (1999)). We refer the interested
reader to this literature for a discussion of the pros and cons of various decompositions.


                                                                   19
    We use this decomposition to examine what underlies the changes in aggregate productivity
and, in particular, to examine evidence of creative destruction. Results are reported in Table
8. The results are pretty stark. The impact of reallocation is almost negligible. There is little
evidence that, conditional on productivity levels, more productive plants are gaining output
shares while less productive ones are losing shares. By far, most of the action is in within-plant
productivity changes. When industry productivity increases, plants really are becoming more
productive. This nding is striking in that it contradicts the oft-professed belief that in protected
industries, there is little incentive for existing plants to become more productive. In textiles and
apparel, it is within-plant productivity growth that is responsible for the increase in industry
productivity.23 The covariance term, which could be considered part of either reallocation or
within-plant growth, is only moderate. The general message is one in which surviving textile
and apparel plants are becoming more productive.24
    The last column gives the net e ect of entry and exit. These gures address the question of
whether all the plant entry and exit, on net, helps or harms industry productivity. In textiles,
the net e ect is always positive albeit modest. This is in part because entrants and exiters tend
to have small market shares. In apparel, the magnitudes are also modest, although in two of the
5-year periods, the net impact of entry and exit was to (barely) decrease industry productivity.
    The overall picture of productivity in the textile and apparel industries is one in which
productivity increased over the two decades studied and in which most of this increase was due
to plants truly becoming more productive. The net impact of entry and exit was consistently
modest and usually contributed to higher industry-level productivity. We conclude that the
decomposition of productivity seems to support the case for creative destruction. The fact
that productivity increased mostly because of within-plant productivity gains strikes us as both
surprising and hopeful. It is surprising because the tremendous job churning and plant entry and
exit documented above might lead one to believe that one cannot teach an old dog new tricks{
that it requires new jobs and new plants for productivity to increase. This result is hopeful
because it suggests that incumbent plants can and do become more productive as they face
increased competition both from abroad and from new domestic entrants. It also suggests that
incumbent plants can learn to bene t from new technologies and new production techniques,
although verifying this requires more analysis into the plant-level determinants of productivity
and, in many cases, exit.
   23
      Of course, it could be that the within-plant productivity increases would have been yet more impressive in
the absence of protection, but absent a well-speci ed model of the industries, this is speculation.
   24
      It is noteworthy that the only really large decline in within-plant productivity came in apparel during 1987-92.
It might be that our productivity measure misses an important dimension of plant performance that is improving
over this time period. After 1987, manufacturers were adopting quick-response production processes in order to
accommodate the push toward lean retailing by retailers. The bene ts of quick-response, which include improving
the match between production and nal demand and lowering inventories held by the manufacturer, might not
be well re ected by our measure of productive eÆciency.



                                                         20
4.3.4   Who Exits?


Before concluding our study of productivity, we want to examine more closely those plants that
do not remain in our sample. The reason for this is that the characteristics of these plants speak
to the issue of plain destruction versus creative destruction. If there is to be a bene t to the
tremendous exit in these industries over the past two decades, it should be the case that exit
is not a random phenomenon. This is an important part of the idea of creative destruction.
On the other hand, if exit is both pervasive and random, it would be easier to make the case
that these industries are simply declining. Section 2 makes clear that exit is pervasive. Here we
examine whether it is random or whether instead exit seems consistent with loosely exposited
notions of competition and industry evolution.
    Table 9 presents the results of our analysis of what predicts plant exit in the textile and
apparel industries. Many of the questions posed in the introduction under the title of \Inter-
actions" are addressed here. The coeÆcients reported in Table 9 are the results of a probit
regression. The dependent variable equals one if the plant exits and zero otherwise. The probits
include xed e ects for 3-digit industry sub-codes. The coeÆcients in the table are the change
in the probability of exit for an in nitesimal change in the independent variable for the case of
continuous independent variables, and the change in the probability of exit for a discrete change
in dummy independent variables. Each probability is evaluated at the mean value of the vector
of independent variables. The coeÆcients on each regressor will be discussed in turn.
    The rst regressor is the Levinsohn-Petrin measure of productivity (hereafter productivity.)
We nd that, conditional on all the other regressors, a plant's productivity explains exit in a
very statistically signi cant manner. The negative coeÆcient indicates that as a plant becomes
more productive, the probability of exit diminishes. This is the most important result in Table 9.
Conditional on the size of the plant, the wages paid, the capital stock per worker, and measures
of outsourcing, it is the less productive plants that are more likely to exit. There are multiple
ways to interpret this result. Those whose faith in the forces of competition is such that they
already knew this had to be the case can note that this then re ects well on our measure of
productivity. Those who worry that the crazy-quilt of protection a orded by the MFA allows
ineÆcient plants to prosper while protecting them from the realities of the world marketplace
should nd some solace in this result. In a probabilistic sense, ineÆcient plants die. One
must be careful when interpreting the magnitude of these coeÆcients since the units in which
productivity is measured, by themselves, have little meaning. Also, the units are not comparable
across the two industries. Because the estimated coeÆcients are local derivatives (evaluated at
the vector of means), we can derive a semi-elasticity by simply multiplying coeÆcients by the
mean level of productivity in each industry. When we do this, we nd that the semi-elasticity
of the probability of exit with respect to a percentage change in productivity is -0.17 in textiles
and -0.05 in apparel. This means that a 10 percent increase in productivity in textiles lowers
the probability of exit by 1.7 percent conditional on all the other regressors and evaluated at
                                                21
the mean. This e ect is over three times as large as the analogous semi-elasticity for apparel.
    The second regressor is the percent of work contracted out, our plant-level measure of out-
sourcing. In apparel, where outsourcing has been a de ning change in the industry over our
sample, we nd that plants that contract out more work are less likely to exit, conditional on
productivity and other plant-level characteristics. It has been frequently claimed that to succeed
in the apparel industry, one needs to play the outsourcing strategy. This appears to be correct
(at least in a probabilistic sense.) Evaluating all the regressors at their means, the magnitude
of the coeÆcient for apparel implies that a ten percent increase in work contracted out lowers
the probability of exit by about 1.6 percent. Given the very large increase over time in the
percent of work that some plants contract out (much larger than the ten percent in the above
example), this e ect might be quite large.25 In textiles, where outsourcing is much less of an
issue, plants that outsource more are more likely to exit, conditional on all the other regressors.
The production process in textiles is much less conducive to outsourcing, and it is not at all
obvious that outsourcing is likely to be a successful business strategy. Those plants that do
outsource may be doing so as a last resort. The magnitude of the coeÆcient implies that at
means, a 10 percent increase in outsourcing in textiles increases the probability of exit by about
2.3 percent.
    The third and fourth regressors are non-overlapping measures of in-sourcing. These variables,
receipts for contract work and a dummy variable for whether the plant's main product class is
commission work, capture the other side of outsourcing. For both textile and apparel, plants
that do more insourcing have a higher conditional probability of exit. The positive sign on the
coeÆcients on these regressors probably re ects the notion that these rms are taking on work
that might otherwise be outsourced to foreign plants. In apparel especially, this is often the more
labor-intensive part of the production process and it is not the segment of production in which
U.S. plants are likely to have a comparative advantage relative to their foreign competitors.
In apparel, plants that insource are competing with low-cost labor principally in Mexico and
the Caribbean Basin. The results suggest that the U.S. plants that try to compete on this
dimension are more likely to fail. The same phenomenon seems to be happening in textiles too,
although both the magnitude of the coeÆcients and their statistical signi cance are smaller than
in apparel.
    \Percent skilled Labor" is a variable that gives the percent of the workforce classi ed as
non-production workers.26 Conditional on productivity and the out- and in-sourcing variables,
and wages, a higher percentage of skilled labor is correlated with a greater probability of exit.
Evaluated at the vector of means, a ten percent increase in the percent of skilled (i.e. non-
production) labor implies that the probability of exit increases about 2.3 percent in textiles
and about 1.5 percent in apparel. There are three interpretations of this result. The rst is
 25
      The e ect is not linear so it is not correct to simply extrapolate for large changes.
 26
      This is clearly not an ideal measure of skilled labor, but it is the best one can do with the data.


                                                          22
that, conditional on productivity, having more non-production workers is not a good idea; non-
production worker labor is relatively expensive. The second is that before rms exit altogether,
they may be more likely to rst release the production workers{ especially if production workers
are paid hourly and work without annual contracts while non-production workers are paid a
salary and may be more likely to have annual contracts. This is especially likely to be true if
exit really means that the plant is moving operations to another location. Third, if there are
  xed costs associated with hiring non-production workers (i.e. search costs), and a small chance
that a plant with a temporary business slump may recover, then the option value of keeping
non-production workers on payroll may exceed the direct cost.
    \Inventories" is the percent of nished-good and work-in-progress inventories on hand at
the end of the year relative to annual shipments. With the move to lean manufacturing, which
emphasizes quick turnarounds, low inventory costs, and short product cycles, much has been
written about how this strategy is key to success in these industries. Our plant-level results
substantiate this claim. Even conditioning on productivity, larger inventories increase the prob-
ability of exit. Because our measure of productivity is unlikely to capture all (or even many)
of the bene ts of lean manufacturing, inclusion of inventories is unlikely to be highly co-linear
with our measure of productivity. This e ect is larger in apparel, where lean manufacturing is
important for a broader set of products than in textiles. A ten percent increase in the ratio of
inventories to shipments raises the probability of exit by 2.6 percent. The analogous gure for
textiles is 1.6 percent.
    We also nd that, conditional on productivity, having more capital per worker raises the
probability of exit in a statistically signi cant but quantitatively small way. The logic behind
this is the same as that for non-production workers. Capital already enters the production
function so our measure of productivity is taking into account the contribution of capital to
output. Conditioning on productivity, having more capital raises the likelihood of failure. A
simple explanation is that capital is expensive and having more than is productive is problematic.
Additionally, the option value story described above for non-production worker labor may apply
here as well; if there are xed costs associated with building capital, a rm facing a downturn
may hold onto its capital on the small chance that things turn around, even if most such rms
will soon exit.
    The next three regressors are measures of the cost of labor. Conditioning on all the other
regressors, higher production worker wages increase the probability of exit in textiles while in
apparel the e ect is statistically insigni cant. For non-production workers, higher wages are
conditionally correlated with a lower probability of exit. This is consistent with unmeasured
worker attributes that contribute positively to the success of the rm. In any case, these e ects
are of comparable magnitudes in textile and apparel and they are small. Increasing salaries by
a thousand dollars lowers the probability of exit by about a tenth of one percent.
    The last regressor is a control for plant size. Conditional on all the other regressors, it is

                                               23
the case that big plants are less likely to exit. We interpret this as evidence of sunk costs in
both industries. The nding that, regardless of almost any set of plausible regressors, bigger
plants exit less frequently is a robust nding in the literature. This e ect is somewhat large. An
increase in plant size of 100 workers lowers the exit probability in textiles by 5 percent and in
apparel (where a 100 worker change is a bigger deal as plants tend to be smaller) by 11 percent.
Because textile plants are about twice as large as those in apparel, the analogous elasticities of
exit with respect to employment are very similar in the two industries.
    In conclusion, exit patterns seem to accord pretty well with what we might expect if the
role of exit is to \dump the chumps." Low productivity plants, those that insource and hence
compete more directly with low-wage foreign competition, those that carry larger inventories,
and those that pay high production worker wages are all more likely to exit. In this fashion,
exit does indeed seem to be weeding out the less competitive plants, and this contributes to the
process of creative destruction as opposed to just plain destruction.

5    Conclusions


Without a doubt, the U.S. textile and apparel industries have faced diÆcult times over the past
quarter century. What is less obvious from the industry-level data is the process by which these
industries are re-inventing themselves as they adapt to new technologies (in the case of textiles)
and new organizational structures (in the case of apparel.) As we've documented above, there
is substantial entry into the industries, job creation rates are high, and productivity dynamics
suggest surviving plants have emerged all the stronger while it has been the less productive plants
that have exited. To the question posed in the rst line of the paper, the answer is that these
industries are indeed examples of creative destruction. Although the industry-level evidence is
certainly consistent with labeling the textile and apparel industries as declining industries, the
plant-level evidence highlights substantial creation.
    A natural question is whether intensi ed import competition can explain all of our results.
We are not sure. Models of international competition and the evolution of distributions of
industry outcomes over heterogeneous plants with simultaneous entry and exit are only now
being developed. Recent work in this vein includes Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2000)
and Melitz (2000). The main results in this paper{ simultaneous entry and exit, job creation
and destruction, and changing distribution of plant-level productivities{ provide a template for
the sort of empirical phenomenon that these models need to be able to capture.
    Even in the absence of appropriate models, at least one point should be clear: Use industry-
level data with caution. Probably the de nitive study of the apparel and textile industries and
the role of international trade is Cline (1989). In his study (using industry-level data), Cline
concluded that:

                                                24
     The persistence of protection in textiles and apparel, despite its relative ine ective-
     ness in promoting adjustment (especially in apparel) and its high cost to consumers
     re ects the perceived importance and political clout of the two sectors. (p. 6, Cline
     (1989)) (Emphasis added.)
We disagree. While we are silent on the cost to consumers of protection in these industries,
plant-level evidence indicates tremendous adjustment.




                                               25
                                            Appendix A
    In this appendix, we brie y discuss how we estimate productivity when employing the
Levinsohn-Petrin approach.
    Estimation proceeds in two steps. In the rst step, we estimate the production function
coeÆcients on those factors of production that are assumed to be freely variable and which will
respond quickly to productivity shocks. In the second stage, we obtain the estimates of the
coeÆcient on capital{ a state variable in the plant's optimization problem. We begin with a
Cobb-Douglas production function for value-added27
                              y = 0+ k + l + l +! + ;
                                 t           k   t
                                                         s
                                                       s t
                                                                       u
                                                                     u t        t       t       (6)
where y is the log of value added in year t, k is the log of the plant's capital stock, l is              s


the log of the skilled labor input (number of non-production workers) and l is the log of the
          t                                                 t                                             t
                                                                                            u


unskilled labor input (number of production worker hours). The two disturbance terms, ! and
                                                                                            t




 comprise the productivity term and any measurement error on output. The rst component
                                                                                                      t




of the productivity term contains the \transmitted" part of productivity, that is, the part that
 t




is observed by plants before they choose variable input levels and that may be serially correlated
within a plant over time. The second component contains any i.i.d. di erences in productivity
that are not observed by plant before they choose input levels, as well as measurement error
on plant-level output. The rst component, therefore, is likely to be correlated with variable
inputs.
    In order to get consistent estimates of the coeÆcients on variable inputs, therefore, we must
control for the e ect that unobserved productivity has on plant choices of input levels. We use the
observation in Levinsohn and Petrin (1999) that, with increasing marginal costs and a perfectly
elastic demand for their good, plants will respond to an increase in productivity by using strictly
more of variable inputs. This strictly monotonic relationship between productivity and variable
input use allows us to write the unobserved productivity term as some exact function of the
capital stock (on which variable input levels will also depend) and employment of a variable
input:
                                          ! = h (e ; k )
                                                 t     t        t   t                           (7)
where h is the inverted function describing optimal energy use. We use energy, e , since it is
excluded from the value-added production function.
          t                                                                                     t




    With (5), we can rewrite (4) as
                                 y = l + l + (e ; k ) +  ;
                                     t
                                            s
                                          s t
                                                       u
                                                     u t                t   t       t           (8)
     27
   A variety of necessary conditions for the existence of a value-added production function are described in
Bruno (1995)



                                                       26
where (e ; k ) = 0 + k + h (e ; k ). Equation (6) is partially linear; it is linear in variable
inputs, and non-linear in electricity and capital. The goal in this rst stage is to obtain esti-
                 t       t           k           t       t       t




mates on the coeÆcients of the inputs that enter (6) linearly (i.e. and .) Here we follow
the approach for semi-parametric estimation of a partially linear equation described in Olley
                                                                                                     s   u




and Pakes (1996). We project value added on l and l and on a fourth- or fth-order poly-
                                                                                 s       u


nomial expansion in e and k.28 This allows us to obtain consistent estimates of coeÆcients on
the included variable inputs (skilled and unskilled labor), and completes the rst stage of the
estimation routine.
    In order to obtain estimates of productivity, we still require an estimate of the coeÆcient
on capital. We estimate the in our second step. Notice that capital enters () twice, i.e.
 (e ; k ) = 0 + k + h (e ; k ); and hence           (and ! ) are not identi ed without further
                                                 k




restrictions.
 t   t   t                   k   t       t   t       t                           k           t




    Identi cation of the capital coeÆcient obtains from assuming that capital is quasi- xed, and
is slow to adjust to the productivity shock. While capital might well adjust to the expected
part of a productivity shock, the identifying assumption maintains that capital does not instan-
taneously adjust to the unexpected part. To operationalize this notion, we must impose some
structure on the stochastic process of the transmitted productivity shock, !. Following Olley
and Pakes (1996), we assume that ! follows a rst order Markov process. In particular, we can
write
                                                             t




                                      ! = E (! j! 1 ) +  ;          t   t       t       t    (9)
where  is the \news" in the transmitted shock. To control for the endogeneity of capital, we
only need to proxy for the E (! j! 1 ). From the rst stage regression, we have an estimate of
             t




 = ! + k , a nonparametric function of which serves as our proxy for each plant's expected
                                                 t       t




productivity.
 t       t           k   t




    The moment condition that identi es the coeÆcient on capital is then given by:
                             E ( +  jk ) = E ( jk ) + E ( jk ) = 0:
                                                 t           t       t       t       t      (10)
                                                                                             t   t


This moment condition simply states that capital does not respond to the innovation in produc-
tivity. Estimation proceeds by employing a Generalized Method of Moments estimator to nd
the parameter estimate that most closely matches our sample to the population moment analog.
  28
     Andrews (1991) shows asymptotic results for estimation of a partially linear equation (equation (6)) using
a series expansion. Alternatively, one could use kernel-based methods to estimate a partially linear equation.
See Robinson (1988). Levinsohn and Petrin (2000) uses this method, estimating a locally weighted quadratic
least squares approximation. Readers not familiar with local regression smoothing might nd it helpful to think
of this step as using weighted least squares to construct predictions of yt given (kt ; et ) using a second order
approximation in (kt ; et ) (a quadratic in (kt ; et )). For any particular point (kt ; et ) for which an estimate of the
expected value of yt is necessary, the regression weights the observations closest to the point (kt ; et ) most heavily.
A consistent estimator of E (yt jkt = kt ; et = et ) is then the intercept from this local quadratic regression. We
have experimented in other contexts with the locally weighted least squares and found it gave, to a remarkable
degree, the same results as the polynomial approximations.

                                                                         27
   Once we have estimated the coeÆcients of the production function, we then simply compute
our plant-level measure of productivity, 
                                       it    kk .it




                                            28
            Table 1:   U.S. Textile and Apparel Imports

                   Textiles               Apparel        Total
           Imports Exports        Imports Exports     807 Imports
1972        3,155 1,340             3,640    596          179
1973        3,033 1,764             3,973    712          251
1974        2,977 2,123             3,876    972          387
1975        2,547 1,974             4,355    958          405
1976        3,062 2,200             5,639 1,102           445
1977        3,101 2,042             6,044 1,211           468
1978        3,612 2,196             7,646 1,436           577
1979        3,366 3,024             7,446 1,808           620
1980        3,507 3,306             7,631 1,887           639
1981        3,852 2,891             8,318 1,760           n.a.
1982        3,561 2,176             8,755 1,262           n.a.
1983        4,161 1,883            10,156 1,057           n.a.
1984        5,753 1,807            13,959 1,019           n.a.
1985        6,278 1,753            15,279 965             n.a.
1986        7,007 1,911            17,507 1,136           n.a.
1987        7,264 2,134            20,857 1,415          1,425
1988        6,602 2,530            20,834 1,808          1,730
1989        7,504 2,938            22,927 2,115          1,958
1990        7,499 3,706            23,372 2,490          1,993
1991        8,106 4,186            23,298 3,139          2,520
1992        8,802 4,487            27,448 3,862          3,202
1993        9,646 4,784            29,380 4,398          3,784
1994        10,379 5,292           31,879 4,960          4,468
1995        7,442 5,354            29,463 4,830          5,787
1996        7,424 5,674            30,008 5,283          6,434
1997        8,457 6,354            34,261 5,936          8,139
Values in million 1987 dollars.




                                  29
       Table 2:    Establishments Count Data

                  Apparel              Textiles
             All Deleted          All        Deleted
            Plants ARs           Plants         ARs
1972        24,441 19,724        7,203         5,611
1977        26,505 19,354        7,202         4,829
1982        24,391 21,054        6,630         5,071
1987        23,168 13,961        6,065         3,850
1992        23,093 14,379(*)     5,886       3,735(*)
(*) indicates estimates.




    Table 3:   Rates of Plant Entry and Exit


                       Gross Rate Gross Rate
                        of Entry   of Exit
        Textiles
        1972-77            26%         32%
        1977-82            31%         32%
        1982-87            20%         38%
        1987-92            28%         31%
        Apparel
        1972-77            42%         44%
        1977-82            48%         43%
        1982-87            25%         55%
        1987-92            49%         46%



                           30
 Table 4:   Aggregate and Average Plant Employment and Capital Stock

                    Industry    Mean         Mean        Mean Real
                   Employment Production Non-Production Capital Stock
                     ('000s)   Workers      Workers     Per Employee
    Apparel
    1972              1,368          77                  13              $8,041
    1977              1,334          73                  13              $5,931
    1982              1,189          63                  14              $5,935
    1987              1,081          68                  13              $6,883
    1992               985           62                  13              $6,493
    Textiles
    1972               953          165                  23              $26,562
    1977               875          173                  26              $24,807
    1982               717          137                  24              $30,980
    1987               672          151                  26              $32,893
    1992               616          139                  23              $37,222


        Table 5:   Average 5-year Rates of Gross and Net Job Flows


                                 Production Workers            Non-Production Workers
                              Textiles         Apparel        Textiles     Apparel
Gross Job Growth                 19               30            28           42
     Continuing Plants           9                10            17           21
         Entrants                10               20            11           21
Gross Job Loss                   30               42            36           49
     Continuing Plants           13               12            16           16
          Exiters                17               30            20           33
Sum of Gross Job Flows           50               73            65           92
Net Job Flows                   -11              -11            -6           -7


                                          31
                  Table 6:   Outsourcing, Insourcing and Input Growth Rates


                                                          Average
                                         Average       Non-Production Average
                                     Production Worker    Worker     Capital Stock
                               Plants Growth Rate       Growth Rate Growth Rate
       Textiles
         Outsourcers            4,819          -0.25            -0.24         -0.27
         Others                18,520          -0.14            -0.07         -0.10
         Insourcers             3,263          -0.23            -0.16         -0.16
         Others                25,492          -0.15            -0.10         -0.14
       Apparel
         Outsourcers           20,066          -0.14            -0.18         -0.18
         Others                82,515          -0.14            -0.10         -0.13
         Insourcers            59,533          -0.25            -0.23         -0.27
         Others                74,693          -0.06            -0.04         -0.05



                                   Table 7:   Productivity Indices



              Manuf.            Textiles                                      Apparel
              BLS     LP       Value Added              BLS          LP       Value Added   BLS
              TFP Productivity Per Worker               TFP      Productivity Per Worker    TFP
1972          1.00   1.00          1.00                 1.00        1.00          1.00      1.00
1977          0.98   1.11          1.09                 1.12        1.09          1.41      1.07
1982          0.99   1.10          1.21                 1.34        1.09          1.55      1.15
1987          1.10   1.58          1.71                 1.46        1.38          1.74      1.22
1992          1.11   1.68          1.96                 1.60        1.26          2.22      1.17



                                                   32
  Table 8:   Decomposition of Industry Productivity Growth

                            Percent of Total Change Due To:
               Output Share             Within-Plant
                Reallocation Covariance      Growth Net Entry
Textiles
1972-77                     -3             13         67      12
1977-82                     -6             13         -4      11
1982-87                      0              9         79      10
1987-92                     -1             11         58      16
Apparel
1972-77                     -5             21          38     20
1977-82                      5             14           1     -9
1982-87                     -3             22          49     14
1987-92                     -2              5         -43     -2
Shares are averages over 3-digit industries.




                                     33
                Table 9:   Predicting Plant Exit

                                        Textiles    Apparel
LP Productivity                          -6.4818     -1.7089
                                         (-9.20 )    (-5.98 )
Work Contracted Out (pct)                 0.2309     -0.1622
                                         (3.56 )     (-7.12 )
Receipts for Contract Work (pct)          0.0752      0.1644
                                         (3.27 )    (15.48 )
Commission Work Dummy                     0.0791      0.0837
                                         (5.72 )    (13.74 )
Percent Skilled Labor                     0.2386      0.1519
                                         (6.49 )     (8.13 )
Inventories                               0.1607      0.2569
                                         (4.00 )     (9.44 )
Capital per Worker                        0.0002      0.0005
                                         ( 2.52 )    (5.14 )
Production Worker Wage                    0.0021      0.0003
                                         (2.11 )     (1.18 )
Non-Production Worker Salary             -0.0009     -0.0011
                                         (-3.84 )    (-7.47 )
Other Compensation per Worker            -0.0064     -0.0023
                                         (-7.18 )    (-5.11 )
Total Employment                         -0.0005     -0.0011
                                        (-24.72 )   (-44.70 )
Number of Observations                    15,406      46,643
\z" statistics in parentheses.




                                 34
References


Abernathy, F. H., J. T. Dunlop, J. H. Hammond,        and D. Weil (1999): A Stitch in Time.
  Oxford University Press, New York.
Andrews, D. W. K.      (1991): \Asymptotic Normality of Series Estimators for Various nonpara-
  metric and semiparametric models," Econometrica, pp. 307{345.
Baldwin, J. R.     (1999): \A Portrait of Entrants and Exits," Statistics Canada, Analytical
  Studies Working Paper No. 121.
Bernard, A., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen,        andS. Kortum      (2000): \Plants and Productivity
  in International Trade," NBER Working Paper No. 7688.
Bruno, M.    (1995): NBER Macroeconomics Annual. MIT Press, Cambridge and London.
Cline, R.  (1989): The Future of World Trade in Textiles and Apparel. Publisher, City.
Davis, S.,  and  J. Haltiwanger     (1992): \Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
  Employment Reallocation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 819{63.
Davis, S., J. Haltiwanger,     andS. Schuh    (1996): Job Creation and Destruction. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA, 1998 edn.
Feenstra, R.    (1996): \U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances," NBER Working
  Paper 5515.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger,        andC. Krizan      (1998): \Aggregate Productivity Growth:
  Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence," NBER Working Paper No. 6803.
Levinsohn, J.,    and A. Petrin     (1999): \When Industries Become More Productive, Do
  Firms?," NBER Working Paper No. 6893.
         (2000): \Estimating Production Functions using Inputs to Control for Unobservables,"
  NBER Working Paper No. 7819.
Marschak, J.,    andW. Andrews       (1944): \Random Simultaneous Equations and the Theory
  of Production," Econometrica, 12(3-4), 143{205.
Melitz, M.    (2000): \The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
  Industry Technology," Mimeo, University of Michigan.
Olley, S.,  and  A. Pakes   (1996): \The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
  Equipment Industry," Econometrica, 64(6), 1263{1298.

                                             35
OTA (1999): Focus: An Economic Pro le of the Apparel Industry. OÆce Textiles and Apparel,
 U.S. Department of Commerce, Washinton, D.C.
Robinson,   P. M.  (1988): \Root-N-Consisten Semiparametric Regression," Econometrica,
 56(4), 931{54.
Rodriguez-Archila, L.   (2000): \Industry Trade and Technology Review," (3335).
Schumpeter, J.  (1942): Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper and Row, third edn.




                                          36
