



 

  

      

    

 
 
 !"#$%
&!'(()))**(!!+()"#$%
      
,%$% ++&-++ .-
/01  %2,#"
3-45

             ! 
" # #   $    %  &  '       $'(  
  )      *( )!   !  * ) ) +#      
(      &   ( "     (         (,  
( %   -&      (  (()
.&  !   -)/ !    )-      ( +   + 
# ! # &0   +# #   #   (    !.  !  
)

+- &  6 5 45  &  
  0  
  ! * "#$%
3-45 2%%,
3 * 771 781 $2
$%#%

./+  & + /  &.  +6 /!  & //5 0 
&6 445    /! 6  & 0/ 6 /5 !45*

).1 44 +

) - & /-0 6 & 04 +.9+   & + /*  + + & 
+ 066-4  +/ & !45  -+ 6 & +/-4-+ +!+ 6 :-5 !+  +
 &+* &+ !! -++  06 &:- +0  & &+0+5 6 + /
-+  065 &  6 /5 !45  & + /* & +-4+ 0 & /5
!45 + +645  + / /./+1 )&  $; + <644=  & > $%% 0?
+ & 44&0 6  2$ ++ ! & <+= 5 -  &46* &+  + -&45
6 & /-0 & )-40  ?!0 6/ +/+ 6 & /! 6 + / /./+ 
 0/0*

&-+1  !!+ & & 04 +. +5+/445 +!0+  + !

/./+ 45  & ? )0 5 & /!  & //5*

 
4 &4 6 /
++&-++ +- 6 &45
$% /4 @.1 $2A778
/01  %2,72A,#78
0 
B/*0-

 
@.+ 6 5 66+
04 +. 0 6 .+
2%& 0 +1 4 ! 8#
+&1 @ 2%$$,
+B6*.

1 Introduction
In December 1996, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan shook global nancial markets when
he raised the possibility of \irrational exuberance" distorting equity prices. His concern, it appears
from the text of his speech, was determining the appropriate monetary policy response in such
situations. However, the central bank likely has a broader concern about equity prices, in that equity
price movements, through their in uence on the macroeconomy, may be an important determinant
of the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Indeed, the Chairman mentioned the impact of rising
stock prices on household wealth or spending in every single one of his semi-annual testimonies to
Congress over the subsequent four years.
This impact of the stock market on the macroeconomy comes primarily through two channels.
The rst, as suggested by the Chairman's testimonies, is that movements in stock prices in uence
aggregate consumption through the wealth channel. The total nancial wealth of U.S. households
stood at $35.7 trillion as of the end of 2000, of which $11.6 trillion was in the form of equity holdings.1 Because of the magnitude of these equity holdings, stock price movements have a signi cant
e ect on household wealth. Second, stock price movements also a ect the cost of nancing to
businesses. In 2000, for example, U.S. non- nancial corporations raised a gross amount of $118
billion through equity o erings and more than $100 billion in venture capital funds.2
Because of their potential impact on the macroeconomy, stock market movements are likely
to be an important determinant of monetary policy decisions. Despite this potential importance,
there has been little empirical evidence measuring the magnitude of the Federal Reserve's reaction
to the stock market. The primary reason is that it is diÆcult to empirically estimate the monetary
policy reaction due to the simultaneous response of the stock market to policy decisions. Indeed,
the policy reaction cannot be identi ed using traditional approaches for addressing the simultaneity
problem, including exclusion restrictions or instrumental variables. For example, it is diÆcult to
nd any instruments that would a ect the stock market without being correlated with interest rate
movements.
In this paper, we apply a new identi cation procedure developed by Rigobon (1999) to solve this
problem. The identi cation is based on the heteroskedasticity of shocks to stock market returns. In
particular, shifts in the importance of stock market shocks relative to monetary policy shocks, and
the estimated changes in the covariance between the shocks that result, allow us to measure the
reaction of interest rates to changes in stock market prices. The results suggest that an unexpected
increase in the S&P 500 index by 5% increases the federal funds rate expected after the next FOMC
meeting by about 14 basis points. Translating this into discrete policy moves, a 5% rise in the S&P
500 index increases the probability of a 25 basis point tightening by just over a half.3 Because the
1

The data are taken from the Flow of Funds accounts produced by the Federal Reserve Board. The gures include
the equity holdings of non-pro t organizations, which are not separated from those of households in the data.
2
Data on gross equity issuance are from Securities Data Company, while that on venture capital are based on a
survey conducted by Venture Economics.
3
That is, if the probability of a policy tightening were 30% under the existing economic situation, a 5% rise in

1

model is symmetric, a 5% decline in stock prices has similar implications for policy easing.
It is important to note upfront that the ndings do not imply that the Federal Reserve is
targeting stock prices or reacting to perceived misalignments in stock prices. There is currently
some debate in the academic literature about whether such a strategy would be an e ective policy
approach. Cecchetti, Genberg, Lipsky, and Wadhwani (2000) argue that monetary policymakers
should react to perceived misalignments in asset prices to reduce the likelihood of asset price
bubbles forming.4 Bernanke and Gertler (1999, 2001) instead argue that monetary policy should
react to asset price movements only to the extent that they a ect expected in ation.5 Along
similar lines, in the context of discussing stock market bubbles, Alan Greenspan has stated that
central banks should remain focused on achieving price stability and maximum sustainable growth,
suggesting that policymakers should respond to stock prices according to their in uence on the
outlook for output and in ation. The ndings in this paper are consistent with this view. Using
rough calculations, the estimated policy response is approximately of the magnitude needed to o set
the expected pass-through of equity market shocks to aggregate demand. Thus, it appears that the
Federal Reserve systematically responds to stock price movements only to the extent warranted by
their impact on the macroeconomy.
The results presented should be regarded as a rst step in addressing a very diÆcult question.
One issue is that policymakers might want to react di erently to equity price movements that
are driven by di erent types of shocks. Our analysis attempts to measure the policy response
to an exogenous movement in equity prices|one that is not driven by other factors that also
a ect the outlook for the economy or monetary policy. To this end, the empirical exercise controls
for the in uence of macroeconomic shocks by including the major economic data releases in the
speci cation. However, it is unlikely that we have successfully controlled for all possible shocks,
and thus our measured response may partly refect the in uence of other factors. Nevertheless,
the analysis provides an estimate of the average response of interest rates to a typical movement
in stock prices, a result that should help advance our understanding of the interactions between
monetary policy and asset price movements.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the problem of identi cation and demonstrates why other widely used identi cation methods are inappropriate in this context. Section 3
develops the method for identifying the system through stock market heteroskedasticity. Section 4
presents the results and evaluates whether the magnitude of the estimated policy response is sensible. Section 5 investigates the robustness of the results and explores whether the ndings could
be driven by alternative explanations. Section 6 concludes.
stock prices would increase the probability of tightening to 80%. If the probability of an easing were 10%, the rise in
stock prices would result in a 40% chance of tightening.
4
The basis of this argument is that preventing asset price misalignments will allow policymakers to more successfully stabilize output and in ation (the policymakers' objectives) by avoiding the large disruptions to the economy
that might occur when those misalignments unwind.
5
Many of these issues are also addressed by Reinhart (1998). Reinhart raises some other interesting questions as
well, such as whether policymakers should respond to the level of stock prices or the change in stock prices.

2

2 The Endogeneity Problem
Although movements in the stock market may importantly a ect monetary policy decisions, identifying the monetary policy response to the stock market is diÆcult. The problem is that the stock
market endogenously responds to monetary policy decisions at the same time that policy is reacting
to the stock market. The simultaneous determination of interest rates and stock prices is depicted
in Figure 1. Holding everything else equal, higher interest rates are associated with lower stock
market prices, given the higher discount rate for the expected stream of dividends.6 At the same
time, the Federal Reserve may react to higher stock prices by raising interest rates. Realizations of
stock prices and interest rates are determined by the intersection of these two schedules and do not
provide a clear reading of whether the policy reaction function is upward sloping in stock prices.
The rst hint that the endogeneity of the stock market response may be an important consideration comes from the simple correlation between movements in short-term interest rates and the
stock market. The correlation between daily changes in the three-month Treasury bill rate and
daily changes in the S&P 500 index, shown later in Figure 3, is typically negative over the period
since 1985|the opposite of the sign that would have been expected from the reaction of monetary
policy.7
Of course, the correlation between interest rates changes and stock market returns could be
in uenced by a number of factors. To add more structure, we characterize the dynamic interaction
between the stock market and interest rates using a Vector Autoregression (VAR). Assume the
dynamics of the short-term interest rate and stock market returns can be written as follows:

it =
st =

st + xt + "t ;
it + xt + t ;

(1)
(2)

where it is the three-month Treasury bill rate and st is the daily return on the S&P 500 index.
The data are daily, and the sample runs from March 1985 to December 1999. The variable xt
consists of 5 lags of the stock market return and the interest rate, as well as observable macroeconomic shocks. These macroeconomic shocks are measured by the monthly releases of major
macroeconomic variables, including the core consumer price index (CPI), the National Association
of Purchasing Managers survey (NAPM), non-farm payrolls (NFPAY), the core producer price index (PPI), and retail sales (RETL). Each of these variables are measured by the di erence between
the released value and the expected value, where those expectations are taken from the Money
Market Services survey about a week before the release.
Equation (1) in the VAR can be interpreted as a high frequency policy reaction function for
6

Of course, the impact on stock prices likely depends on the source of the interest rate movement. On average,
however, it appears from the evidence below that higher interest rates cause stock prices to fall.
7
Note also that the correlation exhibits rich patterns, often becoming positive during periods when the volatility
of the stock market increases. These patterns are the basis for the identi cation procedure used, as discussed shortly.

3

the Federal Reserve. Of course, it is more common to estimate a reaction function using lower
frequency data. But the use of daily data is important in this paper because it allows us to more
accurately de ne the heteroskedasticity of the shocks, as will become apparent below. Note that
the three-month Treasury bill rate is used in the daily reaction function rather than the federal
funds rate. While the federal funds rate is adjusted only every six weeks or so, the three-month
Treasury bill rate will adjust daily according to changes in expectations of monetary policy over
the near term.8 The results therefore infer the magnitude of the monetary policy response to the
stock market from market participants' expectations. Equation (2) measures the response of the
stock market to the interest rate and other shocks. In the speci cation, the shock "t is a monetary
policy shock, and t a shock to S&P returns.
It is well known that equations (1) and (2) cannot be directly estimated due to the endogeneity
of the regressors. Instead, the following reduced form of the system is typically estimated:
 





it
i
= xt + ts :
st
t

(3)

The parameters of the structural form can sometimes be recovered by imposing restrictions on
equations (1) and (2) that allow one to solve for the relevant structural parameters from the
covariance matrix of the reduced form residuals. In the macroeconomic literature, these restrictions
often take the form of exclusion restrictions|that either or is zero. However, neither of these
restrictions is appropriate in the current context. Obviously, we do not want to set to zero
because we are interested in estimating the interest rate response to the stock market.
If we instead assume, inappropriately, that the stock market has no contemporaneous response
to the interest rate ( = 0), the policy reaction function (1) can be estimated directly. The results
from that estimation are shown in Table 1. The three-month interest rate reacts signi cantly to
several of the macroeconomic news releases. More importantly, however, the estimated response
to the stock market, , is negative, as the negative correlation shows through to this parameter.
The most likely explanation of the perverse sign for the policy response to the stock market is the
endogeneity of the stock market response, as highlighted in Figure 1. In that case, the estimated
policy reaction is strongly biased.
A more general approach to addressing the endogeneity problem is through instrumental variables. In fact, one could think of the exclusion restriction behind Table 1 as allowing the stock
market to instrument for itself. But because the stock prices are likely in uenced by the interest
rate shock, it is not a valid instrument. More generally, for the U.S. economy it is hard to conceive
of any instrument that would a ect the stock market without a ecting the path of interest rates.
Any instrument related to the macroeconomic outlook certainly would not meet this criterion. Even
8

More speci cally, the three-month bill rate will re ect expectations of federal funds rate changes over the following
three months, which will encompass one or two FOMC meetings. Because the liquidity of the Treasury bill has declined
over the sample, we have also performed the exercise using eurodollar futures rates. The results, which are discussed
in section 5.4, are similar.

4

variables that are more closely related to corporate pro ts, such as earnings surprises, would likely
contain information about the macroeconomic outlook as well, and thus be correlated with interest
rate changes.9 Thus, instrumental variables is unlikely to be an e ective approach for addressing
the endogeneity problem in this context.
Table 1: Equation for Daily Changes in
Short-Term Interest Rate (Ignoring Endogeneity)

Sample: 1985:3 to 1999:12 Number of obs.: 2733
Std. dev. of dep. var.: 1.43 Std. error of estimate: 0.05
R-squared: 0.99
Durbin-Watson stat.: 2.08

Variable

NAPM
NFPAY
CPI
PPI
RETL
GDP
S&P500

Impact of 1-SD
Change (bp)
0.10
3.88
1.09
0.04
1.65
0.08
-0.21

T-statistic of
CoeÆcient
0.53
8.75
1.74
-0.65
3.53
0.13
-1.90

Regressions include a constant and ve lags of the interest rate and stock returns.

We would expect such problems to a ect a wider class of estimated policy rules as well. For
example, a large literature has developed on estimating simple policy rules that describe quarterly
movements in the federal funds rate.10 One simple variant of these rules is that the federal funds
rate responds systematically to the current in ation rate and output gap, but adjusts only slowly
from its lagged level, as captured in the following rule:

it = (1 ) ( 0 + y yt +



 t) +

  it 1 ;

(4)

where  is the in ation rate, yt is the output gap, and i is the federal funds rate.11 Table 2 shows
the estimated parameters from this rule, in which the federal funds rate has signi cant reactions to
both in ation and output, consistent with the ndings in the literature. Suppose, however, that the
rule were modi ed to include the change in the S&P 500 index over the quarter, denoted sp500,
9

More exogenous events such as changes in tax rates on capital gains or corporate pro ts would also have consequences for monetary policy through their impact on after-tax income.
10
This literature followed the work of Taylor (1993) and Bryant, Hooper, and Mann (1993). For a collection of
papers on monetary policy rules, see the 1999 NBER volume Monetary Policy Rules edited by Taylor.
11
In the estimated rule, the in ation measure is based on the annual change in the GDP de ator and the output
gap is that estimated by the Congressional Budget OÆce. The federal funds rate is the quarterly average of the
e ective rate.

5

as in:

it = (1 ) ( 0 + y (Yt Y  ) +

 +

 t

sp500t ) +   it 1 :

sp 

(5)

The change in stock prices may enter the rule because of its impact on the future path of output and
in ation, as discussed above.12 The estimates from the modi ed rule indicate that the measured
reaction to the stock market is trivial and insigni cant, while the other coeÆcients are largely
una ected.13 As in the daily policy rule, the insigni cance of the reaction to the stock market may
re ect its endogeneity.
Table 2: Quarterly Monetary Policy Rule
(Ignoring Endogeneity)

Excluding
Including
Including
Stock Market Stock Market Stock Market
CoeÆcient
(OLS)
(OLS)
(IV)
0
y

sp



1.13 (1.44)
1.10 (6.62)
1.69 (2.05)
{
0.74 (12.54)

1.14 (1.40)
1.10 (6.56)
1.68 (2.01)
-0.00 (-0.07)
0.74 (13.20)

0.98 (1.48)
0.96 (7.32)
1.69 (2.93)
0.03 (0.48)
0.64 (6.10)

T-statistics shown in parenthesis are based on Newey-West standard errors.

Similar ndings are reported by Bernanke and Gertler (1999), who estimate a forward-looking
policy rule in which the federal funds rate reacts to expectations of in ation and output as well
as to the contemporaneous change in stock prices. Their results indicate a negative and insignificant reaction of monetary policy to movements in the stock market. This nding could re ect
the forward-looking nature of their rule, as the impact of stock price changes could already be
incorporated into the forecasts of output and in ation. However, it may also re ect the endogenous
reaction of the stock market to the interest rate. Bernanke and Gertler recognize the simultaneity
bias and thus instrument for the change in stock prices with lags of macroeconomic variables and
stock returns, but, as discussed above, it is unlikely that these are e ective instruments for stock
market returns. Indeed, we can use similar instruments in the contemporaneous rule estimated
above. The results, also shown in Table 2, again indicate an insigni cant response to the stock
market.
12

For similar reasons, the exchange rate may enter the optimal policy rule in open economies, as has been demonstrated by Ball (1999). In that case the optimal rule speci es a combination of the interest rate and exchange rate
that is appropriate given the values of macroeconomic variables.
13
It is not evident that the change in stock prices is the appropriate measure to include in a rule determining the
interest rate level. An alternative speci cation was estimated that included the ratio of stock market wealth held by
U.S. households to GDP. Under that rule, the policy response to stock market was also insigni cant.

6

Overall, the simultaneous equations problem that arises in identifying the VAR in equations
(1) and (2) cannot be e ectively addressed using exclusion restrictions or instrumental variables.
Alternative identi cation approaches commonly used in the macroeconomics literature, including
long-run restrictions or sign restrictions, also do not help with the identi cation of this parameter.
There are no obvious long-run restrictions that could be imposed to separate policy shocks from
stock market shocks, as both stock market returns and the interest rate likely revert to some
equilibrium values after both types of shocks. Sign restrictions also do not pin down the magnitude
of the parameters, as the observed correlation could be explained under larger (or smaller) policy
responses as long as the endogenous response to the stock market were also larger (or smaller).
Given the shortcomings of commonly-used identi cation techniques, we instead use a methodology
based on the heteroskedasticity of the error terms to identify the monetary policy reaction to the
stock market, as described in the next section.

3 Identi cation through Heteroskedasticity
The above discussion indicates that identi cation approaches that have been widely used in the
macroeconomics literature cannot appropriately separate the response of monetary policy to the
stock market from the endogenous reaction of the stock market to interest rates. In this section,
we expand the procedure developed by Rigobon (1999) which uses the heteroskedasticity found in
interest rates and stock market returns to identify the reaction of monetary policy to the stock
market.
The identi cation relies on the following observation: The responsiveness of monetary policy will
become a stronger determinant of the covariance between interest rates and stock market returns
during periods when equity market shocks are more variable. To see this, consider what happens
if the variance of the stock market shocks rises while the variance of the monetary policy shocks
remains unchanged. Such a shift causes the realizations of stock market returns and interest rates
to more closely trace out the policy reaction function than before, as shown in Figure 2. In other
words, the disturbances are distributed around an ellipse that enlarges along the policy reaction
function when the shocks to the stock market are more volatile. Thus, we are able to identify the
slope of the policy reaction function based on changes in the covariance of interest rate and stock
market movements across periods when the variance of their shocks shifts.
A rough glance at the data suggests that shifts in the volatility of shocks do in fact a ect
the correlation between changes in interest rates and stock prices. Figure 3 shows the six-month
rolling correlation between daily changes in the three-month Treasury bill rate and daily changes
in the S&P 500 index. As noted earlier, this correlation is typically negative, likely re ecting the
endogenous response of stock prices to the interest rate (the downward-sloping schedule in Figure
2). However, the correlation varies fairly extensively over time. In fact, the correlation often
becomes positive during periods in which the volatility of stock market changes is elevated. Under
7

many distributions such as the bivariate normal, the correlation between the shocks would vary
with shifts in the variance of the shocks, but it would not shift signs. Such shifts are most likely
explained by a shift in the relative importance of di erent shocks, as depicted in Figures 1 and 2.
In the empirical exercise that follows, we want to allow for a more generalized speci cation than
depicted in Figure 2. In particular, we modify the VAR used above to include unobserved shocks
that a ect both stock returns and interest rates and that may also be heteroskedastic. In that
case, the dynamic structural equations for the stock market and the short-term interest rates can
be written as follows:

it =
st =

st + xt + zt + "t ;
it + xt + zt + t ;

(6)
(7)

where (6) is the monetary policy reaction function and (7) is the stock market equation. These
equations are similar to equations (1) and (2) above, except we have included an additional variable
zt that represents the unobservable shocks (with the coeÆcient on zt in the stock market equation
normalized to 1). The variable zt could capture changes in risk preferences, liquidity shocks, or
macroeconomic shocks other than those captured by xt . As before, we assume that "t and t ,
the policy and stock market shocks, respectively, are orthogonal. However, this assumption is not
very restrictive, as the presence of the unobserved shock zt can account for correlation across the
structural disturbances.
Generalizing the speci cation to include unobservable shocks comes at some cost. In particular, instead of having full identi cation of the system, we would only be able to achieve partial
identi cation. But the partial identi cation will be suÆcient to measure the reponse of monetary
policy to the stock market|the focus of this paper. Moreover, as we show below, the presence of
zt is crucial for properly measuring the policy reaction, and we can reject the speci cation in which
common shocks are not included.
The parameter of interest is |the reaction of the short-term interest rate to the stock market.
However, equation (6) cannot be estimated directly, because of the simultaneity problem discussed
above, and because zt is unobserved. In fact, only the following reduced form of this system can
be estimated:
 





it
i
= xt + ts ;
st
t

where the reduced form residuals (ti and ts ) are given by

ti =
ts =

1
1

1
1

[( + ) zt + t + "t ] ;
[(1 +
8

) zt + t + "t ] :

(8)

These reduced form innovations have the following covariance matrix:
=

(1

1

"

)2

( + )2 z2 +
.

2 2


+ "2 (1 + ) ( + ) z2 + 2 + "2
(1 + )2 z2 + 2 + 2 "2

#

:

(9)

The problem of identi cation is that the covariance matrix only provides three equations|two
variances and a covariance|while there are six unknowns: , , , z2 , 2 , and "2 .
It is unlikely that this covariance matrix remains constant over the sample, though. Indeed, a
prevalent characteristic of macroeconomic and nancial data is heteroskedasticity. Both interest
rates and stock market returns are known to exhibit patterns of volatility that are somewhat predictable, including periods during which their variances are elevated. While such heteroskedasticity
is typically ignored in VAR studies, here we use it to our advantage to appropriately identify the
parameter .14
Observe that the presence of unconditional heteroskedasticity in the reduced form innovations
provides additional equations to the system represented by (9). Consider, for example, the impact
of a shift to a regime with a di erent covariance matrix. In this case, the new regime provides
three new equations (the covariance matrix). Of course, without any restrictions the new regime
also adds three new unknown parameters { the parameters z2 , 2 , and "2 under the new regime.
But allowing for heteroskedasticity will help identify the system if additional assumptions can be
imposed on the variances of the shock processes. Assumptions of this type may be more appropriate
than the exclusion restrictions considered above.
In the current context, we assume that the monetary policy shocks "t are homoskedastic. This
assumption is not very restrictive, given the richness of the speci cation of the policy reaction
function. In particular, this assumption does not imply that the interest rate itself is homoskedastic.
On the contrary, the interest rate still exhibits heteroskedasticity that is driven by the systematic
response to equity market shocks and by the heteroskedasticity of the unobserved common shocks.
Under the assumption of homoskedastic policy shocks, a shift in the covariance matrix adds three
equations but only two unknown parameters.
In that case, the parameter is identi ed as long as there are at least three di erent regimes
for the covariance matrix. (The results below suggest that there are at least three regimes.) For
each regime i, the covariance matrix can be written as
i

=

(1

1

"

)2

2 +
( + )2 i;z
.

2 2

2 (1 +
2 + 2 + 2
) ( + ) i;z
"
i; + "
i;
2 + 2 + 2 2
(1 + )2 i;z
"
i;

#

:

(10)

Two important assumptions have been made in equation (10). First, as indicated above, the variance of the Fed's reaction function remains constant across regimes. Second, we have assumed that
14

In the present paper we concentrate only on identi cation under unconditional heteroskedasticity. Identi cation
under conditional heteroskedasticity can also be solved using the same arguments.

9

the parameters ( , , and ) are stable across the covariance regimes. Note that this second assumption is implicitly made in the vast majority of related empirical studies. In the macroeconomics
literature, VARs are often estimated across samples that surely exhibit heteroskedasticity, without
allowing shifts in parameters. Similarly, in the nance literature, many studies that even explicitly
allow for variation in volatility, including GARCH models, often impose that the parameters of the
underlying equation are xed.
Under these assumptions, the parameter can be identi ed by the impact of regimes changes on
the variance-covariance matrix. For example, an increase in the variance of stock market shocks,
2 , increases the variances of both reduced form innovations and makes the covariance between
them more positive (assuming is positive)|the intuition shown earlier in Figures 1 and 2. Of
course, because the speci cation allows heteroskedastic unobserved shocks, the algebra is more
complicated. However, it can be shown (see the appendix) that the parameter must solve the
following quadratic equation:

a

2

b +c=0

(11)

where

a = 
b = 
c = 

31;22  21;12
31;22  21;11
31;12  21;11





21;22  31;12
21;22  31;11
21;12  31;11

and 21;12 denotes element (1; 2) of the matrix 21 .15
Note that when there are more than three regimes for the covariance matrix, any three can be
used to arrive at a solution to equations (11). If all of the assumptions of the model hold, the estimate of should be the same under any subset of three regimes. In the empirical implementation,
we use this as a test of overidentifying restrictions. A rejection that the coeÆcient estimates are
the same could indicate that the parameters are unstable across regimes, that the homoskedasticity
assumption on the policy equation is violated, or that there are non-linearities that are not captured
in our speci cation. The test is described in more detail below.

4 Results
The initial step in the estimation procedure is to determine the di erent regimes for the variancecovariance matrix of the reduced form shocks to monetary policy and the stock market. To do so,
we begin by estimating the reduced form (8) and computing the residuals. As expected, there are
rich patterns to the volatility of the shocks to stock market returns and the short-term interest
15

See the appendix for interpreting the other root to equation (11).

10

rate. Because the periods of elevated volatility for interest rates and the stock market at times
coincide with one another and at other times do not, we de ne four regimes: one in which both
interest rates and stock returns have low variance, one in which they both have high variance, and
two in which one has high and the other low variance. Periods of high variance are de ned as
when the thirty-day rolling variance of the residual is more than one standard deviation above its
average. The four covariance regimes that result are described in Table 3. As shown in the table,
the covariance between these variables tends to uctuate with the movements in their variances,
often becoming positive as the variance of the stock market increases.
Table 3: Regimes for Variance-Covariance Matrix

Variance of
Variance of
Frequency
Policy Shocks Stk Mkt Shocks Covariance of Obs.
Regime 1
0.00226
0.5238
-0.00262
90.2%
Regime 2
0.00374
2.4732
0.02757
3.1%
Regime 3
0.02326
4.5422
0.03907
2.6%
Regime 4
0.01059
0.4659
-0.02462
4.1%
High variance regimes are in bold. All variables are measured in percentage points.

This approach for de ning the di erent regimes of the variance-covariance matrix is admittedly
arbitrary. However, the estimates are consistent even if the heteroskedasticity is misspeci ed, as
long as the true data exhibits heteroskedasticity and the regimes are not misspeci ed too badly.
As demonstrated in section 5, because the covariance matrices of misspeci ed regimes are linear
combinations of the true covariance matrices, the system of equations obtained from the mispeci ed
system has the same solution as those derived from a more well speci ed set of regimes. The only
case in which the estimates are not consistent is if the regimes are speci ed so poorly that each
regime contains the same weightings of the true underlying regimes. Some direct evidence on the
impact of misspecifying the heteroskedasticity is also presented in section 5.
The analysis from the previous section indicated that the monetary policy reaction to the stock
market| in equation (6)|could be identi ed as long as there were three regimes for the covariance
matrix. We rst estimate the reaction coeÆcient using the rst three regimes listed in Table 3. The
results indicate a positive policy response to the stock market, with an estimated coeÆcient of
0.02139. The distribution of the coeÆcient can be calculated by bootstrap and is shown in Figure
4 (top panel). In implementing the bootstrap, we use the asymptotic distribution of the covariance
matrices and solve for the estimated coeÆcient in 1000 draws. As apparent from the gure, the
estimated parameter is strongly signi cant, with none of the calculated distribution falling below
zero.
This is the major result of the paper: By employing a more appropriate identi cation approach
based on heteroskedasticity, we nd a signi cant positive reaction of monetary policy to the stock
11

market. The point estimate for the response coeÆcient indicates that a 5% rise in the S&P 500
index tends to increase the three-month interest rate by 10.7 basis points. It may be useful to
translate this estimate into the probability of a policy tightening. On average, the next FOMC
meeting will be about three weeks away, and the three-month rate re ects the expected rate to
prevail over the next twelve weeks. Thus, only 3/4 of the expected impact on the federal funds
rate shows up in the three-month interest rate on impact. The estimated coeÆcient therefore
corresponds roughly to an increase in the expected federal funds rate of 14.3 basis points (equal
to 10.7 times 4/3). Translating this into discrete policy actions, a 5% rise in the S&P 500 index
increases the probability of a 25 basis point tightening by about 57%. A similar-sized fall in stock
prices would have the same implications for a 25-basis point easing.
Similar results are obtained if the parameter is estimated from other subsets of regimes. As
was shown above, the parameter is just identi ed with three regimes and is overidenti ed when
there are four. Indeed, we can instead estimate using any three regimes, such as regimes 1, 2,
and 4. The point estimate resulting from that subset of regimes is 0.02105, and the distribution
of the estimate is shown in Figure 4 (bottom panel). The estimate is again signi cantly positive,
with no realizations falling below zero, and its magnitude is very similar to the previous estimate.
Table 4: Estimates under Alternative Subsets of Regimes

Regimes Regimes Regimes Regimes Regimes
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 4
1, 3, 4
2, 3, 4
All

Mean of distribution
0.021386 0.021051 0.027292 0.14024 0.021022
Std. dev. of distribution 0.005822 0.005229 0.31368 3.812253 0.005229
Median of distribution
0.021168 0.020849 0.016886 0.01913 0.020849
Mass below zero
0.0%
0.0%
1.4%
1.4%
0.0%
The estimates resulting from all four possible subsets of regimes are summarized in Table 4. As
can be seen, the estimates from the subsets shown in Figure 4 are very close to one another. The
other two subsets of regimes yield estimates that are much less precise. The standard deviation of
these estimates blows up considerably, primarily because of some realizations with very high values.
However, even in those cases only a small mass of observations falls below zero, and the medians
of the distributions are very close to the other estimates. Table 4 also shows the results obtained if
all four regimes are used to estimate . In this case, we treat equations (15) and (16) as moment
conditions and solve for the parameters using GMM. The resulting estimates are very similar to
those from the subsets of regimes shown in Figure 4.
As previously mentioned, the di erence between estimates under the various subsets of regimes
can be used as a test of overidentifying restrictions. Such a test would indicate whether the restrictions imposed on the model, most notably the assumption that the parameters are stable across
di erent regimes and the homoskedasticity assumption of the policy shocks, can be rejected. Note,
12

however, that this approach does not test the assumption that the three shocks are uncorrelated.
Because there are ve estimates available, many di erent overidenti cation tests could be performed. We focus rst on the estimates from using regimes 1, 2, and 3 and regimes 1, 2, and 4. The
distribution of the di erence in the estimates, which is also computed using the same bootstrap as
before, is shown in Figure 5. According to that distribution, 61.8% of the observations are negative and 38.2% positive, which implies that we cannot reject the hypothesis that the estimates are
the same. In other words, the overidentifying restrictions are easily passed. Moreover, additional
tests indicate that the overidentifying restrictions could not be rejected using any subset of the ve
estimates.16
The empirical exercise in this paper is concerned only with measuring the policy reaction to the
stock market, and not with determining whether such a reaction is optimal. Nevertheless, it may
be useful to assess whether the magnitude of the estimated policy reaction is reasonable from a
macroeconomic perspective. To do so, we compare the estimated reaction to two benchmarks. The
rst is based on a rough calculation of the impact of stock price movements on aggregate spending.
As previously indicated, there are several channels through which the stock market a ects the
economy, including the wealth e ect on aggregate consumption, and the cost of nancing channel
for investment. For simplicity, we will focus only on the rst of these, realizing that we could be
underestimating the expected impact.
If equity prices were to broadly rise by 5%, for example, household wealth would increase by
about $578 billion, based on household equity holdings as of the end of 2000. If the marginal
propensity to consume out of stock market wealth is 4%, then aggregate consumption would rise
by $23 billion, pushing up GDP by about 0.23%.17 To map this change into a movement in the
federal funds rate, we rely on the literature on estimated monetary policy rules. A vast number of
papers, initiated by Taylor (1993) and others, have estimated policy rules in which the federal funds
rate reacts to output and in ation. While Taylor wrote down a monetary policy reaction coeÆcient
of 0:5 to the output gap, other papers have estimated this coeÆcient to be higher, perhaps around
1 (as in the estimated rule presented in Table 2).18 Under that range of estimates, a 5% rise in the
equity market, through its expected impact on the output gap, would be expected to result in a 12
to 23 basis point rise in the federal funds rate.
Of course, there are a number of reasons to take this back-of-the-envelope calculation with
caution. We ignored other channels through which the stock market impacts the economy as well
as any multiplier e ects. Moreover, the calculation does not account for dynamics. Stock market
wealth has an impact on spending only after a considerable lag, although policy makers may still
choose to react immediately given the lags in the impact of monetary policy. Despite these possible
16
All tests of overidenti cation restrictions were computed by evaluating the mass below zero of the di erence in
the estimates.
17
For estimates of the impact of stock market wealth on aggregate consumption, see Maki and Palumbo (2001),
among others.
18
See, for example, Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Judd and Rudebusch (1998), and Sack (1998).

13

complications, the calculation suggests that the magnitude of the estimated policy reaction to the
stock market is in the ballpark of the reaction that would be expected if the Federal Reserve were
concerned only with the ultimate impact of the stock market on output and in ation.
A second benchmark for gauging the magnitude of the policy reaction relies on the Federal
Reserve's model of the U.S. economy. The model, which is described in Reifschneider, Tetlow, and
Williams (1999), provides an estimate of the extent to which changes in stock market wealth feed
through into aggregate demand. In that paper, the authors presents the simulated response of
the economy to a permanent shock to the equity risk premium, which a ects stock prices without
having a direct e ect on other macroeconomic variables. Under a xed real federal funds rate, the
shock would stimulate aggregate demand and lead to a rise in in ation. Because of these e ects,
though, the central bank would likely tighten in response to the shock. Indeed, the authors consider
the response of the economy under a \stabilizing policy"|one that e ectively reduces the impact
of the shock on output and in ation. Judging from the path of the policy rate under the stabilizing
policy, it appears that a permanent 5% shock to the value of the stock market warrants a persistent
response of the federal funds rate of about 12.5 basis points.
These two benchmarks suggest that one would expect a positive reaction of monetary policy to
the stock market, consistent with our nding of a signi cant, positive response coeÆcient. Moreover, both of these benchmarks indicate that the estimated policy response coeÆcient is within a
reasonable range of the magnitude that one would have expected for a central bank concerned only
with the macroeconomic activity.

5 Robustness
In this section, several sensitivity exercises are run to evaluate the robustness of the speci cation
we have used. In short, the ndings are that the results are largely robust to misspeci cation of
the heteroskedasticity of the shocks, but that the inclusion of the unobserved common shock has a
considerable impact on the results.

5.1 The presence of common shocks
The speci cation above included a common shock zt that could capture a number of factors a ecting
the stock market and interest rates. One possibility is that these shocks represent shifts in investor
risk preferences, which could induce positive correlation between changes in stock prices and in
interest rates. A reduction in risk tolerance, for example, could generate a ight-to-safety e ect
in which investors shift out of stocks and into Treasury bills, pushing down both stock prices
and interest rates. Thus, the inclusion of these shocks in the speci cation is important, because
otherwise it could be argued that the positive coeÆcient obtained in the estimation re ects shifts
in risk preferences rather than the policy response to the stock market.
14

In the absence of a common shock, the speci cation is as follows:

it =
st =

st + xt + "t ;
it + xt + t ;

(12)
(13)

where the assumptions are as before. Given that "t and t are independent and that is presumably
negative, the coeÆcient is forced to capture the positive correlation induced by the common shock.
This will cause an upward bias in the estimation of , if there in fact is a common shock that is
excluded (and is positive). From the reduced form, the covariance matrix of the residuals is
=

(1

1

"

)2

2 2


.

+ "2

2 + "2
2 + 2 "2

#

:

As before, we solve the problem of identi cation by using the additional equations provided by
the heteroskedasticity of the data. In the case with no common shock, however, only two regimes
are enough to identify the system of equations. Moreover, it is not necessary to assume that the
variance of "t is constant, and thus we do not impose it in the estimation.
The procedure for estimating is similar to that of section 4. The VAR is rst estimated to
recover the reduced form residuals. Four regimes are de ned to capture shifts in the covariance
matrix, using the same procedure as above. Using only two of the regimes, we solve the system of
six equations for the parameter .19 As before, because of small sample issues in the estimation
of covariance matrices, we use bootstrapping to compute the distribution of the estimates and the
di erences between estimates.
We begin by estimating under equations (12) and (13) using the rst and third regimes.
The resulting distribution, shown in Figure 6 (top panel), has a mean of 0.140772. The estimate
is signi cantly positive, with 1.0% of the realizations below zero. More importantly, notice that
the estimate (comparing the means) is more than six times larger than the estimates obtained in
the previous section. This di erence is consistent with the intuition expressed earlier|that the
exclusion of the common shock could bias upward the coeÆcient. The potential bias is particularly
problematic in this case, in which the rst and the third regimes are used to derive the estimate.
The third regime, because it involves a high variance of both the interest rate and the stock market,
could be driven by a change in the variance of the common shock, thus resulting in a larger bias.
If the parameter is instead estimated using the rst and second regimes, the results are much
di erent. As seen in Figure 6 (lower panel), the point estimate is 0.022922, and none of the mass
of the distribution is below zero. This estimate is close to the estimates from the previous section,
which is perhaps not surprising given the following intuition. The second regime is the one in which
only the variance of the stock market increases while the variance of the interest rate remains largely
19

We have excluded the algebra showing the solution for the parameter in the bivariate case in order to conserve
space. More details about the solution can be obtained from the authors upon request.

15

unchanged. Even if the true model has common shocks, this regime shift is unlikely to be explained
by an increase in the variance of the common shock. Therefore, most of the variation in the second
moments is probably generated from a shift in the variance of the stock market shock, so that the
estimate of should be close to that found in the previous section. Of course, we can derive an
estimate of from any subset of two regimes, allowing for 12 di erent estimates, or by using all
of the regimes. In Table 5, for brevity, we report only a subset of the estimates. As can be seen,
these estimates show considerable variation across the choice of regimes, and some of them have
considerable mass below zero.
Table 5: Estimates under Alternative Subsets of Regimes

Regimes Regimes Regimes Regimes
1, 2
1, 3
1, 4
All

Mean of distribution
0.022923 0.140772 0.035265 0.001715
Std. dev. of distribution 0.005678 0.375107 0.621873 0.002106
Median of distribution
0.02268 0.091136 0.001987 0.002021
Mass below zero
0.0%
1.0%
22.6%
18.0%
As in the previous section, a test of overidentifying restrictions can be carried out by comparing
the estimates of under any two di erent sets of regimes. We again focus on only two estimates
in order to conserve space.20 Under the assumption that equations (12) and (13) are the correct
description of the data, both estimates should be the same. In that case, changes in the correlation
between the interest rate and the stock market are fully explained by and and the changes in
the variances of the structural shocks. This imposes an internal consistency across the di erent
regimes that is testable. On the other hand, if there exists a common shock not included in the
speci cation, the correlation is also a ected by shifts in its variance and the relative responsiveness
of stock prices and interest rates to the shock. Thus, a richer set of changes in the covariance
matrix can be realized, and it will be impossible to match all of the covariance matrices with a
constant and .
The distribution of the di erence in the two estimates of is shown in Figure 7. The mass of
the distribution below zero is only 4.9%, indicating a rejection of the hypothesis that the estimates
are the same.21 Thus, the assumptions underlying the model in equations (12) and (13) fail the test
of overidentifying restrictions. Recall that a similar test from the previous section could not reject
the assumptions behind the speci cation that included a common shock (with 38% of the mass of
the distribution spanning zero). The tests are based on the exact same draws of the covariance
20

Based on just the 12 potential estimates of using combinations of two regimes, there are 66 possible tests of
overidentifying restrictions.
21
Even stronger rejections of the test of overidentifying restrictions are obtained using other subsets of regimes.
For example, the distribution of the di erence in the estimates from regimes 1-2 and 1-4 has a mass below zero of
99.7%.

16

matrices, so that the rejection has to do strictly with whether the common shock is included.
Additionally, the rejection in this section shows that the test has some power in this data, giving
more credence to the lack of rejection in the previous section.
The inclusion of the common shock is therefore crucial for arriving at an accurate estimate of
the policy response . As discussed, a likely explanation of this shock is a shift in investor risk
preferences, which appear to generate large movements in asset prices at times, including occasional
ight-to-safety episodes. Stock prices typically fall during those episodes, and short-term Treasury
rates can decline from safe-haven buying that is unrelated to policy expectations.22 However,
the model without common shocks would attribute all of these positive comovements to policy
expectations, thus resulting in a very large estimated response coeÆcient. However, the common
shock does not necessarily have to be given this interpretation. The empirical exercise is agnostic
about the source of the common shocks. Indeed, the model with a common shock is equivalent
to a model with no common shock but where we allow the structural shocks to be correlated. In
that case, an increase in the variance of zt is equivalent to a shift in both the variance and the
covariance of the structural shocks. The empirical exercise does indicate, however, that the model
is misspeci ed if the common shocks are excluded.

5.2 Heteroskedasticity misspeci cation
As was mentioned brie y in section 4, the estimates are consistent even under some misspeci cation
of the heteroskedasticity. This result is shown formally in the appendix, but the intuition for it
is straightforward. If the regimes for the shifts in variance are misspeci ed, then the computed
covariance matrices are linear combinations of the true covariance matrices. Thus, the estimates
of the shifts in the variances of the shocks (z2 , 2 , and 2 ) across the regimes will be mismeasured. However, the parameter is determined by how the covariance between the reduced form
innovations changes as the variances shift. Because the misspeci ed covariance matrices are just
linear combinations of the true matrices, the shift in the covariance will still be proportional to
the measured shift in the variances in the manner. Thus, the mismeasurement in the shift in the
variances does not bias the estimates of the parameter .
This argument holds as long as the regimes are not misspeci ed too badly. In that case, the
misspeci cation of the regimes only reduces the eÆciency of the estimates, as it averages out the
di erences across regimes that are the basis for identi cation. However, if the misspeci cation of
the regimes is suÆciently poor, a necessary rank condition will be violated. Indeed, if the regimes
are misspeci ed so much as to have equal weights of the true regimes, the i matrices from equation
(10) will be proportional to one another, and thus the system of equations based on the shifts in
22

While ight-to-safety episodes can push down a variety of short-term interest rates, Treasury yields may be
particularly prone to such e ects. We estimated an alternative speci cation that used a eurodollar futures rate
instead of the Treasury bill rate. The results were similar: the estimated policy response is positive and signi cant,
although a bit smaller, and the model is rejected unless common shocks are included.

17

those matrices is underidenti ed.
Table 6: Estimates under Alternative Regimes

Random
3-month
Regimes

Mean of distribution
0.033343
Std. dev. of distribution 0.189599
Median of distribution
0.044941
Mass below zero
31.8%

Random
6-month
Regimes

0.035966
0.21412
0.024758
45.1%

Estimates based on all regimes.

To illustrate these points, consider a case in which the regimes are very poorly speci ed. In
particular, we split the sample every three and six months and treat each as a separate regime.
The results are shown in Table 6, which for brevity reports only the estimates obtained using all
regimes. As is evident from the table, the estimates of the contemporaneous e ect of stock markets
on the interest rate are extremely noisy. This imprecision should be expected, as it is a direct
consequence of the washing out of the regimes due to the misspeci cation.
Table 7: Estimates under Alternative Regimes

One-half
Std. dev.
Regimes

Mean of distribution
0.009540
Std. dev. of distribution 0.002871
Median of distribution
0.009567
Mass below zero
0.0%

Two
Std. dev.
Regimes
0.031816
0.009947
0.031308
0.0%

Estimates based on all regimes.

If we stick to reasonable changes to the de nitions of the regimes, though, the results found
in section 4 are not strongly a ected. To see this, we compute the estimates reducing the criteria
for determining high volatility periods to half of a standard deviation (from the one standard
deviation threshold used above) and then increasing it to two standard deviations. The point
estimates, reported in Table 7, vary some but are largely similar to the results from section 4.
Indeed, one cannot statistically reject the hypothesis that they are equal to the previous results,
with a signi cance level of 19.0% for the two standard deviation regimes and 9.7% for the one-half
standard deviation regimes. Finally, the regimes could also be de ned based on a regime-switching
model estimated by maximum likelihood. We experimented with such a model and found that the
18

estimated parameter was very similar to the ones reported earlier, which is perhaps not surprising
given the results from Table 7.

5.3 Changes in frequency
Another important issue is whether the central bank's reaction to stock price movements depends
on the frequency of the data. Indeed, one might expect that a rise in equity prices over the course
of a day would prompt a di erent policy response than a same-sized rise that is sustained over a
longer period. If daily movements in the stock market are more volatile (on an annualized basis)
than weekly or monthly movements, as is the case in our sample, one might expect a more tempered
response to higher frequency changes.23
To address this issue, we analyze the impact of changing the frequency of the exercise above
from daily to weekly. The results, shown in Table 8, indicate that under the one-standard deviation threshold, the estimated response of monetary policy is very imprecise. One cannot even
reject the hypothesis that the estimate equals zero. A possible explanation for this nding is that
relying on lower frequency data reduces the heteroskedasticity in the data. Because there are fewer
observations under the high variance regimes, it is more diÆcult to get precise estimates under this
identi cation method.
Table 8: Estimates using Weekly Data

One One-half
Std. dev. Std. dev.
Regimes Regimes

Mean of distribution
0.014812
Standard deviation
0.474815
Median of distribution 0.024658
Mass below zero
27.2%

0.023910
0.011113
0.022638
0.3%

Estimates based on all regimes.

Indeed, the precision of the estimate improves considerably if we reduce the threshold for the
high variance regime to half a standard deviation. In that case, the coeÆcient is precisely estimated,
with a point estimate of 0.023910|somewhat larger than that found in the daily results. One can
marginally reject the hypothesis that the weekly estimate is the same as the daily one, although
the economic interpretation of the estimate is not that much di erent. According to the results, a
5% rise (fall) in the S&P 500 over the course of a week causes the three-month Treasury bill rate to
23

In our sample, daily stock price changes are slightly more volatile relative to weekly changes than would be
expected if stock prices followed a random walk. The relative variance of stock market returns over di erent horizons
has been explored in a number of papers, some of which nd that changes over longer horizons are too volatile relative
to daily changes to be consistent with a random walk. See, for example, Lo and MacKinley (1988).

19

increase (decrease) by 12.0 basis points. Translating this into policy moves, the results suggest that
a 5% rise in the S&P 500 over a week increases the probability of a 25-basis point monetary policy
tightening by 64%.24 Moreover, as in the daily results, one cannot reject that the estimates are the
same across other combinations of regimes, but the overidenti cation restrictions were rejected in
the speci cation that excluded the common shocks.

5.4 Changes in the interest rate variable
In all of the above results, inferences about future monetary policy decisions were made based on
the behavior of the three-month Treasury bill. While the Treasury bill was once the most liquid
security at short maturities, its liquidity has deteriorated notably over the sample. Much of the
market activity at shorter maturities has shifted to other securities, including eurodollar deposits
and eurodollar futures contracts. Thus, one could argue that the eurodollar rate would be a more
appropriate instrument for measuring policy expectations in the latter part of the sample. We ran
an alternative set of daily results replacing the three-month Treasury yield with the rate on the
near-term eurodollar futures contract (the next contract to expire). The value of this contract is
based on the three-month eurodollar rate at the time of expiration, which is always within three
months (the contracts are quarterly). The results were very similar, indicating that the conclusions
reached above are not importantly in uenced by the choice of the interest rate variable.

6 Conclusions
This paper attempts to decompose daily and weekly movements in interest rates and stock prices
into the endogenous responses to di erent types of shocks. By relying on heteroskedasticity to
identify the system of equations, we are able to e ectively measure the reaction of the short-term
interest rate to the stock market, even when the stock market is endogenously reacting to the
interest rate at the same time. The results suggest that stock market movements have a signi cant
impact on short-term interest rates, driving them in the same direction as the change in stock
prices. According to the estimates, a 5% rise in stock prices over a day causes the probability
of a 25-basis point interest rate hike to increase by a half, while a similar-sized movement that
takes place over a week has a slightly larger e ect on anticipated policy actions. The estimated
response is consistent with some rough calculations of the impact of stock price movements on
aggregate demand, suggesting that policy makers are reacting to stock price movements to the
extent warranted by their implications for the macroeconomy.
We attribute this response to the anticipated reaction of monetary policy to an exogenous
movement in stock prices. This interpretation should be taken a bit cautiously, however, because
it is diÆcult to fully remove the in uence of other shocks that might a ect both stock prices
24

The impact on the three-month rate is 12.0 basis points, which translates roughly into a 15.9 basis point impact
on the federal funds rate, or a 64% chance of a 25 basis point move in the federal funds rate.

20

and interest rates. We attempt to do so by including major macroeconomic data releases in the
empirical speci cation. In addition, we include an unobservable common shock in the speci cation
that appears to capture changes in investor risk preferences. However, it is still possible that the
remaining equity price movements are systematically driven by other factors, and thus the measured
policy response could in part re ect the impact of those factors on the policy outlook. Nevertheless,
the exercise provides an estimate of the magnitude of the response of short-term interest rates to a
typical movement in stock prices|an important step in understanding the complicated interactions
involved in contemporaneous movements in asset prices. A useful topic for future research may be
to measure the policy response to stock price movements that are more e ectively conditioned on
the type of underlying shock.

7 References
Ball, Laurence, Policy Rules for Open Economies, in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1999), 127-144.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility,
(1999), Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 17-51.

Economic Review

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in Asset Prices?,
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings (2001), forthcoming.
Bryant, Ralph C., Peter Hooper, and Catherine Mann, eds., Evaluating Policy
Research in Empirical Macroeconomics, Brookings: Washington, D.C. (1993).

Regimes: New

Cecchetti, Stephen G., Hans Genberg, John Lipsky, and Sushil Wadhwani, Asset Prices and Central
Bank Policy, Geneva Reports on the World Economy, Centre for Economic Policy Research (2000).
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler, Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence
and Some Theory, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (2000), 147-180.
Judd, John P. and Glenn D. Rudebusch, Taylor's Rule and the Fed: 1970-1997,
3 (1998), Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 3-16.

Economic Review

Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay, Stock Market Prices Do Not Follow Random Walks:
Evidence from a Simple Speci cation Test, Review of Financial Studies 1 (1988), 41-66.
Maki, Dean M. and Michael G. Palumbo, Disentangling the Wealth E ect: A Cohort Analysis of
Household Saving in the 1990s, Finance and Economic Discussion Series working paper no. 2001-21
21

(2001), Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Reifschneider, David, Robert Tetlow, and John Williams, Aggregate Disturbances, Monetary Policy,
and the Macroeconomy: The FRB/US Perspective, Federal Reserve Bulletin 85 (1999), Federal
Reserve Board of Governors, 1-19.
Reinhart, Vincent, Equity Prices and Monetary Policy in the United States, in The Role of Asset
Prices in the Formulation of Monetary Policy (1998), Bank for International Settlements, 280-300.
Rigobon, Roberto, Identi cation through Heteroskedasticity: The bivariate case, Mimeo (1999),
Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Sack, Brian, Uncertainty, Learning, and Gradual Monetary Policy, Finance and Economic Discussion Series working paper no. 1998-34 (1998), Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Taylor, John B., Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice, Carnegie-Rochester
on Public Policy 39 (1993), 195-214.
Taylor, John B., ed., Monetary Policy
University of Chicago Press (1999).

Conference Series

Rules, National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago:

22

Appendix A:
Solution to the Identi cation Problem
This appendix demonstrates the solution to the identi cation problem described in section 3 of
the text. The parameter is identi ed as long as there are at least three di erent regimes for the
covariance matrix. The covariance matrix under each regime, i = 1; 2; 3, can be written as follows:
i

=

(1

De ne 


j1

=

21

"

1
=

(1

1

)2

2 +
( + )2 i;z
.

2

1

"

)2

and 

31

=

2 2

2 (1 +
2 + 2 + 2
) ( + ) i;z
"
i; + "
i;
2 + 2 + 2 2
(1 + )2 i;z
"
i;
1.

3

( + )2 j21;z +
.

#

:

(14)

Equation (14) implies that

2  2
j 1;

(1 + ) ( + ) j21;z + j21;
(1 + )2 j21;z + j21;

#

;

2
2
where j21;z = j;z
12;z and j21; = j;
12; for j = f2; 3g. Because the parameters are stable
and "2 is homoskedastic, the change in the covariance matrix does not depends on the variance of
the monetary policy shocks.
These two changes in the covariance matrices, 21 and 31 , form a system of six nonlinear
equations with seven unknowns, but in which is just identi ed. To see this, rewrite the covariance
matrix as:



j1

=

(1

1

"

)2

!z;j +

2  2
j 1;

.

!z;2 + j21;
2!z;2 + j21;

where
1+
+
= ( + )2 j21;z :

 =
!z;j

The six equations that result can be written as follows:
2
!z;2 + 2 21
; = (1
2
!z;2 + 21
; = (1
2
2 !z;2 + 21
; = (1

)2  
)2  
)2  

2
!z;3 + 2 31
; = (1
2
!z;3 + 31; = (1
2
2 !z;3 + 31
; = (1

)2  
)2  
)2  

23

21;11
21;12
21;22

31;11
31;12
31;22

#

where  j 1;kl is the k and l element of the j matrix. If  =
6 1, which assures nite variance, then
the three equations for each covariance matrix collapse to

 =




 =




21;12
21;11
31;12
31;11




21;12




31;12

21;22

31;22

(15)

;

(16)

which is a system of two equations with two unknowns. Finally, equations (15) and (16) imply a
quadratic equation for :

a

2

b +c=0

where

a = 
b = 
c = 

31;22  21;12
31;22  21;11
31;12  21;11





21;22  31;12
21;22  31;11
21;12  31;11 :

If the quadratic equation has a real solution, the system of equations is identi ed and can be
solved for and . It is easy to show that one of the solutions of the system of equations gives
the true values, while the second solution gives their inverse.25 Moreover, it is easy to show that,
because the covariance matrices are positive de nite, there should be always a real solution to the
quadratic equation.
25

The quadratic equation has two solutions. One corresponds to the values of  and from the system of equations
(6) and (7). The other corresponds to a system of equations in which the stock market reaction equation is written
in terms of the interest rate and the policy reacton equation in terms of stock prices. In that case, the solution gives
the values for  = 1= and  = 1=.

24

Appendix B:
Consistency under Misspeci cation of Heteroskedasticity
Section 5.2 argues that the parameter estimates are consistent even under some misspeci cation
of the heteroskedasticity. This proposition is demonstrated in this appendix. Taking the reduced
form innovations from our speci cation, equations (6) and (7) can be expressed as
 i


 

"
A0 = zt 0 + t ;

t
t
s
t

(17)

where A includes the parameters measuring the contemporaneous reactions of the variables and

= 1 .26 In the identi cation procedure with three regimes for the variance-covariance matrix of
reduced form innovations, we solve the following system of equations:
2
6
4

reg1 3
i;s
reg2 7
i;s 5
reg3
i;s

2

=A

1 6

4

zreg1
zreg2
zreg3

3
7
5

2

0 A0

1

+A

16

4

reg1 3
";
reg2 7
"; 5
reg3
";

0

A

1;

(18)

regj
where regj
i;s is the covariance matrix between the reduced form shocks in regime j . Similarly, ";
is the covariance matrix of the structural shocks, and zregj is the variance of the common shock. We
assume that the system of equations has a solution, or implicitly that it satis es a rank condition.27
If the regimes are misspeci ed, then the computed covariance matrices are linear combinations
of the true covariance matrices. Formally, the misspeci ed covariance matrix of regime j can be
written as a linear combination of the true covariance matrices, as follows:

2
misj
i;s

reg1 3
i;s
reg2 7
i;s 5
reg3
i;s

= Lmisj  6
4

;

where the vector Lmisj is determined by the extent of the misspeci cation. If these misspeci ed
regimes are used in (18) to solve for the parameters, the resulting system of equations will be a
linear combination of the original system. Indeed, the following equations will hold:
2
6
4

3

mis1
i;s
mis2 7
5
i;s
mis3
i;s

2

=6
4

Lmis1
Lmis2
Lmis3

3

2

7
1 6
5A
4

zreg1
zreg2
zreg3

3
7
5

2

0 A0

26

1

+6
4

Lmis1
Lmis2
Lmis3

3

2

7
16
5A 4

reg1 3
";
reg2 7
"; 5
reg3
";

A

0

1;

To arrive at (17), rst solve equations (6) and (7) to get reduced form equations for it and st as functions of xt
and zt . Next, project both sides of the equation on xt . The left-hand side becomes the reduced form innovations ti
and ts (see equation (8)), and the xt falls out of the right-hand side.
27
See Rigobon (1999) for a discussion of the necessary rank condition and a more complete analysis of the impact
of misspecifying the heterogeneity.

25

which of course can be rewritten as
2
6
4

3

mis1
i;s
mis2 7
5
i;s
mis3
i;s

2

=A

1 6

4

Lmis1
Lmis2
Lmis3

32
76
54

zreg1
zreg2
zreg3

3
7
5

2

0 A0

1

+A

16

4

Lmis1
Lmis2
Lmis3

32
76
54

reg1 3
";
reg2 7
"; 5
reg3
";

0

A 1:

(19)

Note that using equation (19) rather than equation (18) generates the same solution for the parameters of the matrices A and . The misspeci cation of the heteroskedasticity regimes instead
passes through entirely into the estimates of z and "; , which will not equal their values under
the true regimes. Thus, the misspeci cation of the regimes does not bias our estimates (A and )
of the monetary policy response to the stock market.
This analysis holds as long as the misspeci ed system of equations continues to satisfy the
equivalent rank condition that the original system satis ed. In that case, the misspeci cation of
the regimes only reduces the eÆciency of the estimates, as it averages out the di erences across
regimes that are the basis for identi cation. However, if the misspeci cation of the regimes is bad
enough, the rank condition will be violated. Indeed, if the regimes are misspeci ed so much as to
have equal weights of the true regimes, the misj
may be proportional to one another. In that
i;s
situation, equation (19) is a system of equations that is underidenti ed.28
28

This is easily testable. The equivalent approach in a linear system is to test the rank condition conditional on
the order condition. In this case the heteroskedasticity provides the order condition, and the linear independence of
the covariance matrices is the rank condition.

26

Figure 1: Joint Determination of Interest Rates and Stock Prices

Figure 2: Periods of High Stock Market Volatility

27

Figure 3: Comovements in Equity Prices and Interest Rates

28

Figure 4: Distributions of Estimated Policy Response CoeÆcient:
Regimes 1-2-3 and Regimes 1-2-4
29

Figure 5: Test of Overidentifying Restrictions:
Regimes 1-2-3 versus Regimes 1-2-4

30

Figure 6: Distributions of Estimated Policy Response CoeÆcient without Common Shocks:
Regimes 1-2 and Regimes 1-3
31

Figure 7: Test of Overidentifying Restrictions without Common Shocks:
Regimes 1-2 versus Regimes 1-3

32

