 % !!   

  
        
        

 ! ""#
! $&'('
)**$+,,-.-,$ $#,&'('
       
/010 ## 2)3#**#43
5.607/'&
839:

         
  !"# $ %&'   ()&*!* 
* * %*!  ** +&   &"
, -./*&&0 $&! * 
  !    & *-+ )  1            
 - .  &/+
2"-$ $! (33+$ !  +* 11 
! &-"4 1  &         !2! 
+

.*  2*3*##; 5*32*3: 52#
*) 2252  **  .9#
  ! ""#
 ! $-&'('
839:700/
8 - <6 16 0
$%#%

)#$ $#2.#*)=*: 52#;.:9# 5 22524  .9#  2*
3*##6 ) *;: #*2*#  . #  *) .#2 ; .* - #  *5
#*32*359*);9 * 252*); 2*#64#* *)5 24  .9# ;;2*
.$2# *): 52#;*):9234- )#*3$ 2255 *#)) 3*##4
9 #;*)5 2; 2*#- )5 24  .9#  35*.:* * 93.#4*5#*32*3
; 2*#-;*) **);2 #*$;5 2;  5$4#) .* #*2*# 
5$#-9#*) *2$ *5 2; 2*#;2 #*.***) * * 9*5#*32*359#*)
9:3.#4 .9; 2*#-

 225$#*##)*) *5 2; 2*#>$9 3$*&1?;*)

4  *.:9#- 2; 2*#$5 9:>$9 545*# **)#)* 59;*)
:9234)93.#4 .9; 2*##*99 223*;5#*;*)545* **)9;*):9
234-


935. 3###2)9
'077  :
&01#
6/007A
 
9+7/7&1<@/1<
 >+7/7((7&<A<
(/0B2935. -3
)**$+,,-2935. -3,C (/0

 ! ""#
#  3 *2)9;  5*
 
//0#*!9 " 6>@1/<&/
#9#6 @00@1/<&/
 
9+'/0&71'1<<
 >+'/0A711A07
$ ""#B329 -3
)**$+,,-$# 9- #-329 -3,5 -$ ""#

1 Introduction
Describing the joint behavior of the yield curve and macroeconomic variables is important for
bond pricing, investment decisions and public policy. Many term structure models have used
latent factor models to explain term structure movements, and although there are some interpretations to what these factors mean, the factors are not given direct comparisons with macroeconomic variables. For example, Pearson and Sun (1994)’s factors are labeled “short rate” and
“inflation”, but their estimation does not use inflation data. The terms “short rate” and “inflation” are just convenient names for the unobserved factors. Another example is Knez, Litterman
and Scheinkman (1994), who call their factors “level,” “slope” and “curvature”. Similarly, Dai
and Singleton (2000) use the words “level,” “slope” and “butterfly” to describe their factors.
These labels stand for the effect the factors have on the yield curve rather than describing the
economic sources of the shocks.
In the absence of a workhorse general equilibrium model for asset pricing (see Hansen and
Jagannathan (1991)), factor models have the advantage that they only impose no-arbitrage conditions and not all other conditions that characterize the equilibrium in the economy. Most
existing factor models of term structure are unsatisfactory, however, because they do not model
how yields directly respond to macroeconomic variables. 1 In contrast, empirical studies try
to directly model the relationships between bond yields and macro variables by using Vector
Autoregressive (VAR) models. Studies like Estrella and Mishkin (1997) and Evans and Marshall (1998) use VAR’s with yields of various maturities together with macro variables. Using
the VAR, these studies infer the relationships between yield movements and shocks in macro
variables using impulse responses (IR’s) and variance decomposition techniques. For example,
Evans and Marshall (2000) associate shocks to economic activity and price levels with level effects across the yield curve. Another type of shock which can be identified with various schemes
comes from monetary policy (see, for example, Gali (1992), Sims and Zha (1995), Bernanke
and Mihov (1995), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996a), and Uhlig (1999). For a survey,
see Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1998)).
Existing macro VAR studies are characterized by three features. First, only maturities whose
yields which have been included in the VAR may have their behavior directly inferred by the
dynamics of the VAR. As an unrestricted VAR is generally not a complete theory of the term
structure, it says little about how yields of maturities not included in the VAR may move. Second, the implied movements of yields in relation to each other may not rule out arbitrage opportunities when the cross-equation restrictions implied by this assumption are not imposed in the
estimation. Finally, unobservable variables cannot be included as all variables in the VAR must
1

The exception is Piazzesi (2001), who uses a term structure model with interest-rate targeting by the central
bank and releases of macroeconomic variables such as nonfarm payroll employment.

1

be observable. The VAR approach, however, is very flexible, and the Impulse Response Functions (IR’s) and variance decompositions give insights into the relationships between macro
shocks and movements in the yield curve.
A related asset-pricing literature beginning with Sargent (1979) has tried to estimate VAR
systems of yields under the null of the Expectations Hypothesis (see Bekaert and Hodrick
(2001)). While the validity of the Expectations Hypothesis as a term structure model is still
being debated (see Fisher and Gilles (1998) and Longstaff (2000)), this literature has not focused on incorporating macro variables into the VAR. Our approach in this paper specifically
focuses on how macro variables affect term structure dynamics, where the term structure dynamics are given by a Gaussian (VAR) term structure model with time-varying risk premia,
consistent with deviations from the Expectations Hypothesis (see Fisher (1998) and Dai and
Singleton (2001)).
We incorporate macro variables as factors in a term structure model by using a factor representation for the pricing kernel, which prices all bonds in the economy. The pricing kernel
depends on the shocks to both observed macro factors and unobserved factors. Since macro factors are correlated with yields, incorporating these factors may lead to models whose forecasts
are better than models which omit these factors. We investigate whether the purely unobservable factors of multi-factor term structure models can be explained by macro variables, and we
examine how the latent factors change when macro variables are incorporated into such models.
Using a pricing kernel with macro factors is a direct and tractable way of modeling how macro
factors affect bond prices.
Our methodology gives us several advantages over existing empirical VAR approaches.
First, it allows us to characterize the behavior of the entire yield curve in response to macro
shocks rather than just the yields included in the VAR. Second, a direct comparison of macro
variables with latent yield factors can be made. Third, variance decompositions and other methods can estimate the proportion of term structure movements attributable to observable macro
shocks, and other latent variables. Finally, our approach retains the tractability of the VAR
approaches because we estimate a VAR subject to nonlinear no-arbitrage restrictions.
The model is a discrete-time multi-factor model with time-varying risk premia. This term
structure model is Gaussian, like a VAR model, and IR’s and variance decompositions from the
model can be easily obtained. Formally, our model is a special case of discrete-time versions of
the affine class introduced by Duffie and Kan (1996), where bond prices are exponential affine
functions of underlying state variables. In our model, however, some of the state variables are
observed macroeconomic aggregates. With Gaussian processes, the affine model reduces to
a VAR with cross-equation restrictions. Our set-up accommodates lags and moving average
2

errors in the driving factors and allows us to compute variance decompositions where we can
attribute the proportion of movements in the yield curve to observable and unobservable factors.
We can plot IR’s of shocks to various factors on any yield, since the no-arbitrage model gives
us bond prices for all maturities.
Our measures of inflation and real activity are obtained from extracting principal components of two groups of variables that are selected to represent measures of price changes and
economic growth. These factors are then augmented by latent variables. As term structure studies have suggested up to three latent factors as appropriate to capture most salient features of
the yield curve, we estimate models with three latent factors in addition to the macro variables.
Our main model has three correlated unobservable factors, together with the two macro factors
(inflation and real economic activity).
The cross-equation restrictions from no arbitrage improve out-of-sample forecasts from a
VAR. We find that these forecasts can be further improved by incorporating macro factors into
models with latent variables. We show that a significant part of the latent factors implied by
traditional models with only latent yield variables can be attributed to macro variables. In
particular, “slope” and “curvature” factors can be related to macro factors, while the “level”
factor survives largely intact when macro variables are incorporated.
We find that macro factors explain a significant amount of the variation in bond yields.
Macro factors explain up to 85% of the forecast variance at long horizons at short and medium
maturities of the yield curve. The proportion of forecast variance of yields attributable to macro
factors decreases at longer yields. At the long end of the yield curve 60% of the forecast variance is attributable to macro factors at a 1-month forecast horizon, while at very long forecast
horizons over 60% of the variance is attributable to unobservable factors.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the data and details the construction of the macro factors as principal components of several macroeconomic variables. Section
3 motivates an affine equation for the short rate, which can be interpreted as a regression of
the short rate on macro factors and an ‘unexplained’ component of short rate movements. This
last term consists of one or more unobservable (orthogonal) factors. If the latent component
is orthogonal to the macro variables, we can interpret this regression as versions of a Taylor
(1993) rule, where the short rate responds to a linear combination of observable factors, and an
orthogonal unobserved component. Section 4 presents the general model, discusses the estimation strategy, and describes the specific parameterization of the model to be estimated. We lay
out our estimation results in Section 5, and discuss the implied IR’s, variance decompositions
and forecasting results. Section 6 concludes.

3

2 Data
2.1 Yield Data
We use data on zero coupon bond yields of maturities 1, 3, 12, 36 and 60 months from January 1952 to December 2000. The bond yields (12, 36 and 60 months) are from the Fama
CRSP zero coupon files, while the shorter maturity rates (1 and 3 months) are from the Fama
CRSP Treasury Bill files. Figure 1 plots some of these yields in the upper graph and Table 1
presents some sample statistics. The table shows that the data are characterized by some standard stylized facts. The average postwar yield curve is upward sloping; standard deviations of
yields generally decrease with maturity; and yields are highly autocorrelated, with increasing
autocorrelation at longer maturities.
The yield levels show mild excess kurtosis at short maturities which decreases with maturity, and significantly positive skewness at all maturities. Excess kurtosis is, however, more
pronounced for first-differenced yields (for example, 19.44 for the 1-month yield). Although
the distribution of yields in the 1990’s seems to exhibit Gaussian tails, the evidence for the long
series of monthly postwar yields rejects a normal distribution. For our purposes, the Gaussian
assumption made in later sections is a sufficient first approximation to the dynamics of the yield
curve, as we are mainly interested in the joint dynamics of yields and macroeconomic variables.
The Gaussian model we present in Section 4 can be extended to incorporate heteroskedastic dynamics parameterized by discretized square-root processes.
An important stylized fact is that yields of near maturity are extremely correlated - the
correlation between the 36-month and 60-month yield is 99%. In our estimations we use all
five yields to estimate our models, but we specify that some of the yields are measured with
error. We choose the 1, 12 and 60-month yields to be measured without error to represent the
short, medium and long ends of the yield curve in our models with 3 unknown factors. (The
3-month yield has a 99% correlation with the 12-month yield, and the 36-month yield has a
99% correlation with the 60-month yield.)

2.2 Macro Variables
We use macro variables that can be sorted in two groups. The first group consists of various
inflation measures which are based on the CPI, the PPI of finished goods, and spot market
commodity prices (PCOM). The second group contains variables that capture real activity: the
index of Help Wanted Advertising in Newspapers (HELP), unemployment (UE), the growth
rate of employment (EMPLOY) and the growth rate of industrial production (IP). This list of
variables includes most variables that have been used in monthly VAR’s in the macro literature.
4

Among these variables, PCOM and HELP are traditionally thought of as leading indicators of
inflation and real activity, respectively. All growth rates (including inflation) are measured as
the difference in logs of the index at time t and t − 12, t in months.
To reduce the dimensionality of the system, we extract the first principal component of each
group of variables separately. That is, we extract the first principal component from the inflation
measures group, and we extract the first principal component from the real activity measures
group. This leaves us with two variables which we call “inflation” and “real activity”. More
precisely, we first normalize the three (four) macro variables related to inflation (real activity)
to zero mean and unit variance. For each group, the normalized variable vector Zt can be
represented as
Zt = Cfto + t ,

(1)

where Zt = (CPIt PPIt PCOMt ) for the inflation group or Zt = (HELPt UEt EMPLOYt IPt )
for the real activity group. The error term t satisfies E(t ) = 0 and cov(t ) = Γ, where Γ is
diagonal. The matrices C and Γ are either 3 × 1 or 4 × 1 for the inflation group and the real
activity group respectively. The extracted macro factor fto has mean zero (E(fto ) = 0) and unit
variance (var(fto ) = 1).
Table 2 shows the loadings of the first three (four) principal components, and the factor
loadings for using only one principal component to explain the variation in each group. Over
70% (50%) of the variance of nominal variables (real variables) is explained by just the first
principal component of the group. The first principal component of the inflation measures loads
negatively on CPI, PPI, and PCOM. Since negative shocks to this variable represent positive
shocks to inflation, we multiply it by −1 so that we can interpret it as an “inflation” factor. The
first principal component of real activity measures loads negatively on HELP, EMPLOY, and IP
and positively on UE. Again, we multiply this variable by −1 to interpret positive shocks to this
factor as positive shocks to economic growth. We call this factor “real activity”. We plot these
macro factors in the bottom plot in Figure 1.
To obtain some intuition about these constructed measures of inflation and real activity,
Figure 2 plots the inflation and real activity measures versus the actual inflation and real activity
series. The top plot of Figure 2 graphs the inflation factor in circles versus the normalized
inflation measures CPI, PCOM and PPI. The inflation factor closely tracks CPI and PPI, which
roughly move together. The bottom plot of Figure 2 graphs the real activity factor in circles
versus the economic growth variables HELP, EMPLOY, IP and the negative of UE. All these
series have roughly the same cycles, and the real activity factor most closely corresponds with
EMPLOY.
5

Table 3 displays the correlation between the principal components and the original macro
series in each group. These correlations show that the inflation factor is most closely correlated
with PPI and CPI (97% and 93% respectively) and less correlated with commodity prices (59%).
The real activity factor is most closely correlated with employment growth (91%) and industrial
production (87%).
The unconditional correlation between the two macro factors is tiny, one tenth of 1%, as
reported in Table 3. Although the unconditional correlation is weak, the lower plot in Figure 1
of the macro factors indicates that some conditional correlations might be important. In fact,
when we estimate a VAR for the macro factors, some of the conditional correlations turn out
to be significant (they are not reported here). More specifically, we estimate a bivariate process
with 12 autoregressive lags for the macro factors:
o
o
fto = ρ1 ft−1
+ . . . + ρ12 ft−12
+ Ωut−1

(2)

where ρ1 to ρ12 and Ω are 2 × 2 matrices with ut IID N(0,I). The estimation results show that
the coefficient on the seventh lag of real activity in the inflation equation is significant and the
coefficient on the first two lags of inflation in the equation for real activity are significant. This
can also be seen from the impulse responses plotted in Figure 3. The response of inflation
to shocks in real activity is positive and hump-shaped, while the response of real activity to
inflation shocks is initially weakly positive, and then turns slightly negative before dying out.
Since principal components are linear transformations of the data, the skewness, kurtosis and
autocorrelation of the macro variables (Table 1) are inherited by the principal components f to .
Some preliminary information about the relationship between the macro factors and the
yield curve can be gained from the correlation matrix in Table 3. The inflation factor is highly
correlated with yields. This correlation is highest for short yields (67% correlation between
inflation and 1-month yields), and somewhat smaller for long yields (56% correlation between
inflation and 60-month yields). Real activity is only weakly correlated with yields. This correlation does not exceed 6% for any maturity. This weak relationship is not representative for all
measures of real activity. For example, the correlation of HELP and 1-month yields is 63%, but
our real activity factor loads mostly on EMPLOY and IP. Hence, at least for measures of economic activity, it may matter whether the particular variable in question is a leading indicator
of business cycles. This implies that in our analysis we may potentially understate the impact
of real activity on the yield curve by the construction of our real activity factor.

6

3 A First Look at Short Rate Dynamics
3.1 Policy Rules and Short Rate Dynamics in Affine Models
According to the policy rule recommended by Taylor (1993), movements in the short rate should
be traced to movements in contemporaneous macro variables f to and a component which is not
explained by macro variables, an orthogonal shock v t :
rt = a0 + a1 fto + vt

(3)

The shock vt may be interpreted as a monetary policy shock following identifying assumptions
made in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996a,1996b). Taylor’s original specification uses
two macro variables as factors in fto . The first variable is an annual inflation rate, similar to
our inflation factor, and the second variable is the output gap. GDP data are only available at
a quarterly frequency, while our real activity factor is constructed using various monthly series
such as EMPLOY and IP.
Another type of policy rule that has been proposed by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) is
a forward-looking version of the Taylor rule. According to this rule, the central bank reacts
to expected inflation and the expected output gap. This implies that any variable that forecasts
inflation or output will enter the right-hand side of (3). In the hope of capturing the information
underlying macro forecasts, we add lagged macro variables as arguments in equation (3). 2 This

o
o
. . . , ft−p−1
) for some lag length p and including the lags as
is done by writing Xto = (fto ft−1
arguments in the policy rule:
rt = b0 + b1 Xto + vt .

(4)

Affine term structure models (Duffie and Kan (1996)) are based on a short rate equation
just like equation (3) together with an assumption on risk premia. The difference between the
short rate dynamics in affine term structure models and the Taylor rule is that in affine term
structure models the short rate is specified to be an affine (constant plus linear term) function of
underlying latent factors Xtu :
rt = c0 + c1 Xtu .

(5)

Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) implement their forward-looking rule by redefining the shock term v t to
o
o
o
include forecast errors f t+1
−Et (ft+1
). This allows them to use future values of macro variables f t+1
as arguments
on the right-hand side of (3). We could in principle adopt the same approach by including these forecast errors
into some latent variables, but this would mean that we would have to drop the assumption that latent and macro
variables are orthogonal. Our focus is assigning as much explanatory power to macro factors as possible, so we
specify the latent variables as orthogonal.
2

7

The unobserved factors themselves follow affine processes, of which a VAR is a special Gaussian case. The prices of bonds of longer maturities are explicit exponential affine functions
(dependent upon parameters) of ftu if pricing is risk neutral. In the more general case that we
consider, the risk adjustment needs to be specified carefully to obtain similar closed-form solutions for bond yields (this is explained in the next section). With or without risk adjustment,
equation (5) is always an important determinant of the shape of the entire yield curve in affine
term structure models.
Equations (3) through (5) are very similar: they all specify the short rate as affine functions
of factors. We can combine them by writing:


rt = δ0 + δ11
Xto + δ12
Xtu ,

(6)

The approach we take in this paper is to specify the latent factors X tu as orthogonal to the macro
factors Xto . In this case, the short rate dynamics of the term structure model can be interpreted

Xtu being unobserved factors. We use the
as a version of the Taylor rule with the errors vt = δ12
restrictions from no-arbitrage to separately identify the individual unobserved factors.

3.2 Estimating the Short Rate Dynamics
The short rate equation (6) can be estimated by ordinary least squares because of the independence assumption on Xto and Xtu . Table 4 reports the estimation results from two regressions:
the original Taylor rule (3) and the forward-looking version of the Taylor rule (4), which incorporates lags of the macro variables. These regression results give a preliminary view as to
how much of the yield movements macro factors may explain with respect to the unobservable
variables. The R2 of the estimated Taylor rule is 45%, while the estimated forward-looking
version of the Taylor raises the R2 to 53%. These numbers suggest that macro factors should
have explanatory power for yield curve movements.
The behavior of the residuals, however, provides some intuition about what to expect from
a model with unobservable factors. First, the residuals from both versions of the Taylor rule
are highly autocorrelated. The autocorrelation of residuals from the short rate equation with
only contemporaneous macro factors is 0.945, while the autocorrelation from the equation that
includes lagged macro factors is slightly lower, 0.937. The short rate itself has an autocorrelation of 0.972, indicating that macro variables do explain some of the persistent shocks to the
short rate. Second, unless a variable which mimics the short rate itself is placed on the RHS of
equation (3), the residuals will follow the same broad pattern as the short rate. This can be seen
from Figure 4, which plots the residuals together with the de-meaned short rate. This suggests
that the “level” factor found by earliest term structure studies (see Vasicek (1977)), may still
8

reappear when macro variables are added in a linear form to the short rate in a term structure
model.
The coefficients on inflation and real activity in the simple Taylor rule are both significant
and positive. This is consistent with previous estimates of the Taylor rule in the literature, and
also the parameter values proposed by Taylor (1993)’s original specification. However, these
coefficients are highly sensitive to the sample period selected. In particular, the sign of the
Taylor-rule coefficient on real activity crucially depends on the inclusion of the two recessions
in 1954 and 1958. This is evident from the plots of real activity and the 1-month yield in
Figure 1. There are two major reductions in output around May 1954 and April 1958, which
also correspond to NBER recessions. Both these recessions go hand in hand with decreases
in the 1-month rate. These two recessions make the Taylor rule coefficient on output positive.
If we start the estimation of the Taylor rule later, say in 1960 or 1970, the coefficient on real
activity is negative. Only if we start the estimation after the monetary experiment of 1982 is
the coefficient positive. Interestingly enough, the coefficient on output is not significant for the
whole post-1982 period, but it is significant for the Greenspan years (post-1987). In contrast,
Table 4 reports that most parameter estimates for the forward-looking version of the Taylor
rule are not significant, except for the 11th lag on the inflation rate and current real activity.
This suggests that using many lags in the Taylor rule may lead to an over-parameterized and
potentially poorly behaved system.

4 A Term Structure Model with Macro Factors
Based on the macro dynamics (2) and the short rate equation (6), we now develop a discretetime term structure model. The model combines observable macroeconomic variables with unobservable or latent factors. Risk premia in our set-up are time-varying, because they are taken
to be affine in potentially all of the underlying factors. Section 4.1 presents the general model
and Section 4.2 parameterizes the latent variables and risk premia. We outline our estimation
procedure in Section 4.3. Section 4.4 summarizes our parameterization.

4.1 General Setup
4.1.1 State Dynamics
Suppose there are K1 observable macro variables fto and K2 latent variables ftu . The vector


Ft = (fto , ftu ) is assumed to follow a Gaussian VAR(p) process:
Ft = Φ0 + Φ1 Ft−1 + . . . + Φp Ft−p + θ0 ut
9

(7)

with ut ∼ IID N(0, I). The state of the economy is described by a K vector of state variables Xt . We partition the state vector Xt into observable variables Xto and unobservable variables Xtu . The observable vector contains current and past levels of macroeconomic variables

o
o 
Xto = (fto ft−1
. . . , ft−p
) , while Xtu = ftu contains latent yield factors. We take the bivariate
VAR(12) in equation (2) as the process for inflation and real activity so set p = 12. Moving
average terms can be accommodated by including q lagged error terms θ1 ut−1 , . . . , θq ut−q on
the right hand side of (7). In this case, the vector of observable state variables also includes past



o
o
innovations to the macro variables X to = (fto ft−1
. . . , ft−p
uot−1 . . . uot−q ) .3
We write the dynamics of Xt = ( (Xto ) (Xtu ) ) in compact form as a first order Gaussian
VAR:
Xt = µ + ΦXt−1 + Σt

(8)

with t = (ut 0 . . . 0) . In the first order companion form, there are blocks of zeros in the K ×K
matrix Σ to accommodate higher order lags in F t .
4.1.2 Short Rate Equation
The one-period short rate rt is assumed to be an affine function of all state variables:
rt = δ0 + δ1 Xt .

(9)

We work with monthly data, so that we can use the one-month yield y t1 as an observable short
rate rt . By constraining the coefficient δ1 to depend only on contemporaneous factor values,
we can obtain strict versions of the Taylor rule (3). We call this the “Macro Model.” We also
consider the case where δ1 is unconstrained, which correspond to the forward-looking Taylor
rule incorporating lags. We refer to this formulation as the “Macro Lag Model,” because it uses
lags of macro variables in the short rate equation.
Structural changes (or regime shifts) in the economy may cause the relationships in the factor dynamics (8) and the short rate equation (9) to change over time (Ang and Bekaert (1998)).
We will assume that during our sample period, these relationships are stable, just as in Gali
(1992), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996a) and Cochrane (1998).
4.1.3 Pricing Kernel
To develop the term structure model, we use the assumption of no-arbitrage (Harrison and Kreps
(1979)) to guarantee the existence of an equivalent martingale measure (or risk-neutral measure)
Q such that the price of any asset Vt that does not pay any dividends at time t + 1 satisfies V t =
3

In the case of one lag p = 1 and no MA components q = 0, then K = K 1 + K2 .

10

EQ
t (exp(−rt )Vt+1 ), where the expectation is taken under the measure Q. The Radon-Nikodym
derivative (which converts the risk-neutral measure to the data-generating measure) is denoted
by ξt+1 . Thus, for any t + 1 random variable Zt+1 we have that EQ
t (Zt+1 ) = Et (ξt+1 Zt+1 )/ξt .
The assumption of no-arbitrage, or equivalently the assumption of the existence of ξ t+1 , allows
us to price any asset in the economy, in particular all nominal bond prices.
Assume that ξt+1 follows the log-normal process:

 1
ξt+1 = ξt exp − λt λt − λt t+1 ,
2

(10)

where λt are the time-varying the market prices of risk associated with the sources of uncertainty
t . We parameterize λt as an affine process:
λ t = λ 0 + λ 1 Xt

(11)

for a K-dimensional vector λ0 and a K × K matrix λ1 . This specification has been used by
Constantinides (1992), El Karoui, Myneni and Viswanathan (1992), and Liu (1999), among
many others. Fisher (1998) and Dai and Singleton (2001) argue that this specification can
explain deviations from the Expectations Hypothesis. Equations (10) and (11) relate shocks in
the underlying state variables (macro and latent factors) to ξ t+1 and therefore determine how
factor shocks affect all yields.
We define the pricing kernel mt+1 as:
mt+1 = exp(−rt ) ξt+1 /ξt .

(12)

Substituting rt = δ0 + δ1 Xt we have:
1
mt+1 = exp(− λt λt − δ0 − δ1 Xt − λt t+1 )
2

(13)

4.1.4 Bond Prices
We take equation (13) to be a nominal pricing kernel which prices all nominal assets in the
economy. This means that the total gross return process R t+1 of any nominal asset satisfies:
Et (mt+1 Rt+1 ) = 1.

(14)

If pnt represents the price of an n-period zero coupon bond, then equation (14) allows bond
prices to be computed recursively by:
pn+1
= Et (mt+1 pnt+1 ).
t

11

(15)

The state dynamics of Xt (equation (8)) together with the dynamics of the short rate r t
(equation (9)) and the Radon-Nikodym derivative (equation (10)) form a discrete-time Gaussian
K-factor model with K1 observable factors and K2 unobservable factors. It falls within the
affine class of term structure models because bond prices are exponential affine functions of the
state variables. More precisely, bond prices are given by:
pnt = exp(Ān + B̄n Xt ),

(16)

where the coefficients Ān and B̄n follow the difference equations:
1
Ān+1 = Ān + B̄n (µ − Σ λ0 ) + B̄n ΣΣ B̄n − δ0
2



B̄n+1 = B̄n (φ − Σλ1 ) − δ1

(17)

with Ā1 = −δ0 and B̄1 = −δ1 .
These difference equations can be derived by induction using equation (15). 4 For a oneperiod bond, n = 1, we have:
p1t = Et [mt+1 ] = exp {−rt }
= exp {−δ0 − δ1 Xt } .
Matching coefficients leads to Ā1 = −δ0 and B̄1 = −δ1 . Suppose that the price of an n-period
bond is given by pnt = exp(An + Bn Xt ). Now we show that the exponential form also applies
to the price of the n period bond:
= Et [mt+1 pnt ]
pn+1
t


1 
= exp −rt − λt λt + An Et [exp {−λt t+1 + Bn Xt+1 }]
2


1 
= exp −rt − λt λt + An Et [exp {−λt t+1 + Bn (µ + φXt + Σt+1 )}]
2


1 



= exp An − δ0 + Bn µ + (Bn φ − δ1 )Xt − λt λt Et [exp {−(λt + Bn Σ)t+1 }]
2


1 





= exp −δ0 + An + Bn (µ − Σλ0 ) + Bn ΣΣ Bn − δ1 Xt + Bn φXt − Bn Σλ1 Xt
2
Matching coefficients results in the recursive relations in equations (17).
The continuously compounded yield y tn on an n-period zero coupon bond is given by:
log pnt
n
= An + Bn Xt

ytn = −

4

(18)

See the techniques in Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997), Bekaert and Grenadier (2001) and Backus, Foresi,
Mozumdar and Wu (2001).

12

where An = −Ān /n and Bn = −B̄n /n. Note that yields are affine functions of the state
Xt , so that equation (18) can be interpreted as being the observation equation of a state space
system. Additional observation equations will come from the observable variables X to . Most
examples of discrete-time affine models have not incorporated lagged state variables or moving
average errors. However, by treating both the lagged variables and moving average errors as
state variables in Xt , the affine form is still maintained. Despite time-varying risk premia, our
system is still Gaussian, and IR’s, variance decompositions and other techniques can be handled
as easily as an unrestricted VAR.

4.2 Choice of Parameterization
4.2.1 Latent Variables
Empirical studies have concluded that three unobserved factors explain much of yield dynamics
(see Knez, Litterman and Scheinkman (1994)). To compare models with only latent variables
with models incorporating both latent and macro factors we use three unobservable factors.
Hence our most comprehensive model consists of two macro and three latent factors.
Since there are unobservable variables present, normalizations can be made that give observationally equivalent systems. The idea behind these normalizations in a VAR setting is that
affine transformations and rotations of the unobservable factors lead to observationally equivalent yields. These normalizations are discussed in detail in Dai and Singleton (2000). We
estimate the most general parameterization for the unobserved variables in this paper, and then
re-estimate the system a second time while setting any insignificant parameters to zero. This
is more efficient, ensures identification, allows comparison across models, and gives sufficient
freedom to capture yield curve dynamics.
We estimate the following system for the unobservable factors:
u
+ uut ,
ftu = ρft−1

(19)

where uut IID N(0,1) and the 3 × 3 companion matrix ρ is lower triangular. This is the most general identified representation for a Gaussian specification. A multi-factor Vasicek (1977) model
with correlated unobservable factors consists of (19), an affine short rate equation (5), and the
assumption that λ1 = 0. In a Vasicek model, specifying the companion form and holding fixed
the covariances is equivalent to holding the companion form fixed and specifying the covariances. As the latent factors are AR(1) processes, the coefficients Φ2 . . . Φp , in equation (7)
corresponding to Xtu = ftu are zero. Numerous papers in the term structure literature have used
independent factors as a first-cut modeling approach, including Longstaff and Schwartz (1992)
and Chen and Scott (1993). At the estimated parameters, however, the latent factors usually
13

turn out to violate the independence assumption. We therefore estimate a correlated latent factor model to give the latent variables a fair chance to explain the yield curve by themselves,
without the inclusion of macro variables.
We impose independence between latent and macro factors, so that the upper-right 24 × 3
corner and the lower-left 3 × 24 corner of Φ in the compact form in (8) contains only zeros.
This approach to including observed macro factors in a pricing kernel specifies all uncertainties
arising in the latent factors as orthogonal to the macro variables and can answer how yields
respond to pure macro shocks. However, by assuming independence of latent and macro factors
we cannot ask how macro factors respond to latent yield factors. This contradicts empirical
evidence that the term structure predicts movements in macro economic activity (see Harvey
(1988) and Estrella and Hardouvelis (1991)). Extensions of this model where this question can
be addressed can be done by freeing up the companion matrix to allow feedback (so Φ does not
contain zero corner blocks), and looking at contemporaneous correlations of macro and latent
factors (θ0 does not contain zero corner blocks). We leave extensions that free up correlations
between factors for future research and focus on the impact of macro variables on yields.
4.2.2 Risk Premia
The data-generating and the risk neutral measures coincide if λt = 0 for all t. This case is usually called the “Local Expectations Hypothesis,” which differs from the traditional Expectations
Hypothesis by Jensen inequality terms (see Cochrane (2001), Chapter 19). Macro models, such
as Fuhrer and Moore (1995), usually impose the Expectations Hypothesis to infer long term
yield dynamics from short rates. The dynamics of the term structure in the real measure depend
on the risk premia parameters λ0 and λ1 in equation (11). A non-zero vector λ0 affects the
long-run mean of yields because this parameter affects the constant term in the yield equation
(18). A non-zero matrix λ1 affects the time-variation of risk-premia, since it affects the slope
coefficients in the yield equation (18). In a Vasicek (1977) model λ 0 is non-zero and λ1 is zero,
which allows the average yield curve to be upward sloping, but does not allow risk premia to be
time-varying.
Estimating prices of risk is difficult. Many estimations of term structure models with latent
factors cannot reject the hypothesis that the market prices of risk are zero (for example, see the
low t-statistics in Dai and Singleton (2000)). Parameter estimates of λ 0 and λ1 are therefore
interesting in themselves, because the evidence against the expectations hypothesis is still being
debated. Although there is strong traditional evidence against it (Campbell and Shiller (1991)),
newer evidence finds the expectations hypothesis much harder to reject in international data
(Hardouvelis (1994)), or taking into account small-sample biases (see Bekaert and Hodrick
(2001) and Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (2001)).

14

The number of λ parameters to estimate is very large: λ0 has 5 and λ1 has 25 parameters
in the case of the models with macro variables. To avoid over-fitting, we fix some of these
parameters before estimation. First, we set any λ1 parameters corresponding to the latent variables to zero in estimations of models with macro variables, if they were already insignificant
in the Yields-Only estimation. We also specify the λ 1 matrix to be block-diagonal, with zero
restrictions on the upper-right and lower-left corner blocks. This assumption is in the spirit of
trying to let the macro variables characterize as much of the term structure dynamics as possible
without resorting to orthogonal latent variables. Finally, we set all λ 1 parameters corresponding
to lagged macro variables to zero. This leaves two non-zero matrices on the diagonal of λ 1 to
estimate: a 2 × 2 matrix for current macro variables and a 3 × 3 matrix for the latent variables.

4.3 Estimation Method
To estimate the model, we transform a system of yields and observables (Y t , Xto ) into a system
of observables and unobservables Xt = (Xto , Xtu ). The yields themselves are analytical functions of the state variables Xt , which allow us to infer the unobservable factors from the yields.
The estimation method is maximum likelihood, and we derive the likelihood function in the Appendix. In traditional VAR approaches, yields and macro variables are used directly as inputs
into a VAR after specifying the autoregressive lag length. The likelihood for the VAR is a function of (Yt , Xto ), and inferences about yield curve movements and macro shocks can be drawn
from the parameters in the companion form coefficients and covariance terms. Our approach
amounts to estimating a VAR of (Y t , Xto ), with assumptions that (i) identify an unobservable
component orthogonal to macro shocks and (ii) guarantee no arbitrage.
We use a two-step consistent estimation procedure. In the first step, we estimate the macro
dynamics (2) and the coefficients δ0 and δ11 of the macro factors in the short rate dynamics
equation (6). In a second step, we estimate the remaining parameters of the term structure
model holding all pre-estimated parameters fixed. One reason to do this is the difficulties associated with estimating a large number of factors simultaneously with maximum likelihood
when yields are highly persistent. 5 This procedure also avoids the estimation of a large number
of lag coefficients (ρ1 , . . . ρ12 ) in the bivariate VAR for the macro variables by maximizing a
computationally intensive likelihood function.
Both the macro dynamics (2) and the short rate coefficients of the macro variables in equation (6) are estimated by ordinary least squares, as reported in Sections 2 and 3. Since our
5

We tried to estimate various versions of the model in a single step with maximum likelihood. These estimations
typically produced explosive yield dynamics. Fixing the parameters that characterize the dependence of the short
rate on the observable factors in a (consistent) first-step estimation turned out to be a tractable way to avoid the
problem of nonstationary dynamics.

15

constructed macro factors have zero mean and unit variance, the constant δ0 in the short rate
equation represents the unconditional mean of the 1 month yield, which equals 5.10% on an
annualized basis. This number has to be divided by 12 to obtain an estimate for δ 0 at a monthly
frequency. The regression coefficients δ11 of the short rate equation give the maximal proportion
of short rate movements explained by the macro factors, with all remaining orthogonal factors
being unobservable. We use the term structure model to identify the unexplained proportion.
Holding δ0 , δ11 , and the parameters entering equation (2) fixed, we estimate all other parameters of the term structure model including the remaining coefficients in δ 12 corresponding
to the latent factors in the term structure estimation. To obtain starting values for ρ in equation
(19) we estimate the model with λ0 and λ1 equal to zero. We then estimate λ1 still holding λ 0
fixed at zero. In the next estimation round, we estimate λ 0 while setting parameters in λ1 that
turned out to be insignificantly different from zero. We finally set insignificant λ 0 parameters
to zero and re-estimate. This method gives more efficient estimates than a one-step estimation
under the null that the insignificant parameters are equal to zero.
Finally, our likelihood construction solves for the unobservable factors from the joint dynamics of the zero coupon bond yields and the macro factors. To do this, we follow Chen and
Scott (1993) and assume that as many yields as unobservable factors are measured without error, and the remaining yields are measured with error. In particular, for our models with three
latent factors we assume the 1, 12 and 60-month yields are measured without error, and the 3
and 36-month yields are measured with error.

4.4 Summary of Parameterization
To summarize, we estimate the following special case of the general model. The bivariate
system of macro factors fto follows the process:
o
o
+ . . . + ρ12 ft−12
+ Ωut ,
fto = ρ1 ft−1

(20)

with ut IID N(0,I). The 2 × 2 matrices ρ1 , . . . , ρ12 , Ω consist of free parameters.
The trivariate system of latent factors ftu follows the process:
u
+ t
ftu = ρft−1

(21)

with t IID N(0,1). The 3 × 3 matrix ρ is lower triangular to ensure identification. The shock
processes t and ut are independent.
The short rate equation is:


Xto + δ12
Xtu ,
rt = δ0 + δ11

16

(22)

where the parameters δ0 and δ11 are consistently estimated by least squares in a first-step proce
o
o
dure prior to maximizing the likelihood. The observable factors are X to = (fto ft−1
. . . , ft−p
)
and the latent factors are Xtu = ftu . The full set of state variables is Xt = ((Xto ) , (Xtu ) ) .
Market prices of risk are affine in the state vector:
λ t = λ 0 + λ 1 Xt .

(23)

The matrix λ1 has an upper-left 2 × 2 matrix and a lower-right 3 × 3 matrix corresponding to
fto and ftu , while the remaining parameters are set to zero. The parameters in λ0 corresponding
to fto and ftu are free, and all remaining parameters are restricted to be zero.
Our most comprehensive model contains two macro factors and three unobservable factors,
which we denote as the “Macro Lag” model. The estimation of δ 11 that restricts the parameters on lagged parameters to be zero as in equation (22) is denoted the “Macro” model. The
estimation without any macro variables we call the “Yields-Only” model.

5 Estimation Results
Section 5.1 interprets the parameter estimates of the Macro and Yields-Only models. To determine the effect of the addition of macro factors into term structure models, we look at the IR’s
of each factor in Section 5.2. The variance decompositions in Section 5.3 allow us to attribute
the forecast variance at a particular horizon to shocks in macro and latent factors. We compare
the latent factors from the different models in Section 5.4 and find that macro factors do account for some of the latent factors from the Yields-Only model. In Section 5.5, we find that
imposing the cross-equation restrictions from no-arbitrage forecasts better than the unrestricted
VAR’s common in the macro literature. Moreover, incorporating macro variables into a term
structure model helps us obtain even better forecasts. Derivations for the IR’s and variance
decompositions are presented in the Appendix.

5.1 Parameter Estimates
5.1.1 Yields-Only Model
Table 5 presents the estimation results for the Yields-Only Model. The order of the latent factors
in Table 5 is unspecified, but we present the estimation results by ordering the latent factors by
decreasing autocorrelation. The model has one very persistent factor, one less persistent but still
very strongly persistent factor, and the last factor is strongly mean-reverting. This is consistent
with previous multi-factor estimates in the literature such as Chen and Scott (1993).

17

These unobservable factors have been labeled “level,” “slope,” and “curvature” respectively
because of the effects of these factors on the yield curve. In Figure 5 we plot the normalized
factors against three normalized transformations of the 1 month, 12 month and 60 month yields
(yt1, yt12 and yt60 respectively). The first latent variable, Unobs 1, closely corresponds to a “level”
effect, which is defined as 1/3(yt1 + yt12 + yt60 ). The correlation between Unobs 1 and the
level transformation is 92%. The second latent variable, Unobs 2, closely corresponds to a
“spread” transformation, defined as yt60 − yt1 . Unobs 2 and the spread have a correlation of 58%.
Finally, the third latent variable, Unobs 3, is related to a “curvature” transformation, defined as
yt1 − 2yt12 + yt60 . Unobs 3 has a 77% correlation with curvature.6
In Table 5, the estimated vector λ0 has one significant parameter corresponding to the most
highly autocorrelated factor. The parameter is negative, so that the unconditional mean of the
short rate under the risk-neutral measure is higher than under the data-generating measure.
Since bond prices are computed under the risk-neutral measure, negative parameters in λ 0 induce long yields to be on average higher than short yields. Time-variation in risk premia is
mainly driven by the first and third unobservable factor. In other words, risk premia in bond
yields mainly depend on the level and the curvature of the yield curve.
5.1.2 Models with Yields and Macro Variables
Tables 6 and 7 contain estimation results of the Macro Model and the Macro Lag Model. The
autocorrelations of the unobservable factors are comparable across all models, with the exception of Unobs 3. The autocorrelation of Unobs 3 is approximately the same in the Yields-Only
and Macro Model (0.7646 and 0.7728 respectively) but is more persistent in the Macro Lag
Model (0.8210). The δ1 coefficients corresponding to latent factors are also approximately the
same across the three models.
Turning to the risk premia parameters in Tables 6 and 7, the λ 1 coefficients corresponding to
inflation and real activity are significant. This implies that time-variation in risk premia significantly depends on observable macro factors. However, the estimates of the λ 1 risk parameters
differ across the Macro and Macro Lag Model. In particular, the inflation-real activity crossterms (λ1,12 and λ1,21 ), where the additional two subscripts denote matrix elements, are much
larger in absolute magnitude in the Macro Model than in the Macro Lag Model. Similarly,
the inflation and real activity diagonal terms (λ 1,11 and λ1,22 ) are smaller in the Macro Model
estimation than in the Macro Lag Model. This implies that the behavior of inflation and real
activity on the term structure may be potentially quite different across the Macro and Macro
6

For comparison, the standard Knez, Litterman and Scheinkman (1994) three principal components of the
1 month, 12 month and 60 month yields have correlations 100%, 99.8% and 88.6% with the level, spread and
curvature yield transformations.

18

Lag Models. We confirm this in the following sections where we examine IR’s and variance
decompositions. In contrast, the λ 1 parameters corresponding to the latent factors are roughly
similar across the Macro and Macro Lag Models, with the exception of the Unobs 3 diagonal
term (λ1,55 ).

5.2 Impulse Responses
5.2.1 Factor Weights Across the Yield Curve
From equation (18), the effect of each factor on the yield curve is determined by the weights
Bn that the term structure model assigns on each yield of maturity n. These weights B n also
represent the initial response of yields to movements in the various factors. Figure 6 plots
these weights as a function of yield maturity for the Yields-Only model in the upper graph, and
the Macro Model in the lower graph. The Bn coefficients have been scaled to correspond to
movements of one standard deviation of the factors, and have been annualized by multiplying
by 1200.
Turning first to the Yields-Only model, the weight on the most persistent factor (Unobs 1)
is almost horizontal. This means that it affects yields of all maturities the same way, so we can
call it a level factor. The coefficient of the second factor (Unobs 2) is upward sloping. It mainly
moves the short end of the yield curve relative to the long end, so Unobs 2 is therefore a slope
factor. The coefficient on the least persistent factor (Unobs 3) is hump-shaped. Movements in
this factor affect yields at the short-end of the yield curve and middle and long-end of the yield
curve with different signs. Hence, the Bn weights corresponding to Unobs 3 have a twisting
effect, so Unobs 3 is thus a curvature factor. The inverse hump in the coefficient of this factor
cannot be accommodated in a model with independent factors and constant risk premia, where
yield coefficients are monotone functions of maturity.
The corresponding coefficients of the Macro model in the lower plot in Figure 6 look very
similar. We again find that Unobs 1 though 3 represent level, slope and curvature factors. We
find the same correspondence in the Bn coefficients of the Macro Lag model (which we do not
graph here). The Bn coefficients corresponding to inflation and real activity we represent as
stars and circles, respectively. The effect of inflation is hump-shaped but mostly affects short
yields and less so long yields. The magnitude of the inflation weights are higher than the level
factor weights at short maturities, and about half the magnitude of the slope factor weights. Real
activity has a much weaker hump-shaped effect on the yield curve. This suggests that macro
factors have much explanatory power for yield curve dynamics. To trace out the long-term
responses of the yield curve from shocks to the macro variables after the yield curve’s initial
response, we now compute IR’s.
19

5.2.2 Impulse Responses from Macro Shocks
We look at IR’s to yields of maturities 1, 12 and 60 months. Our term structure model allows
us to obtain the movements of the yield curve in response to driving shocks at all horizons,
including maturities omitted in estimation. The IR’s for all maturities are known analytical
functions of the parameters. This is in contrast to estimations with VAR’s where IR’s can only
be calculated for yields included in the VAR. Our estimation also guarantees that the movements
of yields are arbitrage-free.
Figure 7 shows IR’s of 1, 12 and 60 month yields from the Macro model and the Macro
Lag model. In addition, we calculate the IR’s from a simple unrestricted VAR(12), with macro
factors and 5 yields similar to Campbell and Ammer (1993). We order the variables with macro
factors first, and then yields with increasing maturities. The x-axis on each plot is in months
and the IR’s are given in terms of annualized percentages for a shock of one standard deviation.
In all models, shocks to inflation and real activity raise the yield curve across all maturities,
with a larger response to inflation shocks. The IR’s of macro shocks are hump-shaped in all
models. The hump in the unrestricted response to real activity shocks occurs after one year,
while the hump in the response to inflation shocks occurs later, after two years. The magnitudes
and the exact location of the humps differ across models.
Turning first to the IR’s of the unrestricted VAR in the first column of Figure 7, a onestandard deviation shock to inflation initially raises the 1-month yield about 10 basis points.
The response peaks after about two years at 30 basis points and then slowly levels off. The
response of longer yields has the same overall shape. The initial response of the 1-year yield
(5-year yield) is only 8 basis points (5 basis points). The response increases to around 25 basis
points (22 basis points) after two years, and then dies off slowly. The response of yields to real
activity shocks in the unrestricted VAR is slightly smaller than the response to inflation shocks.
The response is again hump-shaped with the hump occurring after one year. The unrestricted
response of the 1-month yield to a 1 standard deviation output shock is around 15 basis points
initially. The response increases to 30 basis points after two years, and then dies off. The initial
responses of the 1-year yield (5-year yield) is 15 (10) basis points. The response increases to
25 (18) basis points after one year and then dies off.
The last two columns of Figure 7 list IR’s in the Macro and Macro Lag models. The humpshape of the IR’s are similar to the shape of the IR’s from the unrestricted VAR, but the IR’s
are much larger. For example, the initial response of the 1-year yield to a 1 standard deviation
inflation shock is 50 basis points in the Macro model. The response then increases to almost
1 percentage point after one year, where it peaks. The hump in the IR to inflation shocks in
the Macro Lag model occurs later, after 2 years, and is therefore similar to the pattern in the
20

unrestricted response. The IR’s from the Macro Lag model, however, are more erratic than those
of the Macro model. This is because the contemporaneous and 11 lags of the short rate equation
contain many insignificant parameters, which cause poor behavior due to over-parameterization.
Our results are different from the empirical VAR studies such as Evans and Marshall (2000).
They associate shocks to price levels and economic growth as having a level-shift effect across
the yield curve. We find that shocks to these factors generally affect the short yield end of the
yield curve more than the long end of the yield curve. The structure in Evans and Marshall
(2000) is to construct VAR’s for yields with macro variables and a monetary policy proxy (the
federal funds rate). In our model, most of the movement in the yield curve at long horizons
is explained by unobserved factors, whereas in the VAR most movements in the term structure
are unexplained and are absorbed by the VAR as covariance error. When estimating the model,
the first unobservable factor mimics the level of the term structure because this is the linear
combination that looks like the first principal component of yields, which the macro factors
cannot replicate. This factor is very persistent, and affects the long end of the yield curve more
than the short end.

5.3 Variance Decompositions
To gauge the relative contributions of the macro and latent factors to forecast variances we construct variance decompositions. These show the proportion of the forecast variance attributable
to each factor, and are closely related to the IR’s of Section 5.2. Table 8 summarizes our results.
The proportion of unconditional variance accounted for by macro factors is decreasing with the
maturity of yields: highest at the short and middle-ends of the yield curve, and smallest for the
long-end. The largest effect is on the 1-month yield where macro factors account for 83% of
the unconditional variance (where the forecasting horizon is infinite). The proportion of forecast variance explained by macro factors displays an interesting pattern for different parts of the
yield curve. For short and intermediate maturities, this pattern is hump-shaped. For example,
macro factors account for 50% of the 1-step ahead forecast variance of the 1-month yield. This
percentage rises to 78% at 12 months and 85% at 60 months, but then converges to 83% for extremely long horizons. For long yields, the explanatory power of the macro variables decreases
with forecasting horizon. Macro variables only account for 40% of the unconditional variance
of long yields, while the rest is attributed to latent factors. The low variance decomposition
of long yields is due to the dominance of persistent unobserved factors (the near unit-root factor). Overall, Table 8 shows that the macro factors explain a large amount of term structure
movements, particularly at the short and middle parts of the yield curve.
More detailed variance decompositions are listed in Table 9 for 1, 12 and 60 month maturities. To interpret the top row of Table 9, for the Yields-Only model, 13.81% of the 1-step ahead
21

forecast variance of the 1-month yield is explained by the first unobserved factor, 33.03% by the
second unobserved factor and 53.14% by the third unobserved factor. In the row labeled h = 1
of the Macro Model in the first panel corresponding to the 1-month yield, 48.87% of the 1-step
ahead forecast variance is attributable to inflation, 0.74% to real activity and the remainder to
the latent factors.
Focusing on the Macro Model, inflation has more explanatory power for forecast variances
than real activity at all points of the yield curve and for all forecast horizons. For example, at the
12-month horizon 68.60% (9.46%) of the forecast variance of the 1-month yield is accounted
for by inflation (economic growth). The explanatory power of real activity generally rises with
the forecast interval h. At the long end of the yield curve the explanatory power of inflation
decreases with h. Inflation and real activity remain important in the Macro Lag Model, but
the proportion attributable to macro variables is much smaller for the 60 month yield than the
Macro Model.
Turning now to the latent factors in Table 9, Unobs 1, corresponding to the first highly persistent latent factor, dominates the variance decompositions for all the yields at long horizons.
Its importance increases for yields with long maturity. This effect mirrors the flat B n yield factor weights in Figure 6. The second unobserved factor (Unobs 2) has greatest effect on short-run
flucations of yields with intermediate maturities. The third unobserved factor (Unobs 3) is the
strongly mean-reverting factor and acts only on the short end of the yield curve. In Table 9 it
accounts for 53% of the forecast variance for the 1-month yield at a one month horizon, but has
little effect on longer yields. These patterns are mirrored in both the Yields-Only model and
models with macro variables, but with different magnitudes. These variance decompositions
suggest that the role of the “level” factor (Unobs 1), “butterfly” factor (Unobs 2) and “slope”
factor (Unobs 3) remain roughly the same with the addition of macro factors. The next section seeks to quantify the change in the behavior of these unobserved factors in the presence of
macro variables.

5.4 Comparison of Factors
The addition of macro factors into a term structure model is shown quantatively in Table 10. In
this table we regress the latent factors from the Yields-Only model onto the macro and latent
factors from the Macro and Macro Lag Models. We run three series of regressions, first only on
the macro variables (Panel A), and then onto the macro and latent variables of the Macro Model
(Panel B), and then onto the macro and latent variables of the Macro Lag Model (Panel C). All
the variables in the regressions are normalized.
Turning first to Panel A of Table 10, the traditional level factor loads significantly onto
22

inflation and real activity, with an adjusted R 2 of 22%. In particular, the loading on inflation is
positive and large (0.46). This suggests that the traditional level factor captures a strong inflation
effect. When the second latent factor, labeled “slope,” is regressed onto the macro factors, we
obtain a high R2 of 49%, with significant negative loadings particularly on inflation (-0.67).
Hence, much of the traditional slope factor is also related to the dynamics of inflation. Finally,
the third latent factor (“curvature”) is poorly accounted by macro factors R2 = 3%. However,
the traditional curvature factor does load significantly onto real activity.
Panel B of Table 10 reports the regression from the traditional Yields-Only factors onto the
macro and latent factors implied by the Macro Model. The level factor from the Yields-Only
model translates almost one for one with the level factor of the Macro Model. The magnitude
of the coefficient on Unobs 1 of the Macro model is very close to 1, and the full regression
produces an R2 of 99%. However, the loadings on the macro factors are significant suggesting
that macro variables do account for some of the level factor.
The reason why the level factor survives almost intact when macro factors are introduced is
because the level factor proxies for the first principal component of the yield curve, as shown
in Figure 5. The unobservable factors are linear combinations of the yields, and the best linear
combination of yields which explains term structure movements is the first principal component.
When macro factors are added, these factors still do not resemble the level of the yield curve,
and so this factor is still necessary to explain the movements across the term structure.
When we regress the Yields-Only slope factor (Unobs 2) onto the Macro Model factors
the loading of the Unobs 2 factor from the Macro Model is significantly smaller than 1, while
the coefficient on inflation is very large and negative, and the coefficient on real activity is
also significant. This means that a large part of the traditional slope factor can be attributed
to inflation movements. In particular, when inflation is high, the slope narrows because the
short rate increases relative to the long rate. Turning finally to the regression of the Yields-Only
curvature factor (Unobs 3), this regression still has a significant negative coefficient on real
activity, but most of the correspondence is with the Unobs 3 factor from the Macro Model (the
coefficient is 0.91).
Panel C of Table 10 reports the regression coefficients of the latent factors from the YieldsOnly model onto the macro and latent factors of the Macro Lag Model. We see that the level
effect again survives almost one for one and there is still a large loading on the inflation factor by
the Yields-Only model’s Unobs 2. However, the R 2 ’s of the Unobs 2 and Unobs 3 regressions
are much smaller than the Macro Model regressions in Panel B.
In summary, Table 10 shows that the traditional level and slope factors are markedly associated with and accounted by observable macro factors. In particular, inflation accounts for
23

large amounts of the dynamics of the traditional slope factor. However, the level effect survives
almost intact when macro factors are added to a term structure model.

5.5 Forecasts
The variance decompositions hint that term structure models with observable macro variables
may help in forecasting future movements in yields. However, these are statements based on
assuming a particular model as the true model after estimation, and may not hold in a practical
setting where more parsimonious data representations often out-perform sophisticated models,
particularly if these more sophisticated models are over-parameterized. To determine if this is
actually the case we conduct an out-of-sample forecasting experiment.
Our procedure for examining out-of-sample forecasts over the last 5 years of our sample is
as follows. We examine forecasts for all the five yields used in estimation. At each date t, we
estimate the models using data up to and including time t, and then forecast the next month’s
yields at time t + 1. The macro factor data is formed using the principal components of the
macro data up to time t, and we estimate the short rate equation and the bivariate VAR of the
macro dynamics only using data up to time t for the Macro and Macro Lag Models. Hence, we
only use data available in the information set at time t in making the forecast at time t + 1.
We perform a comparison of out-of-sample forecasts for six models. First, we use a simple
random walk. Second, we investigate out-of-sample forecasts for the corresponding VAR(12)’s
which do not impose cross-equation restrictions. Our first VAR uses only yields, and we use
a second VAR which incorporates yields and macro variables. Our last three models are the
Yields-Only model, the Macro model and the Macro Lag model. We use two criteria to compare
our forecasts across the models. The first is the Root Mean Squared Error, RMSE, of actual and
forecasted yields, and the second is the Mean Absolute Deviation, MAD.
Table 11 lists the results of the out-of-sample comparisons. Lower RMSE and MAD values
denote better forecasts. We note the following points regarding the forecasting performance of
the models. First, a random walk easily beats an unconstrained VAR. The result holds independently of whether the VAR’s only contain yields, or are augmented with macro variables.
The bad performance is due to the high persistence of yields and small sample biases in the
estimation of autoregressive coefficients in over-parameterized VAR’s.
Second, imposing the cross-equation restrictions from no-arbitrage helps in forecasting. The
improvement in forecasting performance is substantial, generally about 25% of the RMSE and
30% of the MAD for all yields. These constrained VAR’s perform in line with, and slightly
better, than a random walk (except for the 3-month yield). Duffee (2001) remarks that beating
24

a random walk with a traditional affine term structure model is difficult. From forecasting
exercises without risk premia (not reported here), we know that this result crucially depends on
the type of risk adjustment. Linear risk premia, not considered by Duffee (2001), seem to do
well in this regard.
Third, the forecasts of the Macro model are far better than those of the Macro Lag model.
While the forecasts of the Macro Lag model are comparable to those of unconstrained VAR’s,
the Macro model slightly outperforms a random walk (except for the 3-month yield). Both
the Macro model and the Macro Lag model impose cross-equation restrictions on a VAR with
yields and macro variables. The Macro Lag model, however, has a large number of insignificant
coefficients entering the short rate equation. This over-parameterization causes poor out-ofsample performance.
Finally, incorporating macro variables helps in forecasting. More precisely, the forecasts
of the Macro model are uniformly better than the Yields-Only model (except for the 3 month
yield). Hence, we can conclude that (i) adding term structure restrictions improves forecasts
relative to unconstrained VAR’s, even beating a random walk, and (ii) forecasts can be further
improved by including macro variables. Note, however, that we have shown this improvement
is only in incrementally adding macro factors to a given number of latent factors.

6 Conclusion
This paper presents a Gaussian model of the yield curve with observable macroeconomic variables and traditional latent yield variables. The model takes a first step towards understanding
the joint dynamics of macro variables and bond prices in a factor model of the term structure.
Risk premia are time-varying; they depend on both observable macro variables and unobservable factors. Our approach extends the existing empirical VAR work by imposing no-arbitrage
assumptions which allow identification of unobservable factors, and allows the movements of
the entire yield curve to be derived consistent with no-arbitrage.
We find that macro factors explain a significant portion (up to 85%) of movements in the
short and middle parts of the yield curve, but explain only around 40% of movements at the
long end of the yield curve. The effects of inflation shocks are strongest at the short end of
the yield curve. Comparing the latent factors from traditional three latent factor models of
term structure, the “level” factor survives almost intact when macro factors are incorporated,
but a significant proportion of the “level” and “slope” factors are attributed to macro factors,
particularly to inflation. Incorporating macro factors in a term structure model also improves
out-of-sample forecasts.
25

In future research, we plan to extend our empirical specification to allow non-diagonal terms
in the companion form for the factors. This introduces correlations among the latent factors and
feedback from latent factors to macro variables. This allows inference of how latent yield factors
drive macro variables, along the lines of Estrella and Hardouvelis (1991) but with the dynamics
of the yield curve modeled in a no-arbitrage pricing approach.

26

Appendix
A Likelihood Function
We have data on an N vector of zero coupon yields Y t . Our approach to estimation is to solve for the unobserved
factors ftu from the yields Y t and the observed variables X to , which includes observed macro variables f to and
latent variables ftu and lagged terms of the driving factors.
Suppose first that we have N = K 2 yields of different maturity n 1 , . . . , nK2 , as many yields as we have
nK
unobserved factors, f tu . Stacking the equations for the K 2 yields, with Yt = (ytn1 . . . yt 2 ) , we can write:
Yt = A + BXt ,

(A-1)

where A is K2 x1 and B is K2 xK. Partition the matrix B into B = [B o B u ] where B o is a K2 × (K − K2 )
matrix which picks up the observable factors and B u is a K2 xK2 invertible matrix that picks up the unobservable
factors. Then we can infer the unobservable factors in X tu ≡ ftu from Yt and the pricing matrices A and B using
an inversion from the equation:
Yt = A + B o Xto + B u Xtu .

(A-2)

However, the term structure model will only price exactly the yields used to invert the latent factors. To
increase the number of yields to N ≥ K 2 in the estimation, we follow Chen and Scott (1993), and others, in
assuming that some of the yields are observed with measurement error. There will be K 2 yields from which
we invert to obtain the latent variables, and the other N − K 2 yields are measured with error. We assume this
measurement error is IID, and the measurement error is uncorrelated across the yields measured with error. Let
B m denote a N × (N -K 2 ) measurement matrix and u m
t be an (N -K 2 )-dimensional Gaussian white noise with a
diagonal covariance matrix independent of X t . We can then write:
Yt = A + B o Xto + B u Xtu + B m um
t .

(A-3)

In equation (A-3) the yields measured without error will be used to solve for X tu , and the yields measured with
error have non-zero u m
t . For a given parameter vector θ = (µ, Φ, Σ, δ 0 , δ1 , λ0 , λ1 ), we can invert equation (A-3) to
obtain Xtu and um
.
The
variance of the measurement error in our estimations are very small and choosing different
t
bonds to be measured without error do not affect our results.
Denoting the normal density functions of the state variables X t and the errors u m
t as fX and fum respectively,
the joint likelihood L(θ) of the observed data on zero coupon yields Y t and the observable factors X to is given by:
L(θ)) =

T


o
f (Yt , Xto |Yt−1 , Xt−1
)

t=2

log(L(θ)) =

T


o
u
− log | det(J)| + log fx (Xto , Xtu |Xt−1
, Xt−1
) + log fum (um
t )

t=2

1
= −(T − 1) log | det(J)| − (T − 1) log(det(ΣΣ ))
2
T

1
−
(Xt − µ − ΦXt−1 ) (ΣΣ )−1 (Xt − µ − ΦXt−1 )
2 t=2
−

N
−K2
T N −K
2
T −1
1   2 (um
t,i )
log
σi2 −
2
2 t=2 i=1
σi2
i=1

(A-4)

where σi2 is the variance of the i-th measurement error and the Jacobian term is given by


I
0
0
J=
.
Bo Bu Bm
Note that the Jacobian terms of the likelihood in equation (A-4) do not involve A n , and hence the constant prices
of risk λ0 but do involve the linear prices of risk λ 1 .

27

B Impulse Responses




To derive the IR’s of the yields from shocks to the macro variables and latent yield factors F t = (fto , ftu ) consider
the VAR(12) form of F t in equation (7), repeated here:
Ft = Φ0 + Φ1 Ft−1 + . . . + Φp Ft−12 + θ0 ut .

(B-5)

The Φi coefficients take the following form in our parameterization:




ρ1 0
ρi 0
Φi =
for i = 2, . . . , 12.
Φ 0 = 0 Φ1 =
0 ρ
0 0
We write this as an implied Wold MA(∞) representation:
Ft =

∞


Pi ut−i ,

(B-6)

i=0




where ut = (uot uut ) are the shocks to Ft . Note that a Choleski adjustment is needed to take into account the
contemporaneous correlation of the shocks.
The yield on an n-period zero coupon bond y tn is a linear combination of current and lagged values of u t from
equation (18), which we can write as:
ytn = An +

∞


ψin ut−i ,

(B-7)

i=0

where the row vectors ψ in are functions of B n . Note that this is just a linear transformation of the original MA(∞)
form, and the B n are closed-form from equation (17).
For example, for the Macro Model, the state-space X t is given by:








o
o
Xt = (fto ft−1
. . . ft−12
ftu ) ,

where fto are the two macro factors, and f tu are the three unobservable factors. The yields for maturity n, y tn , can
be written as:
ytn = An + Bn Xt



o

= An + Bn1
fto + · · · + Bn12
ft−12
+ Bn13
ftu


= An + B̄n1
Ft + · · · + B̄n12
Ft−12

(B-8)

o
where we partition as B n = [Bn1 . . . Bn13 ], where Bni corresponds to f t−i
for i = 0, . . . , 12 and Bn13 correu
sponds to ft , and B̄n1 = [Bn1 Bn13 ], and B̄ni = [Bni 0] for i = 2, . . . 12.
Then substituting the MA(∞) representation for F t we have:

ψ0n = B̄n1
P0



ψ1n = B̄n1
P1 + B̄n2
P0
..
.



Pi−1 + · · · + B̄n12
Pi−12 , for i ≥ 12.
ψin = B̄n1

(B-9)

and so on.
The vector ψin is the IR for the n-period yield at horizon i for shocks to the driving variables F t at time 0. For
k yields of maturities n 1 , . . . nk , we can stack the coefficients of each yield to write:
∞


Yt = A +

i=0

where Yt = (ytn1 . . . ytnk ) and the j-th row of Ψ i is ψin .

28

Ψi ut−i ,

(B-10)

C Variance Decompositions
Working with the MA(∞) representation of the yields in equation (B-10), the error of the optimal h-step ahead
forecast at time t, Ŷt+h|t is:
Ŷt+h|t − Yt+h =

h−1


Ψi ut+h−i

(C-11)

i=0

Let the j-th component of a vector be denoted by a superscript j and Ψ jk,i denote the element in row j, column k
of Ψi . Then:
j
j
Ŷt+h|t
− Yt+h
=

K


(Ψjk,0 ukt+h + . . . Ψjk,h−1 ukt+1 )

(C-12)

k=1

j
Denote the mean squared error of Ŷt+h|t
as MSE(Ŷt+h|t ). Then

MSE(Ŷt+h|t ) =

K


(Ψ2jk,0 + · · · + Ψ2jk,h−1 ).

(C-13)

k=1

The contribution Ω jk,h of the k-th factor to the MSE of the h-step ahead forecast of the j-th yield is:
Ωjk,h =

h−1 2
i=0 Ψjk,i

MSE(Ŷt+h|t )

,

which decomposes the forecast variance at horizon h of the j-th yield to the various factors.

29

(C-14)

References
Ang, A., and G. Bekaert, 1998, “Regime Switches in Interest Rates,” NBER working paper 7056.
Backus, D., S. Foresi, A. Mozumdar, and L. Wu, 2001, “Predictable Changes in Yields and Forward Rates,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 59, 281-311.
Bekaert, G., and S. Grenadier, 2001, “Predictability of Bond and Stock Returns in Affine Models,” working paper,
Columbia University.
Bekaert, G., and R. J. Hodrick, 2001, “Expectations Hypotheses Tests,” forthcoming Journal of Finance.
Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick, and D. A. Marshall, 2001, “ “Peso Problem” Explanations for Term Structure
Anomalies,” forthcoming Journal of Monetary Economics.
Bernanke, B. S. and I. Mihov, 1995, “Measuring Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper 5145.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. Ammer, 1993, “What Moves the Stock and Bond Markets? A Variance Decomposition for
Long-Term Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance, 48, 1, 3-37.
Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of Financial Markets, Princeton
University Press.
Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1991, “Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird’s Eye View,”
Review of Economic Studies, 58, 495-514.
Chen, R. R., and L. Scott, 1993, “Maximum Likelihood Estimation for a Multi-factor Equilibrium Model of the
Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Fixed Income, 3, 14-31.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans, 1996a, “The Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from
the Flow of Funds,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 16-34.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans, 1996b, “Identification and the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks,”
in eds. Blejer, M., Z. Eckstein, Z. Hercowitz, and L. Leiderman, Financial Factors in Economic Stabilization
and Growth.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans, 1998, “Monetary Policy Shocks: What Have we Learned and to
What End?” NBER working paper 6400.
Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler, 2000, “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and
Some Theory.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 65, 1, 147-180.
Cochrane, J. H., 1998, “What do the VAR’s mean? Measuring the Output Effects of Monetary Policy,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 41, 277-300.
Cochrane, J. H., 2001, Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press.
Constantinides, G. M., 1992, “A Theory of the Nominal Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Review of Financial
Studies, 5, 4, 531-52.
Dai, Q., and K. Singleton, 2000, “Specification Analysis of Affine Term Structure Models,” Journal of Finance,
55, 5, 1943-1978.
Dai, Q., and K. Singleton, 2001, “Expectation Puzzles, Time-varying Risk Premia, and Affine Models of the Term
Structure,” forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.
Duffee, G. R., 2001, “Forecasting Future Interest Rates: Are Affine Models Failures?,” forthcoming Journal of
Finance.
Duffie, D., and R. Kan, 1996, “A Yield-Factor Model of Interest Rates,” Mathematical Finance, 6, 4, 379-406.
El Karoui, N., R. Myneni, and R. Viswanathan, 1992, “Arbitrage Pricing and Hedging of Interest Rate Claims
with State Variables I: Theory,” working paper, Université de Paris VI, Laboratoire de Probabilité.
Estrella, A., and G. A. Hardouvelis, 1991, “The Term Structure as a Predictor of Real Economic Activity,”
Journal of Finance, 46, 2, 555-576.
Estrella, A., and F. S. Mishkin, 1997, “The Predictive Power of the Term Structure of Interest Rates in Europe and
the United States: Implications for the European Central Bank,” European Economic Review, 41, 7,
1375-1401.

30

Evans, C. L., and D. A. Marshall, 1998, “Monetary Policy and the Term Structure of Nominal Interest Rates:
Evidence and Theory,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 49, 53-111.
Evans, C. L, and D. A. Marshall, 2000, “Economic Determinants of the Term Structure of Nominal Interest
Rates,” working paper.
Fisher, M., 1998, “A Simple Model of the Failure of the Expectations Hypthesis,” working paper, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta.
Fisher, M., and C. Gilles, 1998, “Around and Around: The Expectations Hypothesis,” Journal of Finance, 53, 1,
365-383.
Fuhrer, J. C., and G. R. Moore, 1995, “Monetary Policy Trade-Offs and the Correlation between Nominal Interest
Rates and Real Output,” American Economic Review, 85, 1, 219-239.
Gali, J., 1992, “How Well does the ISLM Model Fit Post War Data?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107,
709-738.
Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan, 1991, “Implications of Security Market Data for Models of Dynamic
Economies,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 225-262.
Harrison, J. M., and D. M. Kreps, 1979, “Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod Securities Markets,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 2, 3, 381-408.
Harvey, C. R., 1988, “The Real Term Structure and Consumption Growth,” Journal of Financial Economics, 22,
2, 305-33.
Hardouvelis, G. A., 1994, “The Term Structure Spread and Future Changes in Long and Short Rates in the G7
Countries,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 33, 225-283.
Knez, P. K., R. Litterman, and J. A. Scheinkman, 1994, “Explorations into Factors Explaining Money Market
Returns,” Journal of Finance, 49, 5, 1861-1882.
Liu, J., 1999, “Portfolio Selection in Stochastic Environments,” working paper, UCLA.
Longstaff, F.A., 2000. “The Term Stucture of Very Short Term Rates: New Evidence for the Expectations
Hypothesis.” forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.
Longstaff, F. A., and E. S. Schwartz, 1992, “Interest Rate Bolatiltiy and the Term Structure: A Two Factor
General Equilibrium Model,” Journal of Finance, 47, 4, 1252-82.
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West, 1987, “A Simple Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation
Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55, 703-8.
Pearson, N., and T. S. Sun, 1994, “Exploiting the Conditional Density in Estimating the Term Structure: An
Application to the Cox, Ingersoll and Ross Model,” Journal of Finance, 54, 1279-1304.
Piazzesi, M., 2001, “An Econometric Model of the Yield Curve with Macroeconomic Jump Effects,” NBER
working paper 8246.
Sargent, T. J., 1979, “A Note on Maximum Likelihood Estimation of the Rational Expectations Model of the
Term Structure,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 35, 2, 245-74.
Sims, C., and T. Zha, 1995, “Does Monetary Policy Generate Recessions?” working paper, Yale University.
Taylor, J. B., 1993, “Discretion versus policy rules in practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 39, 195-214.
Uhlig, H., 1999, “What are the Effects of Monetary Policy ? Results from an Agnostic Identification Procedure,”
working paper, Tilburg University.
Vasicek, O., 1977, “An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 5,
177-188.

31

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Data

1 mth
3 mth
12 mth
36 mth
60 mth
CPI
PCOM
PPI
HELP
EMPLOY
IP
UE

Central Moments
mean
stdev
skew
5.1316
2.7399
1.0756
5.4815
2.8550
1.0704
5.8849
2.8445
0.8523
6.2241
2.7643
0.7424
6.4015
2.7264
0.6838
3.8612
2.8733
1.2709
0.9425 11.2974 1.0352
3.0590
3.6325
1.4436
66.7517 22.0257 -0.1490
1.6594
1.5282 -0.4690
3.4717
5.3697 -0.5578
5.7344
1.5650
0.4924

kurt
4.6425
4.5543
3.8856
3.5090
3.2719
4.3655
6.0273
4.9218
1.8665
3.2534
3.6592
3.2413

Autocorrelations
lag 1
lag 2
lag 3
0.9716 0.9453 0.9323
0.9815 0.9606 0.9419
0.9824 0.9626 0.9457
0.9875 0.9739 0.9620
0.9892 0.9782 0.9687
0.9931 0.9847 0.9738
0.9684 0.9162 0.8600
0.9863 0.9705 0.9521
0.9944 0.9900 0.9830
0.9378 0.8954 0.8410
0.9599 0.8889 0.7972
0.9906 0.9777 0.9595

The 1, 3, 12, 36 and 60 month yields are annual zero coupon bond yields from the Fama-Bliss CRSP bond
files. The inflation measures CPI, PCOM and PPI refer to CPI inflation, spot market commodity price inflation, and PPI (Finished Goods) inflation respectively. We calculate the inflation measure at time t using
log(Pt /Pt−12 ) where Pt is the inflation index. The real activity measures HELP, EMPLOY, IP and UE refer
to the Index of Help Wanted Advertising in Newspapers, the growth rate of employment, the growth rate in
industrial production and the unemployment rate respectively. The growth rate in employment and industrial
production are calculated using log(I t /It−12 ) where It is the employment or industrial production index.
For the macro variables, the sample period is 1952:01 to 2000:12. For the bond yields, the sample period is
1952:06 to 2000:12.

32

Table 2: Principal Component Analysis
Principal Components: Inflation

CPI
PCOM
PPI
% variance
explained

1st
-0.6343
-0.4031
-0.6597

2nd
-0.3674
0.9080
-0.2015

3rd
0.6802
0.1145
-0.7240

0.7143

0.9775

1.0000

Factor
Loading
-0.9286
-0.5901
-0.9657

Principal Components: Real Activity

HELP
UE
EMPLOY
IP
% variance
explained

1st
-0.3204
0.3597
-0.6330
-0.6060

2nd
-0.7365
-0.6283
-0.1648
0.1886

3rd
-0.5300
0.6871
0.2444
0.4327

4th
0.2719
0.0612
-0.7158
0.6403

0.5202

0.7946

0.9518

1.0000

Factor
Loading
-0.4622
0.5188
-0.9131
-0.8742

We take the three (four) macro variables representing inflation (real activity) and normalize them to unit
variance. Then the normalized data Z t has the following 1 factor model:
Zt = Cfto + $t
where C is the factor loading vector, E(f to ) = 0, cov(fto ) = I, E($t ) = 0, and cov($ t ) = Γ, where Γ is a diagonal matrix. The columns titled “principal components” list the principal components corresponding to the
first to smallest eigenvalue. The % variance explained for the nth principal component gives the cumulative
proportion of the variance explained by the first up to the nth eigenvalue. IP refers to the growth in industrial
production, CPI to CPI inflation, PCOM to commodity price inflation and PPI to PPI inflation, HELP refers
to the Index of Help Wanted Advertising in Newspapers, UE to the unemployment rate, EMPLOY to the
growth in employment. The sample period is 1952:01 to 2000:12

33

Table 3: Selected Correlations
Inflation

CPI
0.9286

PCOM
0.5901

PPI
0.9657

Real Activity

HELP
0.4622

UE
-0.5188

EMPLOY
0.9131

IP
0.8742

Real
Activity

1 mth

12 mth

Real Activity
1 mth
12 mth
60 mth

Inflation
0.0017
0.6666
0.6484
0.5614

0.0627
0.0510
-0.0270

0.9771
0.9191

0.9639

The table reports selected correlations for the inflation factor extracted from the first principal component
of PCI, PCOM and PPI, the real activity factor extracted from the first principal component of HELP, UE,
EMPLOY and IP, and the 1, 12 and 60 month bond yields, which are used in the estimation. IP refers to
the growth in industrial production, CPI to CPI inflation, PCOM to commodity price inflation, PPI to PPI
inflation, HELP refers to the Index of Help Wanted Advertising in Newspapers, UE to the unemployment
rate, EMPLOY to the growth in employment. The sample period is 1952:06 to 2000:12.

34

Table 4: The Dependence of the Short Rate on Macro Variables
Panel A: yt1 on Constant, Inflation and Real activity
Coeff
t

Inflation
0.0143
(0.0070) ∗

Real Activity
0.1535
(0.0070) †

Constant
0.4250
(0.007) †

Adj R 2
0.4523

Panel B: yt1 on Constant, 12 lags of Inflation and Real activity
Coeff
t
t−1
t−2
t−3
t−4
t−5
t−6
t−7
t−8
t−9
t − 10
t − 11

Inflation
0.0037
(0.0534)
0.0659
(0.0828)
-0.0435
(0.0830)
0.0062
(0.0833)
0.0233
(0.0828)
-0.0088
(0.0825)
-0.0245
(0.0825)
0.0175
(0.0821)
0.0080
(0.0825)
-0.0049
(0.0821)
-0.0079
(0.0820)
0.1427
(0.0522) †

Real activity
0.0398
(0.0065) †
0.0150
(0.0452)
0.0105
(0.0450)
-0.0054
(0.0444)
-0.0172
(0.0441)
0.0145
(0.0442)
-0.0213
(0.0438)
0.0062
(0.0435)
0.0196
(0.0438)
0.0121
(0.0441)
0.0005
(0.0439)
-0.0069
(0.0299)

Constant
0.4296
(0.0306) †

Adj R 2
0.5337

In Panel A we regress the 1 month yield y t1 on a constant, the inflation factor and the real activity factor.
In Panel B we regress yt1 on a constant, inflation, real activity and 11 lags of inflation and real activity. We
report OLS standard errors in parenthesis. Standard errors significant at the 5% (1%) level are denoted ∗ († ).
Sample period is 1952:01 to 2000:12.

35

Table 5: Yields-Only Model Estimates
Companion Form Φ
0.9924
0.0000
(0.0039)
0.0000
0.9548
(0.0062)
0.0000
-0.0021
(0.0001)

0.0000
0.0000
0.7646
(0.0210)

Short Rate Parameters δ1 (× 100)
Unobs 1 Unobs 2
Unobs 3
0.0136
-0.0451
0.0237
(0.0020) (0.0005)
(0.0015)
Prices of Risk λ0 and λ1

Unobs 2

λ0
-0.0033
(0.0004)
0.0000

Unobs 3

0.0000

Unobs 1

Unobs 1
-0.0069
(0.0040)
0.0445
(0.0050)
-0.0049
(0.0090)

λ1 matrix
Unobs 2
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Unobs 3
0.0000
-0.2585
(0.0197)
0.0241
(0.0026)

Measurement Error (× 100)
3 month 36 month
0.0203
0.0090
(0.0003) (0.0002)
The table reports parameter estimates and standard errors in parenthesis for the 3-factor Yields-Only model
Xt = ΦXt−1 +$t , with $t ∼ N (0, I), Φ lower triangular and the short rate equation given by r t = δ0 +δ1 Xt .
All factors Xt ≡ ftu are unobservable. The coefficient δ 0 is set to the sample unconditional mean of the short
rate, 0.0513/12. The prices of risk λ t are given by λ t = λ0 + λ1 Xt . The system is first estimated with λ0 = 0
and λ1 unconstrained. In a second estimation, the insignificant coefficients in λ 1 are set to zero. The sample
period is 1952:06 to 2000:12.

36

Table 6: Macro Model Estimates
Companion Form Φ for Latent Factors
0.9915
0.0000
0.0000
(0.0042)
0.0000
0.9392
0.0000
(0.0122)
0.0000
0.0125
0.7728
(0.0146) (0.0217)
Short Rate Parameters δ1 for Latent Factors (× 100)
Unobs 1
Unobs 2 Unobs 3
0.0138
-0.0487
0.0190
(0.0021)
(0.0007) (0.0022)
Prices of Risk λ0 and λ1
λ0

Inflation

0.0000

Real Activity

0.0000

Unobs 1
Unobs 2

-0.0039
(0.0003)
0.0000

Unobs 3

0.0000

λ1 matrix
Inflation
-0.4263
(0.1331)
1.9322
(0.3893)
0.0000

Real
Activity
0.1616
(0.0146)
-0.1015
(0.0329)
0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

Unobs 1
0.0000

Unobs 2
0.0000

Unobs 3
0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

-0.0047
(0.0043)
0.0459
(0.0055)
-0.0035
(0.0001)

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

-0.2921
(0.0205)
0.0200
(0.0028)

0.0000

Measurement Error (× 100)
3 month
36 month
0.0207
0.0091
(0.0003)
(0.0002)
The table reports parameter estimates and standard errors in parenthesis for the Macro model with the short
rate equation specified with only current inflation and current real activity, as reported in Panel A of Table
4. The short rate equation is given by r t = δ0 + δ1 Xt , where δ1 only picks up current inflation, current real
activity and the latent factors. The dynamics of inflation and real activity are given by a 12 lag VAR (not
reported). The model is X t = ΦXt−1 + $t , with $t ∼ N (0, I). Xt contains 12 lags of inflation and real
activity and three latent variables, which are independent at all lags to the macro variables. In a pre-estimation
we find the inflation and real activity VAR(12), and the coefficients on inflation and real activity in the short
rate equation. The coefficient δ 0 is set to the sample unconditional mean of the short rate, 0.0513/12. We
first estimate the latent factor parameters and the prices of risk λ t = λ0 + λ1 Xt , restricting λ1 to be block
diagonal and using the same form of the prices of risk for the latent factors as the Yields-Only estimation in
Table 5. In a second estimation, the insignificant coefficients in λ 0 and λ1 are set to zero. The sample period
is 1952:06 to 2000:12.

37

Table 7: Macro Lag Model Estimates
Companion Form Φ for Latent Factors
0.9922
0.0000
0.0000
(0.0039)
0.0000
0.9431
0.0000
(0.0118)
0.0000
-0.0189
0.8210
(0.0135) (0.0216)
Short Rate Parameters δ1 for Latent Factors (× 100)
Unobs 1
Unobs 2 Unobs 3
0.0130
-0.0438
0.0256
(0.0020)
(0.0010) (0.0025)
Prices of Risk λ0 and λ1
λ0

Inflation

0.0000

Real Activity

0.0000

Unobs 1
Unobs 2

-0.0050
(0.0003)
0.0000

Unobs 3

0.0000

λ1 matrix
Inflation
-0.8442
(0.2397)
1.1209
(0.1375)
0.0000

Real
Activity
-0.0017
(0.0582)
0.2102
(0.0275)
0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

Unobs 1
0.0000

Unobs 2
0.0000

Unobs 3
0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

-0.0048
(0.0040)
0.0483
(0.0068)
-0.0248
(0.0078)

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

-0.2713
(0.0195)
0.1624
(0.0292)

0.0000

Measurement Error (× 100)
3 month
36 month
0.0251
0.0107
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
The table reports parameter estimates and standard errors in parenthesis for the Macro Lag model with the
short rate equation specified with 12 lags of inflation and current real activity, as reported in Panel B of Table
4. The short rate equation is given by r t = δ0 + δ1 Xt , where δ1 only picks up 12 lags of inflation and real
activity and the latent factors. The dynamics of inflation and real activity are given by a 12 lag VAR (not
reported). The model is X t = ΦXt−1 + $t , with $t ∼ N (0, I). Xt contains 12 lags of inflation and real
activity and three latent variables, which are independent at all lags to the macro variables. In a pre-estimation
we find the inflation and real activity VAR(12), and the coefficients on inflation and real activity in the short
rate equation. The coefficient δ 0 is set to the sample unconditional mean of the short rate, 0.0513/12. We
first estimate the latent factor parameters and the prices of risk λ t = λ0 + λ1 Xt , restricting λ1 to be block
diagonal and not picking up any lagged variables. We us the same form of the prices of risk for the latent
factors as the Yields-Only estimation in Table 5. In a second estimation, the insignificant coefficients in λ 0
and λ1 are set to zero. The sample period is 1952:06 to 2000:12.

38

Table 8: Proportion of Variance Explained by Macro Factors in the Macro Model

short end
middle
long end

1 mth
50%
67%
61%

Horizon h
12 mth 60 mth
78%
85%
79%
78%
63%
48%

∞
83%
73%
38%

We list the contribution of the macro factors to the h-step ahead forecast variance of the 1 month yield (short
end), 12 month yield (middle) and 60 month yield (long end). These are the variance decompositions from
the Macro model outlined in more detail in Table 9.

39

Table 9: Variance Decompositions

h

Macro Factors
Real
Inflation Activity

Latent Factors
Unobs 1

Unobs 2

Unobs 3

0.4887
0.6860
0.7139
0.6985
0.0005
0.2242
0.6885
0.6749

0.0074
0.0946
0.1372
0.1343
0.1081
0.3478
0.1805
0.1768

0.1381
0.3081
0.5579
0.6771
0.0328
0.0251
0.0390
0.0597
0.0549
0.0446
0.0315
0.0507

0.3303
0.4342
0.3116
0.2279
0.4088
0.1836
0.1050
0.1027
0.6235
0.3357
0.0900
0.0882

0.5314
0.2577
0.1305
0.0950
0.0622
0.0108
0.0048
0.0047
0.2130
0.0477
0.0095
0.0093

0.0332
0.0848
0.1208
0.1128
0.2107
0.1895
0.1249
0.1113

0.5972
0.7116
0.8594
0.9103
0.0733
0.0709
0.1271
0.1854
0.2114
0.2001
0.1905
0.2790

0.3517
0.2752
0.1361
0.0869
0.2112
0.1272
0.0851
0.0794
0.4659
0.2588
0.0899
0.0801

0.0511
0.0132
0.0045
0.0028
0.0480
0.0105
0.0054
0.0051
0.0955
0.0249
0.0067
0.0060

0.0170
0.0615
0.0755
0.0593
0.0199
0.0170
0.0169
0.0108

0.7507
0.8443
0.9319
0.9578
0.2756
0.3054
0.4848
0.5953
0.8060
0.8376
0.8619
0.9112

0.1963
0.1427
0.0641
0.0397
0.0804
0.0561
0.0333
0.0262
0.1184
0.0703
0.0262
0.0168

0.0530
0.0130
0.0040
0.0025
0.0319
0.0080
0.0037
0.0029
0.0535
0.0153
0.0045
0.0029

1 month yield
Yields-Only

Macro

Macro
with Lags

1
12
60
∞
1
12
60
∞
1
12
60
∞

12 month yield
Yields-Only

Macro

Macro
with Lags

1
12
60
∞
1
12
60
∞
1
12
60
∞

0.6343
0.7066
0.6615
0.6173
0.0166
0.3268
0.5879
0.5237

60 month yield
Yields-Only

Macro

Macro
with Lags

1
12
60
∞
1
12
60
∞
1
12
60
∞

0.5950
0.5690
0.4027
0.3164
0.0021
0.0597
0.0906
0.0582

The table lists the contribution of factor i to the h-step ahead forecast of the 1 month yield. To interpret the
top row, for the Yields-Only model, 13.81% of the 1-step ahead forecast variance is explained by the first
unobserved factor, 33.03% by the second unobserved factor and 53.14% by the third unobserved factor. The
Yields-Only model only has three latent factors. The macro models have inflation, real activity and three
latent factors. The Macro model has no lags of inflation and real activity in the short rate equation, while the
Macro with Lags model does.

40

Table 10: Comparison of Yields-Only and Macro Factors
Dependent
Variable

Inflation

Independent Variables
Real
Activity Unobs 1 Unobs 2

Unobs 3

Adj R 2

Panel A: Regressions on Macro Factors
Unobs 1
“level”
Unobs 2
“spread”
Unobs 3
“curvature”

0.4625
(0.0735)
-0.6707
(0.0716)
0.0498
(0.0629)

-0.0726
(0.0860)
-0.1890
(0.0611)
-0.1794
(0.0714)

0.2180
0.4902
0.0343

Panel B: Regressions on Factors from Macro Model
Unobs 1
Unobs 2
Unobs 3

0.1118
(0.0054)
-0.9364
(0.0037)
0.0427
(0.0262)

0.0307
(0.0056)
-0.1026
(0.0037)
-0.1238
(0.0260)

0.9507
(0.0055)
0.0199
(0.0042)
0.1656
(0.0289)

-0.0174
(0.0056)
0.7624
(0.0032)
-0.1455
(0.0241)

0.0038
(0.0047)
0.0279
(0.0029)
0.9071
(0.0233)

0.9971
0.9981
0.9256

Panel C: Regressions on Factors from Macro Lag Model
Unobs 1
Unobs 2
Unobs 3

-0.0580
(0.0049)
-0.7069
(0.0393)
0.1112
(0.0458)

-0.0207
(0.0040)
-0.1132
(0.0313)
-0.0081
(0.0386)

1.0248
(0.0044)
-0.2955
(0.0356)
0.2059
(0.0507)

0.0035
(0.0047)
0.5700
(0.0376)
0.0228
(0.0365)

0.0058
(0.0036)
0.1306
(0.0315)
0.8119
(0.0424)

0.9979
0.8715
0.7470

Regressions of the latent factors from the Yields-Only model with only latent factors (dependent variables)
onto the macro factors and latent factors from the Macro and Macro Lag model (independent variables). All
factors are normalized, and standard errors, produced using 3 Newey-West (1987) lags, are in parentheses.
Panel A lists coefficients from a regression of the Yields-Only latent factors onto only macro factors. Panel
B lists coefficients from a regression of Yields-Only latent factors on the macro and latent factors from the
Macro model with only contemporaneous inflation and real activity in the short rate equation. Panel C lists
coefficients from a regression of Yields-Only latent factors on the macro and latent factors from the Macro
Lag model with contemporaneous inflation and real activity and 11 lags of inflation and real activity in the
short rate equation.

41

Table 11: Forecast Comparisons
RMSE Criteria

Yield
(mths)
1
3
12
36
60

RW
0.3160
0.1523
0.1991
0.2493
0.2546

Unconstrained VAR’s
VAR
VAR with
Yields Only
Macro
0.3905
0.3990
0.2495
0.2540
0.2776
0.2722
0.3730
0.3644
0.3793
0.3725

VAR’s with Cross-Equation
Restrictions
Yields Macro Macro Lag
Only
Model
Model
0.3012 0.2889
0.3906
0.1860 0.2167
0.2876
0.1914 0.1851
0.2274
0.2489 0.2092
0.2665
0.2497 0.2333
0.2530

MAD Criteria

Yield
(mths)
1
3
12
36
60

RW
0.2252
0.1159
0.1639
0.1997
0.2054

Unconstrained VAR’s
VAR
VAR with
Yields Only
Macro
0.3076
0.3242
0.1987
0.2056
0.2176
0.2204
0.2991
0.2924
0.2957
0.2930

VAR’s with Cross-Equation
Restrictions
Yields Macro Macro Lag
Only
Model
Model
0.2155 0.2039
0.2981
0.1442 0.1693
0.2344
0.1616 0.1559
0.1870
0.1974 0.1604
0.2111
0.2017 0.1883
0.2064

We forecast over the last 60 months (the out-sample) of our sample and record the root mean square error
(RMSE) and the mean absolute deviation (MAD) of the forecast versus the actual values. Lower RMSE and
MAD values denote better forecasts. Forecasts are 1-step ahead. We first estimate models on the in-sample,
and update the estimations at each observation in the out-sample. RW denotes a random walk forecast, VAR
Yields Only denotes a VAR(12) only with 5 yields, VAR with Macro denotes a VAR(12) fitted to the macro
factors and all 5 yields, Yields-Only denotes the 3 factor latent variable model without macro variables, the
Macro model has only contemporaneous inflation and real activity in the short rate equation, and the Macro
Lag model has contemporaneous and 11 lags of inflation and real activity in the short rate equation. The
first three of these models are thus unconstrained estimations, while the last three impose the cross-equation
restrictions derived from the absence of arbitrage.

42

Monthly Zero Coupon Bond Yields
16

1 month
12 month
60 month

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Macro Factors
Inflation
Real Activity

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

−3
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

The top panel shows a plot of (annualized) monthly ZCB yields of maturity 1 month, 12 months and 60
months. The bottom panel plots the two macro factors representing inflation and real activity. The sample
period is 1952:06 to 2000:12.

Figure 1: Bond Yields and Macro Principal Components

43

Inflation Factor versus Inflation Measures
Inflation Factor
CPI
PCOM
PPI

4

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Real Activity Factor versus Real Activity Measures
3
Real Activity Factor
HELP
−Unemployment
Employment
IP

2

1

0

−1

−2

−3
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

The top panel shows a plot of the inflation factor with CPI, PCOM and PPI measures of inflation. The bottom
panel shows a plot of the real activity factor with HELP, the negative of unemployment, employment and IP
measures of real activity. All variables are standardized to have zero mean and unit variance. The sample
period is 1952:01 to 2000:12.

Figure 2: Inflation and Real Activity

44

Response of Inflation from Inflation

Response of Inflation from Real Activity

0.25

0.25

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

−0.05

−0.05

−0.1

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

−0.1

5

10

15

Response of Real Activity from Inflation
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

45

50

55

60

Response of Real Activity from Real Activity

0.4

−0.2

20

45

50

55

60

−0.2

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

We fit a VAR(12) to the inflation and real activity macro factors. The plot shows the impulse responses to a
Cholesky one standard deviation innovation to each variable. Time is in months on the x-axis.

Figure 3: Impulse Responses from the VAR(12) on Macro Factors

45

Residuals from Taylor Rule Specifications
Residuals Taylor Rule
Residuals Taylor Rule with Lags
Demeaned Short Rate

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.4
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

We show the residuals from the Taylor rule regressions, together with the de-meaned short rate (1 month
yield). We show the residuals from the Taylor rule with no lags, which have 0.9458 autocorrelation, and
the residuals from the Taylor rule with 11 lags, which have 0.9370 autocorrelation. For comparison, the
autocorrelation of the short rate is 0.9716.

Figure 4: Residuals from the Taylor Rule Regressions

46

Level of Interest Rates versus Unobs 1 from Yields−Only Model

Spread of Interest Rates versus Unobs 2 from Yields−Only Model
Level
Unobs 1

3

Spread
Unobs 2

4

3

2.5
2

2

1.5

1

1
0
0.5
−1
0
−2
−0.5
−3

−1

−4

−1.5
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Curvature of Interest Rates versus Unobs 3 from Yields−Only Model
4

Curvature
Unobs 3

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

−3

−4

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

We show the unobserved yield factors from the Yields-Only model versus the level of interest rates (top left
plot), spread (top right plot) and curvature of interest rates (bottom plot). All variables are normalized to have
zero mean and unit variance. The level of interest rates is defined as 1/3(y t1 + yt12 + yt60 ) where yt1 , yt12 and
yt60 are the one-month yield, 12-month yield and 60-month yield respectively. The spread of interest rates is
defined as yt60 − yt1 . The curvature of interest rates is defined as y t1 − 2yt12 + yt60 . The correlation between
the level of interest rates and Unobs 1 is 92%, the correlation between the spread and Unobs 2 is 58% and the
correlation between curvature and Unobs 3 is 77%.

Figure 5: Unobserved Yield Factors versus Level, Slope and Curvature

47

Bn Coefficients from the Yields−Only Model
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2

−0.3

−0.4

−0.5

−0.6

Unobs 1
Unobs 2
Unobs 3
0

10

20

30
Yield Maturity n

40

50

60

B Coefficients from the Macro Model
n

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2

−0.3

−0.4
Inflation
Real Activity
Unobs 1
Unobs 2
Unobs 3

−0.5

−0.6

0

10

20

30
Yield Maturity n

40

50

60

The top (bottom) plot displays the B n yield weights as a function of maturity n for the Yields-Only (Macro)
model. The weights have been scaled to correspond to one standard deviation movements in the factors and
annualized by multiplying by 1200.

Figure 6: Bn Yield Weights for the Yields-Only and Macro Model

48

Unrestricted VAR(12)

Macro Model

Impulse Responses − 1 month yield

Macro Lag Model

Impulse Responses − 1 month yield

1.2

Impulse Responses − 1 month yield

1.2

1.2
Inflation
Real Activity
1

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.4

Percentage Points

1

0.2

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

10

20

30
Months

40

50

60

0.4

0

0

10

Impulse Responses − 12 month yield

20

30
Months

40

50

60

0

0.8

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.3

Percentage Points

0.6

0.5

Percentage Points

0.6

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0

0

40

50

−0.1

60

0

0

10

Impulse Responses − 60 month yield

20

30
Months

40

50

−0.1

60

0.5

0.3

0.2

Percentage Points

0.3

Percentage Points

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

0

40

50

50

60

−0.1

60

0.2

0.1

30
Months

40

Inflation
Real Activity

0.4

20

30
Months

0.5

0.4

10

20

Inflation
Real Activity

0.4

0

10

Impulse Responses − 60 month yield

Inflation
Real Activity

−0.1

0

Impulse Responses − 60 month yield

0.5

60

0.4

0.2

30
Months

50

Inflation
Real Activity
0.7

20

40

Inflation
Real Activity
0.7

10

30
Months

0.8

Inflation
Real Activity

0

20

Impulse Responses − 12 month yield

0.7

−0.1

10

Impulse Responses − 12 month yield

0.8

Percentage Points

0.6

0.2

0

0

Percentage Points

Inflation
Real Activity

1

Percentage Points

Percentage Points

Inflation
Real Activity

0

10

20

30
Months

40

50

60

−0.1

0

10

20

30
Months

40

Impulse Responses (IR’s) for 1 month (top row), 12 month (middle row) and 60 month (bottom row) yields.
The first column presents IR’s from an unrestricted VAR(12) fitted to macro variables and yields ; the middle
column presents IR’s from the Macro model; and the last column presents IR’s from the Macro Lag model.
The IR’s from the latent factors are drawn as lines, while the IR’s from inflation (real activity) are drawn as
stars (circles). All IR’s are from a one standard deviation shock.

Figure 7: Impulse Response Functions

49

50

60

