                                    ") '' 




                                                            


                                                  !


                                           "#$%& '(*+,-
                                   .( //0001%1#&/((/0*+,-


                                
                                 2343 . 5%
                                    6!&7  382+*
                                        9 :




                
 !"#$ %  &'' () *# +    
,    "       !   *       ' #         
 '     -+ "  . -(-/ '-  (  
     0  &  &'1 "       '
"-+       !  2  , 
'


3#  4# ' " '* + + - #
5  - +  "       3 "  '
%%#% ##%#6 :#%! .        %!  6%&     #!
    !
 "#$%& '( #1 *+,-
9 : 8332
9 #1 ;27 +27 ++


                                           $%#%


        .  (%  #! #550 # (#0 % : .%$%& #% %%#%
6##%#67  6%%& %  6# ! ! !#% # 5: % (#&1  #%& . 0:7 
50 6(#% 6( 5!% . . %(!  %5 6#! %& ((#.7  0 
.# %! (# : #%!#% .%! !5 #(6% % .  !1 . 6# % !5% %
6#!  !%& % #% . <%0 #(% #%#6: 6##%#67= 0.. :%.> ):%%
%#6% &!7 %6(# ((#. # #(% #%#6: !:%67 %! .  # 6$
 #% %%#% !1




    !
(6% # #%#6
%5: #  #%7 $ :
$ :7  -;?83+**3
%! 
# !@#%1$ :1!
    Modern international macroeconomics progresses in two main ways. First,
techniques or paradigms developed in mainstream micro or macro theory
have been applied in an international setting. Second, researchers probe
more deeply, using both theoretical and empirical methods, into the classic
issues that deÞne international economics as a distinct Þeld–the implica-
tions of sovereign governments and national monies, of partial or complete
cross-border factor immobility, of transport costs and cross-border informa-
tion asymmetries that impede or even prevent trade. Frequently, prominent
international policy problems, even crises, provide the inspiration for new
explorations.
    Enduring contributions typically reßect both modes of progress. For ex-
ample, an application of new techniques developed elsewhere to an interna-
tional monetary problem may consist merely of relabeling “households” as
“countries”; but the most productive deployments of new techniques throw
additional light on the speciÞc problems of imperfect international economic
integration at the heart of the Þeld. In words Robert A. Mundell (1968,
p. 111) used to describe the rise of pure trade theory, advances in general
economics, when applied with skill and sense in settings that capture salient
empirical features of international economic data, have allowed “constant
reÞnement and extension” in open-economy macroeconomics, “permitting
analytical developments surpassing the possible achievements of unaided in-
tuition.” The contributions of Mundell and of J. Marcus Fleming (1962)
exemplify the most successful interactions of method and subject. No won-
der this body of work has now been honored through the award to Mundell of
the 1999 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences. By merging Keynesian
pricing assumptions and international market segmentation within a simple
yet illuminating model, Mundell and Fleming provided the basic template
for much subsequent research in both theory and policy.1
    This lecture will present a broad overview of postwar analytical thinking
on international macroeconomics, culminating in a more detailed discussion
of very recent progress. Along the way, I will review some important empir-
ical evidence that has inspired alternative modeling approaches, as well as
theoretical and policy considerations behind developments in the Þeld. My
general topic is, in fact, too large and diverse for comprehensive coverage,
given my limited space and scholarship. The account that follows there-
  1
     The most elaborate exposition-cum-interpretation of the Mundell-Fleming framework
is oﬀered by Frenkel and Razin (1987).


                                          1
fore should be interpreted as my own, somewhat impressionistic, view. A
testament to the lasting inßuence of their work is that much of the discus-
sion can be framed with reference to what Fleming and especially Mundell
accomplished in their work of the 1960s and 1970s–and left undone.2
    The discussion is organized as follows. Section I focuses on postwar
advances, discussing how, successively, the work of Mundell and Feming,
the monetary approach to the balance of payments, and the intertemporal
approach to the current account placed international capital mobility and
dynamics at center stage in open-economy macromodels. Section II is an
overview on the behavior of international prices, and the strong evidence that
prices are sticky in nominal terms and that international markets for “trad-
able” goods remain highly segmented. Section III discusses newer modeling
approaches that reconcile the breakthroughs in dynamic open-economy the-
ory through the 1980s with the sticky-price setup pioneered by Mundell and
Fleming. The section includes a rather detailed example of a stochastic “new
open economy macroeconomics” model in which the expenditure-switching
eﬀects of exchange rates central to the Mundell-Fleming model coexists with
extreme market segmentation for tradable consumption goods and pricing
to market. This class of models allows us to address rigorously, for the Þrst
time, a number of classic issues that have long been central to informal policy
discussions in international macroeconomics.


1       Disequilibrium, Capital Mobility, Dynam-
        ics
The Classical paradigm that dominated international macroeconomic think-
ing until the First World War depicted a self-regulating global economy. The
    2
    The postwar period is coterminous with the history of the International Monetary
Fund, and it is no accident that a number of important postwar intellectual developments–
including, among others, contributions by Mundell and Fleming–originated in the re-
search functions of the Fund. In this paper, however, I will not attempt systematically to
review research done by the Fund or by any other institution. Retrospective evaluations of
Fund research can be found in Blejer, Khan, and Masson (1995) and Polak (1995). I will
focus on nuts-and-bolts modeling of open-economy macro structure and policy eﬀects, to
the exclusion of the very interesting work done in recent years on regime switches, policy
credibility, and the like. Even my discussion of macro-structure will be partial, as I will
have space only to mention in passing research on international asset pricing and on the
diﬀerent functions of international capital ßows.


                                            2
Classical world is a stable dynamical system in which adjustment of national
price levels and the free ßow of specie can be relied upon to restore swiftly
both full employment and equilibrium in national balances of payments. This
picture of near-frictionless adjustment, with sovereign economic interventions
limited by rules of the game, is a gross exaggeration even of the conditions
existing under the Victorian Pax Britannica. But the Classical paradigm,
despite its positive shortcomings, serves as a useful theoretical benchmark.
And it reminds us that dynamic considerations have been at the heart of
international macroeconomics at least since the days of Gervaise and Hume.
    During the interwar period, extreme economic dislocations promoted an
overly idyllic view of prewar conditions. These dislocations included nation-
alistic measures that sharply reduced economic integration among countries:
Þat monies trading at ßoating exchange rates, preferential trade arrange-
ments, direct state trading, default on foreign debts, and exchange controls.
In earlier years economists had regarded such nationalistic experiments, when
they occurred in Latin America or other area of the periphery, with a mixture
of “fascination and disgust.”3 Now, however, similar economic arrangements
were painfully relevant among the advanced countries themselves. The Clas-
sical paradigm had become largely irrelevant to actual international con-
ditions. Moreover, it could not explain the economic cataclysm that had
brought those conditions into being.

1.1       Keynesian Approaches: From Metzler and Machlup
          to Mundell
The stage was set for Keynes’s “revolution” and for the adaptation of its
central ideas to international questions at the hands of Metzler, Machlup,
and others. The new models they developed dealt with an essentially static
world characterized by rigid wages and prices, unemployment, and limited
Þnancial linkages between countries. Key contributions elucidated the eﬀects
of trading relations on Keynesian multipliers, international repercussions, the
eﬀects of devaluation, the determination of ßoating exchange rates, and the
role of the terms of trade in the Keynesian consumption function. The role of
monetary factors, so central to the Classical approach, was down-played if not
ignored. Metzler’s (1948) survey for the American Economic Association was
quite explicit in repudiating “the central role which [the classical mechanism]
  3
      The apt phrase is due to Bacha and Díaz-Alejandro (1982).


                                            3
attributes to the monetary system” (p. 212). However, the new approach
gave no guide to the alternative mechanisms that would eliminate external
imbalances over time, and implicit assumed instead that sterilization policies
could be followed indeÞnitely.4
    Meade’s magisterial treatise The Balance of Payments (1951), published
exactly a half-century ago, attempted to embed the Keynesian developments
within a much broader framework that also embraced monetary factors.
Meade’s book is remarkable both in its ambitions and in its accomplishments.
It summarized and (to a lesser extent) synthesized international monetary
thinking as it had developed over the centuries. Meade sought to present
a systematic account of economic problems and their solutions in an open
economy, entertaining a wide variety of assumptions on price ßexibility and
international payments arrangements with the goal of guiding policy choice.
In so doing, he discovered much that would be rediscovered later and set a
large portion of the research agenda for the subsequent decades.
    Indeed, it became fashionable for a time to dismiss much of subsequent
international economic research with the remark “It’s all in Meade”–an
assertion diﬃcult to refute given the work’s nearly impenetrable expository
style. The forbidding facade, however, repelled would-be readers and greatly
reduced its impact. Mundell (1968, p. 113) rated the work as a “landmark
in the theory of international trade and economic theory in general,” much
underestimated by contemporary reviewers, but he lamented the “defects of
its organization and presentation.”
    Meade himself (1951, p. viii) pointed to one major gap in his theoretical
treatment of international macroeconomics:

                But I must confess frankly that there is one piece of mod-
        ern technique in economic analysis which is very relevant to the
        problems discussed in this volume, but of which I have made no
        use. I refer to the analysis of the dynamic process of change from
        one position of equilibrium to another. The method employed in
        this volume is Þrst to consider a number of countries in at least
        partial or temporary equilibrium, domestically and internation-
        ally; then to consider the new partial or temporary equilibrium
        which the economies will attain when the direct and indirect ef-
        fects of the disturbing factor have fully worked themselves out;
  4
      For further discussion, see Obstfeld (1987).


                                              4
     and Þnally to compare the new position of equilibrium with the
     old. In other words, this is a work not on dynamics, but on
     comparative statics, in economics.

     Meade criticized the lack of any explicit mathematical account of how
the economy gets from one “partial or temporary” equilibrium to another.
A related problem, already noted above and highlighted by Meade’s “partial
or temporary” qualiÞer, was even more fundamental to much of the Key-
nesian theorizing of the 1940s and 1950s. Situations of external imbalance
necessarily imply that stocks of domestic wealth–money and perhaps other
assets–are not stationary, and, thus, that the economy’s temporary equi-
librium must evolve over time, even in the absence of exogenous impulses.
But what intrinsic dynamics would operate in a world seemingly at odds
with the assumptions driving Hume’s analysis of the economy’s movement
toward a long-run equilibrium? In particular, would this dynamical process
be a stable one, and how would its nature depend on the activist economic
policies that might be in play? Despite Alexander’s important formulation
of the absorption approach in the early 1950s (Alexander 1952), an approach
that brought to the fore the role of desired wealth changes in generating
international imbalances, surprisingly little progress on these questions was
made until Mundell’s work in the early 1960s.
     In a path-breaking series of articles, Mundell took up the challenge of
Þlling the gap that Meade’s omission of dynamics had left. By so doing, he
reintroduced the idea of a self-regulating adjustment mechanism that had
been central to the Classical framework. In line with the evolution of world
Þnancial markets since Meade’s book, Mundell put international capital ßows
at center stage in his dynamic analysis. Had his achievement been entirely
technical, it might have had little impact. Instead, through a rare combina-
tion of analytical power and Schumpeterian “vision,” Mundell distilled from
his mathematical formulations important lessons that permanently changed
the way we think about the open economy.
     Mundell followed Meade in emphasizing the monetary sector, using a
liquidity-preference theory of money demand to tie down the short-run equi-
librium. Metzler (1968), in work done around the same time, took a similar
tack, but he was less successful, whether his work is judged by its theoretical
elegance or immediate policy relevance. Fleming (1962), working in paral-
lel, developed a model quite similar to Mundell’s basic short-run equilibrium
framework, and the two justly share credit for this contribution. Fleming did

                                      5
not, however, formally address the long-term adjustment process implicit in
Keynesian models, conÞning himself to some prescient remarks on the long
versus short-term responsiveness of the capital account.
    Mundell focused squarely on the dynamic eﬀects of payments imbalances
in his paper on “The International Disequilibrium System” (Mundell 1961a).
Even in a world of rigid prices, Mundell argued, an “income-specie-ßow mech-
anism” analogous to Hume’s price-specie-ßow mechanism ensures long-run
equilibrium in international payments. An increase in a country’s money
supply, for example, would depress its interest rate, raise spending, and open
an external deÞcit that would be settled, in part, through money outßows
For a small economy, the end process would come only when the initial
equilibrium had been re-established. Mundell clariÞed the role of steriliza-
tion operation, showing that they can be at best a temporary response to
permanent disturbances aﬀecting the balance of payments. This work was
inßuential in indicating the ubiquity of self-regulating mechanisms of interna-
tional adjustment, and, as a corollary, the limited scope for monetary policy
with a Þxed exchange rate, even under Keynesian conditions.5
    While Mundell’s “disequilibrium system” argument (1961a) showed how
the income-specie-ßow mechanism would restore balance-of-payments equi-
librium under Keynesian conditions, the analysis did not delineate automatic
forces tending to restore full employment (internal equilibrium). To address
that issue, Mundell pursued the idea of a “policy mix” in which Þscal policy
would play a central role. Mundell (1962) applied a dynamic approach to the
joint use of monetary and Þscal policy to attain internal and external targets
under a Þxed exchange rate. He showed that under capital mobility, pol-
icy dilemma situations that might arise under Þxed exchange rates could be
solved. Mundell showed that by gearing monetary policy to external balance
(deÞned as a zero oﬃcial settlements balance) and Þscal policy to internal
balance (full employment), governments could avoid having to trade oﬀ in-
ternal against external goals in the short run. The key to his argument was
the claim that monetary and Þscal expansion both raise output but have op-
posite eﬀects on interest rates. Thus, for example, a country simultaneously
experiencing unemployment and an external deÞcit could couple Þscal expan-
sion with monetary contraction in a way that lifts aggregate demand while
   5
     Of course earlier writers, such as Keynes (1930, p. 309), had recognized some of
the limitations that Þxed exchange rates and capital mobility place on national monetary
policies.



                                           6
attracting a suﬃciently large capital inßow to close the foreign payments
gap. Without capital mobility, however, this approach could not succeed.
Mundell went on to argue that, when capital is mobile and the exchange rate
pegged, a stable policy mix requires assigning Þscal policy to internal balance
and monetary policy to external balance. A new and subtle insight in this
work was that dynamic stability conditions might diﬀer for alternative policy
assignments and could therefore be used to assess the appropriateness of the
policy mix.
    Related work by Mundell (1960) investigated the relative eﬃcacy of Þxed
and ßexible exchange rates in helping countries adjust to economic shocks.
Mundell showed that the answer depended on government policy rules, the
speed of domestic price-level adjustment in the face of excess or deÞcient
demand, and the degree of capital mobility. Mundell’s emphasis on the role
of diﬀerential sector adjustment speeds in determining an economy’s dynamic
behavior proved inßuential in other contexts, for example, in Dornbusch’s
(1976) Mundellian model of exchange-rate overshooting.
    In one of his most celebrated contributions, Mundell (1963) took the
speed of capital-market adjustment to an extreme. With perfect capital
mobility, he showed, only Þscal policy aﬀects output under Þxed exchange
rates; monetary policy serves only to alter the level of international reserves.
Conversely, Þscal policy might be dramatically weakened under ßoating rates.
One implication of this analysis, which was not seen right away, was that the
balance of payments might be a misleading indicator of external balance in
a world where central banks could easily borrow reserves in world capital
markets. A more relevant concept of external balance would have to focus
on the long-run solvency of the private and public sectors, taking into account
vulnerabilities that might expose a country to a liquidity crisis.
    The Mundellian idea of the policy mix was a major conceptual advance
and seemingly oﬀered an elegant way to avoid unpleasant tradeoﬀs. But the
approach had at least two theoretical drawbacks. First, Mundell’s theoretical
speciÞcation of the capital account as a ßow function of interest-rate levels (a
formulation used by Fleming 1962 as well) was theoretically ad hoc. It im-
plied, implausibly, that capital would ßow at a uniform speed forever even in
the face of a constant domestic-foreign interest diﬀerential. The second prob-
lem, already mentioned, was the deÞnition of external balance in terms of
oﬃcial reserve ßows, rather than in terms of attaining some satisfactory sus-
tainable paths for domestic consumption and investment. As a medium-term
proposition, it would be unattractive, perhaps even infeasible, to maintain

                                       7
balance-of-payments equilibrium through a permanently higher interest rate.
The results of such a policy–crowding out of domestic investment and an
ongoing buildup of external debt–would eventually call for a sharp drop in
consumption.6 While Mundell’s framework was perhaps useful for thinking
about very short-run issues (such as the need to maintain adequate national
liquidity), it failed completely to bridge the gap from the short run to the
longer term.
    Indeed, the theory of the policy mix had little practical signiÞcance under
the Bretton Woods. In his detailed study of nine industrial countries’ policies
during the postwar period to the mid-1960s Michaely (1971, p. 33) found
only two episodes in which the prescription of the Mundellian policy mix was
consistent with the oﬃcial measures authorities actually took. Most of the
time, Michaely concluded, Þscal policy simply was excluded from the list of
available instruments.7

1.2     Classicism Redux: Monetary and Portfolio Ap-
        proaches
By the mid-1960s, Mundell’s dissatisfaction with his own early rendition of
monetary dynamics led him to pursue the monetary approach to the bal-
ance of payments. The approach is also associated, in diﬀering forms, with
Harry G. Johnson and with the IMF’s Research Department under Jacques
J. Polak.8 If one thought of the University of Chicago style of monetary
approach as being primarily a retrogression to the Classical paradigm, one
might reckon its intellectual impact as being rather transitory. I think that
conclusion would be wrong, however, and that the monetary approach in real-
ity made three enduring contributions. Along with research of the late 1960s
on closed-economy models of money and growth, it helped drive home to the
   6
     Meade (1951, p. 104n) recognized clearly that in choosing between monetary and
Þscal policy, “[t]he question of the optimum rate of saving is involved.” Mundell brießy
discusses problems of the composition of the balance of payments in chapter 10 of his
1968 book, likening them to problems of the proper division of national product between
consumption and saving. Purvis (1985) includes a nice discussion of Þscal deÞcits and
the external debt burden from the perspectives of the Mundell-Fleming and subsequent
models.
   7
     For a more detailed discussion of practical problems in deploying Þscal policy, see
Obstfeld (1993).
   8
     See Frenkel and Johnson (1976) and International Monetary Fund (1977). For a
perspective on alternative interpretations of the monetary approach, see Polak (2000).


                                           8
profession key distinctions between stocks and ßows in dynamic international
macroeconomic analysis. Furthermore, it provided a set of consistent long-
run models that, aside from their intrinsic theoretical interest, could serve as
benchmarks for more realistic analyses. Finally, with its formal elegance and
the extravagance of its claims, the monetary approach breathed new life and
brought new blood into a Þeld that was becoming a bit tired.
    I argued earlier that Mundell’s treatment of capital ßows in his work on
the policy mix emphasized the monetary component of wealth at the expense
of other forms, notably net external assets. As a result, the distinction
between stock equilibrium in asset markets and ßow equilibrium in output
and factor markets was blurred. These failings would have appeared even
more glaring had Mundell’s models of the early 1960s been applied to longer-
term issues, rather than to the short-run Keynesian stabilization questions
for which they were designed. Mundell presumably intended to include his
own earlier work when he remarked, in his “Barter Theory and the Monetary
Mechanism of Adjustment” (Mundell 1968, chapter 8, p. 112):

      Innovations in the Þeld since the 1930s have stressed the applica-
      tion of Keynesian economic concepts to the international sphere,
      rather than the integration of Keynesian international economics
      with classical barter theory or classical international monetary
      economics, creating a weakness in the area.

    Indeed, the model Mundell developed here as a “start on the problem”
did allow for sticky domestic prices, slowly adjusting to a carefully speci-
Þed underlying Classical equilibrium. Later work, both by Mundell and his
students at Chicago, was to take the Classical assumptions more literally;
see, for example, Mundell (1971). Although most of the work of the mone-
tary approach school over-simpliÞed wildly in abstracting from assets other
than money, a major attention, as noted above, was the careful attention
paid to the equilibrating role of output and factor prices in the transition
from temporary to long-run equilibrium. While the approach lacked real-
ism, it clariÞed the precise mechanics of Humean international adjustment,
demonstrated the longer-run links between growth and the balance of pay-
ments, and showed how a focus on money supply and demand could help one
to quickly ascertain the balance-of-payments eﬀects of various disturbances.
However, due to the ongoing growth of world Þnancial markets, the appropri-
ateness of relying on the balance-of-payments money account as an indicator

                                       9
of external balance was becoming increasingly questionable as the monetary
approach developed, especially for industrial countries with ready access to
world capital markets.
    Models incorporating a broader spectrum of assets were being developed
concurrently. McKinnon and Oates (1966) is an early attempt along these
lines, as is chapter 9 of Mundell (1968). Tobin’s (1969) seminal contribution
to monetary theory set oﬀ a surge of research on multi-asset portfolio-balance
models better equipped than those of the monetary school to describe in-
ternational adjustment in a world of mobile capital. Foley and Sidrauski’s
(1971) elegant dynamic closed-economy rendition of the portfolio-balance
approach provided a model for intertemporal applications in open-economy
settings. The monetary and portfolio-balance approaches essentially merged
in the mid-1970s, producing useful descriptive models of the long-run ad-
justment of monetary ßows, current accounts, goods prices, and, somewhat
later, of ßoating exchange rates.9 Following Black’s (1973) lead, many of
these ßoating-rate models took from macroeconomics proper the then-novel
modeling assumption of exchange-rate expectations that are rational, that is,
consistent with the economy’s underlying structure (including the statistical
distribution of the relevant exogenous forces). Of course, the rational expec-
tations assumption also Þgured prominently in the many extensions of the
Mundell-Fleming framework that continued to be fruitfully pursued, start-
ing with Dornbusch’s (1976) landmark “overshooting” version of Mundell-
Fleming, which incorporated output-price, but not wealth, dynamics.
    These modern exchange rate models share a view of the exchange rate
as an asset price (the relative price of two currencies), determined so as to
induce investors willingly to hold existing outside stocks of the various assets
available in the world economy. Mussa (1976) oﬀers what is perhaps the clas-
sic exposition of this asset view of exchange rate determination. The enduring
insight of the exchange rate’s asset-price nature was obscured in versions of
the Mundell-Fleming model that modeled the capital account analogously to
   9
     For a more detailed discussion, see Obstfeld and Stockman (1985). A notable intel-
lectual landmark here is the May 1976 conference issue of the Scandinavian Journal of
Economics. The monetary approach to exchange rate determination is one strand in this
literature; generally that approach builds upon a version of the ßexible-price monetary
model in which the law of one price holds and money supplies rather than exchange rates
are exogenous while exchange rates rather than money supplies adjusts to equilibrate si-
multaneously the goods and asset markets. See, for example, the essays in Frenkel and
Johnson (1978).



                                          10
the current account, as a ßow function of the level relative interest rates. By
postulating that the exchange rate is determined by the condition of a zero
net balance of payments, those models missed the exchange rate’s role in rec-
onciling stock demands and supplies that are normally orders of magnitude
greater than balance of payments ßows. Thus, the Mundell-Fleming model,
in its earlier incarnations, oﬀered no account of high exchange rate volatility.

1.3       Intertemporal Approaches to the Current Account
A Þnal important branch in these dynamic developments was the application
of optimal growth theory, in the style of Ramsey, Cass, and Koopmans, to
open economies. Notable contributions along these lines were made early on
by Bardhan (1967), Hamada (1969), and Bruno (1970).
    Building on these approach in the early 1980s, a number of researchers
developed an intertemporal approach to the current account in which sav-
ing and investment levels represent optimal forward-looking decisions.10 The
new approach contrasted with the Keynesian approaches in which net ex-
ports are determined largely by current relative income levels and net for-
eign interest payments are, for the most part, ignored. These new models,
unlike the earlier open-economy growth models, were applied to throw light
on short-run dynamic issues–such as the dynamic eﬀects of temporary and
permanent terms-of-trade shocks—and not just the transition to a long-run
balanced growth path. They could also be used to think rigorously about
national intertemporal budget constraints, government intertemporal budget
constraints.
    The intertemporal approach, unlike the Keynesian or monetary approaches
provided a conceptual framework appropriate for thinking about the impor-
tant and interrelated policy issues of external balance, external sustainability,
and equilibrium real exchange rates (for a recent example, see Montiel 1999).
All of these concepts are intimately connected with the intertemporal trade-
oﬀs that an economy faces. Another major advantage of the intertemporal
approach was its promise of a rigorous welfare analysis of policies in open
economies–an analysis on a par, in rigor, with those already applied rou-
tinely to intertemporal tax questions. The approach shifts attention from
automatic adjustment mechanisms and dynamic stability considerations to
intertemporal budget constraints and transversality conditions for maximiza-
 10
      For a more extensive survey of the area see Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995a).


                                            11
tion, although those perspectives may well, of course, be mutually consistent.


2      Models versus Reality
Like the monetary approaches to the balance of payments and to exchange
rates, the intertemporal mode of current account analysis developed in the
1980s generally assumed perfectly ßexible domestic prices. It thereby ab-
stracted from short-run price rigidities and the concomitant disequilibria in
goods and factor markets: the issues at the heart of the Mundell-Fleming
model and its successors, such as the Dornbusch model, were simply put
aside. The monetary and intertemporal models also, in general, assumed a
rather high degree of economic integration among the economies being mod-
eled. Presumably, a high level of integration among economies might justify
abstraction from price rigidities, since these could not survive long in the
face of international goods arbitrage.
    Was this level of abstraction justiÞed? In a well-known paper written
after nearly a decade of ßoating exchange rates, McKinnon (1981) argued
that the world economy had moved far away from the “insular” economic
pattern of the 1950s and 1960s, in which countries carried out some foreign
trade but were otherwise largely closed to external inßuences. In the new
world of more open economies, the earlier Keynesian (and elasticities) ap-
proach to open-economy macroeconomic questions had become outmoded.
Instead, the type of assumption underlying the monetary approach–highly
open economies with goods and capital markets open to the forces of interna-
tional competition–was a better approximation to reality.11 Twenty years
further on in the process of postwar globalization, shouldn’t the McKinnon
arguments, if true when they were advanced, carry even greater force?

2.1     Evidence on Insularity
The answer that seems to come resoundingly from the data is “No.” Even to-
day, the world’s large industrial economies (along with many smaller economies)
remain surprisingly insular, to use McKinnon’s term. McKinnon rightly iden-
tiÞed a trend of increasing openness, but jumped the gun in declaring the
  11
    McKinnon diﬀered from the monetary approach in questioning the existence of a stable
national money demand function, in the absence of which, he argued, Þxed exchange rates
were preferable to ßoating rates.


                                          12
age of insularity to be over.
   There are several well-known manifestations of .persistent insularity. For
many goods, transport costs are suﬃciently high that a fairly large proportion
of GDP can be considered eﬀectively nontradable. But as Meade (1951,
p. 232) pointed out in an even more insular era, nontradability is only an
extreme consequence of trade costs, which attach to all goods to varying
degrees:
       Products range with almost continuous variation between those
       for which the cost of transport is negligibly low in relation to their
       value and those for which the costs of transport are so high as to
       be in all imaginable circumstances prohibitive.
    One consequence of pervasive transport costs (and other costs of trade
such as oﬃcial impediments) is the existence of a fairly sizable “transfer
eﬀect” due to changes in countries’ net foreign assets.12 This transfer eﬀect
can be seen both in countries’ terms of trade and in their real exchange
rates. Regarding the latter, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2000), using the most
comprehensive cross-country panel on national net foreign asset positions
developed to date, estimate that a 50 percent of GDP fall in a country’s
net foreign asset position (corresponding, perhaps, to a 2 percent of GDP
fall in the long-run current account balance) would be associated with a 16
percent real currency depreciation. They Þnd that this eﬀect is potentially
much larger for bigger and less open economies. In addition, we see fairly
large home biases in consumption and trade. Of course, standard versions of
the Mundell-Fleming model assume a transfer eﬀect arising from (generally
unexplained) home consumption preference.
    We also observe puzzling symptoms of capital-market segmentation, no-
tably, the Feldstein-Horioka cross-section correlation of saving and invest-
ment and the home bias in equity portfolios. While imperfections intrinsic
to capital markets partly lie behind these capital-market puzzles, costs of
trade in goods can go a long way in generating “insular” capital-market be-
havior, as argued by Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000b).
    Some of the most dramatic evidence on insularity–certainly the hard-
est to rationalize in terms of internationally divergent consumer tastes or
  12
    See Mundell (1991) for a discussion of theory relating to the transfer problem. As
Mundell points out, even with nontradable goods, there need be no transfer problem–
see also chapter 4 in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996) for a model along these lines. But the
preconditions for this result are very stringent and unrealistic.

                                         13
other devices–is the evidence on international price discrepancies for sup-
posedly tradable goods. Since, of all the evidence on segmentation, that on
international prices bears most directly on the appropriateness of competing
open macro-models and on the role of the exchange rate, I will focus on that
evidence for the balance of this section.

2.2     Evidence on International Pricing
A large body of empirical work weighs in against the proposition that inter-
national good-market arbitrage is eﬀective in quickly eliminating price diﬀer-
entials. The most convincing evidence began accumulating in the 1970s. Not
coincidentally, the timing coincides with the availability of evidence on inter-
national pricing relationships under ßoating exchange rates. Isard’s (1977)
classic study was one of the Þrst to present evidence against the Law of
One Price (LOOP), showing that the common currency unit values for sim-
ilar tradable goods categories typically have diverged widely. These types
of results continue to be conÞrmed in later data.13 Therefore, at the micro
level, there is evidence that arbitrage is either inoperative or operates with
signiÞcant lags.
    At the macro level, some of the most striking evidence on international
prices was assembled in an important paper by Mussa (1986). Mussa doc-
umented that, systematically and across a huge range of episodes, real ex-
change rates become much more variable when the nominal exchange rate is
allowed to ßoat. Real exchange rate variability tends to be almost a perfect
reßection of nominal rate variability, which changes in the two rates highly
correlated and independent movements in price levels playing a minor, if
any, role. The overwhelming evidence that a key real relative price depends
systematically on the monetary regime amounts to a powerful demonstration
that domestic price levels are quite sticky. Some of the regime changes Mussa
examined–such as Ireland’s switch from its currency board sterling link to
the European Monetary System–amount virtually to natural experiments,
and it therefore is hard to argue that the regime switches themselves are
endogenous responses to underlying shifts in the volatility of international
prices. When the exchange rate is cut loose, its variability is vastly accen-
tuated while nominal goods prices continue to move sluggishly. The sole
  13
    For more complete references, see the valuable surveys by Rogoﬀ (1996) and Goldberg
and Knetter (1997).



                                          14
exceptions seem to be episodes in which domestic inßation is extremely high,
in which case prices, like the exchange rate, come unhinged and the corre-
lation between real and nominal exchange rate changes drops (see Obstfeld
1998).
    The Mussa results also have a bearing on hypotheses about cross-border
goods market integration. If arbitrage works strongly to keep international
goods prices in line, then very large real exchange rate ßuctuations would be
ruled out. At the very least, large ßuctuations would be rather temporary, as
proÞt maximizing traders quickly move to reap extra-normal proÞts, driving
real exchange rates back into line. In fact, the evidence contradicts this idea
as well. As shown by many, many studies (see Rogoﬀ 1996 for a survey), real
exchange rate movements are highly persistent, so much so that it has been
diﬃcult to reject the statistical hypothesis that real exchange rate processes
contain unit roots–a violation of even a weak form of long-run purchasing
power parity that allows for deterministic trends. The best current esti-
mates of real exchange rate persistence suggest that under ßoating nominal
exchange rate regimes, the half-lives of real exchange rates innovations range
from 2 to 4.5 years.
    Such macro-level evidence may not be viewed as entirely convincing. For
one thing, real exchange rates are calculated with respect to the overall CPI
including nontradables (or some other comparably broad price index). Thus,
it could be the case that there is actually a considerable degree of arbitrage
among the most tradable goods entering these price indexes. Furthermore,
there is the theoretical possibility that much of the persistence in real ex-
change rates is due to real shocks, shocks that alter international relative
prices permanently without necessarily creating opportunities for arbitrage.
Work based on disaggregated price data for CPI components, however, sug-
gests that both of these hypotheses are not very relevant. As Engel (1993)
shows, Mussa-style results also hold for international comparisons of the con-
sumer prices of similar tradable goods. Regarding real shocks as a source of
persistence in real exchange rates, it is much harder to argue that real shocks
are responsible for changes in the relative international prices of very simi-
lar, supposedly tradable goods. Yet movements in these relative prices are
just as persistent as movements in real exchange rates. Rogers and Jenkins
(1995), for example, perform unit root tests on the relative United States-
Canada prices of 54 narrowly deÞned categories of goods and services. They
Þnd that they can reject the null hypothesis of a unit root at the 10 percent
level for only eight of the 54 categories (all food products). But even for

                                      15
food products, not all relative prices seem to be detectably mean reverting.
Obstfeld and Taylor (1997) document similar persistence at a disaggregated
level. This, it seems to me, is persuasive evidence against the theory that real
shocks are the main source of real exchange rate persistence. What recurrent
real shocks do we imagine would be buﬀeting the relative supermarket price
of Canadian and United States ßour? The weight of evidence suggests that
whatever factors allow the LOOP deviations documented by Isard (1977)
and many others also lie behind the big and persistent swings in countries’
real exchange rates.

2.3     Accounting for Real Exchange Rate Changes
In recent important work, Engel (1999) oﬀers a striking way of illustrating
just how pervasive the segmentation between countries’ consumer markets
is. Engel suggests decomposing a CPI real exchange rate change into (1)
the component due to changes in international diﬀerences in two countries’
relative prices of nontradable to tradable goods and (2) the component due
to changes in the countries’ relative consumer price of tradables.14 Under
classic theories of the real exchange rate determination, such as the Harrod-
Balassa-Samuelson account (see Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ, chapter 4), tradables
as a category closely obey the LOOP and so all variability in real exchange
rates is attributable to factor (1) above. Engel’s work shows that the op-
posite is true for real exchange rates against the United States. Even for
real exchange rate changes over fairly long horizons, nearly all variability can
be attributed to component (2), the relative consumer prices of tradables.
This is a striking contradiction of the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson theory. In-
ternational divergences in the relative consumer price of “tradables” are so
huge that the theoretical distinction between supposedly arbitraged tradables
prices and completely sheltered nontradables prices oﬀers little or no help in
understanding U.S. real exchange rate movements, even at long horizons.
Apparently, consumer markets for tradables are just about as segmented
internationally as consumer markets for nontradables.15
  14
     As Engel (1999) explains, this is not an orthogonal decomposition. However, I do not
believe that issue is central in interpreting his results, and I henceforth follow Engel in
leaving it aside. Rogers and Jenkins (1995) earlier provided extensive evidence pointing
to the same kinds of results that Engel emphasizes.
  15
     Of course, the results are subject to the caveat made above that tradability is a
matter of degree. Notwithstanding that fact, one can still view them as evidence that


                                            16
    Engel’s Þndings can be summarized by graphs such as Figures 1-4. These
Þgures are based on monthly 1973-95 data from Engel (1999, section I).
They show bilateral comparisons based on three ßoating exchange rates, dol-
lar/yen, dollar/F-franc, and D-mark/C-dollar. Let E denote the nominal
exchange rate, P the overall CPI, and PT and PN respectively, the CPIs for
tradables and nontradables 16 In Figures 1-4, the behavior of the overall CPI-
based real exchange rate, Q = EP ∗ /P , is compared with that of the tradable
and nontradable real exchange rates, EPt∗ /Pt and EPn∗ /Pn . Each panel shows
a plot against time, t, of the correlation between t-period percentage changes
in the two variables shown.
    As suggested by Engel’s Þndings, the data reveal no signiÞcant diﬀerence
between short-term and long-term correlations, consistent with the hypoth-
esis that mean reversion in the relative international price of consumer trad-
ables is extremely slow. Strikingly, it seems not to matter much whether
tradables or nontradables are used to compute real exchange rates. Indeed,
it is remarkable that relative tradables prices consistently tend to display
a higher correlation with real exchange rates than do relative nontradables
prices, though the discrepancies are small and statistically insigniÞcant. For
the countries shown, the behavior of relative international tradables prices is
so similar to that of relative international nontradables prices, even for hori-
zons out to Þve years, that one is led to question whether the distinction is
even meaningful in discussing how real exchange rates behave under ßoating.
At the consumer level, one sees no evidence here of greater cross-border price
coherence for tradables.
    High exchange rate volatility is what makes the preceding results so dra-
matic. Given the sluggish behavior of nominal consumer prices and the lack
of operational arbitrage between consumer markets, the behavior of nominal
exchange rates dominates these data. The role of exchange-rate volatility
in masking domestic relative price movements is illustrated in Figures 5-7,
which use the monthly 1972-97 data from section IV of Engel (1999), in
which the producer price index (PPI) is used to proxy the price of tradables.
The Þgures are constructed as follows. For horizons t = 1 through t = 18,
goods commonly considered to be “tradable” due to relatively low transport costs appear
to be not very tradable at all if they are deÞned to include the services that bring them
from the point of production to the consumer.
   16
      Engel (1999, appendix A) outlines his methodology for constructing the CPI
subindexes. Engel’s tradables comprise the OECD’s “all good less food” and “food,”
his nontradables, “services less rent” and “rent.”


                                           17
I average the mean squared error (MSE) of the 18 t-period changes in the
“traded goods” component of the CPI, log(E × P P I ∗ /P P I), each expressed
as a fraction of the MSE of the t-period change in log Q. The resulting ratios,
measured by the vertical axes of Figures 5-7, are plotted against the variance
of month-to-month changes in log E, which can be read oﬀ the horizontal
axis. A more nuanced picture now emerges. Figure 5 shows that, in pair-
ings against the U.S., Canada is an outlier, showing both the lowest nominal
exchange-rate variability and the lowest share of real exchange-rate variabil-
ity explained by tradables, just under 70 percent.17 When we examine all
non-U.S. pairings in Figure 6, however, we see that there are other instances
in which low nominal exchange rate variability is associated with relatively
low shares of tradables in real exchange rate variability, shares that can be as
low as 50 percent. Putting all the pairings together in Figure 7, U.S./Canada
no longer appears as an outlier. Indeed, when nominal exchange rate volatil-
ity is suppressed, factors other than changes in the relative international price
of consumer tradables appear to play a signiÞcant role in determining real
exchange rates. They are no longer swamped by huge nominal exchange rate
changes, as in Figures 1-4.18
    Figures 5-7 nonetheless conÞrms the main conclusions we have already
reached. Even for Þxed exchange rate pairings such as Austria/Germany, rel-
ative tradables prices still play a very big role (over 50 percent) in explaining
real exchange rate changes. Even this number suggests considerable market
segmentation at the consumer level. That nominal exchange rate changes
alone seemingly can induce large, persistent changes in relative tradables
prices, without setting into motion any prompt, noticeable arbitrage mecha-
nisms, is a further indication of segmentation. Finally, the fact that nominal
volatility plays so strong a role in driving relative international price changes
is more evidence of stickiness in domestic nominal prices. Indeed, the data
behave as if all consumer prices are sticky in domestic currency terms, even
the prices of goods that may be imported from abroad.
  17
     The countries paired with the United States in Figure 5 are Austria, Canada, Den-
mark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
and the United Kingdom.
  18
     These types of results also occur in the bilateral comparisons carried out by Rogers and
Jenkins (1995), but they do not systematically compare the correlation between nominal
volatility and the importance of LOOP deviations in determining real exchange rates.




                                             18
2.4     Direct Evidence on Pricing to Market
The preceding evidence leads to the conclusion of both sticky domestic prices
for consumer goods and high barriers between countries’ consumption-goods
markets. Assumptions on consumer prices are key components of any macro-
model, since consumer decisions are based on those prices and will inßuence
the economy’s response to disturbances. Because the ultimate consumer is
several steps removed from the port of entry of import goods, however, Þnd-
ings such as Engel’s (1999) have only an indirect bearing on the height of
barriers to international trade between Þrms, which accounts for most of in-
ternational trade. Consumer prices, in addition to incorporating the import
prices of the underlying commodities purchased, also reßect the costs of non-
tradable components such as retailing costs, internal shipping, and the like.
These nontraded inputs make it diﬃcult to assess the speciÞc role of barriers
to international trade in the underlying “tradable” commodities. They also
make it harder to draw conclusions about the stickiness of import prices.
    Further ambiguities come from the impossibility of ensuring that even
disaggregated CPI data from diﬀerent countries represent in any sense the
prices of identical goods. Not only does index composition diﬀer across coun-
tries with respect to subcategories of the tradable, there is also no way to
ensure that even very similar tradables included in two indexes originate from
the same producer.
    Recent evidence on “pricing to market” (PTM) in international trade
has helped to resolve these diﬃculties. The term PTM, coined by Krugman
(1987), refers to third-degree price discrimination by an exporter, based on
the location of importers.19
    Using detailed disaggregated data on the diﬀerent prices that individual
Þrms set for the same good exported to diﬀerent locations, the econometrician
can control for unobserved marginal production cost while ascertaining how
  19
     Under Þrst-degree price discrimination, a monopolistic producer can perfectly exploit
the heterogeneity among consumers by quoting each individual buyer a siﬀerent price (or
course, resale must be prevented). Under second-degree price discrimination, the monop-
olist does not observe any signal of consumer type and can exploit heterogeneity only by
inducing self-selection on the part of consumers. Under third-degree price discrimination,
the monopolist bases price on an observable signal about consumer type–in the present
context, national location. (For further discussion see Tirole 1988, p. 135.) As under Þrst-
degree price discrimination, trade impediments must rule out arbitrage between diﬀerent
consumer types. That is, pricing to market cannot take place unless there is international
market segmentations.


                                            19
exchange rate changes relative to diﬀerent destinations aﬀect prices charged.
Under perfectly competitive conditions and costless international trade, an
exporter’s home currency price is determined entirely by domestic marginal
cost; thus, given marginal cost, the exporter will raise price to any destination
country fully in proportion to an appreciation in the source country’s nominal
exchange rate against the destination country. In other words, the extent of
exchange-rate pass-through is unitary. When pass-through is incomplete,
however, there is evidence of PTM.
    The extent of PTM diﬀers across source countries and products, of course.
In their excellent survey of studies on international pricing, Goldberg and
Knetter (1997, p. 1244) conclude that “a price response equal to one-half
the exchange rate change would be near the middle of the distribution of
estimated responses for shipments to the U.S.” The markup adjustment fol-
lowing an exchange rate change, according to them, generally occurs within
a year.

2.5    On the Need for a Synthesis
Perhaps the most salient feature of the data is that nominal exchange rate
changes are associated with virtually commensurate ßuctuations in real ex-
change rates. Moreover, relative international consumer prices of even trad-
able manufactured goods seem to move virtually one-for-one with the nominal
exchange rate. At the level of consumers, the pass-through from exchange
rates to import prices is virtually zero in the short run. Further up the
distribution chain, where imports Þrst enter a country, the pass-through of
exchange rate changes to prices generally is positive, but substantially below
one. Market segmentation allows exporters to change destination-speciÞc
markups in response to exchange rate movements.
    The accumulation of such evidence highlighted how some basic assump-
tions shared by the monetary and intertemporal approaches contradict cen-
tral policy-relevant facts. Both approaches fail to incorporate short run price
rigidities, and both assume complete pass-through of exchange rate changes
to import prices.
    Despite building in nominal rigidities, the Mundell-Fleming model, taken
literally, also assumes unitary pass-through from the exchange rate to im-
port prices. That eﬀect is central to the expenditure-switching eﬀect of ex-
change rates, which is the key feature giving monetary policy its eﬃcacy
under ßexible exchange rates, or allowing exchange rate changes to counter

                                       20
nation-speciÞc shocks in Mundell’s (1961b) optimum currency area analysis.
    The empirical failures of the standard models developed before 1990 were
unsatisfactory not only from a positive point of view, but because they re-
duced applicability to questions of policy. The Mundell-Fleming model, for
example, makes no distinction between retail and wholesale import prices,
and it would have to be modiÞed to capture both the near-zero pass-through
of the exchange rate to consumer prices of imported goods and the par-
tial (but positive) pass-through of the exchange rate to the prices exporters
charge. The precise way this is done, however, has critical policy impli-
cations. If one abstracts from partial exchange-rate pass-through at the
wholesale level, as Engel (2000) does, then the expenditure-switching eﬀect
of the exchange rate disappears entirely: exchange rate shifts do not alter
the prices consumers face, and there is no Þrm-to-Þrm trade. On the other
hand, if partial pass-through by exporters does aﬀect economic decisions, the
expenditure-switching eﬀect is present, albeit perhaps in a muted form.
    As another example, its failure to incorporate price rigidities dramatically
reduces the policy utility of the intertemporal approach (except, perhaps, for
very long-run issues). How can one accurately evaluate an economy’s depar-
ture from external balance without some notion of its distance from internal
balance, that is, a state of zero output gap and near-target inßation? How
can one evaluate the equilibrium real exchange rate without some notion of
the kind and height of the barriers separating national markets? How can one
conduct welfare analysis without an attempt to model the economy’s distor-
tions, including those due to price rigidity? By the late 1980s and early 1990s,
the clash of theory and data suggested the need for a coherent synthesis of
the Keynesian and intertemporal approaches within an empirically-oriented
framework.


3    The New Open Economy Macroeconomics
The most recent synthesis of earlier approaches combines monopolistic pro-
ducers with nominal rigidities in a dynamic context with forward-looking
economic actors. As proponents of the New Keynesian approach to closed-
economy macroeconomics argued in the late 1980s, monopoly is a natural as-
sumption in any context with price setting, and imperfect competition helps
rationalize the idea that output is demand determined over some range, since
price exceeds marginal cost in the absence of unexpected shocks. Moreover,

                                      21
the literature on sunk costs and hysteresis makes it plausible that market
power should play some role in explaining the persistence of international
relative price movements.20
    Svensson and van Wijnbergen (1989) provided an early prototype model
along these lines, in which output is produced at zero marginal cost up to
some limit and asset markets, as an aid to modeling, are assumed to be
complete. Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995, 1996, 1998, 2000a) proposed a more
tractable intertemporal monopolistic competition framework with sticky (that
is, preset) nominal output prices and incomplete asset markets. The new ap-
proach addresses the positive questions asked of the Mundell-Fleming model
as well as normative questions that could previously be addressed only within
the empirically incomplete intertemporal approach. There have been numer-
ous extensions, which I do not have the space to discuss in any systematic
way. Luckily, Lane (2001) has provided a comprehensive survey.

3.1     Price Setting in New Open Economy Models
One of the most important extensions has been to allow for PTM, in contrast
to the original Obstfeld-Rogoﬀ model, which assumed complete pass-through
of exchange rates to import prices. Betts and Devereux (1996) made the
initial contribution along these lines. In an open economy, nominal price
rigidities can take a variety of forms, since producers can choose to preset
product prices in domestic or foreign currency. In the Betts-Devereux setup,
some producers pre-set home prices in home currency and export prices in
foreign currency–what Devereux (1997) refers to as “local currency pricing”
(LCP)–although home and foreign markups over marginal cost are initially
the same. After a shock is realized, however, the home and foreign prices of
the good can diverge widely as the exchange rate moves, with international
market segmentation preventing arbitrage by consumers. This approach im-
plies zero exchange rate pass-through in the short run for PTM goods, and,
for goods priced in the exporter’s currency, complete pass-through. It is only
one of several possible ways to model PTM, which of course can occur in
a ßexible-price world. Because the setup (like that of Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ
1995) assumes constant markups, it is not amenable to an analysis of possible
  20
    Cheung, Chinn, and Fujii (1999) present some industry-level evidence supporting this
idea.




                                          22
eﬀects of exchange rates on markups.21
    The LCP-PTM framework has been widely adopted, however, as it pro-
vides tractability in model-solving while reproducing (for PTM goods) the
virtually proportional eﬀect of nominal exchange rate changes on the relative
international prices of similar traded goods. Furthermore, the assumption of
market segmentation at the consumer level certainly rings true, and helps
to rationalize why even big exchange rate changes seem to have so little im-
pact on the economy in the short run (see Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ 2000b on the
“exchange rate disconnect” puzzle).
    Leading recent examples in this literature include Devereux and Engel
(1998, 2000), which adapt the stochastic models in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1998,
2000a) to a PTM-LCP environment with complete nominal asset markets,
and Kollmann (1996), Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2000), and Bergin and
Feenstra (2001), who incorporate dynamic Calvo (1983) nominal contracts
and investigate the ability of the resulting models to replicate a number of
business cycle covariances.22
    These models, however, while capturing the apparent zero pass-through
of exchange rates to retail prices, do not reßect the partial pass-through
to wholesale import prices implied by the micro studies on pass-through.
Indeed, taken literally–as models in which the prices consumers pay for
imported goods correspond to the import prices used to deÞne a country’s
terms of trade–these PTM-LCP models imply that when a country’s cur-
rency depreciates, its terms of trade improve. The reason is simply that
import prices are given in domestic currency, whereas export prices, which
are rigid in foreign-currency terms, rise in home-currency terms when the
home currency depreciates.
    That prediction is wildly at odds with the data, as Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ
(2000a) show. The discrepancy is illustrated in Figures 8-11, which plot
12-month percentage changes in bilateral exchange rates against 12-month
changes in relative export prices, using monthly 1974-1998 data on four coun-
try pairs. The relative export price is deÞned as EPX∗ /PX , an increase in
which reßects an increase in the home country’s overall export competitive-
ness, and if export prices are somewhat sticky in the exporters’ currencies,
  21
     The assumption of constant markups also precludes an analysis of the choice of invoice
currency, which of course should be endogenous. See Friberg (1998).
  22
     Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1998, 2000a) assume that full exchange-rate pass-through to
import prices is a reasonable approximation to reality, although their basic results hold
qualitatively with partial (but positive) pass-through.


                                            23
we would expect this relative price to display a positive correlation with the
nominal exchange rate. On the other hand, if exporters practice LCP on
their foreign sales, the correlation could well be negative. The extent of pos-
itive correlation is strikingly apparent, and there is a suggestion of PTM for
some episodes in which relative export prices respond in a damped fashion
to exchange rate changes. These relationships are consistent with a model
in which domestic marginal cost (consisting mostly of wages) is sticky in
domestic-currency terms, and export prices are set as a (perhaps somewhat
variable) markup over marginal cost.23
    Results such as those in Figures 8-11 illustrate the likelihood of quite
divergent behavior by wholesale and retail import prices. A natural ques-
tion, however, is whether these correlations are central to understanding the
macroeconomic implications of exchange rate changes. Most current PTM-
LCP models eﬀectively shut down any mechanism by which exchange rate
changes might redirect expenditure internationally. In essence, when all the
prices domestic actors face are preset in domestic currency, there is no room
for the exchange rate to change the relative prices they face. Thus, the im-
plicit assumption is that price changes such as those shown in Figures 8-11
are economically unimportant. Devereux and Engel (1998, 2000), following
Engel (2000), argue that due to PTM-LCP, the size of the expenditure-
switching eﬀect central to the Mundell-Fleming model is likely to be very
small. Devereux, Engel, and Tille (1999) explicitly model the distinction
between wholesale and retail import prices, but in a model where retailers
hold no inventories and simply respond passively to consumer demand, so
that once again, exchange rates are assumed not to alter any relative prices
relevant to economic agents’ decisions.
    This line of reasoning takes the implications of some very restrictive mod-
els much too seriously. In reality, there is copious evidence that exchange rate
changes do indeed redirect global expenditure, though perhaps with lags–
see Krugman (1991) for an overview of evidence through around 1990. That
eﬀect should be built into our macroeconomic models, as it is central for con-
clusions about the eﬃcacy of macroeconomic policies and the performance of
alternative exchange-rate regimes. There is no reason models characterized
by PTM-LCP cannot simultaneously imply strong expenditure-switching ef-
fects, as I now illustrate. Indeed, in the model I describe below, PTM-LCP
  23
    That wages exhibit substantial stickiness in domestic currency terms strikes me as
indisputable. For some U.S. evidence, see Altonji and Devereux (1999).


                                         24
is a rather incidental feature; despite it, the model is isomorphic in its es-
sential implications to the non-LCP model of Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1998).
The main action occurs in Þrm-to-Þrm trade that is driven by exchange rate
ßuctuations.

3.2    A Stochastic Model with Local-Currency Pricing
       to Market
Multiperiod dynamics are not central to the eﬀects I wish to explore here, so I
specify a model in which all economic action save the setting of nominal wages
and consumer prices takes place within a single period. Nominal wages and
consumer prices are set before the market period. The model combines PTM-
LCP for Þnal consumption goods with marginal cost, source-country currency
pricing for intermediate goods. It can, alternatively, be interpreted as a model
in which Þrms produce some intermediate imports at foreign subsidiaries,
rather than importing them from separate entities located abroad. Rangan
and Lawrence (1999) stress sourcing decisions as a major channel through
which exchange rate movements inßuence trade ßows and, hence, aggregate
demands for countries’ outputs.
     There are two countries, Home and Foreign. Home contains a unit interval
[0, 1] of workers indexed by i. Each supplies, in a monopolistic fashion, a
distinctive variety of labor services. They have identical preferences
                                     C 1−ρ  K
                             U=            − Lν ,
                                     1−ρ    ν
where ρ > 0, ν > 1 and the real consumption index C is a composite of a
continuum of Þnal commodities indexed by j ∈ [0, 1],
                            ·Z 1                     ¸ θ−1
                                                        θ
                                          θ−1
                       C=          C(j)    θ    dj           , θ > 1.
                              0

In the utility function P is the usual CPI function of the individual nominal
commodity prices P (j). Foreign is symmetric, but with prices and quantities
denoted by asterisks. Importantly, K is a stochastic shock to labor supply
that the monetary authorities may be able to respond to after sticky nominal
prices are set.
    Home produces a homogeneous intermediate good Yh Its nominal domestic-
currency price is Ph , and with free-trade in intermediates, Ph∗ = Ph /E, where

                                           25
E, the nominal exchange rate, is the Home-currency price of Foreign currency.
The Home intermediate good is produced under competitive conditions out
of all of the distinctive variety of domestic labor services. (Similarly, Foreign
produces the intermediate Yf , with foreign-currency price Pf∗ , etc.) The
assumption of full and immediate pass-through for intermediates is not re-
alistic, but it simpliÞes the model and as long as there is an economically
signiÞcant pass-through, of the type suggested by Figures 8-11, my main
results will go through. The production function for either intermediate is:
                              ·Z 1                     ¸ φ−1
                                                          φ
                                            φ−1
                        Y =          L(i)    φ    di           , φ > 1.
                                0

   Nominal wages W (i) [W ∗ (i) in Foreign] are set in advance to maximize
EU i . The demand for labor variety i in this setting is
                                            "           #−φ
                                      W (i)
                               L(i) =                           Y
                                       W
(in Home or Foreign), where
                                     ·Z 1                       ¸ φ−1
                                                                   1
                                                     1−φ
                           W =              W (i)          di           .
                                       0
Because intermediates markets are perfectly competitive, Ph = W and PF∗ =
W ∗.
   A Home Þnal-goods producer (or distributor) j “manufactures” Þnal con-
sumption Y (j) out of the Home and Foreign intermediates according to the
production function
                         Y (j) = 2Yh (j)1/2 Yf (j)1/2                  (1)
where Yh (j), for example, is input of the Home-produced intermediate into
production of Þnal consumption good j. But, as noted above, substitution
between production inputs can be viewed as a sourcing decision. [For For-
eign, Y ∗ (j) = 2Yh∗ (j)1/2 Yf∗ (j)1/2 .] The Home (Foreign) distributor distributes
exclusively in Home (Foreign), so that in a sense, Þnal consumption goods
are nontradables and in equilibrium, C(j) = Y (j) and C ∗ (j) = Y ∗ (j). I as-
sume that consumers have no way to arbitrage across international markets
ex post.
    The Þnal-goods Þrm must hold domestic money in order to transform
intermediates into retail consumer goods. SpeciÞcally, a Home Þrm j will
choose
                                                 1/2
                               M(j) = αPh1/2 PF C(j),

                                                26
while a Foreign Þrm chooses
                                                  ∗1/2
                              M ∗ (j) = αPh∗1/2 PF       C(j).
              1/2   1/2
[Note that Ph PF is the minimal Home-currency cost of producing a unit
of Þnal consumption good, given the production function of eq. (1).] This
“money-in-the-production-function” formulation is one way of imposing a
demand for money on the model; Henderson and Kim (1999) describe a
related device in the context of consumer money demand.Aggregate money
suppliesM and M ∗ , like K and K ∗ , are random variables with realizations
that do not become known until after wages and Þnal product prices are set.
     The model assumes an extreme home bias in equity ownership, such that
Home (Foreign) residents own all shares in the stock of the Home (Foreign)
distributor. The (ex post) budget constraint of representative Home resident
i is                                      Z 1
                           i
                       P C = W (i)L(i) +      Π(j)dj,
                                                     0
where Π(j) denotes nominal proÞts of Þrm j, and his/her Þrst-order condition
for the pre-set nominal wage, W (i), is:
                          (                                   )
                        C −ρ               φKL(i)ν
                      E      (1 − φ)L(i) +                        =0
                         P                  W (i)
or                                    Ã       !
                      W (i)        φ    E {KL(i)ν }
                             =                       .                  (2)
                        P        φ − 1 E {L(i)C −ρ }
Recall that in the present setup with the CPI preset in domestic currency
terms, P is deterministic and can be passed through the expectations oper-
ator. Aside from that modiÞcation, this Þrst-order condition is the same as
in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1998, 2000a).
    The more novel element is the Þrst-order condition for the Þnal-goods
Þrm, which presets consumer prices in local currency. Let T denote real
government transfers to Home Þrms. Consider the maximization problem of
Home Þrm j, which chooses P (j) in advance to maximize the expected value
(to its domestic owners) of proÞts
         nh                                                                  i   o
                                1/2                                    1/2
     E    P (j)C(j) − Ph1/2 PF C(j) + P T + M0j − αPh1/2 PF C(j) C −ρ
subject to
                                          "       #−θ
                                        P (j)
                                 C(j) =                  C.
                                         P

                                           27
That is, the Þrm (in eﬀect) maximizes
                                                                 "           #−θ        
                P (j) 1−θ                                             P (j)               
                                                     1/2
             E  −θ          − (1 +        α)Ph1/2 PF                              C 1−ρ
                                                                                           
                  P                                                     P

with respect to P (j), a problem that yields the Þrst-order condition
                                 Ã           !     n                                               o
                                                                          1/2       1/2
                                      θ           E (1 + α)Ph PF C 1−ρ
            P (j) = P =
                                     θ−1                           E {C 1−ρ }
                         Ã           !      n                                                      o
                              θ           E (1 + α)(W W ∗ )1/2 E 1/2 C 1−ρ
                   =                                                                                   .
                             θ−1                               E {C 1−ρ }
Of course, the Foreign CPI is preset at the level
                     Ã           !     n                                                           o
                          θ          E (1 + α)(W W ∗ )1/2 E −1/2 C 1−ρ
              P∗ =
                         θ−1                           E {C 1−ρ }

    I have written the preceding equation for P ∗ in terms of C rather than C ∗
because the model implies that C = C ∗ in equilibrium, PTM notwithstand-
ing. To see why, notice that the Home budget constraint (in equilibrium,
after eliminating the government budget constraint) gives
                                                       h                 1                 1   i
               P C = W L + Π = W L + P − W 2 (EW ∗ ) 2 C

or
                             µ            ¶− 12            µ             ¶− 12
                           EW ∗                      EW ∗
                    C=                            L=                             Yh .                      (3)
                            W                         W
For Foreign, one Þnds that
                                             µ             ¶ 12
                                      EW ∗
                                      ∗
                                  C =                             Yf .
                                       W
Clearing of the markets for Home and Foreign intermediates gives
                              µ            ¶ 12                µ             ¶ 12
                          1 EW ∗                     1 EW ∗
                     Yh =                         C+                                C ∗,
                          2 W                        2 W
                             µ            ¶− 12                µ             ¶− 12
                       1 EW ∗                        1 EW ∗
                  Yf =                            C+                                 C ∗.
                       2 W                           2 W

                                                  28
Substituting for C and C ∗ in either of these yields the equilibrium relative
price
                             EW ∗     Pf    Yh
                                   =     = ,
                              W       Ph    Yf
from which it follows that
                                                         1    1
                                  C = C ∗ = Yh2 Yf2 .
    Let us now assume that all of the exogenous variables driving the econ-
omy are lognormally distributed. It then becomes relatively straightforward
to combine the preceding Þrst-order conditions to obtain loglinear price and
consumption equations which parallel precisely those derived in Obstfeld and
Rogoﬀ (1998, 2000a). These equations, importantly, involve the second as
well as the Þrst moments of the (random) endogenous variables. The log-
linearized equations for CPIs (with lowercase letters denoting natural loga-
rithms) are
         "          #
         θ(1 + α)  1    1            (1 − ρ)2 2 1 2 (1 − ρ)
 p = log          + Ee + (w + w∗ ) +         σc + σe +      σ ce ,
           θ−1     2    2               2        8     2
         "          #
          θ(1 + α)   1    1            (1 − ρ)2 2 1 2 (1 − ρ)
 p∗ = log           − Ee + (w + w∗ ) +         σc + σe −      σ ce ,
            θ−1      2    2               2        8     2
which together imply
                             Ee + p∗ − p = −(1 − ρ)σ ce .
This is the equation for the ex ante CPI real exchange rate. (The intuition
turns on how production costs–the exchange rate term–and hence proÞt
covaries with demand and with the marginal utility of consumption; see
Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ 2000a.)
    To derive the (log) expected terms of trade, use eq. (3) to rewrite eq. (2)
(in a symmetric equilibrium) as
                                                                        ½        ³               ´ν        ¾
               Ã         !                      Ã              !    E K              EW ∗         2
                                                                                                      Cν
         W          φ        E {KYhν }               φ                                W
           =                                =                            ½³              ´1              ¾;
         P         φ−1       E {Yh C −ρ }           φ−1                       EW ∗           2
                                                                    E          W
                                                                                                 C 1−ρ

in Foreign,                                  ½                                       ¾
                                                         ³          ´− ν
                              Ã         !   E K      ∗       EW ∗        2
                                                                             C   ν
                    W∗             φ                          W
                       =                        ½³            ´− 1               ¾       .
                    P∗            φ−1                EW ∗           2
                                            E         W
                                                                        C 1−ρ

                                            29
Let us assume that the Þrst and second moments of κ and κ∗ are the same.
Loglinearize the preceding equations in the usual way, and combine them
with the equations for p and p∗ above. The result is the very familiar pair of
equations for the expected terms of trade and expected consumption equa-
tions (see Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ 1998, 2000a):
                                  1
        Ee + w∗ − w = −νσ ce −      (σ κe + σ κ∗ e ) + (σ κ∗ c − σ κc ) ≡ Eτ ,           (4)
                                  2
             "            #       ν2 2
           ν + (1 − ρ) 2            σ
                                  8 e
                                         + ν2 (σ κ∗ c + σ κc ) + ν4 (σ κe − σ κ∗ e )
  Ec = ω −             σc −                                                          ,   (5)
                2                                   ν − (1 − ρ)
where                         (   "                     #                  )
                   1          (φ − 1) (θ − 1)       1
           ω≡             log                 − Eκ − σ 2κ .
              ν − (1 − ρ)       φθ(1 + α)           2
   We can derive ex post levels of consumption and the exchange rate from
the monetary equilibrium conditions. The (binding) Home and Foreign CIA
constraints imply that in equilibrium
                                 1   1    1
                      m = log α + w + w∗ + e + c,
                                 2   2    2
                                 1    1  1
                    m∗ = log α + w + w∗ − e + c.
                                 2    2  2
Form these one derives
                              e = m − m∗                                                 (6)
and
                         1            1
                    c = (m + m∗ ) − (w + w∗ ) − log α.                  (7)
                         2            2
These expressions can be used to analyze the variances and covariances af-
fecting the economy’s equilibrium in terms of the model’s exogenous shocks.
    A couple of immediate points can be made about the model. First, since
p and p∗ are predetermined, the CPI real exchange rate will be perfectly
correlated with the nominal exchange rate e, close to what one sees in the
data. Nominal exchange rate ßuctuations induce commensurate changes in
the international prices of supposedly tradable consumption goods.
    Second, the model includes a substantial expenditure-switching eﬀect of
exchange rate changes, one that operates at the Þrm rather than at the
consumer level. Solving the model, one can show that:

                                         30
                                 1
                        y = m − (w + w∗ ) − log α,
                                 2
                                  1
                       y ∗ = m∗ − (w + w∗ ) − log α.
                                  2
An increase in a country’s money supply depreciates its currency and leads to
a proportional rise in output and employment in this model. If Home raises
m, Foreign output is unaﬀected (a knife-edge result) because the negative
expenditure-switching eﬀect of the rise in e on y ∗ is exactly oﬀset by the
accompanying rise in world consumption spending c. Nonetheless, domestic
monetary policy can diﬀerentially aﬀect domestic output through its impact
on the nominal exchange rate.24

3.3    Optimal Policy and Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes
One major advantage of stochastic models in the new open economy macroe-
conomics is that they allow a complete stochastic analysis of welfare under
alternative exchange rate regimes in the presence of sticky prices. That enter-
prise goes well beyond what was possible before, and opens up the prospect
of a rigorous evaluation of alternative systems. In the example of this sec-
tion, for example, countries clearly can gain if they can gear monetary policy
reaction functions toward oﬀsetting shocks to K and K ∗ , as in Obstfeld and
Rogoﬀ (2000a). That factor increases the relative attractiveness of national
monetary policy autonomy, for reasons that Mundell (1961b) spelled out.
    It is straightforward to illustrate optimal policies and evaluate alterna-
tive monetary regimes in the present model. One simplifying feature of this
model, which also holds in my 1998 paper with Rogoﬀ but not in our 2000a
paper, is that, regardless of the policy rules the two countries adopt, Home
and Foreign always enjoy equal expected welfare levels:

                                  EU = EU ∗ .

(See the appendix for a derivation.) An implication is that there are no
potential divergences of interest between the countries; any development that
aids or hurts one automatically aﬀects the other identically. This implication
  24
    Were wages ßexible instead of sticky, the impact of domestic money on domestic
output would be reduced to m/ν < m.


                                       31
of the model is not realistic; however, it greatly simpliÞes the analysis of
policy regimes because coordination issues can be ignored.
    What is the preceding common level of global welfare? Making use of
another result derived in the appendix, we see that
                     νφθ (1 + α) − (1 − ρ) (φ − 1) (θ − 1) n 1−ρ o
             EU =                                         E C      ,
                             νφθ (1 + α) (1 − ρ)
so that expected utility is proportional to
                 (       )                "                              #
                 C 1−ρ          1                  (1 − ρ)2 2
               E             =     exp (1 − ρ)Ec +         σc .
                 1−ρ           1−ρ                    2

A further simpliÞcation is to express the (log) “productivity” shocks in terms
of global and idiosyncratic components,
                                    κ + κ∗        κ − κ∗
                             κw ≡          , κd ≡        ,
                                      2             2
which are mutually orthogonal and satisfy σ 2κ = σ 2κ∗ = σ 2κw + σ 2κd . Equa-
tion (5), Þnally, implies that we can fully understand the ex ante welfare
implications of policy rules by considering their eﬀects on the expression
                                                   ν2 2
                    (1 − ρ) 2       ν                σ
                                                    8 e
                                                          + νσ κw c + ν2 σ κd e
           V ≡ Ec +        σ c = ω − σ 2c −                                     .   (8)
                       2            2                     ν − (1 − ρ)
   Optimal policy rules take the form

    m − Em = −δκd − γ (κw − Eκ) , m∗ − Em∗ = δ ∗ κd − γ ∗ (κw − Eκ) .

These rules, combined with eqs. (6) and (7) above, allow us to express the
world welfare criterion V deÞned by eq. (8) in terms of the parameters
δ, δ ∗ , γ, and γ ∗ . For example, the term σ 2c in V can be written as 14 (δ ∗ −
δ)2 σ 2κd + 14 (γ + γ ∗ )2 σ 2κw . By setting ∂V /∂δ = 0 (similarly for the other policy
parameters) and solving, we Þnd that the optimal policy rules entail
                                    1                 1
                       δ = δ∗ =       , γ = γ∗ =             .
                                    ν            ν − (1 − ρ)
These monetary rules have an intuitive interpretation. As one can verify, they
allow the global economy to attain the ßexible-wage and price real resource

                                           32
allocation ex post, notwithstanding nominal price rigidities. A similar inter-
pretation characterized optimal policies in the non-PTM, traded-nontraded
goods model in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000a).
    In that paper, Rogoﬀ and I worked through the properties of a number
of possible exchange rate regimes, showing how to carry out exact welfare
calculations and rankings. The paper showed that an “optimal ßoat,” in
which countries commit to optimal monetary rules analogous to those just
derives, dominates an “optimal Þx,” in which national money supplies are
perfectly correlated but the world money supply responds optimally to the
global shock κw . Of course, the latter regime dominates a “global monetarist”
regime in which exchange rates are Þxed and the world money supply is held
constant in the face of the real shocks. All of those results extend directly to
this section’s model.
    An alternative conceptual experiment considers an asymmetrical one-
sided peg regime. Suppose that one of the countries (Home, say) can choose
the monetary policy rule it prefers on nationalistic grounds while Foreign
is required to peg its currency’s exchange rate against Home’s. One can
show in that case that the center country, Home, will choose δ = 0 and
γ = 1/ [ν − (1 − ρ)] , as under an “optimal Þx,” while the passive country,
Foreign, must likewise choose δ ∗ = 0 and γ ∗ = 1/ [ν − (1 − ρ)] in order to
maintain a Þxed exchange rate against Home. Global welfare thus is the
same, here, as under an optimal cooperative Þxed-rate regime. Why? Under
one-sided pegging by Foreign, a Home monetary policy rule that responded
in a contractionary fashion to κd would force Foreign to shrink its money sup-
ply when hit by favorable idiosyncratic real shocks. That would be harmful
to Foreign, leading to a contractionary expected output response there that
would reduce Home and Foreign ex ante consumption equally. As a result, it
is in Home’s self-interest (given Foreign’s monetary behavior) to weight do-
mestic and Foreign real shocks equally in its monetary policy response rule.
This is not a general result. It need not hold, for example, when countries’
expected welfare levels can diﬀer as a result of a direct utility eﬀect of the
expected terms of trade, Eτ , as in my 2000a paper with Rogoﬀ.

3.4    Other Applications
The class of model that I have just illustrated can reconcile the “old-time
religion” of Mundell and Fleming with the evidence on international prices.
But the range of applications goes much further. One of the most striking

                                      33
implications of the model is that uncertainty can aﬀect the Þrst moments
of endogenous variables such as the terms of trade and consumption. For
example, a rise in Home monetary variability raises the prospects that Home
workers will be called upon to supply unexpectedly high levels of labor when
consumption is high and the desire for leisure greatest. That eﬀect tends to
raise domestic relative wages and lower worldwide consumption; see eqs. (4)
and (5).
    This natural incorporation of uncertainty under price rigidity suggests
that we may Þnally be close to understanding, at an analytical level, some
of the gains monetary uniÞcation confers by eliminating exchange rate un-
certainty. Those gains are fundamental to the aﬃrmative case for monetary
union, as outlined so brießy in Mundell’s (1961b) optimum currency area
paper, yet progress in understanding them had been so slow that Krugman
(1995) was led to identify progress in this area as the major challenge for
international Þnance.
    What forms is the new research on stochastic dynamic Keynesian models
taking? New developments have occurred on several fronts:
    • We now have some rigorous general-equilibrium models allowing us
      to investigate the links between exchange-rate variability and interna-
      tional trade; see, for example, Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000).
    • We have the prospect of understanding the characteristics of the risk
      premia in interest rates and forward exchange rates within dynamic
      Keynesian settings; see Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1998) and Engel (1999).
    • We can begin to contemplate a full integration of classical interna-
      tional macroeconomic questions with issues of liquidity and Þnancial
      constraints (see, for example, Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee 2000).
    • We can now reformulate the analysis of international policy coordina-
      tion in terms of coordination on policy rules, a topic that has become
      quite important as institutional reform of monetary institutions has
      proceeded at the national level; see Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2001).


4     Conclusion
In this lecture I have outlined the major challenges facing international mon-
etary analysis at the start of the postwar era, and some of the remarkable

                                     34
strides forward that have been made over the half century since the publi-
cation of Meade’s (1951) landmark work, The Balance of Payments. I end
on an upbeat note–I think we can now claim to have progressed far beyond
the point where anyone can seriously argue that “It’s all in Meade,” or in
Mundell and Fleming, for that matter. But I do not want to minimize, ei-
ther, the work that remains to be done, both in the areas I have discussed
in this lecture and in others that I have not touched upon. Though there is
much to learn still, I believe that the promising recent developments will pro-
mote continued growth in our understanding of international macroeconomic
relations.




                                      35
Appendix: Expected Utilities in the PTM-LCP Model
    The text established that the Þrst-order condition for nominal wage set-
ting (by worker i) is
                     (                                   )
                     C −ρ               φKL(i)ν
                   E      (1 − φ)L(i) +                      = 0,            (9)
                      P                  W (i)

that the “retailers” set the nominal price of Þnal consumption goods so that
(for every retailer j)
                                      n                                 o
                                               1−ρ 1/2   1/2
                           θ E (1 + α)Ph PF C
              P (j) = P =                                                   (10)
                          θ−1       E {C 1−ρ }
                                n                                       o
                                         ∗ 1/2 1/2 1−ρ
                        θ E (1 + α)(W W ) E C
                     =                                 ,
                       θ−1         E {C 1−ρ }

and that C = C ∗ always, where C is Þnal consumption. For the Foreign
price P ∗ , the last equality in eq. (10) holds with the sole modiÞcation that
E 1/2 is replaced by E −1/2 .
    Using this information, one can evaluate
                                  (                 )
                                C 1−ρ  K
                         EU = E       − Lν ,
                                1−ρ    ν

from which it will follow that EU = EU ∗ . To do so, start by invoking the
budget constraint
                                           h        1           1   i
               P C = W L + Π = W L + P − W 2 (EW ∗ ) 2 C,

where Π (as before) denotes the proÞts of the domestic retailing Þrms (owned
entirely by domestic residents). The preceding equation implies that
                                      1        1
                           W L = W 2 (EW ∗ ) 2 C,

so that eq. (9) becomes (after multiplying through by the predetermined
wage and suppressing the i index)

                 1 n 1           1      o   φ
                   E W 2 (EW ∗ ) 2 C 1−ρ =     E {KLν } .
                 P                         φ−1

                                      36
(Remember that P is predetermined too.)
   The next step is to substitute eq. (10) for P on the left-hand side above.
The result is
                      n   1
                                  o
       E {C 1−ρ } E E 2 C 1−ρ            n        o     φθ (1 + α)
              n   1
                              o       = E C 1−ρ =                     E {KLν } .
            E E C 1−ρ
                  2                                   (φ − 1) (θ − 1)

One now concludes that
                          (                                )
                          C 1−ρ    (φ − 1) (θ − 1) 1−ρ
         EU =         E          −                C
                         1−ρ         νφθ (1 + α)
                      νφθ (1 + α) − (1 − ρ) (φ − 1) (θ − 1) n 1−ρ o
              =                                            E C
                                νφθ (1 + α) (1 − ρ)
                      νφθ (1 + α) − (1 − ρ) (φ − 1) (θ − 1) n ∗ 1−ρ o
              =                                            E (C )
                                νφθ (1 + α) (1 − ρ)
              =       EU ∗ ,

as claimed above in section 3.3.




                                             37
References
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, “A Simple Model
of Monetary Policy and Currency Crises,” European Economic Review 44
(May 2000): 728-38.
Alexander, Sidney S., “Eﬀects of a Devaluation on a Trade Balance,” Staﬀ
Papers, International Monetary Fund (Washington), 2 (April 1952): 263-78.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Paul J. Devereux, “The Extent and Consequences of
Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 7236 (July 1999).
Bacha, Edmar Lisboa, and Carlos F. Díaz-Alejandro, International Financial
Intermediation: A Long and Tropical View, Princeton Essays in International
Finance 147 (May 1982).
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, “Does Exchange Rate Stability
Increase Trade and Welfare?” American Economic Review 90 (December
2000): 1093-109.
Bardhan, Pranab. K., “Optimum Foreign Borrowing,” in Essays in the The-
ory of Optimal Economic Growth, edited by Karl Shell (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1967).
Bergin, Paul R., and Robert C. Feenstra, “Pricing-to-Market, Staggered Con-
tract, and Real Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Eco-
nomics (2001), forthcoming.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, “The Exchange Rate in a Model
of Pricing to Market,” European Economic Review 40 (April 1996): 1007-21.
Black, Stanley W., International Money Markets and Flexible Exchange Rates,
Princeton Studies in International Finance 32 (March 1973).
Blejer, Mario I., Mohsin S. Khan, and Paul R. Masson, “Early Contributions
of Staﬀ Papers to International Economics,” Staﬀ Papers, International Mon-
etary Fund (Washington), 42 (December 1995): 707-33.
Bruno, Michael, “Capital, Growth, and Trade,” mimeo, Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, 1970.
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (1983): 383-98.
Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Can Sticky Price
Models Generate Volatile and Persistent Exchange Rates?” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staﬀ Report 277 (August 2000).



                                    38
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii, “Market Structure
and the Persistence of Sectoral Real Exchange Rates,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 7408 (October 1999).
Devereux, Michael B., 1997, “Real Exchange Rates and Macroeconomics:
Evidence and Theory,” Canadian Journal of Economics 30 (1997): 773-808
     , and Charles Engel, 1998, “Fixed versus Floating Exchange Rates:
How Price Setting Aﬀects the Optimal Choice of Exchange-Rate Regime.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 6867 (December 1998).
     , and Charles Engel, 2000, “Monetary Policy in the Open Economy
Revisited: Price Setting and Exchange Rate Flexibility,” mimeo, April 2000.
     , Charles Engel, and Cedric Tille, 1999, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through
and the Welfare Eﬀects of the Euro,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 7382 (October 1999).
Dornbusch, Rudiger, “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Journal
of Political Economy 84 (December 1976): 1161-76.
Engel, Charles M., “Is Real Exchange Rate Variability Caused by Relative
Price Changes? An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics 32 (1993): 35-30.
       , “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Po-
litical Economy 107 (June 1993): 507-38.
     , “On the Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in Sticky-Price General
Equilibrium Models,” in International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays
in Honor of Robert P. Flood, Jr., edited by Peter Isard, Assaf Razin, and
Andrew K. Rose (Boston: Kluwer 1999).
     , “Local-Currency Pricing and the Choice of Exchange-Rate Regime,”
European Economic Review 44 (2000): 1449-72.
Fleming, J. Marcus, “Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under
Floating Exchange Rates,” Staﬀ Papers, International Monetary Fund (Wash-
ington), 9 (November 1962): 369-79.
Foley, Duncan K., and Miguel Sidrauski, Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a
Growing Economy (London: Macmillan, 1971).
Frenkel, Jacob A., and Harry G. Johnson, eds., The Monetary Approach to
the Balance of Payments (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1976).
     , and     , eds., The Economics of Exchange Rates: Selected Studies
(Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1978).



                                    39
     , and Assaf Razin, “The Mundell-Fleming Model a Quarter Century
Later: A UniÞed Exposition,” Staﬀ Papers, International Monetary Fund
(Washington), 34 (December 1987): 567-620.
Friberg, Richard, “In Which Currency Should an Exporter Set His Price?”
Journal of International Economics 45 (June 1998): 59-76.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Michael M. Knetter, “Goods Prices and
Exchange Rates: What Have we Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature
35 (September 1997): 1243-72.
Hamada, Koichi, “Optimal Capital Accumulation by an Economy Facing an
International Capital Market,” Journal of Political Economy 77 (1969).
Henderson, Dale W., and Jinill Kim, “Exact Utilities under Alternative Mon-
etary Policy Rules in a Simple Macro Model with Optimizing Agents,” in
International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of Robert P.
Flood, Jr., edited by Peter Isard, Assaf Razin, and Andrew K. Rose (Boston:
Kluwer 1999).
International Monetary Fund, The Monetary Approach to the Balance of
Payments (Washington: IMF, 1977).
Isard, Peter, “How Far Can We Push the ‘Law of One Price’?” American
Economic Review 67 (December 1977): 942-48.
Keynes, John Maynard, A Treatise on Money, vol. 2 (London: Macmillan,
1930).
Kollmann, Robert, “The Exchange Rate in a Dynamic-Optimizing Cur-
rent Account Model with Nominal Rigidities: A Quantitative Investigation,
mimeo, Université de Montréal (1996).
Krugman, Paul R., “Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes,”
in Real-Financial Linkages among Open Economies, edited by Sven Arndt
and J. David Richardson (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987).
     , “Has the Adjustment Process Worked?,” in International Adjust-
ment and Financing: The Lessons of 1985-1991, edited by C. Fred Bergsten
(Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 1991).
     , “What Do We Need to Know about the International Monetary Sys-
tem?” in Understanding Interdependence: The Macroeconomics of the Open
Economy, edited by Peter B. Kenen (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1995).
Lane, Philip, “The New Open Economy Macroeconomics: A Survey,” Jour-
nal of International Economics (2001), forthcoming.


                                    40
     , and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. “The Transfer Problem Revisited:
Real Exchange Rates and Net Foreign Assets.” Center for Economic Policy
Research Discussion Paper 2511 (July 2000).
McKinnon, Ronald I., “The Exchange Rate and Macroeconomic Policy: Chang-
ing Postwar Perceptions,” Journal of Economic Literature 19 (June 1981):
531-57.
      , and Wallace E. Oates, The Implications of International Financial In-
tegration for Monetary, Fiscal and Exchange-Rate Policy, Princeton Studies
in International Finance, 1966.
Meade, James E., The Balance of Payments (London: Oxford University
Press, 1951).
Metzler, Lloyd A., “The Theory of International Trade,” in A Survey of Con-
temporary Economics, edited by Howard S. Ellis (Philadelphia: Blakiston,
1948).
      , “The Process of International Adjustment under Conditions of Full
Employment: A Keynesian View,” in Readings in International Economics,
edited by Richard E. Caves and Harry G. Johnson (Homewood, Illinois: Ir-
win).
Michaely, Michael, The Responsiveness of Demand Policies to Balance of
Payments: Postwar Patterns (New York: Columbia University Press, 1971).
Montiel, Peter J., “Determinants of the Long-Run Equilibrium Real Ex-
change Rate,” in Exchange Rate Misalignment: Concepts and Measurement
for Developing Countries, edited by Lawrence E. Hinkle and Peter J. Montiel
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999).
Mundell, Robert A., “The Monetary Dynamics of International Adjustment
under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
74 (May 1960): 227-57.
      , “The International Disequilibrium System,” Kyklos 14 (1961a): 154-
72.
     , “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review
51 (November 1961b): 509-17.
     , “The Appropriate Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy under Fixed
Exchange Rates,” Staﬀ Papers, International Monetary Fund (Washington),
9 (March 1962): 70-9.
     , “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible
Exchange Rates,” Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 29
(November 1963): 475-85.


                                    41
     , International Economics (New York: Macmillan, 1968).
     , Monetary Theory (Santa Monica, CA: Goodyear, 1971).
      , “The Great Exchange Rate Controversy: Trade Balances and the In-
ternational Monetary System,” in International Adjustment and Financing:
The Lessons of 1985-1991, edited by C. Fred Bergsten (Washington, D.C.:
Institute for International Economics, 1991).
Mussa, Michael, “The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments, and Mone-
tary and Fiscal Policy under a Regime of Controlled Floating,” Scandinavian
Journal of Economics 78 (May 1976): 229-48.
      , “Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real Exchange
Rates: Evidence and Implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Pol-
icy 25 (Autumn 1986): 117-214.
Obstfeld, Maurice, “International Finance,” in The New Palgrave: A Dic-
tionary of Economics, edited by John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter
Newman (New York: Stockton Press, 1987).
     , “The Adjustment Mechanism,” in A Retrospective on the Bretton
Woods System, edited by Michael David Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1993).
      , “Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Developments in Theory and Pol-
icy,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 100 (March 1998): 247-75.
     , and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “The Intertemporal Approach to the Current
Account,” in Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, edited by Gene
M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1995a).
      , and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux,” Journal of
Political Economy 103 (June 1995b): 624-60.
    , and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, Foundations of International Macroeconomics
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996).
     , and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Risk and Exchange Rates,” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 6694 (August 1998).
    , and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy
Models,” Journal of International Economics 50 (February 2000a): 117-153.
      , and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroe-
conomics: Is There a Common Cause?” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2000, edited by Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2000b).


                                    42
      , and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Global Implications of Self-Oriented National
Monetary Rules,” mimeo, June 2001, and Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
      , and Alan C. Stockman, “Exchange Rate Dynamics,” in Handbook of
International Economics, vol. 2, edited by Ronald W. Jones and Peter B.
Kenen (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1985).
     , and Alan M. Taylor, “Nonlinear Aspects of Goods-Market Arbitrage
and Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited,” Journal of the
Japanese and International Economies 11 (December 1997): 441-79.
Polak, Jacques J., “Fifty Years of Exchange Rate Research and Policy at the
International Monetary Fund,” Staﬀ Papers, International Monetary Fund
(Washington), 42 (December 1995): 734-61.
     , “Two Monetary Approaches to the Balance of Payments: Post-Keynesian
and Johnsonian,” mimeo, International Monetary Fund, July 2000.
Purvis, Douglas D., “Public Sector DeÞcits, International Capital Move-
ments, and the Domestic Economy: The Medium-Term is the Message,”
Canadian Journal of Economics 18 (November 1985): 723-42.
Rangan, Subramanian, and Robert Z. Lawrence, A Prism on Globalization:
Corporate Responses to the Dollar (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institu-
tion, 1999).
Rogers, John H., and Michael Jenkins, “Haircuts or Hysteresis? Sources of
Movements in Real Exchange Rates,” Journal of International Economics
38 (1995): 339-60.
Rogoﬀ, Kenneth,“ The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 34 (June 1996): 647-668.
Svensson, Lars E. O., and Sweder van Wijnbergen, “Excess Capacity, Mo-
nopolistic Competition and International Transmission of Monetary Distur-
bances,” Economic Journal 99 (September 1989): 785-805.
Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Industrial Organization (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1988).
Tobin, James, “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 1 (February 1969): 15-29.




                                    43
Correlation of percent changes




                                   1

                                 0.99

                                 0.98

                                 0.97

                                 0.96

                                 0.95

                                 0.94
                                     0       10          20        30         40       50         60
                                                    Time horizon for changes (months)

                                         Q and EPt*/Pt        Q and EPn*/Pn        EPt*/Pt and EPn*/Pn




                                          Figure 1: U.S. and Japan, 1973-95




                                                              44
Correlation of percent changes




                                    1

                                 0.995

                                 0.99

                                 0.985

                                 0.98

                                 0.975
                                     0       10          20        30         40       50         60
                                                    Time horizon for changes (months)

                                         Q and EPt*/Pt        Q and EPn*/Pn        EPt*/Pt and EPn*/Pn




                                         Figure 2: U.S. and France, 1973-95




                                                              45
Correlation of percent changes




                                    1

                                 0.995

                                 0.99

                                 0.985

                                 0.98

                                 0.975
                                     0         10          20        30         40       50         60
                                                      Time horizon for changes (months)

                                           Q and EPt*/Pt        Q and EPn*/Pn        EPt*/Pt and EPn*/Pn




                                         Figure 3: Germany and Canada, 1973-95




                                                                46
Correlation of percent changes




                                   1

                                 0.98

                                 0.96

                                 0.94

                                 0.92

                                  0.9

                                 0.88
                                     0        10          20        30         40       50         60
                                                     Time horizon for changes (months)

                                          Q and EPt*/Pt        Q and EPn*/Pn        EPt*/Pt and EPn*/Pn




                                         Figure 4: Germany and Japan, 1973-95




                                                               47
Share of Q MSE due to tradables




                                   1
                                  0.9
                                  0.8
                                  0.7
                                                 U.S.-Canada
                                  0.6
                                  0.5
                                  0.4
                                     0    0.005 0.01      0.015 0.02   0.025 0.03   0.035
                                             Std deviation of exchange rate change




                                         Figure 5: Pairings against the U.S.

                                                               48
Share of Q MSE due to tradables




                                   1
                                  0.9
                                  0.8
                                  0.7
                                  0.6
                                  0.5
                                  0.4
                                     0   0.005 0.01   0.015 0.02   0.025 0.03   0.035
                                           Std deviation of exchange rate change




                                          Figure 6: Non-U.S. pairings

                                                       49
Share of Q MSE due to tradables




                                   1
                                  0.9
                                  0.8
                                  0.7
                                              U.S.-Canada
                                  0.6
                                  0.5
                                  0.4
                                     0   0.005 0.01         0.015 0.02   0.025 0.03   0.035
                                           Std deviation of exchange rate change




                                    Figure 7: All industrial-country pairings

                                                             50
                                                                              -30%
                                                                                     -20%
                                                                                             -10%
                                                                                                    0%
                                                                                                         10%
                                                                                                                                20%
                                                                                                                                      30%
                                                                                                                                            40%
                                                                                                                                                  50%
                                                                                                                                                        60%
                                                                                       1973DEC
                                                                                       1974NOV
                                                                                        1975OCT
                                                                                       1976SEP
                                                                                       1977AUG
                                                                                         1978JUL
                                                                                        1979JUN
                                                                                       1980MAY
                                                                                       1981APR
                                                                                       1982MAR
                                                                                        1983FEB




     (twelve-month percent changes)
                                                                                        1984JAN
                                                                                       1984DEC
                                                                                       1985NOV
                                                                                        1986OCT




51
                                                                                       1987SEP
                                                                                       1988AUG
                                                                                         1989JUL
                                                                                        1990JUN
                                                                                       1991MAY
                                                                                       1992APR
                                                                                       1993MAR
                                                                                        1994FEB
                                                                                        1995JAN
                                                                                       1995DEC
                                                                                       1996NOV
                                                                                        1997OCT
                                                                                       1998SEP




     Figure 8: Dollar/yen exchange rate and relative export competitiveness
                                                                                                                          jpn/us.er
                                                                                                           jpn/us.exppr
                                                                                   -30%
                                                                                          -20%
                                                                                                     -10%
                                                                                                              0%
                                                                                                                                            10%
                                                                                                                                                  20%
                                                                                                                                                        30%
                                                                                                                                                              40%
                                                                                                 1973 DEC
                                                                                                 1974 NOV
                                                                                                  1975 OCT
                                                                                                 1976 SEP
                                                                                                 1977 AUG
                                                                                                   1978 JUL
                                                                                                  1979 JUN
                                                                                                 1980 MAY
                                                                                                 1981 APR
                                                                                                 1982 MAR
                                                                                                  1983 FEB
                                                                                                  1984 JAN




     (twelve-month percent changes)
                                                                                                 1984 DEC
                                                                                                 1985 NOV
                                                                                                  1986 OCT




52
                                                                                                 1987 SEP
                                                                                                 1988 AUG
                                                                                                   1989 JUL
                                                                                                  1990 JUN
                                                                                                 1991 MAY
                                                                                                 1992 APR
                                                                                                 1993 MAR
                                                                                                  1994 FEB
                                                                                                  1995 JAN
                                                                                                 1995 DEC
                                                                                                 1996 NOV
                                                                                                  1997 OCT
                                                                                                 1998 SEP




     Figure 9: Dollar/sterling exchange rate and relative export competitiveness
                                                                                                                                 uk/us.er
                                                                                                                   uk/us.exppr
                                                                                  -40%
                                                                                         -30%
                                                                                                -20%
                                                                                                       -10%
                                                                                                              0%
                                                                                                                                  10%
                                                                                                                                                20%
                                                                                                                                                      30%
                                                                                                                                                            40%
                                                                                                                                                                  50%
                                                                                                                                                                        60%
                                                                                                1973DEC
                                                                                                1974NOV
                                                                                                 1975OCT
                                                                                                1976SEP
                                                                                                1977AUG
                                                                                                  1978JUL
                                                                                                  1979JUN
                                                                                                1980MAY
                                                                                                1981APR
                                                                                                1982MAR
                                                                                                 1983FEB




     (twelve-month percent changes)
                                                                                                  1984JAN
                                                                                                1984DEC
                                                                                                1985NOV
                                                                                                 1986OCT




53
                                                                                                1987SEP
                                                                                                1988AUG
                                                                                                  1989JUL
                                                                                                  1990JUN
                                                                                                1991MAY
                                                                                                1992APR
                                                                                                1993MAR
                                                                                                 1994FEB
                                                                                                  1995JAN
                                                                                                1995DEC
                                                                                                1996NOV
                                                                                                 1997OCT
                                                                                                1998SEP




     Figure 10: Dollar/D-mark exchange rate and relative export competitiveness
                                                                                                                                    ger/us.er
                                                                                                                   ger/us.exppr
                                                                                   -30%
                                                                                          -20%
                                                                                                    -10%
                                                                                                            0%
                                                                                                                                            10%
                                                                                                                                                  20%
                                                                                                                                                        30%
                                                                                                                                                              40%
                                                                                                 1973 DEC
                                                                                                 1974 DEC
                                                                                                 1975 DEC
                                                                                                 1976 DEC
                                                                                                 1977 DEC
                                                                                                 1978 DEC
                                                                                                 1979 DEC
                                                                                                 1980 DEC
                                                                                                 1981 DEC
                                                                                                 1982 DEC
                                                                                                 1983 DEC
                                                                                                 1984 DEC
                                                                                                 1985 DEC




     ness (twelve-month percent changes)
                                                                                                 1986 DEC




54
                                                                                                 1987 DEC
                                                                                                 1988 DEC
                                                                                                 1989 DEC
                                                                                                 1990 DEC
                                                                                                 1991 DEC
                                                                                                 1992 DEC
                                                                                                 1993 DEC
                                                                                                 1994 DEC
                                                                                                 1995 DEC
                                                                                                 1996 DEC
                                                                                                 1997 DEC




     Figure 11: C-dollar/sterling exchange rate and relative export competitive-
                                                                                                                                can.uk.er
                                                                                                                 can.uk.exppr
