' !

 


      
       



 
!"#$% &()**
+,,&--.../0/"%-&&1-.()**
  '     
2343 115+1,,1 6
70$%  382)(
9:

  
                  
 
      !"  #$  %  &   !     '  $   
(')   %*  ) $  )
  +  $  
    ) + $   ,     - )  .      
/&   $ 0.         $        
(  $ $ +   
1- 2$' 3 45)        ,
2$  $      $ , $ )1

      )  , -
,)    $

5,$" %%,$"  $, ",$%
+":   &&$5,$" ,"  ,
 
' !"#$% & "/ ()**
9: 8332
9 "/ 83 928 )2 ;3
$%#%

+$1 && &1,1  7" "< ,+ $,%,$" ,17$11$" "< 5,$"  7$, 1",$%
.+ &,1 7,, 0",+ 051 "< ,+$ +"1+" $5"7  051 &, +7 5&$,
,7$1 ,+ =&5, 6 "<  5+$>1 $1,$$,: <"7 7#$%  <<", ," 05"7 1#$/ ! 1+".
,+,  $51 $ 1%%,$" +1 &",,$: 70$%"1 <<5,1 " ,+ <5,$" "< $$6$1 ,+,
05"7 1#$ $ ,+ 1,: 1,,  +5 " 7$, 1",$% ,+ &1"  +"1+" $5"7
$1,$0,$"  .</ ! 5$0, ,+ 1,:?1,, "< " 7" ,"  1,,$1,$51  5"7& 
61$" "< ,+ 7" ," ,+ 1,1 "0,$ &6$"1: <" ,+  / ! <$ ,+, 1%%,$" $1 $#: ,"
+6  17 %,$6 $7&5, $ ,+  ,+ $ ,+  1  1, "< ,+ <,$$,:  5,$"
,17$11$" &"511/ !+ ,+ ,$6 1&&: "< 1#$ $$6$1 $1 "%"1 ,+ .< <<5,
"< $51 1",$% " 1#$ $$6$1 &1 " ,+ 7%$, "< ,+ 1&&: $51/

 
&,7, "< 5""7$51
. "# $61$,:
8;@ 5 ,,
. "#  2333)
 '  
/< A:/

1. Introduction
The eÂ®ect of greater sorting into communities, workplaces, schools and households
is becoming a topic of concern in many countries. Wilson (1987) and Reich (1991),
for example, have worried that increased segregation at the community level or in
the creation of new \gated communities" will lead to increased inequality in the
US. In Europe, observers worry that the geographic and social marginalization
of recent immigrants may lead to increased social tensions. In the UK, the
stratiÂ¯cation of the social system and the existence of a self-perpetuating social
and educational elite is a perennial topic of debate.
There is some evidence, at least in the US, that there is increased sorting in
almost all these spheres. Jargowsky (1996), for example, shows that sorting by
income at the neighborhood level appears to have increased across all groups in
US metropolitan areas even after controlling for racial and ethnic group characteristics. This appears to be particularly true for Blacks and Hispanics, leading to
the fear that lower-income individuals in these groups will be left without positive
peer eÂ®ects provided by a more integrated middle class. Kremer and Maskin
(1996) present some evidence that sorting by skill level in the workplace has increased and Mare (1991) shows that the probability that a high school graduate
will marry a college graduate has decreased.
This paper is concerned with the eÂ®ect of increased segregation on marital
sorting, inequality and welfare. We present a model of marital sorting in which
both environment (the degree of segregation) and preferences (the tradeoÂ® individuals make between the quality of a match and the consumption they would
enjoy) determine the degree of assortative matching. In the model, individuals
are either skilled or unskilled (according to education decisions made when young)
and have a given number of opportunities in which to form a household with another agent. The probability of an individual meeting a skilled or an unskilled
individual depends on the degree of segregation in society. Whether a household
is formed or not depends on an individual's future matching opportunities, on
the quality of the match, and on the household income an individual would enjoy. Couples have children and these in turn decide whether to become skilled or
unskilled workers. A decision to become skilled (synonymous here for acquiring
a given level of education) is costly, both in terms of resources and in terms of
eÂ®ort. To Â¯nance education, young individuals borrow in an imperfect capital
market in which parental income plays the role of collateral. Thus parental income and the child's eÂ®ort cost (the distribution of which is allowed to diÂ®er by
1

family type), determine the proportion of children from each family type that in
aggregate become skilled. These individuals then also meet and form households,
have children, and so on.
We show that the steady state to which this economy converges will in general
depend upon initial conditions. In particular, it is possible to have steady states
with a high degree of sorting (skilled agents form households predominantly with
others who are skilled; unskilled form households predominantly with unskilled)
and high inequality Alternatively, there can be steady states with a low degree
of sorting and low inequality.
We then examine the theoretical eÂ®ects of an increase in segregation on the
steady-state of the economy. We show that this depends not only on the proÂ¯le
of fertility and the propensity for children to become skilled (as in FernÂ¶andez
and Rogerson (forthcoming)), but also on the degree to which this increase in
segregation aÂ®ects the expected utility diÂ®erential between skilled and unskilled
individuals and how this translates into a change in the relative supply of skilled
individuals.
Next we examine the eÂ®ects of an increase in segregation by parameterizing
the steady state of the model to several key UK statistics. We use primarily the
British Cohort Study to create a sample of parents and children that permits us to
examine the degree of correlation of parents in education and the probability that
a child from diÂ®erent parental types will become skilled. This, along with data on
fertility by parental type, the skill premium, and the elasticity of substitution in
production, allows us to Â¯nd the steady-state proportion of skilled individuals in
the economy. We next proceed to examine the eÂ®ects of an increase in segregation
Â¯rst in a model in which all behavior (i.e., matching and the skill supply by each
family type) is exogenously speciÂ¯ed. This allows us to compare our results with
those of FernÂ¶andez and Rogerson for the US. We then add endogenous matching
to the parameterized model and lastly we allow for endogenous relative supply of
factors as well. We Â¯nd that the eÂ®ects of increased segregation depends on the
speciÂ¯cation of the model. Skilled workers are always made better oÂ®; the fate of
unskilled workers depends on the size of the supply response. In all cases, however,
an increase in segregation leads to increased inequality of expected utility between
skilled and unskilled workers. From an ex ante utility point of view, however, we
Â¯nd that increased segregation increases welfare in the fully endogenous calibrated
model.
The literature most closely related to this paper is Kremer (1997), FernÂ¶andez
and Rogerson (forthcoming), and FernÂ¶andez, Guner and Knowles (2001). The
2

Â¯rst two papers examine the consequences of greater marital sorting on long-run
inequality. Kremer (1997) uses a linear model of intergenerational transmission
of education to argue that even a large increase in marital sorting is unlikely to
have important quantitative consequences for the distribution of income in the US
in the long run. FernÂ¶andez and Rogerson argue the opposite by showing that the
intergenerational transmission process is likely to be non-linear. They show that
once fertility diÂ®erentials and the (non-linear) propensity of children from diÂ®erent family types to become more educated are taken into account, an increase in
marital sorting would be likely to have a signiÂ¯cant quantitative impact on the US
income distribution. Lastly, FernÂ¶andez et al.(2001) provide a model of marital
sorting, fertility and inequality that generates multiple steady states with greater
inequality leading to more assortative matching and greater fertility diÂ®erentials
among high and low income families. Using a cross-section of 35 countries, they
show that couples are more correlated in their years of education the greater the
skill premium and that countries with more sorting have lower per capita income,
as predicted by the model. There is also a small literature on endogenous matching but that basically abstracts from the endogeneity of the income distribution
in the economy (e.g., Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite (1992), and Burdett and
Coles (1997, 1999)). Aiyagari, Greenwood, and Guner (2000) and Greenwood,
Guner and Knowles (200) also examine marriage decisions, but they are primarily
concerned with fertility and divorced decisions (which our model does not address) and use a computational approach to solve complicated individual decision
problems.
In addition to the literature on marital sorting, there is also a rapidly growing
literature that is concerned with various aspects of sorting in other spheres (see
FernÂ¶andez (forthcoming) for a recent review of this literature). Alesina and
La Ferrara (2000) examine the consequences of heterogeneity of communities for
the formation of social capital. Using survey data on group membership in US
localities, they Â¯nd that participation in social activities is signiÂ¯cantly lower in
more diverse (racially or ethnically) and more unequal communities. Bisin and
Verdier (2000) provide a model of intergenerational transmission of ethnic and
religious traits. They Â¯nd that an increase in segregation increases the fraction
of assortative marriages. FernÂ¶andez and Rogerson (1996) use a multi-community
model to show that a local system of Â¯nancing education is likely to lead to
suboptimal sorting of income groups, with too few higher-income individuals living
in poorer communities. There is also a large literature that examines the eÂ®ects of
borrowing constraints on human capital accumulation. The most relevant papers
3

here are by Benabou (1996), Cooper (1997), Durlauf (1995), and FernÂ¶andez and
Rogerson (1997,1998) as they concerned with the eÂ®ects of sorting or stratiÂ¯cation
(into neighborhoods and schools) for the transmission of education and growth in
the presence of borrowing constraints.
This paper is organized as follows. The next section sets up the model.
Section 3 is devoted to a theoretical analysis of the eÂ®ects of increased segregation.
Section 4 parameterizes the steady state of the model to UK statistics. Section
5 examines the reaction of the parameterized model to an increase in segregation.
Section 6 concludes.

2. The Model
We consider a two period OLG model with the following timing of decisions.
In the Â¯rst period of life, young individuals decide whether to become one of
two types{skilled or unskilled{with each type synonymous with the individual
acquiring a given amount of education. Having made the education decision, the
individual enters a \household matching market" and acquires a mate. In the
second period the individual works, pays oÂ® debt associated with the education
decision of the Â¯rst period (if any), consumes and has children.
To simplify our model we take a couple's fertility as exogenous and, as will
be seen shortly, we also abstract from bargaining problems within a family by
assuming that the couple shares a joint household utility function over consumption. Thus, in the second period of life families simply consume their household
income I minus whatever debt repayment they need to make. All the interesting economic action in the model concerns how individuals decide with whom to
match given their skill type and how they decide upon a skill type in the Â¯rst
place. We next turn to a discussion of the matching decision.
2.1. Segregation and Household Matching
Our model of household sorting (or matching) is simple and yet allows both environment (how segregated schools and neighborhoods are) and preferences (how
individuals trade oÂ® income and quality of relationship) to matter. Individuals
are assumed to have two rounds in which to Â¯nd a match. The opportunities
available in an individual's Â¯rst round depend on the individual's environment.
The opportunities available in the second round depend on the individual's skill
type.
4

In the Â¯rst round individuals are more or less segregated according to the individual's exogenously speciÂ¯ed environment. There they meet someone and can
decide whether to match with that person. If they decide not to match with that
person they then enter the second round of matching. In this round, a skilled
individual will be matched with another skilled individual, whereas unskilled individuals get matched with other unskilled individuals. This two-step process (as
in FernÂ¶andez, Guner and Knowles (2001)) is meant to reÂ°ect that, by and large,
when one is younger one has access to a more varied group of individuals (in terms
of their Â¯nal educational attainment) than when one is older.1
The role of the environment is reÂ°ected in the degree to which individuals
are segregated in the Â¯rst stage. To make this diÂ®erentiation stark, we assume
that a fraction Âµ of individuals are perfectly segregated. Within this segment of
society, segregation ensures that types do not mix, even when relatively young.
Thus, skilled individuals (or individuals who will become skilled) meet only other
skilled individuals in the Â¯rst round; likewise, unskilled meet only other unskilled
in the Â¯rst round. The remaining 1 Â¡ Âµ fraction of the population is not segregated. Thus, for the unsegregated portion of the population, if Â¸ is the fraction
of the population that is skilled, then the probability of a skilled and an unskilled
individual \meeting" in the Â¯rst round is given by Â¸(1 Â¡ Â¸).
The degree of segregation Âµ of the population reÂ°ects, among other things, both
the residential and schooling environment: e.g., how much society is divided into
gated communities, exclusive suburbs, depressed ghettos; the degree of segregation
of schools and within a school; the variance of school quality; the prevalence of
exclusive private schools and low quality urban public schools; tracking by ability
within a school, magnet schools, etc.
We will be interested in examining the consequences to society of an increase
in the degree of segregation, Âµ. Undoubtedly, Âµ is itself an endogenous variable,
aÂ®ected by the amount of inequality in society. It is, however, also amenable
to public policy. That is, if schools are locally Â¯nanced (as in the US), there is,
for the same amount of inequality, a greater incentive to segregate along income
lines into neighborhoods than if schools are centrally funded (as in most European
countries) since local Â¯nancing gives an incentive for higher-income individuals not
to mix with lower-income people as diÂ®erent housing values implies redistribution
1

Other matching models are also possible such as random matching over time with discounting. The formulation we have chosen is very tractable and allows us to get rid of the multiple
equilibria that can result otherwise.

5

from those with more expensive property to those with less. 2 Or, if highways are
built allowing easy access from suburbs to jobs in the city, it is easier to segregate
into diÂ®erent neighborhoods than in their absence. Alternatively, the placing of
some public low-income housing in richer communities or the existence of a lower
variance in the quality of schooling may allow a lower degree of segregation for
the same degree of inequality. 3
In order to determine who will match with whom, we need to specify utilities
from forming a household. For now, we do not impose any structure other
than: (i) Individuals share the same utility from a match. This ensures, for
example, that there is no bargaining problem between spouses over the allocation
of household income; and (ii) In forming a match, individuals obtain utility both
from consumption and from the quality of the match. These two components are
assumed to be additively separable. The assumptions above permit us to write
the indirect utility from a partner in a match of quality q and household income
I as:
V (I; q) = v(I) + q

(2.1)

where v is assumed to be concave.
We assume that quality is perfectly observable to both participants and that
it is completely match speciÂ¯c. The draws of quality are independently distributed across rounds and participants. Thus, quality (like beauty, supposedly) is
completely in the eye of the beholder, and furthermore is mutual (i.e., the two
participants to a match do not disagree about the match quality). Lastly, solely
to simplify algebraic presentation, we assume that quality is distributed identically across both types of individuals (skilled and unskilled) so that quality is an
iid draw from a cumulative distribution Q in each round of matching.
Note that the assumptions above imply that if two individuals of the same
type meet in the Â¯rst round, either because they belong to the segregated part
2

See FernÂ¶a ndez and Rogerson (1996, 1998) for an analysis of the consequences of a local
system of school Â¯nance.
3
The way we have mo delled segregation is symmetric for skilled and unskilled inviduals.
However, one could well mo del it as an unsymmetric phenomenon with a fraction Âµs of the
skilled population and a potentially diÂ®erent fraction Âµu of the unskilled seceding or being
excluded from the rest of the population. This would then imply that the unsegregated part
(1Â¡Âµs ) Â¸
of the population would now consist of a proportion (1Â¡ Âµs)Â¸+(1Â¡Âµ
of skilled individuals
u) (1Â¡Â¸)
(1Â¡ Âµ )(1Â¡Â¸)

u
and a proportion (1Â¡Âµs )Â¸+(1Â¡Âµ
of unskilled individuals. As we do not have data on the
u)( 1Â¡Â¸)
magnitudes of these parameters, we model it as symmetric.

6

of society or because they met someone of their own type at random, they will
accept any match quality above the mean Â¹ = E(q) of the quality distribution and
reject any that is below. This follows from the fact that their household income
is invariant to proceeding to the second round (whereupon they are guaranteed to
meet someone of their own type). If, on the other hand, a skilled and unskilled
individual meet in the Â¯rst round (thus, only from the non-segregated part of
society), then a skilled individual will only accept the match if q is greater than
qÂ¤ , given by:
qÂ¤ = v(Iss ) Â¡ v(Isu ) + Â¹

(2.2)

i.e., a quality of match such that a skilled individual is indiÂ®erent between obtaining the household income of two skilled individuals, Iss , with an expected match
quality of Â¹ and settling for a lower household income of Isu.
2.2. The Labor Market, Family Income, and Sorting
We next turn to the determination of household income. Given a constant returns
to scale production function
F (Ls ; Lu ) = LF (Â¸; 1 Â¡ Â¸)

(2.3)

where Li, i 2 fs; ug denotes the amount of labor of type i and L = Ls + Lu , the
assumption of a perfectively competitive labor market implies that wages depend
only on the fraction Â¸ of skilled individuals in the population, i.e.,
ws (Â¸) = F1(Â¸; 1 Â¡ Â¸)

and

wu(Â¸) = F2 (Â¸; 1 Â¡ Â¸)

(2.4)

Most often we will be concerned not with the skilled wage but with its value
net of the monetary cost p of acquiring skills, which we denote by wes . Assuming
that individuals work only in the second period (whereupon they repay the cost
of acquiring skills if they become skilled), and letting Iij denote the household
income for a couple composed by skill types i; j 2 fs; ug, we obtain:
8
>
<

e s (Â¸);
2w
if ij = ss
e
Iij (Â¸) = > ws (Â¸) + wu(Â¸); if ij = su
:
2wu(Â¸);
if ij = uu

7

(2.5)

Thus we can express qÂ¤ in (2.2) as a function solely of Â¸, i.e., qÂ¤(Â¸). Note that q Â¤
is not a function of Âµ.
The observations above immediately permits us to solve for the proportion '
of each type of household that will form in the population as a function of Â¸ and
of the population Âµ that is segregated.
8
>
<

ÂµÂ¸ t + (1 Â¡ Âµ)[Â¸2t + Â¸t(1 Â¡ Â¸t )Q(q Â¤(Â¸t ))];
if ij = ss
Â¤
' ij (Â¸t ) = > (1 Â¡ Âµ)2Â¸t (1 Â¡ Â¸t )(1 Â¡ Q(q (Â¸ t));
if ij = su
:
Âµ(1 Â¡ Â¸t ) + (1 Â¡ Âµ)[(1 Â¡ Â¸t )2 + Â¸t (1 Â¡ Â¸ t)Q(qÂ¤ (Â¸t))];
if ij = uu
(2.6)

Remark 1. The degree of correlation of spouses in education (or skill type), Â½,
is given by Âµ + (1 Â¡ Âµ)Q(qÂ¤)
It is useful to note the following features of this correlation: (i) it is independent
of Â¸ except via the endogenous dependence of q Â¤ on Â¸; (ii) if there is complete
segregation (Âµ = 1), then Â½ = 1; if there is no segregation (Âµ = 0), then Â½ =
Q(q Â¤); (iii) if individuals only cared about household income and not quality then
Q(q Â¤) = 1 and Â½ = 1; if individuals simply matched with whomever they met in
the Â¯rst round (i.e., Q(qÂ¤ ) = 0), then the degree of correlation would be governed
solely by the degree of segregation of the environment, and hence Â½ = Âµ.
2.3. The Education Choice
Next we consider a young individual's decision to become skilled. The expected
utility from becoming skilled (gross of any disutility from eÂ®ort, as will be discussed shortly), given that a fraction Â¸t+1 also become skilled, is given by:
V s (Â¸t+1) = [Âµ + (1 Â¡ Âµ)Â¸t+1]

Z q
0

+(1 Â¡ Âµ)(1 Â¡ Â¸ t+1 )

max [Vss (x; Â¸t+1); Vss (Â¹; Â¸t+1)] dQ(x)

Z q
0

max [Vsu(x; Â¸t+1); Vss(Â¹; Â¸t+1)] dQ(x)

whereas the expected utility of becoming an unskilled worker is:
Z qÂ¤

V u (Â¸t+1) = (1 Â¡ Âµ)Â¸t+1[

0

Vuu(Â¹; Â¸t+1 )dQ(x) +

+[Âµ + (1 Â¡ Âµ)(1 Â¡ Â¸t+1)]

Z q
0

8

Z q
qÂ¤

V su(x; Â¸t+1)dQ(x)]

(2.7)

max [Vuu(x; Â¸t+1); Vuu(Â¹; Â¸t+1 )] dQ(x)

Note that the expected payoÂ® from becoming skilled includes the monetary cost
of acquiring an education as skilled wages in both (2.7) and (2.7) are expressed
as net of p.
Next we turn to the dependence of a child's decisions on her family type. We
introduce two diÂ®erent ways in which a family may matter (i) family background;
(ii) borrowing constraints. We consider each in turn.
In addition to bearing a monetary cost if they choose to become skilled, individuals also face an idiosyncratic (non-monetary) eÂ®ort cost Â°i. This magnitude of
this cost can be thought of as being inÂ°uenced by parental background as reÂ°ected
in the education of these, which can facilitate or make more diÂ±cult the child's
acquisition of human capital. We allow therefore the distribution of the eÂ®ort
cost to depend on family type and indicate by Gij (Â°) its cumulative distribution.
To simplify exposition, we assume that the draws are perfectly correlated within
a family and that Â° enters linearly in a skilled individual's utility function, i.e.,
the payoÂ® to individual i of becoming a skilled worker is given by Vis = V s Â¡ Â°i.
DeÂ¯ne by Â° Â¤(Â¸) the skilled-unskilled payoÂ® diÂ®erential generated when a fraction Â¸ of the population becomes skilled, i.e.,
Â° Â¤ (Â¸t+1) Â´ V s (Â¸t+1) Â¡ V u(Â¸t+1 )

(2.8)

Note that an individual with idiosyncratic cost Â°i of becoming skilled who expects
a fraction Â¸ of her cohort to become skilled would also prefer to be skilled as long
as Â°i Â· Â° Â¤(Â¸).
Next we turn to the eÂ®ect of parental income on a child's decision to acquire
an education. We assume that in order to Â¯nance the acquisition of skilled
education, children need to access capital markets. 4 Capital markets are unable
to monitor how these funds are spent so that parental income must act as collateral
for children. We assume that children within the same family with n Â¡ 1 siblings
can borrow up to some (increasing) function Z(I; n) of parental income (e.g., the
latter acts as collateral), so that the (integer part) of the solution to:
Z(I ; n) = mp

(2.9)

yields the maximum number mnij = intm of skilled individuals a family with n
children and income Iij can produce. Note that mnij is in general a function of
Â¸ as this determines family income. For simplicity, we assume that fertility is
4

A bequest model would have similar implications.

9

exogenous, but we allow the number of children n that a family has to depend on
family type by modeling it as a random draw from a cumulative distribution Hij .
We denote by Â´nij the probability that a family of type ij has n = f0; 1; 2; :::; Â¹ng
and use fij to denote their average fertility, i.e., fij =

n
Â¹
P

n=0

nÂ´nij .

Putting together both parental income and background, yields

Â¡ij(Â¸t; Â¸ t+1 ) =

X
G ij (Â° Â¤ (Â¸t+1)) n=n
min[mnij (Â¸t ); n]Â´nij
fij
n=0

(2.10)

as the fraction of children that will become skilled given that they belong to
families of type ij and that an expected fraction Â¸t+1 of that cohort also plans to
become skilled.
Note that in the absence of borrowing constraints, min[mnij ; n] = n and hence
Â¡ij = G ij (Â° Â¤ ). Furthermore, note that if under this scenario the distribution of
non-monetary costs were independent of family background, i.e., Gij = G 8ij,
then all families would produce the same fraction of skilled children independent
of type. In general, however, Â¡ij is a function both of Â¸t (since parental income
determines the maximum number of children who can aÂ®ord to become skilled)
and of the expected value of Â¸t+1 (which given rational expectations must also
be the realized value), since this determines the incentive for individuals with
diÂ®erent Â°i to desire to become skilled.
2.4. Equilibrium
An equilibrium at time t and t + 1; for an initial division of the population into
skilled and unskilled (Â¸t ), is given by marriage decisions as speciÂ¯ed by (2.2), wages
as speciÂ¯ed by (2.4), and decisions by children to become skilled as speciÂ¯ed by
(2.10). It is easy to ensure the existence of an interior equilibrium by placing
conditions on the production function or on the Z function such that even if
Â¸ = 0, some portion of children can aÂ®ord to become skilled. This ensures that
the economy does not get stuck in a poverty trap in which no one can aÂ®ord
to become skilled. To bound Â¸ away from one it is suÂ±cient to assume that
technology is such that F1 < F2 for some Â¸ < 1. As shown in the Appendix (to
be done), under a mild assumption to ensure that Â° Â¤ (Â¸t+1) Â´ V s (Â¸t+1) Â¡ V u (Â¸t+1)
is decreasing in Â¸, equilibrium will also be unique.
Equilibrium can be depicted as the intersection of two curves as shown in Figure 1. In this Â¯gure, the downward sloping curve gives the diÂ®erence between V s
10

and V u as a function of Â¸t . The upward sloping line is generated by considering, for a given Â¸tÂ¡1 , the fraction of individuals that
P both are willing to and can
aÂ®ord to become skilled as a function of Â°, Â¸t =

ij

'ij (Â¸tÂ¡1)Â¡ij (Â°;Â¸tÂ¡1 )f ij

P

ij

'ij (Â¸tÂ¡1)f ij

.

From

this relationship we can solve for Â° as a function of (Â¸tÂ¡1; Â¸t ) which we denote by
Âª(Â¸tÂ¡1; Â¸ t). This curve is upward sloping since an increase in Â° will increase the
supply of skilled labor from all family types.
2.5. Dynamics
We now turn to specifying the dynamic evolution of this economy. The working
population in the economy in period t + 1 as a function of Â¸ t is given by:
Lt+1(Â¸t ) =

X

'ij (Â¸t )fij Lt

(2.11)

ij

and the number of skilled individuals is:
Ls;t+1 (Â¸t ; Â¸t+1) =

X

'ij (Â¸t )Â¡ij (Â¸t ; Â¸t+1) fij Lt

(2.12)

ij

A steady state in this economy will be a skilled fraction of the population Â¸Â¤ such
that
Ls;t+1(Â¸Â¤; Â¸t+1 )
Â¸t+1 (Â¸ ) =
= Â¸Â¤
Â¤
Lt+1(Â¸ )
Â¤

(2.13)

Alternatively, we can express the steady state as:

Â¤

Â¸t+1(Â¸ ) =

P

ij

'ij (Â¸Â¤)Â¡ij (Â¸t+1; Â¸Â¤)fij
= Â¸Â¤
P
Â¤)f
'
(Â¸
ij
ij
ij

(2.14)

In general this model may have multiple steady states as the initial condition
of the economy may determine which steady state it converges to. This is due
to a non-convexity in the form of a discrete amount needed to become skilled
and to the presence of borrowing constraints. For example, for a given degree of
segregation, an economy that starts out with a low fraction of skilled individuals
and thus high inequality between skilled and unskilled, may end up in a steady
11

state that reproduces those features due to the fact that uu type families will
have low income and are more likely to be constrained. On the other hand, an
economy with the same degree of segregation but with a large fraction of skilled
individuals will have low inequality and low sorting and can end up in a steady
state with a high fraction of skilled individuals as uu family income will be higher
and thus they are less likely to be constrained.
In any case, the potential multiplicity of steady states is not the feature of the
analysis we wish to emphasize. Our calibration procedure will select a steady
state and we will be interested in the eÂ®ect of a change in segregation we will be
given that initial steady state. We now turn to an analysis of this.

3. The EÂ®ect of an Increase in Segregation
The eÂ®ect of an increase in segregation in this model depends on: (i) whether
the number of children that become skilled next period's skilled is a concave or
convex function of parental human capital; (ii) whether the growth rate of fertility
is concave or convex in parental types; (iii) the eÂ®ect of an increase in segregation
on the expected utility diÂ®erential of skilled relative to unskilled individuals.
This can be seen most clearly by totally diÂ®erentiating (2.14) with respect to
Âµ and evaluating it at Â¸t = Â¸t+1 = Â¸Â¤. Doing this yields:
dÂ¸Â¤
Â¸Â¤(1 Â¡ Â¸Â¤)(1 Â¡ Q(q Â¤))[(fss Â¡ss Â¡ 2fsuÂ¡su + fuuÂ¡uu) Â¡ Â¸Â¤ (fss Â¡ 2fsu + fuu )]
=
dÂµ
D
P
Â¡ij (Â¸Â¤;Âµ) @Gij (Â° Â¤(Â¸Â¤ ;Âµ)) @Â° Â¤
Â¤
ij 'ij(Â¸ )fij Gij (Â¸Â¤ ;Âµ)
@Â° Â¤
@Âµ
+
(3.1)
D
where
X
X
@Ã ij (Â¸Â¤ ; Âµ) Â¤
Â¤
D =
fij 'ij (Â¸ ; Âµ) +
fij
(Â¸ Â¡ Â¡ij ) Â¡
@Â¸
ij
ij
0

1

@ Â°Â¤ @ X
Â¡ (Â¸Â¤; Âµ) @G ij(Â° Â¤(Â¸Â¤; Âµ)) A
'ij(Â¸ Â¤)fij ij Â¤
@ Â¸ ij
Gij (Â¸ ; Âµ)
@Â° Â¤

is required to be positive in order for the original steady-state to be locally stable. 5
Â¤

(Â¸ ;Âµ)
that @Ã ij@Â¸
has two components: one is what happens to the proportion of couples
of diÂ®erent types due to the change in Â¸; the other is what happens to these proportions as a
results of the change in qÂ¤ brought about by the change in wages that result from the change in
Â¸.
5 Note

12

Note that throughout this analysis we are assuming that any change in wages
brought about by the change in Â¸ does not alter how binding borrowing constraints
are.
Let us consider the two lines in 3.1 separately. 6 Consider the Â¯rst term
in the square brackets: This term shows the eÂ®ect on the number of children
who become skilled of, ceteris paribus, replacing 2 su couples by one ss and one
uu couple{which is what an increase in segregation does. If the relationship is
concave in parental years of education (and as we shall show for the UK data
it is), then an increase in sorting will tend to decrease the number of skilled
children. Alternatively, this can be expressed as stating that if the production
of skilled children has a negative cross-partial in each parent's years of education
(i.e., if the marginal increase in the number of skilled children brought about by
an increase in one parent's education is decreasing in the years of education of the
other parent) then the number of skilled children will be maximized by mixing s
and u individuals in couples rather than by creating homogenous couples.
The second term in the square brackets reminds us that what we are interested
in is not the number of skilled children per se, but rather their proportion in the
population. It gives the change in the aggregate economy's fertility rate as a
result of an increase in segregation (i.e., the replacement of 2 su couples by one ss
and one uu couple). If this term is positive (we are subtracting it) it reinforces
the negative Â¯rst term as it shows that average fertility rate would increase thus
ensuring that the smaller number of skilled children also translates into a smaller
fraction of skilled children. Again, for our UK statistics this term is indeed
positive.
Â¤
The sign of the second line is given by the sign of @Â°
which indicates what
@Âµ
happens to the diÂ®erential between skilled and unskilled individuals' expected
utility if, ceteris paribus, segregation is increased. At Â¯rst blush, one might think
that this term must be unambiguously positive. Skilled individuals will be made
better oÂ® if they have a greater chance to meet with other skilled individuals (and
thus enjoy higher household income with a greater probability). This intuition is
correct. Where one's intuition may be misleading is in concluding that unskilled
individuals will necessarily be made worse oÂ®. The eÂ®ect on V u is actually
ambiguous. Although unskilled individuals now have a lower chance of matching
with skilled individuals and enjoying higher income through that match, if this
probability was low in the Â¯rst place because most matches were being rejected,
6 The

Â¯rst line is the same as in FernÂ¶a ndez and Rogerson (forthcoming) but the second has
no counterpart there.

13

then there is a positive counterpart to increased segregation. This counterpart
is the fact that unskilled individuals need not waste their time (their matching
opportunities) on a match that will happen only with a low probability and if
rejected leaves them with a match quality of expected value Â¹. Instead it allows
a greater proportion of them to make better use of the two rounds by having their
matches be only with other
unskilled individuals and thus permitting them an
Rq
expected match quality of Â¹ qdQ + Q(Â¹)Â¹.
More formally,
@Â° Â¤
@(V s Â¡ V u)
Â´
= (1 Â¡ Q(qÂ¤ ))[(q Â¤ Â¡ Â¹) Â¡ Â¸(vss Â¡ 2vsu Â¡ vuu)] +
@Âµ
@Âµ
Â¤

(2Â¸ Â¡ 1)[(Q(q ) Â¡ Q(Â¹))Â¹ Â¡

Z qÂ¤
Â¹

qdQ]

(3.2)

Note that concavity of v ensures that vss Â¡ 2vsu Â¡ vuu is negative and thus that
the expression in the Â¯rst square brackets is positive. The ambiguity comes
from the second term where the expression in the square brackets is negative,
reÂ°ecting the gain in expected match quality{with probability Q(qÂ¤ ) the match
would have been rejected by the skilled individual resulting in expected match
Â¤
quality Q(q
)Â¹ whereas with increased segregation the expected match quality
Rq
is instead Â¹ qdQ + Q(Â¹)Â¹. Thus the sign of the second expression depends on
whether Â¸ is greater or smaller than 1=2. Note therefore that the expected utility
diÂ®erential will unambiguously increase if Â¸ is smaller than 1=2. If Â¸ > :5 and
if Q(qÂ¤) is very close to one (i.e., skilled individuals reject almost all matches
with unskilled individuals) then the diÂ®erential can decrease. The reason that
Â¸ > :5 appears as a condition for the diÂ®erential to fall is that both skilled and
unskilled workers are made better of by the increase in expected match quality
due to increased segregation. If, however, 1 Â¡ Â¸ was low, then skilled workers
only had a low probability of meeting an unskilled workers whereas an unskilled
worker has a high probability (Â¸) of meeting a skilled worker. Thus, in order for
the gain to unskilled workers to be greater than that to skilled workers requires
Â¸ >1Â¡
Â¸, i.e., Â¸ > :5. Note that this requirement makes it relatively unlikely
@Â° Â¤
that @Âµ < 0 since Q (q Â¤) is increasing in the wage diÂ®erential and thus reaches its
maximum at Â¸ = 0. Thus, in general, one would expect an increase in segregation
to increase the relative attractiveness of becoming skilled.
To summarize, the eÂ®ect of an increase in segregation is ambiguous. For
the UK, in the absence of a supply response, Â¸ should fall. When there is a
14

supply response, i.e., @G
6= 0, the eÂ®ect is ambiguous.
@Â°
parameterization of our model.

We now turn to the

4. Parameterizing the Model
In this section we parameterize our model by choosing parameter values so that
the cross-sectional data generated by the steady-state of our model are consistent
with those observed in actual UK data.
We proceed by constructing a sample of parents and children. Our primary
data source is the British Cohort Study (BCS). This survey began with all children
born between in one week in April 1970 in the UK. Parental education data was
obtained from a retrospective questionnaire of parents conducted Â¯ve years later
in the BCS survey of 1975. The education data of children is obtained when
these are 26 years old from the BCS 1996 survey. There they report their highest
qualiÂ¯cation level, which we map into years of education by considering how long
it usually takes to obtain the stated level. In order to include a child in the
sample we require both the data on parental and children educational attainment
to be present. After eliminating the categories of \not known, not stated, or
non-applicable", we were left with a sample of 6361 children with their respective
parents.7 In general, if an individual indicated no qualiÂ¯cations, 10 years of
educations were assigned. Individuals with any secondary qualiÂ¯cations were
assigned 11 years; those with advanced vocational qualiÂ¯cations and some A level
were assigned 13 years; those with a sub-degree level of further education (such
as nursing and higher education diplomas) were assigned 15 years; whereas those
with a degree and higher were assigned 16 years. 8
From our BCS sample, we can calculate how correlated spouses are in their
years of education (i.e., Â½). We Â¯nd Â½ = :5 which is lower than the :6 that we Â¯nd
for couples around the same age bracket in the US. Recall that the correlation
of spouses in our model is given by Â½ = Âµ + (1 Â¡ Âµ)Q(qÂ¤). Thus, for the case in
which all marital sorting is exogenous (Q(q Â¤) = 0) we set Âµ = :5. For the case in
which we allow both endogenous sorting and segregation, we set Âµ = :1 implying
that Q(q Â¤) = 49 .
Note that in the second case, the requirement that Â½ = :5 and q Â¤ > Â¹ implies
that for any positive choice of Âµ, Q must be a distribution such that the mean lies
7

Each sibling in a pair of twins or higher multiple births was included as an independent
observation.
8
The details of the coding into years of education are available by request from the author.

15

below the median. A simple distribution that possesses this property is the step
distribution whose cdf is given by:
x
2a
xÂ¡a
:5 +
2(h Â¡ a)

0 Â· x <a
a Â· x Â·h

for a > h2 . Of course, we would like to calibrate our function not just to a point
but also to a slope. We have found no literature to guide us on this but Â¯nd it
useful to use the function above anyway. For all our experiments, this function
will produce a constant frequency (since in the vecinity of the steady state the
distribution is uniform), which seems like a reasonable assumption. That is, if
skilled individuals increase their pickiness by Â¢q, they will decrease the fraction
of unskilled individuals that they are willing to match with by an amount that is
proportional to Â¢q.
Next we consider the choice of the Gij 's. Of course, we have no direct measure
of these. Using our sample of parents and children, however, we can Â¯nd the
fraction of children from each family type that becomes skilled. In order to do
this, we need to introduce a cutoÂ® in achievement below which we consider an
individual unskilled. We choose to call all individuals with at least two A levels
(or their equivalent) skilled and all those below are considered unskilled.9 We
Â¯nd that this fraction is .77 for type ss; .52 for type su; and lastly .23 for type uu.
Thus, we require the steady state of our model to satisfy Â¡ss = :77, Â¡su = :52,
and Â¡uu = :23. It is of interest to contrast these with the US where, deÂ¯ning as
skilled anyone who has gone beyond a high-school degree, yields :81, :63 and :30
respectively.
In the absence of any knowledge of what the \correct" distribution of the Â°'s
might be, we assume that they are uniformally distributed with diÂ®erent means.
In addition to requiring these to match the Â¡ij 's we also ask that in aggregate
they produce a supply response that is in accordance with the literature in this
area. We leave the description of the exact calibration to section 5:3.
Next we turn to the fertility proÂ¯les. As the BCS data does not have fertility
of parents , we use the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) of 1992 to examine
this question. We construct a sample of women (with their partners) who were
between the ages of 18 to 35 in 1970. The couple's fertility is then identiÂ¯ed
9

In our mapping from achievement to years of education, this is equivalent to considering
skilled those individuals with more than 13 years of education.

16

from the retrospective fertility data taken in 1992 and the education of the two
partners in the couple is obtained.10 We Â¯nd that the fertility of ss couples is
2.07; that of su couples is 2.11; and that of uu couples is 2.18. It is of interest
to contrast this fertility proÂ¯le with that of the US (respectively, 1.84, 1.90 and
2.26), not for the absolute numbers, but for the fact that it the UK's is far more
similar across family types than that of the US.
We calibrate our fertility distributions by assuming that the fertility of a family
type is a random draw from a binomial distribution over the two integers that
bracket the average fertility rate for that type (i.e., either two or three for all
types), such that the expected value of that distribution equals that family type's
average fertility. Thus, Â´2ss = :93, Â´2su = :89, and Â´2uu = :82.
Lastly, we choose to calibrate a constant elasticity of substitution production
function:
1

F (Ls ; Lu ) = A[bLÂ±s + (1 Â¡ b)LÂ±u] Â±

which allows us to write the relative wages of skilled to unskilled workers (the skill
premium) as:
ws
b
=
wu
1Â¡b

Ãƒ

Â¸
1Â¡Â¸

!Â±Â¡1

Based on data in Machin (1999), we match a skill premium of 1:8 as our benchmark. We also make use of the survey by Katz and Autor (1999) which suggests
that a reasonable elasticity of substitution to match lies between 1 and 2:5. We
choose to match an elasticity of substitution of 1:5 as our benchmark case, implying Â± = 1=3. We also set the initial value of wu equal to 30; 000 as a normalization.
We leave the discussion of the results of the parameterization of the model to
the next section in which they are compared with the new steady state resulting
from an increase in Âµ.
4.1. Welfare Analysis
Both in order to evaluate welfare and to be able to examine the endogenous
response in sorting resulting from an increase in the degree of segregation in the
10

A bias of using this metho d is that we only obtain fertility data from couples that are still
together in 1992.

17

economy, we need to specify the household's utility function v.
work with log utility, so:

We choose to

v(I) = log I
w
es
e s will decrease
which implies that q Â¤ = log we2s+w
+ Â¹. Note that an increase in w
u
Â¤
Â¤
11
q whereas an increase in wu will increase q .
There are several measures of welfare that are potentially of interest. The most
important statistic to report is what happens to skilled and unskilled workers, i.e.,
V s and V u. It is useful to convert the measure of the change in utility to the
percentage change in all household incomes the individual would have to gain in
the original steady state so as to be indiÂ®erent between it and the steady state that
emerges as a result of a change in segregation. Thus, we can Â¯nd Â¢i i 2 fs; ug
such that

V i0(1 + Â¢i ) = V i1
where 0 indicates the original steady state and 1 indicates the new steady state.
So, for example, we would solve for Â¢s Rby solving for its value that set V s0(1 +
Â¢s ) = [Âµ + (1 Â¡ Âµ)Â¸0][log 2wes (1 + Â¢s ) + Â¹q qdQ + Q (Â¹) Â¹] + (1 Â¡ Âµ)(1 Â¡ Â¸t+1)[(1 Â¡
R
e s (1 + Â¢s ) + Â¹)] equal to V s1 .
Q(q Â¤)) log(wes + w u)(1 + Â¢s ) + 0q qdQ + Q(q Â¤)(log 2w
It is easy to show that
log(1 + Â¢i) = V i1 Â¡ V i0
Another interesting measure of welfare is an individual's ex-ante welfare. That
is, we can think of the individual as having a probability of being born to a family
type ij as given by P'ij'fijijfij and then becoming skilled with probability Â¡ij(Â° Â¤; Â¸)
ij

s

R Â°Â¤

Â°dGij

and obtaining expected utility V Â¡ 0Gij (Â° Â¤) in that case, and becoming unskilled
with probability 1 Â¡ Â¡ij (Â° Â¤ ; Â¸) and obtaining expected utility V u . Summing over
all the family types, we obtain that an (unborn) individual's ex-ante utility, U, is
given by:
11

Given our choice of utility function, we Â¯nish our calibration of the distribution of quality
2w
es (using steady-state wages to
by choosing an arbitrary initial value for a, say a = 72
5 log w
es+w u
evaluate the expression), yielding h = 8aQ(q Â¤ ) Â¡ 2a Â¡ 4 log 2 wes .
w
es+w u

18

Â¸V s + (1 Â¡ Â¸)V u Â¡

P

Â¡ij (Â° Â¤ ;Â¸) R Â°Â¤
ij ' ij fij Gij (Â° Â¤) 0

P

ij

Â°dG ij(Â°)

'ij fij

(4.1)

Again we can convert the change in ex-ante expected utility in the pre and post
increased segregation steady states by solving for the fraction Â¢ that an individual
have to obtain from all household incomes in the original steady state so as to be
indiÂ®erent between the two steady states (U 0 and U 1). As before, it is easy to
show that Â¢ solves log(1 + Â¢) = U 1 Â¡ U 0. Note that the last term in expression
(4.1) is the expected disutility from the eÂ®ort cost to become skilled. As we will
need to refer to it in our welfare calculations, we shall henceforth denote it by
W (Â° Â¤; Â¸).

5. Response to an Increase in Segregation
We will be examining three diÂ®erent possible scenarios. The Â¯rst is one in which
almost all behavior is exogenous in that both the supply response is Â¯xed and
the degree of sorting is not aÂ®ected by any changes in the environment. In the
second scenario, we allow for sorting to respond to incentives, but keep the supply
response of factors Â¯xed. In the last scenario, both relative supplies of factors
and the degree of sorting respond to their environment.
In all cases the calibration procedure is similar. The parameters A, b, Â±, Âµ
and the steady state value of Â¸ are determined by the wage premium, the normalization of the initial value of the unskilled wage, the elasticity of substitution, the
correlation of spouses in their years of education, and the Â¡ij values. This will
uniquely determine steady-state Â¸ and is the extent of the calibration needed for
the Â¯rst scenario. The second scenario endogenizes the degree of sorting. This
is done by introducing a quality distribution Q(q). As discussed previously, we
calibrate it by requiring that when combined with an initial choice on the degree
of segregation Âµ = :1 and evaluated at qÂ¤ (i.e., the value of match quality such
that a skilled individual is indiÂ®erent between matching with an unskilled individual and obtaining a match with another skilled individual with match quality
Â¹ as speciÂ¯ed in equation (2.2)), it matches the correlation of spouses found in
the data. Note that this procedure yields an equilibrium diÂ®erence in V s and V u
(i.e., Â° Â¤). Thus, our last exercise is to introduce a supply response in terms of a
distribution of Â°'s given by Gij 's such that when evaluated at Â° Â¤ they yield the
Â¡ij's and the supply response observed in the data.
19

5.1. Exogenous sorting and supply response
We Â¯rst examine the consequences in changes in the degree of segregation in an
economy in which almost all behavior is exogenously speciÂ¯ed. That is, we will
explore the eÂ®ect of an increase in environmental segregation (i.e., Âµ) assuming
that there is no endogenous component to sorting, i.e., Q(q Â¤) = 0 and hence Â½ = Âµ,
i.e., the degree of segregation is the same as the degree of correlation of spouses.
In addition we assume that there is no endogenous response of the Â¡ij 's to the
change in sorting. This assumption can be made consistent with microeconomic
foundations, but for the moment we can simply interpret this constancy as the
outcome of some socioeconomic/genetic process such that the Â¡ij 's are constant.12
Thus, changes in the relative supplies of skilled and unskilled labor are governed
by changes in the relative frequency of diÂ®erent family types. This is a very
useful benchmark as it is the most \mechanical" approach that still respects the
fact that there are fertility diÂ®erentials as well as propensities for children to
become skilled that diÂ®er across family types. Furthermore, this will allow for an
easy comparison with the results obtained for the US by FernÂ¶andez and Rogerson
(forthcoming).
Table 1 below reports the results of the calibration in the Â¯rst row and the
response to an increase in segregation (equivalent here to the correlation of spouses
in their years of education) from :5 to :6 in the second row.
Table 1
Increase in Segregation: Exogenous Responses
Â¸
ws
wu
std log y std logfy Vs
Vu
Âµ = :5 0.49161 54000 30000 0.29385 0.25536 11.509 11.082
.
Âµ = :6 0.48823 54179 29828 0.29834 0.26766 11.523 11.061
Â¢s = 0:0149
Â¢u = Â¡0:0208
Â¢ = Â¡0:0049
The results of the baseline calibration yields around 49% of individuals who
are skilled. This is a bit higher than the 41% reported by Green and Steedman
(1997) as the fraction of 18 year olds that have attained 2 A levels or level 3 Vqs
in England in 1995, but the trend toward higher qualiÂ¯cations is increasing so
the Â¯gure may be higher when a new \steady state" is attained. The standard
deviation of log income is small relative to its actual value of :5 in the national
12

In Fernandez and Rogerson (forthcoming) individuals either have or do not have ability to
become skilled (e.g., Â° 2 f0; 1g). Thus a child's Â° can be considered a draw from a binomial
distribution G ij .

20

labor force survey, but that is to be expected since all the variation in personal
income in the model is produced by two wages only.
Next we turn to the consequences of an increase in the degree of segregation.
We know from the theory discussed previously, that an increase in segregation will
necessarily decrease Â¸ if fss Â¡ss Â¡2fsuÂ¡su + fuuÂ¡uu is negative and (fss Â¡2fsu +fuu)
is positive. Using the UK numbers for these parameters we obtain Â¡:1198 and 0:3
respectively. Thus, an increase in Âµ will unambiguously decrease the proportion
of skilled people in the new steady state.
As shown in row 2 of Table 1, the eÂ®ect of an increase in the correlation of
spouses is to decrease Â¸ from :492 to :488 (around 0:69%). This increases the
skilled wage by :33%, decreases the unskilled wage by :57%, and serves to increase
the inequality in the personal income distribution as measured by the standard
deviation of log y (as shown in column 4) and in the distribution of family income
(as shown in column 5 by log fy). The standard deviation of personal log income
increases by 1:52% and that of family income increases by 4:81%. Skilled workers
are made better oÂ® (they would require a 1.5% increase in household incomes to be
as well oÂ® in the original steady state); unskilled workers are made worse oÂ® (they
would require a 2% decrease in the original steady-state household incomes to be
indiÂ®erent). Ex-ante welfare falls and a :5% decrease in the original steady-state
household incomes would be required to create indiÂ®erence.
Although the change in the income distribution is not negligible, the response
of the individual income distribution is small relative to what we found for the
US (close to a 5% increase for an increase in Âµ from :6 to :7). Of course, that
calibration was to diÂ®erent parameters for the wage premium and Âµ, but the main
diÂ®erence stems from the fertility and Â¡ij proÂ¯les as noted earlier.
The easiest way to understand the contributions of the fertility and Â¡ij proÂ¯les
is by calibrating the steady state of the model using some of the US statistics.
In Table 2 below, we show the result of replacing the UK fertility proÂ¯le by the
US one, recalibrating the model and increasing Âµ to :6. Now the increase in
segregation produces an increase in the standard deviation of the log of personal
income of around 2:22%. Skilled workers' welfare improves by more than before;
unskilled workers' welfare fall by more. The decrease in ex ante welfare is likewise
greater.

21

Table 2
Increase in Segregation: Exogenous Responses
US fertility, UK Â¡ij
Â¸
ws
wu
std log y std logfy V s
Vu
Âµ = :5 0.4574 54000 30000 0.29282 0.25529 11.504 11.076
Âµ = :6 0.4523 54293 29756 0.29932 0.26925 11.522 11.054
Â¢s = 0:0174
Â¢u = Â¡0:0218
Â¢ = Â¡0:0064
Even more dramatically, as shown in Table 3, if we replace instead the UK's
Â¡ij proÂ¯le with that of the US (keeping the UK fertility proÂ¯le) and recalibrate
the model, an increase in Âµ to 0:6 now produces an increase in personal inequality
of 4:20%.
It is interesting to think about what the diÂ®erence in the US and UK Â¡ij
proÂ¯les imply. The important thing to note is not the fact that these numbers
are larger for each family type in the US than in the UK nor the slope of the
relationship, but rather that in the US a child's chances of becoming skilled are
relatively more improved by switching from uu parents to su parents than by
switching from su parents to ss. In the UK, on the other hand, it is almost as
signiÂ¯cant to switch from uu parents to su ones as it is to switch from su parents
to ss parents. That it, the US relationship is more concave than the UK one,
and hence an increase in segregation will have more important eÂ®ects there than
for the UK. The easiest way to see this is by examining the ratio between Â¡su
uu
and Â¡ss+Â¡
which is 1.135 for the US whereas it is 1.0505 for the UK (a linear
2
relationship would yield a ratio of 1).
Table 3
Increase in Segregation: Exogenous Responses
UK fertility, US Â¡ij
Â¸
ws
wu
std log y std logfy Vs
Vu
Âµ = :5 0.6384 54000 30000 0.28239 0.24194 11.527 11.106
Âµ = :6 0.6308 54286 29503 0.29427 0.26121 11.539 11.071
Â¢s = 0:0124
Â¢u = Â¡0:0342
Â¢ = Â¡0:0082
Lastly, Table 4 shows the result of using both the US fertility and Â¡ij proÂ¯les.
In this case the eÂ®ect of the increase in the degree of segregation is to increase personal inequality by 5:38%, even more than what FernÂ¶andez and Rogerson obtained
for the US.
22

Table 4
Increase in Segregation: Exogenous Responses
US fertility, US Â¡ij
Â¸
ws
wu
std log y std logfy Vs
Vu
Âµ = :5 0.6098 54000 30000 0.28671 0.24632 11.523 11.101
Âµ = :6 0.5995 54112 29370 0.23021 0.26882 11.538 11.063
Â¢s = 0:0147
Â¢u = Â¡0:0372
Â¢ = Â¡0:01070
Note that in all cases the increase in the inequality of the distribution of family
income is much greater than that in personal income. This is due to the fact
that not only does the income of unskilled individuals fall, but also the probability
of a mixed household (skilled with unskilled) decreases thereby exacerbating the
inequality in family income.
5.2. Endogenous Sorting
The second analysis allows sorting to be endogenous. In order to examine the
eÂ®ect of an increase in segregation when sorting is endogenous, we arbitrarily set
Âµ = :1 and thus obtain Q(q Â¤) = 49 resulting in a correlation of spouses equal to :5.
Now we increase of Âµ from :1 to a value such that, if there were no endogenous
response in sorting, would produce a correlation of spouses of :6. This occurs at
Âµ = :28: Table 5 below shows the result of the increase in segregation in the new
steady state..

23

Table 5
Increase in Segregation: Endogenous Sorting
Âµ = :1
Âµ = :28
Â¸ 0.49161
0.48822
ws
54000
54179
wu
30000
29828
std log y 0.29385
0.29835
std logfy 0.25536
0.26769
Â¤
q
3.1309
3.1342
Q (q Â¤) 0.4444
0.4449
Â½ 0.5000
0.6002
Vs
14.984
14.999
Vu
14.557
14.537
Â¢s = 0:0153 Â¢u = Â¡0:0205 Â¢ = Â¡0:0046
Note that the increased segregation now produces a correlation of spouses that
slightly exceeds :6 as skilled individuals react to the increased wage inequality by
becoming pickier (i.e., requiring a higher q Â¤) in order to accept a match with
an unskilled individual. This causes Â¸ to fall by very slightly more than in
the Â¯rst case as even fewer matches between skilled and unskilled individuals
are formed. Unskilled individuals would be willing to give up around 2.18% of
household income to return to the original steady state, whereas skilled individuals
would be willing to give up around 1.7% of income to maintain the new steady
state. These last numbers diÂ®er more than others did compared with their
counterparts in Table 1 since they reÂ°ect the fact that individuals obtain utility
from the quality of their matches as well as from income and thus a change in
segregation aÂ®ects utility through this channel as well.
5.3. Endogenous Sorting and Supply
The last analysis we perform is to allow both sorting and the Â¡ij 's to respond
to the change in segregation. Note that incorporating an endogenous supply
response does not require us to recalibrate the entire model; it simply requires
us to calibrate the Gij 's so that when evaluated at Â° Â¤ it matches the parameter
values given by the data described below. 13 Throughout we will assume that the
13 Â¤

Â° is the diÂ®erence between V s and V u produced in the steady-state of the calibrated model.

24

changes observed in wages do not change the bindingness of borrowing constraints.
We assume that the Â°'s are uniformly distributed with a cumulative distribuij
tion given by Gij (Â°) = Â°Â¡a
kÂ¡aij . We calibrate the three aij 's and the k by using four
statistics. The Â¯rst three statistics are the fractions of children of each family
type that become skilled, i.e., the Â¡ij 's given by the data. We require that the
Gij 's evaluated at the steady-state level of Â° Â¤ (and given an assumption about
how binding borrowing constraints are across diÂ®erent family and fertility types)
match the Â¡ij's given by the data.14 The last statistic is much more problematic.
We would like to know what the supply response of skilled labor is to something
like a change in the skill premium or a change in p. These numbers very much
depend on the model one is estimating.
In the absence of any parameter estimates for the UK, we rely primarily on
Kane (1994) who examines the college enrollment of 18-19 year olds from 1973
to 1988 in the US. Using a pooled time series cross-section of states (which provides variation in tuition costs and enrollment), Kane estimates a probit model
of Â¯nishing high school and attending college. He is then able to examine the
simulated eÂ®ects of an increase in tuition. He Â¯nds that an increase in tuition
of $1000 decreases the enrollment of whites by about 3%. We translate this tuition decrease into a percentage increase in the income diÂ®erential of skilled and
unskilled individuals by converting this number into a change in this diÂ®erential.
Given an average income diÂ®erential of around $10,000 over this period, we have
a 10% change in the income diÂ®erential. Thus, we calibrate our Gij 's by requiring that a change in skilled individuals' income from $54000 to $56400 (keeping
the unskilled wage Â¯xed at 30000), yield a 3% increase in the fraction of skilled
individuals. The utility diÂ®erential is generated not only by the change in skilled
wages, but also by the fact that any labor supply change will also change the
matching probabilities. We maintain the frequencies of the diÂ®erent family types
Â¯xed at their original level. This procedure yields us the aij 's and the k.
Kane also Â¯nds though that the eÂ®ect of a dollar in earnings diÂ®erentials
was worth roughly 1=5th of a dollar change in net direct costs in terms of how
responsive individuals were to attending college. In terms of net present value,
however, his calculations indicate that a dollar increase in the initial earnings
diÂ®erential should be worth roughly $5.20 in direct costs. Thus, individual are
responding by 1/26 less to a change in tuition then to a change in direct costs
when translated to net present value. This suggests that our change of wages
from $54000 to $56400 should produce a 0:115% increase in the fraction of skilled
14 Â¤

Â° is the diÂ®erence between V s and V u produced in the steady-state of the calibrated model.

25

individuals. We thus repeat our calibration using 0:15% (slightly larger than
above) as our parameter estimate.
It is diÂ±cult to place a great deal of trust in any of these parameters. Heckman, Lochner and Taber (1998), for example, develop a general equilibrium model
of skill formation with heterogeous ability and on-the-job investment. Calibrating
their model and simulating they conclude that a tuition increase of $1000 would
decrease the probability of attending college by about 0:07 on average. But their
calibration also implies that agents with ability in the second quartile from the
bottom would, on the basis of net present value of earnings, Â¯nd it advantageous
to be unskilled workers and not attend college whereas those with lower ability (in
the bottom quartile) would be better oÂ® going to college. Lastly Lee (2001) in a
similar model but without on-the-job-investment and with the option for agents
to stay home, Â¯nds that an increase in the skill premium of 24.5% increased the
proportion of those who had attained at least one year of college from 39.6% to
42.6%, i.e., a proportionately 7.6% increase. Again, in terms of our model this
would imply that an increase in the skilled wage to $56400, keeping the unskilled
wage Â¯xed (i.e., a 4.4% increase in the skill premium) should increase the fraction
of skilled workers by 1.36% which evaluated at our initial steady state implies an
increase in the workforce of :67%.15
Below we report our results parameterized to two diÂ®erent cases. The Â¯rst
which we call \large response" is to produce an increase of 3%; the second, denoted
by \small response" is to produce an increase of .15%.
We specify borrowing constraints as I Â¡ cn Â¸ mp where c is some minimum
consumption level required by each child in the family. As this is an inequality
(and we are not using data to match either c or p, nor are we examining the eÂ®ect of
changes in constraints), then in general, any particular Â¡ij number does not have a
unique decomposition into a parameter of a given distribution and a assumption
about how binding is the borrowing constraint. For any distribution Gij , the
requirement that Â¡ij =

n=n
Gij (Â°Â¤ ) P
min[m; n]Â´nij
f ij
n=0

can be decomposed several ways

into a family background and a borrowing constraint component. 16
Table 6 below shows three such decompositions for our calibrated uniform
distributions for both the large and small response case. The Â¯rst column assumes
15

The calculations for the increase in the proportion of skilled workers in resonse to the change
in the skill premium were done by Donghong Lee (personal correspondance) based on the model
and results from his thesis (2001).
16
For all our calculations we arbitrarily set p = 1000.

26

that the observed Â¡ij 's are the result only of family background; there are no
borrowing constraints (this is indicated by setting the maximum number of skilled
children that parents can produce equal to the total number of children, i.e.,
mnij = n). The second column is generated by assuming that there are mild
borrowing constraints in that uu families with three children can at most aÂ®ord
to Â¯nance the acquisition of skills for two of them. Note that the assumption of
mild credit constraints for uu families shifts their mean downwards as implied by
the assumption that their lower rate of production of skilled children reÂ°ects not
only parental background as reÂ°ected in the distribution of the Â°'s but also the
existence of borrowing constraints. The last column assumes that both su and
uu families with three children can aÂ®ord to produce a maximum of two skilled
children. 17
Table 6
Decomposition of Â¡ij 's into Means and Borrowing Constraints
large response mnij = n m3uu = 2 m3uu = 2; m3su = 2
Â¹ss
0.3658
0.3658
0.3658
Â¹su
0.4247
0.4247
0.4210
Â¹ uu
0.4469
0.4459
0.4459
small response mnij = n m3uu = 2 m3uu = 2; m3su = 2
Â¹ss
-1.1652
-1.1652
-1.1652
Â¹su
0.36580
0.3658
0.2688
Â¹ uu
0.9425
0.9161
0.9161
We will use the second column of Table 6 as our benchmark. Note that the
borrowing constraints in this scenario are very mild in that only those uu families
with 3 children are aÂ®ected, and only if their children have Â° < Â° Â¤. This is less
than 2% of the population.
The introduction of an endogenous supply response to the change in incentives
radically alters the results of our Â¯rst two analyses. Table 7 below shows the eÂ®ect
17

The fact that the means are negative comes from the calibration procedure. To accomodate
a small labor supply response some of the aij 's are negative. This is not problematic from the
point of view of the model; it simply implies that some individuals enjoy becoming skilled and
thus will do so even if the diÂ®erential is zero or negative. In any case, it is easy to get rid of this
feature by transforming the uniform distribution to a step function with all those individuals now
below zero now distributed uniformly between zero and some positive number smaller than Â°Â¤ .
This transformation would leave the calibration unchanged and thus all the results unchanged
except our calculation of W and hence U .

27

of an increase in segregation from its initial steady state value of :1 to :28 which,
as before, is the value of Âµ that would be required to produce a correlation of
spouses of :6 if there were no reaction of individuals to the change in segregation.
We discuss both cases of Table 7 in turn. Turning Â¯rst to Table 7a, the Â¯rst
result to note is that Â¸ now increases by 2.5% rather than dropping by .7% as
it did in the exercise of the previous section. There are two eÂ®ects here: the
Â¯rst is the one we have analyzed previously, that is, ceteris paribus, an increase
of correlation of types causes a destruction of mixed marriages which leads to a
lower average production of skilled children as a fraction of the population. The
second eÂ®ect is a new one: ceteris paribus, the increase in segregation makes it
relatively more attractive to become skilled (i.e., Â° Â¤(Â¸) increases for a given Â¸)
as now a skilled person will be more sure of being matched with another skilled
individual (whereas this probability decreases for an unskilled individual). Thus,
the Â¯rst eÂ®ect is to decrease Â¸ whereas the second eÂ®ect is to increase it.
The two eÂ®ects are shown in Figure 2. The Â¯rst eÂ®ect is seen in that the Âª
curve shifts up since a greater value of Â° is required to produce a given Â¸ given
that fssÂ¡ss Â¡ 2fsuÂ¡su + fuuÂ¡uu is negative and (fss Â¡ 2fsu + fuu ) is positive. The
shift of this curve shows the negative eÂ®ect of replacing 2 us couples with one uu
and one ss couple from the point of view of producing a greater skilled fraction
of the population. The second eÂ®ect is shown in the the shift upwards of the
V s Â¡ V u curve indicating the increase in the relative attractiveness of becoming
skilled for a given Â¸. As can be seen in the Â¯gure, the shifts of these two curves
necessarily increases Â° Â¤ (i.e., the diÂ®erential in utilities between a skilled and an
unskilled person), but the net eÂ®ect on Â¸ depends on which curve shifts more. As
is clear from the result of our analysis above, for our choice of functional forms
and the UK numbers, the second eÂ®ect dominates for both cases of Table 7.
As a result of the Â¸ increase, the skilled wage drops by :12% whereas the
unskilled wage increases by 2:1%. This has a strong eÂ®ect on the personal income
distribution as can be seen by the fact that the standard deviation of log income
falls by over 5:6%. The narrowing of the skill premium makes skilled individuals
less picky (i.e., q Â¤ falls) so that the correlation of spouses rises to .5987 rather
than to :6. Although the welfare lost due to eÂ®ort (i.e., W ) is higher in the new
steady state, this is due to the fact that more people Â¯nd it attractive to become
skilled. In this scenario everyone is made better oÂ® as can be by the fact that all
the Â¢'s are positive. This is despite the fall in the skilled wage as the increase in
segregation more than compensates for this.18
18

Note though that to examine the eÂ®ect on the representative skilled person from family type

28

The story told in Table 7b, however, is rather diÂ®erent. The smaller increase
in Â¸ (1.3%) resulting from the increase in segregation translates into a smaller
decrease in the skilled wage (.6%) and a smaller increase in the unskilled wage
(1.1%). As before, the expected utility of a skilled person increases. What is interesting to note, however, is that despite the wage increase unskilled individuals
are on the whole left worse oÂ® . Although they earn more, they are also less likely
to marry a skilled person, and this second eÂ®ect outweighs the Â¯rst.19 Unskilled
individuals would be willing to give up :58% of their original steady-state household income in order to remain in that steady state. Skilled individuals, on the
other hand, are made better oÂ® despite the fall in skilled wages as they are now
more sure of matching with another skilled individual. They would be willing to
sacriÂ¯ce .84% of the original steady state household income to change to the new
steady state. A surprising feature of Table 7b is that the welfare lost due to eÂ®ort
W actually falls despite the fact that more people are becoming skilled. This is
due to the change in the frequency of family types. As a result of the increase
in Â¸ and Âµ, there is a larger proportion of ss types which implies a tilt towards a
lower cost of becoming skilled.
In both supply cases, the inequality in utility increases despite the decrease
in income inequality as can be seen by the fact that Â° Â¤ Â´ V s Â¡ V u increases.
For the Â¯rst time, however, the ex-ante expected utility of an unborn individual
is higher in the new steady state (in both cases); all household incomes would
have to be increased by .55% and .36% in the original steady state in order to
achieve indiÂ®erence with the new steady state for the large and small response
cases respectively.
ij requires not only examining what happens to V

s

s

but rather to V Â¡

R Â°Â¤
0

Â°dG

G ij (Â° Â¤ )

since this will

take into account the expected eÂ®ort cost contingent on becoming skilled.
19
Since their chances of marrying a skilled person were not insigniÂ¯cant, the increased segregation does not have the eÂ®ect of making them better oÂ® by preserving 2 eÂ®ective rounds in
which to obtain a better than average quality match.

29

Table 7a
Increase in Segregation: Endogenous Responses{Large response
Âµ = :1
Âµ = :28
Â¸ 0.4916
0.5040
ws
54000
53350
wu
30000
30644
std log y 0.29385
0.27721
std logfy 0.25536
0.24824
Â¤
q
3.131
3.119
Q (q Â¤) 0.4444
0.4427
Â½ 0.5000
0.5987
Â¤
Â°
0.427
0.428
Vs
14.985
14.989
Vu
14.558
14.561
W
0.1809
0.1844
U
14.587
14.592
Â¢s = 0:0042 Â¢u = 0:0033 Â¢ = 0:0055
Table 7b
Increase in Segregation: Endogenous Responses{Small response
Âµ = :1
Âµ = :28
Â¸ 0.4916
0.4980
ws
54000
53664
wu
30000
30329
std log y 0.29385
0.28531
std logfy 0.25536
0.25568
qÂ¤
3.131
3.124
Â¤
Q (q ) 0.4444
0.4436
Â½ 0.5000
0.5994
Â¤
Â°
0.427
0.441
Vs
14.985
14.993
Vu
14.558
14.552
W -0.5477
-0.5794
U
15.315
15.351
Â¢s = 0:0084 Â¢u = Â¡0:0058 Â¢ = 0:0363
30

5.4. Robustness
We have checked the robustness of our results to various assumptions. For example, instead of assuming that individuals from uu families are mildly constrained,
we have assumed that there are no borrowing constraints for any family types.
The results are very similar. As shown in our Â¯rst exercise, the numbers obtained
are sensitive to the fertility distribution and to the degree of concavity of the Â¡ij 's.
Changes in the elasticity of substitution of labor types in the production function
aÂ®ect the impact of a change in Â¸ on the skill premium and hence on the income
distribution.

6. Conclusion
This paper presents a model of the intergenerational transmission of education
and marital sorting where parents matter both because of their household income
and because parental human capital determines the expected value of a child's
disutility from making an eÂ®ort to become skilled. We show that an increase in
segregation has potentially ambiguous eÂ®ects on the fraction of individuals that
become skilled in the steady state, and hence on marital sorting, the personal and
household income distribution, and welfare.
We calibrate the steady-state of our model to UK statistics and compare a
version of the model to the results obtained previously for the US. We Â¯nd that
segregation is likely to have a smaller negative impact in the UK than in the
US as a result of the fertility and education transmission process. In the model
in which both sorting and education is endogenous, we Â¯nd that an increase in
segregation will lead to a higher fraction of skilled individuals, a more compressed
income distribution, and higher welfare for skilled individuals. The eÂ®ect on the
welfare of unskilled individuals depends on the size of the supply response. For
a large response, their utility increases; for a small response, unskilled individuals
are made worse oÂ® despite the increase in their wage.

31

References
[1] Aiyagari, S. Rao, J. Greenwood, and N. Guner. \On the State of the Union."
Journal of Political Economy, 108 (2000), 213-244.
[2] Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara, \Participation in Heterogeneous
Communities," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXV (2000), 847-904.
[3] BÂ¶enabou, Roland, \Heterogeneity, StratiÂ¯cation and Growth," American
Economic Review, LXXXVI (1996), 584-609.
[4] Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, \Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural
Transmission, Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics CXV (2000), 955-87.
[5] Burdett. Ken, and Melvyn Coles, \Marriage and Class," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, CXII (1997), 141-68.
[6]

, \Transplants and Implants:
Improvement," mimeo, (1999).

The Economics of Self-

[7] Cole, Harold, George Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, \Social Norms, Savings Behavior and Growth," Journal of Political Economy, C (1992), 10921125.
[8] Cooper, Suzanne, \A Positive Theory of Income Redistribution," Journal of
Economic Growth, III (1998), 171-195.
[9] Durlauf, Steven, \A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality," Journal of Economic Growth, I (1995), 75-93.
[10] FernÂ¶andez, Raquel, \Sorting, Education and Inequality," in Advances in Economic Theory, Dewatripont, Hansen, and Turnovsky (Eds.), Cambridge University Press, forthcoming, 2001.
[11]

, Nezih Guner, and John Knowles, \Love and Money: A Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis of Household Sorting and Inequality," mimeo, 2001.

[12]

and Richard Rogerson, \Income Distribution, Communities and the
Quality of Public Education," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI (1996),
135-164.
32

[13]

, \Education Finance Reform: A Dynamic Perspective," Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, XVI (1997), 67-84.

[14]

, \Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform," American Economic Review, LXXXVIII (1998), 813-833.

[15]

, \Sorting and Long-Run Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[16] Green, Andy and Hilary Steedman, \Into the Twenty First Century: An
Assessment of British Skill ProÂ¯les and Prospects," Center for Economic
Performance, March 1997.
[17] Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner and John Knowles, \More on Marriage,
Fertility, and the Distribution of Income," University of Rochester, mimeo,
(1999).
[18] Heckman, J., L. Lochner, and C. Taber, \Explaining Rising Wage Inequality:
Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings
with Heterogeneous Agents," Review of Economic Dynamics, 1(1) (1998),
1-58.
[19] Jargowsky, Paul, \Take the Money and Run: Economic Segregation in US
Metropolitan Areas," American Sociological Review, LXI (1996), 984-998.
[20] Kane, T., \College Entry by Blacks since 1970: The Role of College Costs,
Family Background, and the Returns to Education," Journal of Political
Economy, 102(5) (1994), 878-911..
[21] Katz, Larry and David Autor, \Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality," in Handbook in Labor Economics, volume 3A, edited by Orley
Ashenfelter and David Card, (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1999).
[22] Kremer, Michael, \How Much Does Sorting Increase Inequality," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 115-139.
[23]

and Eric Maskin, \Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill," Harvard
University mimeo, 1996.

33

[24] Lee, Donghoon, \An Estimable Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of
Work, Schooling and Occupational Choice" mimeo, University of Pennsylvania, 2001.
[25] Machin, Steve \Wage Inequality in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s', in P. Gregg
and J. Wadsworth (eds.) The State of Working Britain, Manchester University Press, 1999.
[26] Mare, Robert, \Five Decades of Educational Assortative Mating," American
Sociological Review, LVI (1991), 15-32.
[27] Reich, Robert, \Secession of the Successful," New York Times Magazine,
Jan. 20 (1991).
[28] Wilson, William, J.,The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass Public Policy, Chicago, IL., University of Chicago Press, (1987).

34















































 
 






