                                  % &  




                 
                    


                                                
                                                !


                                           "#!  $"'()*
                                   $++,,,-""!+$ $".+,'()*


                         %      
                                /010  .. 23.. 43
                                     5-"6!7  08/('
                                        3




         ! !  
"!"# "!"$% &'(#  !'  )!$ !*(
**! *%++ ,  "-  %!" %&  !
        !    !    (     ' * . %! ( + (  
. %! (+/    .$+ !+  ! !! ! !0&% !!!  !+
 ! !! (!+'    +  *!0


1("20 (  * 0  !!% 0! !+ 
!(-       !! %  +    1  ! %
! 0
"!"   .2  .3. ,  "2 33" " .
.! 6  9. 6 6" .5
   6   !
% "#!  $"  '()*
3 800/
  :7 )7 07 87 (7 *7 17 ;7 :


                                                    

        . $ $" .36. ,  6.!       <.2  2.3  7 - 2 $ =! "!"  
.$4".   6 4 3.7 . -  $"2 <33" !" . <"5 9$"$"  6  !"  $5 
4.5  "!"   $3-2 !6.  $ "23 "7 , .36 ,  225$. . ! . -
2 !! , 65.. <  <.2  2.3 >/?  4 < !4"5  ,2 6<<" $.
< "!"   $3-2 !6. " ..!67 6 >8?   9 - . <  6<<" @3".62.  .,
   ."35. "A3"6  !"  2 $ =  <  "!"   .$4". 6$6  
$ <  .$4"   6  9  .  ..  ."35 <" $2.   5. !"  <.2 
.$4".7 .32 . 6- 6 $3-2 <" ."323" % 2" .7 "@3".62  25$ . 
..  ."35 <" $2.   5. !"  6"2 .$4".7 .32 . ""4".- 4"5 
6 5 !. 3""5"7 , .,    . $..-  6.!         <.2  2.3   !" . <3
2 $ =  < <.2  .$4".7 -3  !" 7     !" . <3 2 $ =  < 6"2
.$4".




                                                         !
$ "5 < 252.                                           $ "5 < 252.
4". < .                                               <"6 4".
@$2B33263                                                  6 %
                                                                  " !B 6. <"663
                                                                                                   1

1       Introduction

Governments make decisions that affect the well-being of future generations. In
particular, they issue debt that is repaid by future generations and decide how
much to invest in intergenerational public goods (IPGs). Some IPGs, such as public
infrastructure and environmental preservation, generate benefits for present and
future generations. Others, such as pure R&D, generate benefits mostly for future
generations.
    Given that public policy is made by present generations, the following two prob-
lems arise when they do not fully internalize the well-being of future generations: (1)
present generations have an incentive to use debt to expropriate future generations,
and (2) present generations have a tendency to under-invest in IPGs. Since the long
term well-being of a society depends on its ability to generate sufficient investment
in future generations, this creates an important problem in institutional design.
    When generations are selfish, as we assume in this paper,1 any institution that
solves this problem must find a mechanism to induce present generations to internal-
ize the well-being of future generations. As it has been pointed out in the literature2,
land provides such a mechanism: current generations own the land stock of the econ-
omy and thus care about the effect of public policy on land prices.3
    This paper studies how to design a fiscal constitution that, by capitalizing inter-
generational spillovers into land values, is able to protect future generations from
expropriation and to generate optimal investment in IPGs. We focus on how to
achieve these goals by changing two dimensions of the fiscal constitution: (1) the
level of government to which different types of IPGs are assigned, and (2) the tax
base of the different jurisdictions. We compare the ability of the following four
institutions to generate capitalization of intergenerational spillovers: a centralized
system with land taxation, a centralized system with income taxation, a federal
    This is the benchmark case for the types of problems studied here and provides the hardest test-
    1

bed for a fiscal constitution. A more realistic assumption would be to assume that agents exhibit
paternalistic (non-dynastical) altruism: agents care about the level of IPGs and debt passed to
future generations, but not about their welfare. However, paternalistic altruism by itself would
not eliminate the problem: present generations would still need institutional incentives to fully
internalize the well-being of future generations. (See Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff (1992,1997)
and Rangel (2001)).
    See Oates and Schwab (1988,1996), Glaeser (1996), Sprunger and Wilson (1998), and Brueckner
    2

and Joo (1991).
    Other assets, like stocks, are also traded across generations. In section Section 3.1 we describe
    3

the properties that make land an ideal asset to deal with these problems.
                                                                                                  2

system with land taxation, and a federal system with income taxation.
    An alternative to the institutions studied here would be a fiscal constitution that
fully specifies, in advance, the amount of debt and investments in IPGs that must
be made in every period and state of the economy. However, such a constitution is
not feasible. There exists a significant amount of uncertainty about the future and
as a result the sequence of optimal investments is not known in advance. A good
fiscal constitution addresses this fundamental incompleteness by placing constraints
on how decisions are made and how the government is financed.
    The contribution of this paper is three-fold. First, we show that to design a fiscal
constitution that protects future generations it is important to distinguish between
fiscal spillovers and direct spillovers. A policy generates a fiscal spillover if it affects
the budget constraint of future governments. For example, the debt increases the
amount of revenue that has to be raised by future governments, but has no other
effects. By contrast, a policy generates a direct spillover if it affects the technology
set of future generations. Irreversible environmental damages, like the extinction of
species, are an example of this type of spillover.
    Second, we show that land taxation is the essential instrument to generate full
capitalization of fiscal spillovers. Full capitalization of fiscal spillovers, including the
debt, arises in both centralized and federal systems as long as all intergenerational
expenditures are financed with land taxes. By contrast, full capitalization fails in
both cases if expenditures are financed with income taxes.
    Third, we show that interjurisdictional competition is the essential instrument to
generate the capitalization of direct spillovers. For these policies, interjurisdictional
competition generates capitalization effects that do not arise without decentraliza-
tion (or at the state level in the absence of mobility). Furthermore, the advantage of
decentralization for direct spillovers does not depend on the choice of the tax base.
Nevertheless, with a finite and small number of jurisdictions full capitalization of
direct intergenerational spillovers typically does not take place. This stands in sharp
contrast to the case of fiscal spillovers, where full capitalization is possible.
    There is a large body of literature on the design of fiscal constitutions.4 It
has focused on intragenerational and static aspects of the problem like the role of
heterogeneity in preferences, mobility, returns to scale in production, interjurisdic-
   4
    See Oates (1999), Rubinfeld (1987), and Wildasin (1986) for excellent reviews of the literature.
See also Inman and Rubinfeld (1996).
                                                                                                   3

tional spillovers, local informational advantages, experimentation, and asymmetries
between local and central politics. By contrast, this paper focuses on intergenera-
tional and dynamic issues.5
    A number of papers have also studied the design of intergenerational fiscal con-
stitutions. Most prominently, Oates and Schwab (1988,1996), Glaeser (1996), and
McKinnon and Nechyba (1997) have argued that interjurisdictional competition is
necessary to protect future generations. In their view, the ability to escape negative
spillovers by moving to other jurisdictions is the central mechanism for protecting
future generations. For example, Oates and Schwab (1996, p.327) state that: “The
capitalization of any changes in the values of local amenities into property values pro-
vides a powerful incentive for current residents in a jurisdiction to take into account
the effects of their decisions on future residents. The disciplinary force provided by
such capitalization is absent at the national level, for its source is the mobility of
individuals across jurisdictions. It is thus quite possible that decentralized decision
making on certain environmental issues provides more protection for the interests of
future generations than does a more centralized system”. Similarly, Glaeser (1996,
p.100) states that: “Property values do not reflect amenities on a nation-wide level
nearly as clearly as they do on the local level, because the migration costs between
countries are so much higher than the migration costs between jurisdictions.”
    In this paper we arrive at a different conclusion. First of all, we show that land
taxes provide an alternative mechanism for capitalizing fiscal spillovers. Not only
that, we show that full capitalization of fiscal spillovers arises with land taxation
both in centralized and decentralized systems, but in general, not in a decentralized
system with income taxation. Thus, land taxation, and not interjurisdictional com-
petition, is the essential mechanism for the capitalization of fiscal spillovers. This is
important because many IPGs that generate significant amounts of fiscal spillovers —
such as public infrastructure and R&D — also exhibit economies of scale and generate
   5
     The following papers also develop dynamic models of federal systems. Wildasin and Wilson
(1996) develop a dynamic model of land-value-maximizing local governments and show that it
generates inefficient levels of generational public goods. Sprunger and Wilson (1998) study the
capitalization of intergenerational spillovers in a dynamic model. They study pure federal systems
                             intra


in a partial equilibrium framework in which there is full capitalization of the spillovers. They show
that the introduction of asymmetric information between residents and outsiders can eliminate the
full capitalization result, leading to under or over-investment in IPGs. Brueckner and Joo (1991)
study how capitalization effects influence how residents vote on local elections. As we assume in
this paper, they show that agents are not pure property value maximizers, but also care about the
taxes that they pay and their own consumption of public goods.
                                                                                      4

interjurisdictional spillovers. If the insights from these papers were correct, there
would be no hope of designing a fiscal constitution that generates optimal provision
of these programs: there would be an inescapable conflict between the provision of
intergenerational incentives and the basic principle of fiscal decentralization, which
says that programs should be allocated to the lowest jurisdiction that encompass
all of the interjurisdictional spillovers. This is also important because, if decentral-
ization was the only institution capable of stopping intergenerational expropriation
through the debt, then restrictions on the federal government’s ability to raise debt
would be necessary. In addition, interjurisdictional competition does play a role
in the capitalization of direct spillovers such as irreversible environmental damage.
But even then the intergenerational case for decentralization needs to be qualified:
full capitalization is typically not possible for these types of policies.
    Two essential factors explain why we arrive at different conclusions than the
previous literature. First, previous studies do not consider the case of centralized
institutions with land taxation. Second, and most important, previous studies work
in a partial equilibrium framework by assuming that there is an infinite number of
jurisdictions. The assumption of partial equilibrium is not innocuous in this context:
with an infinite number of jurisdictions decentralization generates full capitalization
of all intergenerational spillovers regardless of the tax base. By contrast, in the
empirically relevant case of a finite and small number of jurisdictions, the choice of
the tax base becomes important and full capitalization of direct intergenerational
spillovers is no longer possible.
    Several other papers are related to the issues studied here. Rangel (2001)6 stud-
ies the political economy of IPGs in a centralized system without land but with
a richer set of public policies. He shows that present generations can be given an
incentive to care about future generations through a political economy mechanism:
there are equilibria in which present generations invest in IPGs such as long term
environmental quality because otherwise they do not receive social security benefits
in old age. The comparison in the performance of the two institutions is stark.
There is a wide class of environments where a centralized system with land taxation
generates optimal investment in future generations and no intergenerational redis-
tribution, but a centralized system without land taxation does not. Kotlikoff and
Rosenthal (1993) study the ability of a pure federal system with two jurisdictions
  6
      See also Boldrin and Montes (1998).
                                                                                                                        5

                                   generation t                                                    period
                                      born                       election                           ends


                       period t                   land market,              policy implemented,
                       starts                     old consume               consumption of young
                                                     and die




                                   Figure 1: Timing of a period.
and income taxation to generate optimal investment in an IPG that only generates
direct intergenerational spillovers. They derive a result similar to Theorem 7 in this
paper. Finally, Epple and Schipper (1981), Inman (1982,1990), Johnson (1997), and
Mumy (1978) have studied the extent to which expropriation of future generations
can take place in a federal system through partially funded state and local public
pension systems.
2 Basic Model
Consider a simple overlapping generations economy. Every period t = 1, 2, ... a new
generation of constant size N is born and lives for two periods. Agents have identical
preferences and economic opportunities. Every period there are three goods: a
generic consumption good, land, and a public good. The consumption good is
adopted as a numeraire. The amount of land in the economy is fixed and equal to
L.

     In the first period of life agents supply labor inelastically in exchange for a wage
w.   In the second period they do not work. Agents can borrow and save at the
constant interest rate       r >   0. These assumptions hold in a closed economy that has
an aggregate production function of the form                          F (K, λ)        =    wλ      + (1 + r)K , where   λ

denotes labor and     K     denotes capital, or in a small open economy in which capital
is mobile, labor is not, and the world equilibrium interest rate is r.
     The timing of a period is depicted in Figure 1. At the beginning of the period
generation   t   is born and receives its wage. Immediately after, a land market takes
place in which the young purchase the land stock from the elderly. The elderly
then consume all of their savings, including the proceeds from land sales, and die.
Afterwards there is an election in which public policy for the period is decided. The
period ends with the implementation of the chosen policies and the consumption
and savings decisions of the young.
                                                                                                              6


   Note that, since the elderly die at the beginning of the period, generations ba-
sically live for one period. In the second period they are alive just long enough to
be able to sell the land and to consume their financial assets. This is the simplest
demographic structure that gives rise to the intergenerational issues that we study.
The crucial assumption is that agents care about the price at which they can sell
their land in old age.
   The preferences of generation t are given by              U (cy , co , l, Gt ),   where   cy   and   co   de-
note their consumption when young and old,               l   denotes their consumption of land,
and   Gt   denotes their consumption of intergenerational public goods during their
youth. Since savings have no effect on wages or asset returns, agents are never liq-
uidity constrained, and savings play no role in our analysis, we simplify the notation
by working with the reduced form utility function:
                                                                         c   o
                 V (x, l, Gt )   ≡ max
                                    y
                                   c ,co
                                         U (cy , co , l, Gt ) s.t. cy +
                                                                        1+r
                                                                            = x.                             (1)

We assume that V is twice continuously differentiable, strictly increasing, strictly
concave, and satisfies the Inada conditions in all of the arguments. The following
notation will be useful below. Let

                             l(p, G)     ≡ arg max
                                               l≥0
                                                   V (w − pl, l, G).


We assume that l(p, G) is decreasing in p, and strictly decreasing if l > 0. We can
think of l(·, G) as the demand function for land in a “static” economy where the
level of public goods is given exogenously.
    Every period t the government makes two decisions: (1) how much to invest
on intergenerational public goods (IPGs), denoted by I ; and (2) how much debt
                                                                        t

to issue. Let D denote the amount of debt at the end of the period. The gov-
                  t

ernment can borrow and lend at the fixed interest rate r. The only restriction on
the government’s ability to issue debt is a debt ceiling Dmax ≤ rwN . Given this
inequality, every generation has enough resources to service any amount of the debt
that it receives from the previous generation. Another rationale for the debt ceiling
is discussed in the next section.
    Given these two decisions, and the debt inherited from the previous generation,
the amount of taxes that must be raised in period t is given by
                                   It   + rD −1 − (D − D +1).
                                            t        t         t
                                                                                      7

Note that the debt can be negative: the government could leave a trust-fund to
future generations. Also, the debt inherited from previous generations imposes
restrictions on present governments. For example, if s = Dmax the government
                                                          D

needs to raise at least rDmax units of revenue.
    As discussed in the introduction, it is important to distinguish between fiscal and
direct intergenerational spillovers. A policy in period t generates a fiscal spillover
on generation t + 1 if it affects the budget constraint of the government in period
t + 1. By contrast, a policy in period t generates a direct spillover if it affects the

technology of the economy in period t +1. The debt is an example of a government
policy that only generates fiscal spillovers: each unit of inherited debt increases the
revenue requirement of the government by 1 + r units, but has no other effects.
Irreversible environmental public goods, like the extinction of an species, are an
example of direct spillovers.
    We study two extreme types of IPGs: durable public goods (DPGs) and pure
IPGs. The technology for DPGs in period t is given by
                                 G = (1 − δ )G −1 + I ;
                                  t              t    t                              (2)
where I denotes the amount of investment in period t, and δ ∈ (0, 1) denotes the
        t

depreciation rate. Also, DPGs are reversible: a generation can choose to de-invest
and consume the DPGs that it receives from the previous generation. Thus, I can   t

be negative, although it is bounded below: I ≥ −(1 − δ)G −1. The key feature of
                                                 t             t

DPGs is that they only generate fiscal spillovers. Since DPGs are reversible, each
unit of DPGs produced in period t increases the budget of the government in period
t + 1 by 1 − δ units. By contrast, the technology for pure IPGs is given by


                                       G = I −1 .
                                        t    t


The key feature of pure IPGs is that they only generate direct spillovers. In fact,
pure IPGs are an extreme form of direct spillovers since the level of public goods
consumed by generation t is determined entirely by the previous generation. Most
IPGs generate a mixture of fiscal and direct spillovers. DPGs and pure IPGs are
useful conceptual devices because they allow us to isolate the ability of an institution
to capitalize fiscal and direct spillovers.
    At time t = 1 there is also an old generation 0 that owns the land and only lives
for that period. Let G0, I0, and D0 denote the initial levels of IPGs, investment,
and debt. We assume that G0 = I0 = D0 = 0.
                                                                                              8

    There is a single branch of government and decisions are made by standard
majority rule. When there are multiple jurisdictions, only the residents of the juris-
diction have the right to vote. Formally, we model the elections as a direct vote over
the feasible policy space. However, given that agents are homogenous, this model of
politics generates identical outcomes to any model of representative democracy in
which Condorcet winners are selected whenever they exist. This includes the stan-
dard Downsian model of two party competition with binding campaign promises.
    Given the stationary and symmetric nature of the model, we focus on symmetric
Markovian allocations and equilibria. The state of the economy at the beginning
of period t is denoted by s ≡ (s , s ), where s denotes the amount of IPGs
                                        G   D             G

received from the previous generation, and s = D −1. These two variables measure
                                                  D       t

the amount of intergenerational spillovers generated by government policy. The
formula for s depends on the type of IPG. In the case of DPGs it is given by
               G

s ≡ (1 − δ )G −1 . For pure IPGs it is given by s ≡ I −1. The inclusion of other
 G              t                                        G      t

variables in the state space, like savings, has no effect on our results.
    In the following four sections we study four institutions that differ on the tax
base that they use to finance intergenerational expenditures (land versus income
taxes) and on their jurisdictional structure (centralization versus decentralization).
A comparison of these institutions will allows us to understand the role that land
taxes and federalism play on the capitalization of intergenerational spillovers, and
thus on the provision of IPGs and on intergenerational expropriation.
3 Centralized Systems with Land Taxation
We start the analysis with the case of a centralized system where land is the only tax
instrument: the government can only raise taxes using a proportional tax per-unit
of land.7
    Let (I (s), D(s)) denote a policy rule that specifies the level of investment and
debt in state s. Given this policy rule, land taxes are given by
                                  I (s) + (1 + r)sD − D(s)
                          τ (s) ≡                          .
                                                  L
     7
     Other methods of land taxation are possible; for example, taxes based on the market value
of land, or taxes based on measures of land productivity. See Skinner (1991) for a discussion of
different methods of land taxation and the difficulties in implementing them. For example, taxes
on the market value of land require frequent assessments by the tax authority and involve large
transaction costs. By contrast, taxes based on land area are easier to implement.
                                                                                                     9


The following objects are also useful. ∆(s)                 ≡ D(s) − sD denotes the change in the
government debt.                         
                                G(s) ≡        sG + I (s)
                                                  for DPGs
                                                for pure IPGs
                                                 sG

denotes the amount of public goods consumed in state s. Finally, σ(s) denotes the
state that the policy rule generates at the beginning of period t + 1 when the state
in period t is s.
    The restriction to land taxation does not rule out intergenerational expropria-
tion. For example, if sD = 0 the government could raise up to Dmax units of revenue
using debt and use it to give a transfer to current generations. The institution, how-
ever, places a restriction on the form of these transfers: all transactions between the
government and the citizens must take place through the land tax (or subsidy).
DEFINITION 1:                  An equilibrium for a centralized system with land taxes is
       given by an allocation (l(s), G(s)), a policy rule (I (s), D(s)), and land prices
        ( ) satisfying, for each s:8
       p s


       1. Land market equilibrium:

             ( ) ∈ arg max       V (w − l(p(s) + τ (s) − p(σ(s)) ), l,G(s)) and l(s)N = L.
             l s
                          l   ≥0                          1+r
       2. Political equilibrium: Given the land holdings l(s), the land prices p(s),
       and the capitalization function p(·), (I (s), D(s)) is a Condorcet winner in the
       set of feasible policies Π(s).9
    The equilibrium notion requires rational expectations and sequential rationality.
Individuals make decisions twice during their life: in the land market and in the
election. At every stage, agents take as given present and future prices, and the
   8
    Formally, an allocation also includes a description of the amount consumed by young and old in
every state: cy (s) and co (s). Given the objectives of the paper, and the assumptions of the model,
we do not explicitly keep track of these variables. However, for any equilibrium, cy (s) and co (s) are
defined by:
                                                  y o
                                     arg max U(c , c , l(s), G(s))
                                             cy ,co
s.t.
                                      co
                                y
                               c +
                                     1+r
                                         =w       − l(s)(p(s) + τ (s) − p(σ(s))
                                                                         1+r
                                                                                ).


   9 A policy (I, D) is feasible in state s satisfies:
                                                  (1) I ≥ −s in the case of DPGs, and I ≥ 0 in the
case of pure IPGs; (2) 0 ≤ τ l(s) ≤ w − l(s)[p(s) − p1+(σr) ], where τ and σ are the land tax and the
continuation state generated by (I, D); and (3) D ≤ Dmax .
                                                                                        10

outcome of future elections. Consider the land market first. When an agent decides
how much land to buy, he takes as given present and future land prices and the
outcome of the election that will take place later in the period. The outcome of the
election is important because it determines the land tax rate and the price at which
the agent will be able to sell the land. In this sense, agents are price takers and
policy takers. Land prices adjust to clear the land market in every state.
    Now consider the election. Suppose, for example, that the public goods are
DPGs. At this time land holdings are fixed. Agents take as given the capitalization
function p(·), which gives the relationship between the outcome of the election and
the price at which agents will be able to sell their land. Since agents are homogenous,
the preferences of the representative agent over policies (I, D) are given by
   V (w − l(s)[p(s) + (1 + r)sDL + I − D − p((1 − δ )(   I + sG ), D) ], l(s), s + I ). (3)
                                                       1+r                      G
The choice of investment affects their consumption of DPGs, but also the future
price of land. The choice of debt only affects their life-time wealth. With homoge-
nous agents, a Condorcet winner exists as long as there is a pair (I (s), D(s)) that
maximizes (2) on the set of feasible policies Π(s).
    Note that an equilibrium specifies what happens at any possible state of the
economy, even at states that are never reached in equilibrium. In particular, it
specifies how land prices p(s) change for any possible political decision. In this
economy, this capitalization function is the only mechanism through which present
generations internalize the spillovers that they generate on future generations.
3.1 Fiscal Spillovers
The following result characterizes the outcome of the centralized institution with
land taxation when government policy only generates fiscal spillovers.
THEOREM 1: Consider an economy with DPGs, a centralized system with land
   taxation, and a debt ceiling max ≤ (1+
                                        Lp .10 This institution generates equi-
                                          r) D

         libria of the following form:
                                             s       L and G s      G
                                            l( ) =
                                                     N      ( ) =       ,




                                       τs        G − sG rsD − D s , ∆       ( )
                                       ( ) =
                                                 L L L  +
                                                              L                        (4)


  10
       p is a constant given in (5).
                                                                                      11



                     any feasible level of debt with   D(s) ≤ Dmax, and
                                p(s) = p + sLG − (1 +Lr)sD ;                         (5)

      where   G and p are uniquely defined constants.
      The allocation generated by these equilibria is Pareto optimal.

   Note a few interesting properties of these equilibria. First, there is full capi-
talization of fiscal spillovers. An additional  unit of DPGs bequeathed to the next
generation increases the value of the land stock by one unit; an additional unit of
debt decreases it by 1 + r units.
    Second, given that there is full capitalization of fiscal spillovers, no intergenera-
tional redistribution is possible: the life-time wealth of a generation is not affected
by the actions of previous generations. DPGs are reversible and each unit of inher-
ited DPGs increases the government budget by one unit. This is a transfer from
generation t to generation t +1. An extra unit of inherited DPGs also increases the
value of the land stock by one unit. Since the trading of land generates a transfer
from generation t +1 to generation t, the two transfers cancel each other. A similar
argument applies for the debt.
    Third, the allocation is state independent. This follows from the fact that full
capitalization of fiscal spillovers makes intergenerational transfers impossible. As
a result, regardless of the history of the economy, every generation faces the same
problem.
    Fourth, the institution generates a Pareto optimal allocation. This follows be-
cause voters are homogeneous — with heterogeneous agents, majority rule generally
leads to sub-optimal decisions — and because, with full capitalization, voters fully
internalize the fiscal spillovers generated by the DPGs. With heterogenous agents,
the full capitalization result in Theorem 1 still holds, but the level of DPGs chosen
need not be Pareto optimal. This failure of optimality, however, is due solely to the
limitations of majority rule as a collective decision making mechanism.
    Fifth, the levels of debt and land taxes are not pinned down by the model. The
level of debt is irrelevant since any attempt to pass debt to future generations is
fully undone by changes in the land prices. But then, consider a generation who
decides to finance its expenditures on DPGs with debt, instead of land taxes. That
generation pays less taxes when young, but sees the present value of land decrease
                                                                                     12

by exactly the same amount. This allows them to postpone their taxes until the
second period of their lives, but not to escape them.
    The intuition behind the result is simple. Since DPGs are fully reversible, a unit
of DPGs inherited from the previous generation gives the government one unit of
the fully rivalrous consumption good. The commitment to use land taxes implies
that a voter’s claim on these resources depends on how much land he owns. In other
words, the commitment to use the land tax transforms the public spillover into a
private rent per-unit of land. This private rent is given by the term − sLG in (4).
These private rents shift the demand for land on a one-to-one basis: an extra unit
of private rents per-unit of land increases the agent’s willingness to pay for land by
exactly by one unit. This shift in demand generates the full capitalization of the
fiscal spillovers given by the term sLG in (5). The intuition for the debt is similar.
A unit of debt inherited from the previous generation creates a burden of 1 + r on
the government. The commitment to use the land tax transforms this burden into
a negative rent per-unit of land equal to − 1+Lr .
    Three properties of land are essential for generating this result: (1) land is
infinitely lived and sold from generation to generation, (2) land is supplied inelasti-
cally, and (3) land trades at a positive value even in the absence of intergenerational
spillovers. The first property makes present generations care about capitalization
effects, which is the central mechanism at work in the institutions studied in this
paper. The second property is essential for the full capitalization result, and thus
for optimal decision making: every unit of damage to future generations must reduce
the value of land by exactly one unit. If land were supplied elastically, we would get
positive but not full capitalization. For this reason we focus on land taxes, and not
on property taxes. Land is supplied inelastically. Property, with its combination
of land and capital, is not. The third property is essential to be able to capitalize
negative fiscal spillovers like the debt: if the asset has no value, its price cannot go
down in response to an increased level of debt. There is nothing special about land
beyond these three properties.
    Oates and Schwab (1988,1996), Glaeser (1996), and McKinnon and Nechyba
(1997) have argued that interjurisdictional competition is essential to protect future
generations from expropriation through the debt, and to generate incentives to invest
optimally in future generations. Theorem 1 shows that this is not the case. A
centralized system generates full capitalization of intergenerational fiscal spillovers
                                                                                                   13

as long as the fiscal constitution restricts the tax base to land taxes. Furthermore,
as we will see in section 6, the land tax and decentralization are not alternative
mechanisms to induce full capitalization of fiscal spillovers: full capitalization of
fiscal spillovers typically fails in a decentralized system with income taxation. Thus,
a credible commitment through the fiscal constitution to use land taxes is the central
mechanism behind the full capitalization of fiscal spillovers.
    Now we provide another rationale for the debt ceiling. Given the restriction to
land taxes, a debt ceiling is needed to guarantee the existence of equilibria. The
debt ceiling requires (1 + r)D(s) ≤ pL; i.e., the total fiscal burden generated by the
debt must be less than the value of land (net of intergenerational spillovers). One
can show that if this inequality is violated, there are states of the economy in which
the aggregate demand for land is less than L for any non-negative price, and thus
the land market cannot clear.
    We end this section with some technical comments about the result. The most
important comment is that we have not been able to prove that these are the only
symmetric Markovian equilibria in the infinite model, nor have we been able to
construct other equilibria. We argue, however, that even if there are other equilibria,
a case can be made in favor of the equilibria that we characterize. First, we know that
the equilibria in Theorem 1 are the only equilibria in a finite version of the model11
where a standard backward induction argument shows that, under our assumptions,
all of the equilibria exhibit full capitalization of fiscal spillovers. (There is not a
unique equilibrium because with full capitalization of fiscal spillovers the path of the
debt is not pinned down). Second, any other equilibria of the infinite model would
have a “bubble-like” structure: in some states the demand for land would increase,
not because of a changes in the real fiscal spillovers received from the previous
generation, but because changes in the state of the world would affect agent’s believes
about the future base-line price of land (a change in the p). Such equilibria, if they
exist, are less plausible than the equilibria characterized in Theorem 1. In our
equilibria, all that voters need to understand is that any land rents left to the
  11
     The finite version of the model has a finite number of generations, say T , who live for two
periods. There is a last generation T + 1 who only lives for one period. This generation buys
the land stock from generation T but does not sell it to anyone else, benefits from the previous
investments in IPGs but does not generate spillovers for another generation, and fulfills the debt
obligations that it receives from generation T . Under our assumptions for l(p), all of the equilibria
of this model generate full capitalization as in Theorem 1, although the baseline level of land taxes
and land prices (τ and p) can change with time.
                                                                                        14


next generation will be incorporated into land prices through the usual forces. By
contrast, the bubble-like equilibria would require agents to forecast changes in the
demand for land that are not due to fundamentals and that have not been observed
before. Were would such forecasts come from? This discussion on uniqueness also
applies to Theorems 3, 4 and 5. In each case, our results hold at every equilibrium
of the finite version of the model.
       We have assumed that land is not an input of production. This is not central
to the result. Consider a linear aggregate production function F (K, λ, lp) = wλ +
(1 + r)K + vlp , where λ and lp denote the amount of labor and land inputs, and K
denotes capital. The profit maximization conditions of the firm imply that, in any
equilibrium, the total price of land

                         pT (s) ≡ p(s) + τ (s) − p((1 − δ1)G+(rs), D(s))               (6)

must be equal to v . This generates a full capitalization result identical to the one
in Theorem 1.12 Interestingly, it does not matter that firms pay land taxes even
though they do not vote, or that the households only own a fraction of the land
stock. With full capitalization, the total price of land is always constant and thus
the amount of land purchased by the firms is also constant. Thus, the household’s
market and voting problems have not changed.
       Finally, we have assumed that the aggregate production function takes a linear
form. Consider instead a general production function F (K, λ, lp ) satisfying constant
returns to scale. The results in Theorem 1 hold at the steady state. The intuition
is simple. With full capitalization there are no intergenerational transfers. Thus, at
the steady state the savings of a generation are not affected by the public policy
decisions of the pervious generation. As a result, the economy remains in the steady
state. Things are more complicated outside the steady state because the problem
is no longer stationary. We conjecture, but have not proven, that it is possible to
extend the results to this case: there is full capitalization of fiscal spillovers, and the
allocation is not affected by the previous public policy decisions.

3.2       Direct Spillovers


Now consider the performance of this institution when intergenerational public
goods only generate direct spillovers.
  12
       The proof in the appendix goes through with minor modifications.
                                                                                      15


THEOREM 2: Consider an economy with pure IPGs, a centralized system with
      land taxation, and no government debt. Suppose that agents have additively
      separable preferences of the form W (c, l) + Z (G). This institution generates a
      unique equilibrium of the following form:
                          ( ) = NL , G(s) = τ (s) = 0, and p(s) = p.
                         l s



      This allocation is not Pareto optimal: it is possible to generate a Pareto im-
      provement that increases the level of DPGs in every period t ≥ 2.
    The performance of the institution with pure IPGs stands in stark contrast with
the case of DPGs: no investment in future generations takes place. The problem is
that this institution is able to capitalize fiscal spillovers, but not direct spillovers.
In section 5 we show that decentralization can help in this case.
    A comparison of Theorems 1 and 2 shows that the choice of land taxation to
finance intergenerational programs has a profound impact in the capitalization of
fiscal spillovers, but not on the capitalization of direct spillovers. The intuition for
this difference is simple. Fiscal spillovers can be transformed into private rents using
land taxes, direct spillovers cannot.
    The no capitalization result in Theorem 2 depends on having additively separable
preferences of the form W (c, l) + Z (G). This is the reason. In a land market
equilibrium the total price of land, as defined in (6), must be equal to the marginal
rate of substitution between c and l, given the anticipated level G(s) of DPGs.
With pure IPGs, G(s) depends on s since G(s) = I −1. With additive separable
                                                         t

preferences, this does not affect the marginal rate of substitution and thus land
prices. Without additive separability, a capitalization effect appears that is due, not
to the direct value of the IPGs inherited from the previous generation, but to the
effect of the IPGs on the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
land. Interestingly, these indirect capitalization effects can be positive or negative,
and their size is not related to the value of the public goods. Thus, this type of
capitalization effects are not a reliable mechanism for generating optimal investment
in future generations. A similar comment applies to Theorems 3 and 5-7, were we
also assume that agents have additively separable preferences.
                                                                                                          16

4 Centralized System with Income Taxation
Now consider a centralized institution with income taxation. Since agents are iden-
tical, and labor supply is inelastic, we model the income taxes as lump-sum taxes.
    In the rest of the paper we simplify the model by assuming that the government
must balance the budget every period. This is without any conceptual loss. Given
that DPGs and debt only generate fiscal spillovers, adding debt has no effect on the
results: every capitalization result for DPGs extends immediately to the debt.
    The state of the world now is one-dimensional and given by s ≡ sG . Let I (s)
denote a policy rule that specifies the level of investment in state s. Given this
policy rule, lump-sum taxes are given by
                                      T (s) ≡ IN(s) .
The definition of G(s) has not changed. The mapping σ(s) is now uni-dimensional
and given by               
                    σ(s) ≡ (1 − δ)(ssGG + I (s)) forforpure
                                                         DPGs .
                                                            IPGs
DEFINITION            2:        An equilibrium for a centralized system with income taxes is
       given by an allocation (l(s), G(s)), a policy rule I (s), and land prices p(s)
       satisfying, for each s:

       1. Land market equilibrium:

            ( ) ∈ arg max
           l s
                           l   ≥0
                                    V (w − T (s) − l(p(s) − p1(σ+(sr)) ), l,G(s)) and l(s)N = L.
       2. Political equilibrium: Given the land holdings l(s), the land prices p(s),
       and the capitalization function p(·), I (s) is a Condorcet winner in the set of
       feasible policies Π(s).13
4.1 Fiscal Spillovers
The following result characterizes the performance of the institution when there are
only fiscal spillovers:
  13
                                                                               ≥−
   In this institution, a policy I is feasible in state s if it satisfies: (1) I       s in the case of DPGs,
and I  ≥0 in the case of pure IPGs; and (2) 0       ≤ ≤ −
                                                     T     w l(s)[p(s) p1+−    (σ )
                                                                                 r  ], where  T and σ are the
income tax and continuation state generated by I.
                                                                                     17


THEOREM 3: Consider an economy with DPGs, a centralized system with in-
      come taxation, and no government debt.
      (1) If agents have quasi-linear preferences of the form W (l, G) + c this insti-
      tution generates equilibria of the form:
                                       , G(s) = G, T (s) = T −   , and p(s) = p;
                                     L                         s
                          l(s)   =
                                     N                         N

      where G, T , and p are uniquely defined constants.
      The allocation generated by this equilibrium is not Pareto optimal: it is possible
      to generate a Pareto improvement that increases the level of DPGs in every
      period t ≥ 1.
      (2) If agents have Cobb-Douglas preferences of the form cαlβ Gγ , this institu-
      tion generates equilibria of the form:
                                                   L
                                          l(s) =       ,   G(s) = G + ηs,
                                                   N


                                   − (1 −Nη)s , and p(s) = p + πs;
                                 T (s) = T

      where G, T , p, π ∈ (0, α+
                               β 1 ), and η ∈ (0, γ ) are uniquely defined constants.
                                βL               α+γ
      The allocation generated by this equilibrium is not Pareto optimal: it is possible
      to generate a Pareto improvement that increases the level of DPGs in every
      period   t   ≥ 1.
   The fir  st part of the result shows that with quasi-linear preferences there is
no capitalization of fiscal spillovers. This necessarily generates an inefficiently low
level of DPGs. The second part of the result shows that without quasi-linearity
some but not full capitalization of fiscal spillovers can arise. Since π < α+β β L1 ,
increasing the amount of DPGs passed to the next generation by one unit increases
the value of the land stock by less than one unit. But then, present generations do
not fully internalize the fiscal spillovers and the level of DPGs is inefficiently low.
The mechanism behind this partial capitalization is very different from the one for
land taxes: it is driven by income effects. A higher level of DPGs makes the next
generation wealthier. If land is a normal good this generates a positive capitalization
effect.
    The result extends to the debt. With less than full capitalization intergenera-
tional redistribution is possible and generations have an incentive to raise as much
                                                                                     18

debt as possible. A comparison of Theorems 1 and 3 shows that in centralized
systems a commitment to finance intergenerational expenditures with land taxes is
essential to get full capitalization of fiscal spillovers and to avoid intergenerational
expropriation through the debt.
    It is important to emphasize that a commitment to finance intergenerational
expenditures with land taxes is not incompatible with intragenerational redistribu-
tion. All of our capitalization results are easily extended to a world with hetero-
geneous agents. In that case the fiscal constitution describes a tax system with
two orthogonal tiers. Tier 1 deals with intergenerational issues. Tier 2 deals with
intragenerational redistribution. The two tiers are orthogonal if intergenerational
expenditures are fully absorbed by the taxes in Tier 1.
4.2   Direct Spillovers


Now consider the case in which there are only direct spillovers. A straightforward
extension of Theorem 2 to the case of income taxation shows that, with additively
separable preferences of the form W (c, l) + Z (G), a centralized system with income
taxation generates no capitalization of direct spillovers, and thus no investment in
pure IPGs.
    This, together with Theorem 2, imply that with these preferences it is not pos-
sible to generate any capitalization of direct spillovers in a centralized institution.
In the next section we show that for this type of spillovers decentralization plays a
crucial role.
5     Federal System with Land Taxation
Now consider federal systems with land taxation. The key difference between this
institution and a centralized system with land taxation is that interjurisdictional
competition introduces an additional capitalization mechanism. New generations
prefer to move to jurisdictions with a more attractive package of intergenerational
spillovers, which increases the price of land in those jurisdictions.
    In a pure federal system the nation is divided into J identical jurisdictions with
L =      units of land. Each jurisdiction decides how much to invest in a local IPG,
      L
 J    J

like local public infrastructure. Let G denote the level of local IPGs in period t and
                                       j
                                       t

jurisdiction j, and I the level of investment. Since the IPGs are local, investment in
                    j
                    t
                                                                                                                                19

one jurisdiction has no effect on the level of IPGs in other jurisdictions. As before,
for DPGs G = (1 − δ)G −1 + I , and for pure IPGs G = I −1.
                          j
                          t
                                                          j
                                                          t
                                                                    j
                                                                    t
                                                                                                    j
                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                            j
                                                                                                            t

    Let s = (s1, ..., s ) denote the state of the economy in period t. Given a policy
             t                t
                                              J
                                              t

rule I (s) for jurisdiction j , land taxes are given by
         j



                                               I (s)                               j
                                      τ (s) ≡        .                     j
                                                                                   LJ

As before, let σ (s) denote the state of jurisdiction j in period t + 1 if the state
                                  j


in period t is s. N (s) denotes the number of residents in jurisdiction j, and l (s)
                                          j                                                                                 j


the amount of land that they consume. To simplify the analysis, we do not require
N (s) = j (J ) to take integer values.14
  j               L
              l       s

       The notion of equilibrium for a federal system with land taxation is a natural
extension of Definition 1.

DEFINITION 3:                                     An equilibrium for a federal system with land taxation is given
         by an allocation (  N (s),l (s),G (s)) =1, a policy rule (I (s)) =1, and land
                                                              j        j       j   J
                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                j       J
                                                                                                                        j


         prices (p (s)) =1 satisfying, for each s:
                              j           J
                                          j



         1. Land market equilibrium:

                  l (s) ∈ arg max V (w − l(p (s) + τ (s) − p 1(σ+(sr)) ), l, G (s)) for all j,
                                                                                                j
                  j                                                        j       j                            j

                               ≥0                 l




              V (w − l (s)(p (s) + τ (s) − p 1(σ+(sr)) ), l (s), G (s)) = U (s) for all j ,
                                                                               j




                                                  N
                                      j               j            j                    j           j
                                                                                                                                (7)
                                                              j(  s) = N , and lj (s)N j (s) = LJ for all j.
                                                      j

         2. Political equilibrium: Every jurisdiction , given the number of agents in       j
         the jurisdiction   N j (s), land holdings lj (s), the capitalization function pj ( ),                                  ·

         and the choices of the other jurisdictions I −j (s), chooses a Condorcet winner
         I j (s) in the set of feasible policies Πj (s,I −j (s)).15
       This equilibrium notion is based on the following two economic assumptions.
First, there are no “locational costs” for the new generations: at the time of the land
market they can purchase land in any jurisdiction and, ex-ante, the jurisdictions are
  14
       Alternatively, we could have assumed that there is a continuum of agents.
  15
                                                                                   ≥ −sj inj the
       In this institution, I is feasible in state s and jurisdiction j if it satisfies: (1) I
case of DPGs, and I ≥ 0 in the case of pure IPGs; and (2) 0 ≤ τ l (s) ≤ w − l (s)[pj (s) − 1+r ],
                                                                                           p (σ )       j           j

where τ and σ are the land tax and continuation state generated by (I, I −j (s)).
                                                                                              20


identical. By assumption, they purchase land in at most one jurisdiction. Second,
there is no short-term migration: after the generations choose where to locate, they
stay there for the rest of the period. Since in this model agents die right after they
sell the land in the second period of life, there is no mid-life migration. In a more
realistic (but not nearly as tractable) model with multi-period lives, the definition of
equilibrium would require agents to stay in the jurisdiction for the rest of the period,
but not for the rest of their lives. In other words, the essence of the assumption
is that agents cannot leave the jurisdiction immediately after the election: they
are stuck with the outcome of the election for at least one period. In equilibrium,
however, they anticipate the policies that will be enacted, and thus can move into
jurisdictions that will enact their preferred policy.16

5.1 Fiscal Spillovers
The following result shows that the institution generates full capitalization of local
fiscal spillovers.

THEOREM 4: Consider an economy with local DPGs, a federal system with land
       taxation, and no debt. This institution generates equilibria of the following
       form:
                                     (s) = LNJ , Gj (s) = G,
                                      l
                                          j                                        (8)
                          τ j (s) = LG − Ls , and pj (s) = p + Ls .
                                           j                     j
                                                                                   (9)
                                      J     J                    J

    The proof of the result is a straightforward extension of Theorem 1 and shows
that interjurisdictional competition plays no role in the result. To see this, suppose
that there is no mobility across the jurisdictions: each jurisdiction has NJ agents
in every period and new generations must live in the same jurisdiction than their
parents. By Theorem 1, the equilibrium of this institution is the allocation and
policy rule described in (8) and (9). We claim that this is also an equilibrium when
there is mobility. Consider the land market first. Given the prices and policy rule,
the non-mobility condition in (7) is satisfied in each state. Thus, this allocation is
also a land market equilibrium when mobility is possible. Now consider the electoral
  16
    By contrast, other authors (see Epple and Romer (1991)) assume that agents are myopic at the
time of the election, but can move away right after the election. That is a natural assumption in
the static framework used in that literature, but is conceptually problematic in a dynamic model
since it only requires feasibility along the equilibrium path.
                                                                                       21

stage. Mobility does not change the capitalization function or land holdings, and
thus has no effect on the policy choice. This concludes the proof.
    A comparison of Theorems 1 and 4 show that interjurisdictional competition
plays no role on the capitalization of local fiscal spillovers when intergenerational
expenditures are financed with land taxes. Full capitalization of fiscal spillovers
takes place with or without interjurisdictional competition. This implies that there
is no intergenerational case for the decentralization of policies, such as debt, that
only generate fiscal spillovers. The allocation of these types of programs to the dif-
ferent levels of government must be based solely on other considerations like returns
to scale in production and interjurisdictional spillovers. Programs that exhibit sig-
nificant increasing returns to scale, such as the maintenance of a nuclear arsenal,
should be allocated to the national government. By contrast, programs such as local
infrastructure should be assigned to local governments. In both cases, the full capi-
talization result implies that present generations fully internalize the fiscal spillovers
that they generate on the future.
5.2   Direct Spillovers


Now consider the case of direct spillovers. Thus far we have been able to provide
complete and algebraic descriptions of the equilibrium allocations and policy rules.
Unfortunately, we have been unable to find closed form solutions for this case.
We can, however, characterize the capitalization properties of these institutions by
focusing on the case of quasi-linear preferences.
    Let G denote the level of IPGs produced at the symmetric steady state. Similarly,
let l = NL and N = NJ denote the amount of land consumed by each agent and the
size of each jurisdiction at the symmetric steady state.
THEOREM 5: Consider an economy with pure local IPGs, a federal system with
      land taxation, and no government debt. Suppose that agents have preferences
      of the form W (l) + Φ(G) + c. This institution generates equilibria in which,
      for all j , k = j, and all s = (G, ..., G, sj , G, ..., G):
                           p s ∈ (0, N j (s)Φ (sj ) )and ∂pk (s) < 0.
                         ∂ j( )                



                           ∂sj             LJ             ∂sj
   A comparison of Theorems 2 and 5 show that interjurisdictional competition
plays an important role in the capitalization of direct spillovers. With these types of
                                                                                                 22


preferences the centralized institution generates no capitalization. By contrast, the
federal system generates a capitalization effect that is proportional to            N j (s)Φ (sj ),
                                                                                             




                                                                         s
which measures the welfare impact of a marginal change in j on the next generation
of residents.17 However, since L        ∂pj (s)
                                       J ∂sj      < N j (s)Φ (sj ), the institution only generates
                                                              




partial capitalization.
    The intuition is simple. An increase in the level of IPGs in jurisdiction j makes
it more attractive for the new generations. This increases the demand for land
in the jurisdiction and its land price. But the increased demand for jurisdiction
j also decreases the price of land in the other jurisdictions, increasing their at-
tractiveness. This second force dampens the capitalization of IPGs and generates
cross-jurisdictional capitalization effects: an increase in sj generates a negative cap-
italization effect in the other jurisdictions.
    Given these forces, it is not surprising that the amount of under-capitalization
disappears as the number of jurisdiction increases. However, this does not mean
that the problem can be solved by introducing a fiscal constitutions with more ju-
risdictions. Public goods, like roads, exhibit decreasing returns to scale and affect
residents of large geographical areas. Increases in the number of jurisdictions would
improve the intergenerational incentives at the cost of introducing other sources of
inefficiency. In the limit, each jurisdiction would have one agent who fully internal-
izes the well-being of the next generation, but who ignores the spillovers that his
decisions generate on the other jurisdictions.
6 Federal Systems with Income Taxation
Finally consider a federal system with income taxation. T (s) denotes the lump-sum
                                                                     j


tax in jurisdiction j and state s. The definition of equilibrium is a straightforward
combination of definitions 2 and 3 and thus is omitted.
    Given that we are unable to provide closed from solutions for the equilibria
of this institution we limit our attention to study its ability to capitalize the two
types of intergenerational spillovers. To do this we consider a special case of the
institution in which every jurisdiction is required to consume G units of DPGs, in
                                                                             




the case of fiscal spillovers, or to invest G units in IPGs for the next generation, in
                                                    




the case of direct spillovers. This requirement holds in every period except t where
  17
       See the proof in the appendix for the exact formula.
                                                                                                        23

the jurisdictions are free to choose the level of investment.
6.1 Fiscal Spillovers
The following result characterizes the ability of this institution to capitalize the
fiscal spillovers generated by the choice of DPGs in period t.
THEOREM 6: Consider an economy with local DPGs, a federal system with
      income taxation, no government debt, and a mandatory level of provision G in                  




      all periods except t. Suppose that agents have preferences of the form W (l, G)+
      c. Any equilibrium of this institution satisfies, for all j and k = j :

                             j
                          ∂pt+1 (G , ..., G )
                                                    =
                                                            (J   − 1)     lWll
                                                                                 . L1 , and
                                     ∂ sj               J
                                                          G
                                                          LJ
                                                                     + JlWll       J


                           ∂pkt+1(G , ..., G )
                                               

                                                        =   −             lWll             1.
                                      ∂sj                + J lW LJ
                                                                     G
                                                                     LJ           ll
                                                                                       .
                                                                                           J



    This capitalization functions are rather different from the ones in Theorem 4.
First, with income taxation there are cross-jurisdictional effects. Second, generically
perfect capitalization does not occur. Depending on the value of G the institution              




can generate partial capitalization (if G is small enough), more than 100% capi-
                                                    




talization (for intermediate values of G ), and even negative capitalization (if G is
                                                                                                   




large enough). In this result G is a parameter of the fiscal constitution. However,
                                      




the result is also of interest for the full blown institution since it is possible to choose
parameters that generate any level of DPGs along the equilibrium path, and thus
any of these 3 cases. For example, it is possible to choose parameters such that
the steady state level of DPGs is large, in absolute terms, but also inefficiently low
because there is negative capitalization in equilibrium.
    The intuition for the stark difference between land and income taxation goes as
follows. Regardless of the tax base, we can think of government policy as taking
place in two stages. First, the government returns all the fiscal spillovers received
from the previous generation to the citizenry. Second, it raises enough revenue to
pay for the DPGs that it wants to consume. By design, the choice of DPGs in period
t + 1 is fixed and equal to G . To pay for this every jurisdiction needs to raise G
                                                                                                         
                                 




units of revenue. The capitalization effects in the land market change the number
of residents who live in each jurisdiction. With land taxation this has no effect on
the tax per-unit of land that the residents pay. With income taxation, by contrast,
                                                                                                                                         24

lump-sum taxes decrease as agents move into the jurisdiction. This introduces an
additional force: it makes jurisdiction j even more attractive. If G is large enough                               




this effect dominates and the only way the non-mobility condition in (7) can be
satisfied is if agents move out of jurisdiction j in response to an increase in s . This                                       j


generates a negative capitalization effect. In this case the utility of living in every
jurisdiction goes up: in jurisdiction j because of the additional IPGs received from
the past, in the other jurisdictions because the lump-sum taxes needed to pay for
G go down.
  




    A comparison of Theorems 1, 4 and 6 show that interjurisdictional competition
and land taxation are not alternative mechanisms for generating perfect capitaliza-
tion of fiscal spillovers. The use of land taxes transforms the fiscal spillovers into
private rents and thus generates perfect capitalization with or without interjuris-
dictional competition. By contrast, interjurisdictional competition without land
taxation can generate over, under, and even negative capitalization.
6.2    Direct Spillovers


Finally consider the performance of this institution when there are only direct
spillovers.

THEOREM 7: Consider an economy with pure local IPGs, a federal system with
   income taxation, a mandatory level of investment G in all periods except t                   
                                                                                                                                            ,

      and no government debt. Suppose that agents have preferences of the form
      W (l) + Φ(G) + c.             Any equilibrium of this institution satisfies, for all j ,                                     k   = j ,
      and all   s   = (G
                                             j       
                                 , ..., G , s , G , ..., G      
                                                                    :
                                                                    )


                                                           (J −1)lj Wllj
              ∂pj (s)                                           (lk )2                          N (s)Φ (s ) , and
                                                                                                    j                 j


                ∂sj
                             =
                                   (J −1)G
                                               +        G
                                                               +     (J −1)lj Wllj     k k
                                                                                     + ( j )2ll
                                                                                       l W          L      J
                                   LJ (lk )2         LJ (l j )2          (lk )2          l


                                                                        k    k
                ∂p (s) = −                                                  ll
                                                                                                        N k (s)Φ (sj ) .
                                                                        l W

                                                                    (lj )2
                     k                                                                                                     



                 ∂s      j
                           ( −1)
                              k 2 +
                                         J         G          G
                                                                j       +(J −1)lj Wllj
                                                                                         +   lk W
                                                                                                j
                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                  ll          LJ
                                        L   J (l )         LJ (l )2          (lk )2           (l )2


    These capitalization functions are rather different from the ones generated by
a pure federal system with land taxation. Land taxation always generates under-
capitalization. By contrast, depending on the size of G , income taxation can gener-     




ate partial capitalization (if G is small enough), more than 100% capitalization (for
                                               
                                                                                      25

intermediate values of G ), and even negative capitalization (if G is large enough).
                                                                    




The intuition for this result is identical to the one for Theorem 7.
    A comparison of Theorems 2, 5, and 7 show that there is an intergenerational
case for decentralization. However, it is significally weaker than the one that has
been made by Oates and Schwab (1988,1996), Glaeser (1996), and McKinnon and
Nechyba (1997). First of all, it only applies for intergenerational expenditures that
generate a disproportionate amount of direct spillovers, generate a small amount
of interjurisdictional spillovers, and exhibit limited returns to scale in production.
Irreversible local environmental damage is an example of such an expenditure. The
debt, protection of national parks, and public infrastructure are not. Second, decen-
tralization is not a sufficient policy instrument: the choice of the tax base is crucial.
The use of land taxation always generate positive, but not full capitalization. By
contrast, income taxes can generate under, over, and negative capitalization; with
perfect capitalization being the exception rather than the rule. This constitutes a
choice between second best policy instruments. Each tax base dominates the other
for some public goods.
7 Conclusion: How to Design an Intergenerational Fis-
  cal Constitution
This paper has studied how to design a fiscal constitution that, by capitalizing
intergenerational spillovers into land values, is able to protect future generations
from expropriation and to generate optimal investment in IPGs. In particular, we
have studied how to accomplish these goals by changing two dimensions of the
fiscal constitution: (1) the level of government to which different types of IPGs are
assigned, and (2) the tax base of the different jurisdictions.
    We have shown that the instruments required to generate capitalization of the
intergenerational spillovers depend on the type of the spillover. Land taxation is the
essential instrument for policies that mostly generate fiscal spillovers, such as debt
and public infrastructure. By contrast, interjurisdictional competition is the essen-
tial instrument for policies that mostly generate direct spillovers, such as irreversible
environmental damages. We have also shown that it is possible to design a fiscal
constitution that generates full capitalization of fiscal spillovers, but in general, not
one that generates full capitalization of direct spillovers.
    Our results provide the following guidelines for how to design a fiscal constitution
                                                                                          26

that is intergenerationally friendly:
      •   Implement a mixed federal system that includes a national government and
          multiple tiers of decentralization (states, counties, and localities) and introduce
          policy-specific restrictions on the tax base of each jurisdiction.
      •   To avoid intergenerational redistribution using the debt, require every govern-
          ment unit to finance all debt service using its own land taxes.
      •   Allocate DPGs to the lowest level of government that internalizes all interjuris-
          dictional spillovers and exhausts the returns to scale in production. Finance
          DPGs only with land taxes: any transfer of resources between the govern-
          ment and the citizenry that results from the purchase or sale of a DPG must
          be made using land taxes (or subsidies). This implies that national infras-
          tructure, R&D, and national forests are assigned to the federal government
          and financed with a federal land tax. Local infrastructure is assigned to local
          governments and financed with local land taxes.
      •   Local IPGs that generate significant direct intergenerational spillovers, like
          local irreversible environmental decisions, are decentralized.
      •   IPGs that generate direct spillovers, but also significant amount of interjuris-
          dictional spillovers (or that exhibit returns to scale in production) are treated
          differently. In this case, the allocation of the programs to jurisdictions depends
          on the relative size of two forces: the provision of intergenerational incentives,
          which calls for decentralization, and the internalization of interjurisdictional
          spillovers, which calls for centralization. For example, in the case of the preser-
          vation of endangered species the interjurisdictional spillovers are likely to be
          dominant, which calls for centralization. By contrast, in the case of state parks,
          which generate some interjurisdictional spillovers but are consumed mostly by
          state residents, the provision of intergenerational incentives dominates.
    The fiscal constitution described here provides an alternative to the imposition
of budget rules and capital accounting.18 These rules are common in the US and
restrict the circumstances under which the government can issue debt. For example,
in some jurisdictions debt is allowed only for “capital investing”. In principle, this
 18
      See the Report of the President’s Commission to Study Capital Budgeting (1999).
                                                                                     27

allows present and future generations to share the costs of providing IPGs, but it
rules out intergenerational expropriation. The problem with these types of rules is
that it is hard to distinguish capital from non-capital public goods because most
durable public good benefits present and future generations. Also, these rules typ-
ically do not preclude the introduction of pay-as-you-go social insurance systems
that are equivalent to issuing debt. Both problems limit the effectiveness of the
institution. By contrast, the fiscal constitution specified here does not restrict the
ability of the government to issue debt (expect, perhaps, for a large total debt ceil-
ing). And yet, it accomplishes the goal that motivates the use of budgetary rules:
intergenerational expropriation is not possible and future generations repay present
generations for the spillovers that they receive (fully in the case of fiscal spillovers
and partially in the case of direct spillovers).
8    Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Theorem 1: (Step 1) Consider a static version of our land market. L
    units of land are supplied inelastically by exogenous land owners. There are N
    identical agents with preferences given by (1) and wealth w. The level of the
    parameter G is fixed exogenously and there are no taxes. We claim that there
    is a unique land price p∗(G) that clears this market. The properties of V (.)
    imply that l(p) is continuous, l(p) → 0 as p → ∞, and l(p) → ∞ as p → 0.
    Furthermore, by assumption l(p) is decreasing, and strictly decreasing at any
    l > 0. This implies that there exists a unique p∗(G) such that Nl(p∗(G)) = L.
      (Step 2) Now we show that the land prices in (5) clear the land market in
                    s    p s                                                   s
      every state . Let T ( ) denote the total cost of a unit of land in state , which
      is given by
                        pT (s) ≡ p(s) + τ (s) − p((1 − δ1)G+(sr),D(s)) .
      In the land market agents take as given the outcome of future elections and the
      capitalization function given in (5). As a result, land market clearing requires
      pT (s) = p∗ (G(s)) for all s.                               G(s) = G, and
                                      Substituting the values of (4),

                p((1 − δ )G(s), D(s)) = p + (1 −Lδ )G − (1 + r)(sLD + ∆(s))
      we get that

                p(s) = [p∗ (G) − G +
                                     p + (1 − δ )G ] + sG − (1 + r)sD .
                                 L 1 + r (1 + r)L L             L
                                                                               28


Thus, the prices in (5), with

                         p = 1 +r r (p∗ (G) − ((1r + δ )G ),
                                                   + r)L
clear the market in every state s.

(Step 3) Now consider the election stage. At this stage agents take as given
the capitalization function in (5) and their land holdings     ( ) = NL . We need
                                                               l s

to show that, for every state s, (I (s), D(s)), with I (s) = G − sG is a Condorcet
winner on Π(s). It is useful to relabel the policy space in terms of changes in
the debt ∆ and desired level of DPGs. The preferences of the representative
agent over (∆, G) are given by
                            ( − NL µ(s, ∆, G), NL , G),
                          V w


where
         ( ∆, G) = p(s) + G − sG +LrsD − ∆ − p((1 − δ1)G,
        µ s,
                                                       +r
                                                          sD + ∆)
                                                                  .


Note that this specification assumes that the DPGs are reversible, since we
have not restricted the second term to be positive. Substituting the value of
p(s) we get that


                     µ(s, ∆, G) =
                                    rp
                                         +  G
                                              −  (1 − δ)G ,
                                   1 + r L (1 + r)L
which is state independent and is not affected by ∆. Then, the strict concavity
properties of V guarantee that there is a unique G such that any feasible pair
(∆, G) is a Condorcet winner.
(Step 4) Finally we show that the institution generates an allocation that is
Pareto optimal. Since the economy is dynamically efficient, any inefficiency
must be due to the level of DPGs. Thus, without loss of generality, we can
focus on the case in which there is no debt.
Consider the stationary allocation that arises when all of the fiscal spillovers
produced by the period t DPG are returned to generation t and, given this,
generations invest optimally in the DPG. The level of DPGs in this allocation
is given by
                  G = arg max V (w −
                                       G + (1 − δ)G , L ,G).
                          G≥0          N (1 + r)N N
                                                                                 29

     Clearly, since the economy is dynamically efficient, this allocation must be
     Pareto optimal. (Recall that for DPGs the spillovers are reversible). But this
     is the same allocation generated by the institution.
Proof of Theorem 2: (Step 1) By the same argument used in step 1 of the
     previous proof, let p∗(G) be the unique price that clears the static version of
     the land market. With preferences of the form W (c, l) + Z (G) we must have
     that p∗(G) = p∗. It is straightforward to show that if p = 1+r r p∗ the market
     clears in every state.
     (Step 2) Now consider the electoral stage. τ = 0 is the unique Condorcet
     winner in every stage since prices are state independent and τ does not affect
     the level of IPGs consumed by the generation paying the taxes.
     (Step 3) Consider a move from the equilibrium allocation to the following
     allocation: every generation t ≥ 1 invests ε in the IPG, and ρ units of the
     private good are transferred from each generation t ≥ 2 to each generation
     t − 1. This improves the welfare of generation 1 as long as ρ > ε(1 + r). By
                                     N ,x → ∞ as x → 0. Thus, as long as ρ and ε
                                     L
     the Inada conditions, ∂V w−x,
                                (
                                  ∂G
                                       )


     are sufficiently small, every generation t ≥ 2 is also better off.
Proof of Theorem 3:
Part 1: (Step 1) Let p∗(G) denote the market clearing price in a static economy,
     as defined in Step 1 of the proof of Theorem 1. Given the quasi-linear of
     preferences, p∗(G) does not depend on the wealth of the agent.
     (Step 2) It is straightforward to check that if p = 1+r r G the land market
     clears in every state s.
     (Step 3) Consider the election in state s. The problem of the representative
     agent can be written as

                          max W  L
                                ( , G) + w +
                                             s − G − L p.                      (10)
                          G≥0    N           N N N
     As long as w is large enough, the solution is interior for every s and state
     independent. By the properties of the utility function the solution, denoted
     by G, is unique. The form of the tax function follows directly.
     (Step 4) The FOCs for (10) are given by N WG = 1. But then, it is possible
     to construct a Pareto improvement by increasing the level of DPGs in every
                                                                                     30

      t≥ 1 by a marginal amount ε. Each increase leaves generation t first-order in-
      different, and in addition generates 11+−rδ units of resources, measured in period
      t   prices, that can be used to make each generation t better off.

Part 2: (Step 1) Let pTI (s) ≡ p(s) − p(σ(s))    1+r denote total land prices for this
     institution. Given that preferences are Cobb-Douglas, in equilibrium we must
     have that
                               L = β 1 (w + s − G(s) ).
                               N α + β pTI (s)          N N
     Which implies that, for all s,
                     p(s) − p((1 −1 +δ)rG(s)) = α +β β NL (w + Ns − GN(s) ).       (11)
     (Step 2) Consider the election in stage s. The representative agent solves

      G(s) = arg ma                             L
                        x γ log(G) + α log(w − p(s) + − −
                                                           s G L p((1 − δ)G) ). (12)
                     G≥0                        N         N N N 1+r
     (Step 3) Now we show that there are constants p, G, π ∈ (0, α+          β 1 ) and
                                                                              βL
     η ∈ (0, α+γ γ ) such that p(s) = p + πs and G(s) = G + ηs satisfy (11) and (12)
     for all s. To show this suppose that the solution has this form.
     For (11) to be satisfied for all s it must be the case that

                                 π[1 − (11−+δr)η ] = 1 −L η α +β β                 (13)

      and
                         p = 1 +r r [ NL α +β β (w − NG ) + (11−+δr)π G].
      Let π 1(η) denote the locus implicitly defined by (13). It is easy to check that
                             β 1 ) and (1, 0), is concave, and negatively slopped in
      it passes through (0, α+βL
      the first quadrant.
      For (12) to be satisfied for all s it must be the case that
                                    η = α+ γ (1 − Lπ ) .                           (14)
                                             γ 1 − (1−1+δ)rπL
      and
                                       γ (w − NL 1+
                                   G= α+
                                                  rp )
                                                    r .
                                         γ   (1−δ)πL
                                                1−     1+r
      Let π η) denote the locus implicitly defined by (14). It is easy to check that
             2(
                                        γ , 0), is linear, and negatively slopped.
      it passes through (0, L1 ) and ( α+γ
                                                                                                   31


     Any intersection of  π1 (η) and π 2 (η ) satisfying π ∈ (0, α+β β L1 ) and η ∈ (0, α+γ γ )
     defines an equilibrium. The properties of π 1(η) and π2 (η) imply that there is
     a unique solution in this range.
    (Step 4) Note that the problem of the representative voter generates first
    order conditions
                                N VVG = 1 − Lπ (11 −+ δr) .
                                    c

    Since π < L , an argument similar to the one in the fourth Step for Part 1
                1

    shows that it is possible to generate a Pareto improvement by increasing the
    level of DPGs in every period.
Proof of Theorem 5: (Step 1) We show that there is an equilibrium in which
    investment in pure local IPGs is state independent. The voting problem of
    the representative agent in jurisdiction j and state s is given by
                                                               −j )
                            w − lj (s)pj (s) + ( p (G1 +, Gr            − LG )lj (s),
                                                   j   j                    j
                       max
                       G ≥0
                         j
                                                                            J

     where    G−j   denotes the anticipated choices of the other jurisdictions. The
     G j   that solves this problem is state independent as long as                G−j   is also state
     independent. Then there is a symmetric equilibrium in which the level of
     investment in each jurisdiction, call it      G, is state independent.
     (Step 2)    Consider the land prices in period t when the state of the world is
     s = (G, ..., G, sj + θ, G, ..., G). Let

                                                     pj (G, ..., G)
                                   j (s) = pj (s) −
                                  p
                                                         1+r
     denote the pre-tax cost of housing in period t and state s. Given step 1, the
     symmetric land market equilibrium in period t is fully characterized by the
     following four equations (where k denotes any jurisdiction other than j ):
                              ( j (s)) + Φ(sj + θ) + w − LG lj (s) − pj (s)lj (s)
                             W l                                                                 (15)
                                                                J

                     =        ( k (s)) + Φ(G) + w − LG lk (s) − pk (s)lk (s),
                             W l
                                                           J

                                    ∂W (lj (s)) = pj (s) + G ,                                  (16)
                                       ∂l                   LJ
                                    ∂W (lk (s)) = pk (s) + G ,                                  (17)
                                       ∂l                   L       J
                                                                                                                                32


     and
                                         LJ
                                                  +(        J − 1) lkL(Js) = N.
                                        l s
                                        j( )


     (Step 3) Note that ∂ p∂s(js) =
                             j                     j (s )
                                              ∂p
                                                  ∂s j
                                                            . Treating θ as a parameter, applying the
     implicit function theorem, and evaluating at θ = 0 we get that:
                                              (J −1)lj Wllj
                      ∂pj (s)
                              =
                                                   (lk )2                  N (s)Φ (s ) , and
                                                                                  j                  j


                       ∂sj              (J −1)lj Wllj
                                                             +
                                                          lk W
                                                                k
                                                                ll             L              J
                                            (lk )2         (lj )2


                         ∂p (s) = −                                                   N (s)Φ (s ) .
                                                              k  k
                                                             l W
                           k                                    ll                            k                   j
                                            ( )2               lj

                          ∂s   j    ( −1)     J
                                                +(          lj W
                                                                 j
                                                                ll     lk W
                                                                                  k
                                                                                 ll       L           J
                                       ( )2            lk                  lj   )2

     The properties of this derivatives then follow from                                          W , W < 0.
                                                                                                      j
                                                                                                      ll
                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                       ll



Proof of Theorem 6: The proof is almost identical to the proof of Theorem 5 and
     thus is omitted. There are only two differences. First, (15) is now given by

                          W (l (s),G ) + w − (GL− θ) l (s) − pj (s)lj (s)
                                                                       
                                    j                                                    j

                                                                           J



                     =       k ( ( ) )+w−
                          W l s ,G
                                  
                                                                     G k
                                                                     LJ
                                                                        l s ( ) − pk (s)lk (s),
     and equations (16) and (17) in the system now become
                     ∂W (lj (s))
                                 = pj (s) and ∂W (l (s)) = pk (s).
                                                    k

                               ∂l                                                ∂l

     Second, the first step of the proof is not needed since by construction, the
     level of local DPGs in period t + 1 must be equal to G . This implies that the                    




     properties derived in this theorem hold at every equilibrium.
Proof of Theorem 7: The proof is almost identical to the proof of Theorem 5 and
    thus is omitted. There a only two differences. First, equations (16) and (17)
    in the system now become
                     ∂W (l (s))
                                = p (s) and ∂W (l (s)) = p (s).
                                   j                                                  k
                                                   j                                                           k
                               ∂l                                                ∂l

     Second, the first step of the proof is not needed since by construction, the level
     of investment in pure local IPGs in period t + 1 must be equal to G . This                                             




     implies that the properties derived in this theorem hold at every equilibrium.
                                                                                 33

References
 [1] Altonji, L., F. Hayashi, and L. Kotlikoff (1992) “Is the Extended Family Altru-
     istically Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data,” American Economic Review,
     December, 1177-98.
 [2] Altonji, L., F. Hayashi, and L. Kotlikoff (1997) “Parental Altruism and Inter
     Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, Decem-
     ber, 1121-66.
 [3] Boldrin, Michele and Ana Montes (1998) “Intergenerational Transfer Insti-
     tutions: Public Education and Public Pensions,” University of Minnesota,
     manuscript.
 [4] Brueckner, Jan and Man-Soo Joo (1991) “Voting with Capitalization,” Regional
     Science and Urban Economics, 21, 453-67.
 [5] Epple, Dennis and Thomas Romer (1991) “Mobility and Redistribution,” Jour-
     nal of Political Economy, 99, 828-58.
 [6] Epple, D. and K. Schipper (1981) “Municipal Pension Funding: A Theory and
     Some Evidence,” Public Choice, 37, 141-78.
 [7] Glaeser, Edward (1996) “The Incentive Effects of Property Taxes on Local
     Governments,” Public Choice, 89, 93-111.
 [8] Inman, Robert (1982) “Public Employee Pensions and the Local Labor Bud-
     get,” Journal of Public Economics, 19, 49-71.
 [9] Inman, Robert (1990) “Public Debts and Fiscal Politics: How to Decide?”,
     American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 80, 81-5.
[10] Inmand, Robert and Daniel Rubinfeld (1996) “Designing Tax Policy in Feder-
     alist Economies: An Overview,” Journal of Public Economics, 60, 307-34.
[11] Johnson, R. (1997) “Pension Underfunding and Liberal Retirement Benefits
     Among State and Local Government Workers,” National Tax Journal, 50, 113-
     39.
[12] Kotlikoff, Larry and Robert Rosenthal (1993) “Some Inefficiency Implications
     of Generational Politics and Exchange,” Economics and Politics, 5, 27-42.
                                                                                  34

[13] McKinnon, Ronald. and Thomas Nechyba (1997) “Competition in Federal Sys-
     tems: The Role of Political and Financial Constraints,” in The New Federalism:
     Can the States Be Trusted?, John Ferejohn and Barry Weingast (eds.), Hoover
     Press, 1-55.
[14] Mumy, G. (1978) “The Economics of Local Government Pensions and Pension
     Funding,” Journal of Political Economy, 86, 517-27.
[15] Oates, Wallace (1999) “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism,” Journal of Economic
     Literature, 37, 1120-49.
[16] Oates, Wallace, and Robert Schwab (1988) “Economic Competition Among
     Jurisdictions: Efficiency Enhancing or Distortion Inducing?”, Journal of Public
     Economics, 35, 333-54.
[17] Oates, Wallace, and Robert Schwab (1996) “The Theory of Regulatory Federal-
     ism: The Case of Environmental Management,” in The Economics of Environ-
     mental Regulation, W. Oates (ed.), Cheltenham,UK: Edward Elgar Publishing
     Limited.
[18] Rangel, Antonio (2001) “Forward and Backward Intergenerational Goods: Why
     is Social Security Good for the Environment?”, Stanford manuscript.
[19] Report of the President’s Commission to Study Capital Budgeting. Washington
     D.C., 1999.
[20] Rubinfeld, Daniel (1987) “The Economics of the Local Public Sector,” in Auer-
     bach and Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, vol. II, Elsvier Science
     Publishers.
[21] Skinner, Jonathan (1991) “Prospects for Agricultural Land Taxation in Devel-
     oping Countries,” The World Bank Economic Review, 5, 493-511.
[22] Sprunger, Philip and John Wilson (1998) “Imperfectly Mobile Households and
     Durable Public Goods: Does the Capitalization Mechanism Work?”, Journal of
     Urban Economics, 44, 468-92.
[23] Wildasin, David (1986). Urban Public Finance. Hardwood Academic Publish-
     ers.
                                                                           35

[24] Wildasin, David and John Wilson (1996) “Imperfect Mobility and Local Gov-
     ernment Behavior in an Overlapping Generations Model,” Journal of Public
     Economics, 60, 177-90.
