                                    &$'   




                                             


                                              
                                             !"!
                                              !#


                                           $!"#%!()*+
                                   %,--... /! !#-%%!0-.()*+


                                   & 12 2  2
                                       *34300500 65
                                         27/!8#9 3:*;(
                                               5#50




                    
  !"    #$    %  &'  !  
! ( $%  ! )*+'$( (,, -$
./ 01    (      2   3  4.155567 +15686
%$9  *%!:       $
  4 + . 


;<$"   01      (   "   % :
 :!    $<'!: %   ;
  % 
5<5!=808>5=!757
  9 !"!8!#
  &$!"#%!  ()*+
  5#50:33*
  *:9:*9 *:



                                                 


         0%%!650!5!>5=50#68057%?5<5!=#80
 %?=#5085=07?5?057%?/5<5!=#88
/0#89.8!6865!0"00?>5=05.!8 50805!6=8
50057%86!0!0"6!000!=7/0!68>5=
%!757/50=/0057%#80  !0"6!07%8/=>5=!5!08
057%?5<5!=#8007!!8!?7#5800?5850#
50057%8 1!6!=!9>5=%!75707500?%5@@




                    !"!                  !#
  %!7?70             %!7?70             %!7?70
!6!0=               !6!0=               !6!86!0=
!9 3(4))*3:*           !9 3(4))*3:*           27/!8#9 3:*;(
8 &                           8 &                           =#A?0 !6!8 85
=A%! 85               B%!"!A%! 85
1    Introduction

Over the past century in the United States, the average return on the stock market has exceeded the
return on short-term government bonds by over 6 percentage points at an annual rate. Economists
have tried to understand this equity premium by appealing to the risks inherent in such an investment.
However, as initially demonstrated by Mehra and Prescott (1985) and then by the extensive literature
that followed, such a large premium has proven difficult to explain within the canonical consumption-
based asset pricing framework. The source of the puzzle is clear: according to the model, asset returns
should alter investors’ marginal utility; their marginal utility is a function of their consumption; but
aggregate consumption moves little with unpredictable returns. As a result, inordinately high degrees
of risk aversion are necessary to reconcile the low variability of consumption with the high volatility
of stock returns.
    One possible solution to the puzzle is to modifying the specification of the investors’ marginal
utility. The canonical time-separable power utility function is abandoned in favor of specifications
constructed so that marginal utility is more responsive to asset returns. Prominent examples of
this approach include Constantinides (1990), Epstein and Zin (1991), Bakshi and Chen (1996) and
Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
    A second approach, initiated by Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), is to model markets so that only a
subset of households hold equity and bear the aggregate risk of the market. The households that
do not hold stock — due to uninsurable income risk or costs of investing in stocks — contaminate
tests of the canonical theory that employ aggregate consumption data. In theory, the consumption
of wealthy households who hold equity can be used to evaluate the canonical theory. Consumption
data on wealthy households or stock owners confirms that these households do bear more market
risk, but this additional risk is insufficient to save the model. Estimates of risk aversion, while lower
than for the representative agent, are still unrealistically high.
    In this paper, we modify the period utility function, as in the first approach, and evaluate the risk
of equity using the marginal utility of the wealthy only, as in the second approach. We model utility
as a function of multiple goods and demonstrate that reasonable levels of risk aversion are consistent
with the consumption of luxury goods and the equity premium. As in the first approach, we modify
the canonical utility function, but instead of dropping the assumption of time separability of utility,

                                                   1
we drop the assumption that the period utility function is homothetic across goods. Specifically,
utility is a function of both the consumption of basic goods, of which a certain amount is required in
every period, and the consumption of luxury goods, of which none are consumed when expenditure
levels are not high. Given such nonhomothetic preferences, the share of luxury goods in overall
consumption rises with total expenditures.
    Households display a high degree of risk aversion with respect to their consumption of basic goods,
consistent with a subsistence aspect of basic goods. Cutting down on basic goods is costly in utility
terms. For wealthy households, the consumption of luxury goods responds to wealth shocks due to
stock returns, consistent with a more discretionary aspect of luxuries. We derive the Euler equation
associated with the consumption of each type of good. Our theory implies that households are less
risk averse with respect to the consumption of luxury goods, so that the equity premium puzzle —
the high degree of risk aversion implied by observed consumption of basic goods — is not inconsistent
with our model. The real test of the model lies in the Euler equation for luxury goods: is the
covariance of returns and marginal utility measured by luxury consumption sufficient to justify the
equity premium? By studying luxuries, we evaluate the behavior and risk aversion of rich households.
    Since no extant datasets measure consumption of high-end luxury goods, we construct time
series data on luxury consumption from sales data for luxury goods instead of household surveys
of consumer spending or national accounts data. Household surveys typically contain few wealthy
households and measure categories of consumption that do not distinguish between basic and luxury
goods. While we also evaluate readily-available government statistics, we construct separate time
series on sales of high-end luxury goods: luxury automobile purchases; U.S. sales of the following
luxury retailers: Saks, Tiffany, Bulgari, Gucci, Hermès, Louis Vuitton, Moët & Chandon, Hennessy
(the latter three part of the luxury conglomerate LVMH), and Waterford Wedgewood; aggregated
U.S. imports from the Comité Colbert, a consortium of seventy French luxury good manufacturers
(including Hermès and LVMH for whom we also obtained disaggregated U.S. sales data); and chari-
table contributions by high-income households. We define a luxury retailer as those companies listed
by Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch in their analysts’ reports on the luxury goods retail sector.
Note that many of the luxury retailers whose names we do not list individually in our data appendix
are owned by luxury powerhouses such as LVMH, for whom we have total U.S. sales data. At last
count (in 2000), LVMH owns 46 different luxury brand names, whose sales represent 15% of the $68
                                                  2
billion global luxury-goods market, against 6% for Richemont, the next largest.
     We find that the consumption of luxuries covaries significantly more with stock returns than
aggregate consumption does. Our estimates of the coefficient of relative risk aversion are an order of
magnitude lower than those found using National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) aggregate
consumption data. For example, different series on high-end luxury retail sales yield point estimates
for risk aversion ranging from 3.2 to 24.5 while consumption of nondurables and services in the
NIPA yields a point estimate of 169. Given moderate sampling uncertainty, we cannot reject that
completely reasonable levels of risk aversion generated the observed data on the consumption of
luxury goods.
     Figure 1 depicts this main result. Panel A plots the excess returns of U.S. stocks over Treasury
Bills against consumption growth of nondurables and services from the U.S. NIPA data, and against
consumption growth as measured by the U.S. sales of luxury retailers. Panel B plots the time
series for these same three series. Aggregate consumption of basic goods is almost non-responsive
to stock excess returns. By contrast, the consumption of luxuries is both more volatile than that of
NIPA consumption and much more correlated with excess returns. This series is our flagship series,
collected from U.S. sales data reported in the annual reports of luxury retailers. The estimated
coefficient of relative risk aversion is 3.2. Some of our other measures of luxury consumption are not
as highly correlated with stock excess returns, but all series on luxury consumption lead to strikingly
lower estimates of risk aversion than NIPA data.
     One potential concern is that luxury goods sales measure expenditures on durable goods, and
so are more volatile than the correct measure, flow consumption. But our results are not driven by
the volatility of expenditures. The increases in expenditure four years after an excess return implies
even lower risk aversion than the contemporaneous movement in expenditures.
     We analyze two additional features of luxury data. First, we estimate conditional Euler equations
to measure intertemporal substitution and compare our results again with those from NIPA data.
Estimated intertemporal elasticities of substitution are on average larger for the luxury consumption
series than for NIPA consumption, but the variation across series is substantial. Second, we construct
time series on the prices of three high-end luxury goods whose supplies are highly inelastic: pre-
War Manhattan coop apartments, central London real estate and Bordeaux wines from the finest
Chateaux and years. We calculate the equity premium from these price indexes under the assumption
                                                  3
that the supplies of these goods are fixed. The price series for luxury goods in fixed supply do not
rationalize the equity premium as well as the quantity series for the luxury goods in elastic supply.
Since this test relies on there being no close substitutes in more elastic supply, we think it inferior
to the quantity indexes.
    Our findings of reasonable levels of risk aversion based on luxury consumption data lead us to
conclude that the single-good assumption that is embodied in most previous studies of asset prices
and consumption leads to incorrect inference about the validity of the basic model. In particular,
within the basic power utility paradigm, there is no equity premium puzzle for the households that
hold most US equity, or at least one not easily explained by sampling uncertainty. Our estimates of
risk aversion imply that the risk faced by wealthy households is sufficient to justify the typical return
on equity.1
    The balance of the paper is laid out as follows. Section 2 lays out our assumptions about
nonhomothetic utility and explains how the presence of multiple goods and luxury consumption
changes inference. Section 3 presents the estimating equations. The main results are in Section 4,
which describes the data that we gather to estimate risk aversion and the results of estimation on
each series. In section 5, we push our findings in three different directions. First, we present results
that deal with the issue of durability; second we ask what our data on luxury consumption imply for
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution; third, we estimate the equity premium based on the price
of those luxury goods whose supply is inelastic. The final section concludes. We include appendices
with a complete description of our data series and derivations omitted from the main text.

2        Luxury Goods, Basic Consumption and Euler Equations

This section first lays the groundwork for studying the equity premium then presents our modification
of the canonical model to include multiple goods with nonlinear Engel curves. We explain the
properties of this utility function and the implications for inference based on luxury goods. Finally,
we derive the asset pricing Euler equations and the implications for the covariance of aggregate
consumption and returns.
    1
        It could also well be that more sophisticated utility specifications such as those incorporating habit formation, but

applied in a two-good world, could go even further towards reconciling the equity premium.




                                                               4
2.1   The Equity Premium Puzzle

In the canonical model of investor behavior, households choose consumption expenditures (Xt) and
the share of their saving invested in the stock market (ωt ) to maximize the expected present dis-
counted value of utility flows for a given level of initial wealth
                                                                    ∞
                                                                        β u X                 A:
                                                                                                 t



                                             maxXt ,ωt         E                t
                                                                                    (       )                     (2.1)

                                       ∞ ω R
                                                                                        t
                                                                        t=0


                                s.t.         (   t   t+1   + (1 − ωt)Rft+1 )(At − Xt ) ≥ 0                        (2.2)
                                       t=0


                                                               X ≥0
                                                                t                                                 (2.3)

where:

   • u() is the period utility function and is increasing, concave, and twice differentiable
   • β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor
   •A    t   is household wealth at the start of period                 t
   • R +1 is the gross real return on stocks between time t and t + 1
         t



   • R +1 is the gross real return on Treasury bills between t and t + 1 (assumed to be conditionally
         f
         t

      risk free)

   Note that for simplicity, and consistency with the canonical model, we are assuming that house-
holds are infinitely lived, that leisure is additively separable from consumption, and that markets
are complete so that labor income risk can be completely diversified. As is well-known, this setup is
easily extended to accommodate the choice of additional assets without changing the intertemporal
conditions that we consider.
   Assuming that the maximum of the objective is finite, we can rewrite the household optimization
problem as a dynamic program

                                 t
                                                          t            t
                                                                            
                        J (A |I ) = { max } u(X ) + E βJ (R̃ +1(A − X )|I +1)
                            t                                                       t           t    t   t
                                                                                                                (2.4)
                                       Xt ,ω t



where J denotes the value function, It the state of the economy at time t, R̃t+1 = ωt Rt+1 +(1−ωt )Rtf+1
is the gross real return on wealth between time t and t+1 and the program is subject to the constraints

                                                                    5
                                      
(2.2)-(2.3). The envelope and first-order conditions imply the conditional moment restriction
                                     
                                E βuu((XX +1
                                  t
                                           t

                                           )
                                              )
                                                (R +1 − R +1)
                                                  t
                                                          f
                                                          t     = 0.                            (2.5)
                                           t


To evaluate the model’s predictions, the traditional approach is to assume that every agent’s utility
function is of the constant relative risk aversion class and that markets are complete. In this case,
the consumption of all agents move together, and one can evaluate the implications of this moment
condition using aggregate consumption data.
   Within this canonical model, the equity premium can only be explained by appealing to un-
appealingly high risk aversion. As first shown by Mehra and Prescott (1985), given the observed
joint stochastic process for the return on stocks, the return on bonds, and aggregate consumption,
the coefficient of relative risk aversion implied by this model is implausibly high. Campbell (1999)
surveys the last fifteen years of research and shows that the puzzle is robust across countries and
time.


2.2     Nonhomothetic Preferences

Our point of departure from the canonical model is to drop the single-good assumption and model
the within-period utility function in greater depth. We assume that households consume two types
of goods: basic consumption, C , and luxury goods, L. We conceptualize the former, which we treat
as the numeraire in the economy, as the standard goods that most households in the U.S. regularly
consume and that make up the bulk of the National Income and Product Account (NIPA) measures
of consumption. The latter, luxury goods, are consumed only by the extremely rich.
    We adopt a two-good specification for the household within-period utility function that encom-
passes our concepts of “luxury” and “standard” goods. We reinterpret the previous statement of the
problem as follows. X represents total expenditure in period t, measured in terms of the numeraire
(C ) and optimally allocated between C and L. The utility function u(X ) represents an indirect
utility function (with the relative price suppressed), and the direct utility function v(C,L), which




                                                 6
we assume for simplicity is additively separable,2 is
                                 X = C + PL                                                                          (2.6)
                             v(C,L) = (Max{01,C− −φ a}) + (L 1+−b)ψ
                                                       1−φ        1−ψ
                                                                                                                     (2.7)
where P is the relative price of luxury goods, a, b, γ, and ψ are positive constants, ψ < φ, and we
add the constraint that C > 0 (implying from (2.3) that L > 0).
    This specification of utility captures two features of basic and luxury goods. First, luxury goods
                                                                         ψ 1
are not consumed by the poor and middle class: there exists C̄= a + b φ P φ > a such that L = 0 for
all C ≤C. That is, when the marginal utility of wealth is high, the agent chooses to consume none of
        ¯
the luxury. Note that the assumption a,b > 0 assures that the minimal amount of basic consumption
at which a consumer starts consuming luxury goods is greater than the sustenance level.
    Second, the consumption of the rich is dominated by luxuries:

                                                       lim
                                                           C      = 0                                                (2.8)
                                                      X →∞ X
                                                      lim
                                                          PL      = 1
                                                     X →∞ X
We prove this claim in Appendix A.1. The assumption that                      ψ < φ implies that as the marginal
utility of wealth goes to zero, the budget share of the luxury approaches one.
    An example of this expenditure behavior is presented in Figure 2. The limit behavior of the ex-
penditure shares are governed by ψ and φ so that the assumption ψ < φ delivers luxury consumption
in excess of basic consumption at large expenditure levels. The local-to-zero behavior of expenditure
shares are governed by      a and b and the fact that −a < b delivers basic consumption in excess of
luxury consumption at low expenditure levels.
   2 Modelling a nonseparability between   C   and   L is unlikely to matter for our estimation.   In order to overturn our

argument and findings, the marginal utility of luxuries would have to decrease when the consumption of basic goods

rises. Thus the stochastic discount factor would not covary much with market returns and the puzzle would remain

even though luxury goods covary strongly with market returns. Such a nonseparability would have to be large, because

basic consumption moves very little with market returns. Such conditions seem unlikely although they are maintained

in the canonical model.




                                                              7
2.3       Euler Equations and Risk Aversion

We show in Appendix A.2 that the first-order condition and envelope condition from the dynamic
program for the choice of C and L imply the following two sets of consumption conditional Euler
equations:
                                                  
                   E β((CC +1−−a)a−) R +1 = E β((CC +1−−a)a−) R +1 = 1
                                    −                         φ −                                                 φ

                             t
                                      t
                                                      φ               t                   (2.9)
                                                                                              t
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                              φ
                                                                                                                      f
                                                                                                                      t
                                      t                                                               t
                                                  
              E (L + b)− P R +1 = E β((LL +1++b)b−) PP R +1 = 1
                   β  L +1 + b)
                     (         − P
                                 t
                                              ψ
                                                          t
                                                                −                                     t
                                                                                                                  ψ
                                                                                                                          t   f
                       t                  ψ                           t                       t               ψ               t
                                 t                    t+1                                             t               t+1


from which it follows that
                                            
                                        E β((CC +1−−a)a−) (R +1 − R +1) = 0
                                                          −                               φ

                                              t
                                                                  t
                                                                                  φ           t
                                                                                                          f
                                                                                                          t                                       (2.10)
                                                                  t
                                      
                                     E β ((LL +1++b)b−) PP+1 (R +1 − R +1) = 0.
                                                       −                      ψ

                                      t
                                                  t
                                                                          ψ
                                                                                      t
                                                                                              t
                                                                                                          f
                                                                                                          t                                       (2.11)
                                                  t                               t


The law of iterated expectations implies the unconditional versions of these equations from the
conditional ones.
    The focus of the previous literature is on equation (2.5), or, if one takes the view that luxuries are
not contained in NIPA nondurable consumption and services, then on equation (2.10). We instead
focus on estimation and testing of equation (2.11). Equation (2.11) provides a test of whether the
consumption Euler equation holds for wealthy households.
    Our choice of utility function implies that the risk aversion of the rich is a lower bound for the risk
aversion of the typical household.3 The coefficient of relative risk aversion with respect to gambles
over C is γ (C ) = φ − and so falls with C and lim →∞ γ (C ) = φ. Risk aversion with respect
                C
                              C
                             C a                                                                  C       C


to gambles over L is γ (L) = ψL/(L + b) and so increases with L and lim →∞ γ (L) = ψ. Risk
                                 L                                                                                            L    L


aversion with respect to gambles over X , which is the risk aversion coefficient that previous papers
consider, is a weighted average of γ (L) and γ (C ). γ (X ) declines with X and ∞ > γ(C ) ≥ ψ. We
                                                      L                           C


estimate the level of risk aversion of the extremely rich, that is we estimate ψ. Thus our estimates
provide a lower bound on the risk aversion over wealth gambles in the population.4
   3                                                                                                                              −Xu (X ) .
                                                                                                                                         
       To be clear, risk aversion refers to local risk aversion according to the Arrow-Pratt definition:                           u (X )
                                                                                                                                              The utility

function is continuous between ( a, ∞), but is not differentiable where X =C¯. Our construction does have the desirable
property that the limit of risk aversion from above and below X =C are both γ C (C ).
   4                                                                 ¯
       The inverse of this observation is that this utility function leads to intertemporal elasticities that vary with wealth.




                                                                                          8
       It is worth noting that risk aversion that varies with wealth is an inherent feature of any non-
homothetic intra-period utility function. There is no utility function that admits nonhomothetic
Engel curves and delivers constant relative risk aversion (Hanoch (1977)).5
       This specification has two additional desirable features. First, since risk aversion declines with
wealth, the wealthy hold a larger share of their wealth in equity, consistent with observed behav-
ior (detailed in the next subsection). Second, the consumption of basic goods is a smaller share
of expenditures for the rich. The distribution of basic consumption, as measured in the PSID or
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), is more equally distributed across households than the distri-
bution of permanent income or wealth (Huggett and Ventura (2000) and Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes
(2000)). Thus the consumption of the poor and middle class remains a significant share of aggregate
consumption despite the skewness in the wealth distribution.


2.4      Risk Aversion from Basic Consumption and Luxury Consumption

It is important to address why an econometrician using the usual consumption Euler equation (2.10),
to study the return on stocks and bonds would not accept the model since the equation holds in
equilibrium. Further, why does the luxury consumption Euler equation provide the correct test?
     Since there is some share of consumption that is necessary, the intra-period utility function does
not exhibit constant relative risk aversion. For low levels of consumption, households are extremely
unwilling to subject consumption to risk and so hold little equity and have stable consumption.
Thus any test using the consumption of all households calculates risk aversion from an average of
this nonresponsive consumption and the consumption of higher wealth households. Since the budget
share of basic consumption declines with wealth, poor households are weighted more heavily in this
average than their weight in wealth. According to our theory then, inference based on aggregate
consumption data should find high levels of risk aversion. This argument implies that limiting the
sample studied to rich households provides a test of our theory, but there are further reasons to think
basic consumption is inappropriate for such a test.
This may or may not provide an explanation for the fact that rich households are observed to consume a lower share
of their total wealth than low income households.
   5
    See also Stiglitz (1969) and the discussion of the intertemporal elasticitiy of subsitution in Browning and Crossley
(2000).

                                                           9
    While not explicit in our above specification, it is reasonable that marginal utility from the
consumption of basic goods is bounded from above or reaches zero (satiation), as in the cases of
constant absolute risk aversion utility and quadratic utility respectively. In either case the coefficient
of relative risk aversion for basic consumption goes to infinity as wealth rises and marginal utility
falls. Thus high-wealth households maintain relatively stable basic consumption and choose to have
luxury consumption react to market returns. If we modified our function u(C ) to exhibit this feature,
calculations based on basic consumption growth would find high risk aversion due to the unresponsive
consumption of the rich as well as the unresponsive consumption of the poor.
    In addition to the direct implications of nonhomothetic preferences, there are two classes of extant
theories that imply in our two-good world that basic consumption is inappropriate for pricing asset
risk while luxury consumption provides the correct measure. Our study provides a test of both of
these classes of theories, which both pass.
    The first class of theories model the poor as not holding stocks due to fixed costs of participating
in the equities market or due to uninsurable labor income risk. The theory of limited participation
(Mankiw and Zeldes (1991)) posits that households must pay a fixed cost in order to invest in the
stock market. In this case, non-rich households are not be willing to incur this cost to invest and so
their wealth is not directly affected by returns on equity and their consumption covaries less with
the market.6 The theory positing incomplete markets argues that the poor do not hold stocks since
households face uninsurable idiosyncratic endowment risk. According to this theory, households that
face significant risk from labor income choose to invest less or not at all in stocks because their
consumption is already (uninsurably) quite risky (Heaton and Lucas (1996), Constantinides and
Duffie (1996) and Brav, Constantinides and Geczy (1999)). As with limited participation models,
this theory predicts a low covariance between the consumption of the poor or middle-class and stock
returns. Aggregate consumption includes the consumption of these households, and so the theory
predicts an equity premium puzzle with respect to aggregate consumption and stock returns. Since
   6
    For some evidence on this theory see Vissing-Jorgenson (1998), Attanasio, Banks, and Tanner (1998). Guvenen
(2000) calibrates a model in which only some households have access to the equity market and in which there are two
types of agents, high-risk aversion agents and low risk aversion agents. The paper demonstrates that inference based
on aggregate consumption in the canonical manner implies an implauibly high risk aversion, but it is also true that the
model has to assume an equity premium an order of magnitude smaller than observed.

                                                          10
the consumption of luxury goods measures the marginal utility of the very rich, both theories imply
that one should recover reasonable measures of risk aversion when using the consumption of luxury
goods.7
    Second, and less prominent, the basic consumption Euler equation may fail because there are
costs to adjusting either basic consumption or an item that is nonseparable with basic consumption.
Some items in basic consumption require commitment or are subject to direct or indirect adjustment
costs associated with changing consumption. Similarly, the marginal utility of some items are not
separable from the consumption of goods that have high costs associated with adjusting the level
of consumption. For example, items like transportation or fuels (subcategories of NIPA nondurable
consumption) are in part determined by a household’s consumption of housing and automobiles,
items which are subject to large adjustment costs and are infrequently adjusted. Items like mobile
phone service, health club memberships, and the like involve a degree of commitment over time. In
contrast, such costs and nonseparabilities apply less to the consumption of luxury goods.
    By studying the behavior of luxury goods, we test the central predictions of asset pricing in a
way that is robust to these deviations from the canonical theory. Conversely, by testing a prediction
of asset pricing that is consistent with these modified theories, we provide a test of these theories
that is consistent with the presence of luxury goods.
    The difficulties just discussed in using basic consumption to study the equity premium do not
apply to the consumption of luxury goods. The consumption of necessities by the poor and rich
does not contaminate a luxury-based measure of marginal utility; luxury goods are “discretionary.”
The extremely rich are unlikely to face labor income risk that is significant relative to their wealth;
the rich are willing and able to pay any fixed costs for market participation. Moreover, very rich
households hold most equity and most hold equity. While the first part of this statement is to some
extent tautological, the wealth distribution is so highly skewed that the concentration is extreme.
The top 1% of households ranked by non-human wealth own over one-third of all privately-held
wealth, over half of stock wealth not held in pension funds, and 47% of all stock wealth. The top
5% of households own over half of all privately-held wealth, over 80% of stock wealth not held in
  7
   The one caveat we must note is that some rich households receive some share of labor income as stock options.
While the idiosyncratic component of such risk is easy to unwind, the employee is discouraged from doing so.


                                                      11
pension funds, and 75% of all stock wealth.8 It is also the case that most of the very rich own some
stock and investable wealth is a larger share of wealth for the rich than for the typical household,
again, almost tautologically.9 Of the top 1% of households ranked by non-human wealth, 82% hold
stock directly; of the top five percent of households, 78% hold stock directly. For the population as
a whole, less than 50% hold stock directly.10

3        Estimating Equations

We seek to evaluate the risk aversion of the rich using equation (2.11) and observations on high-end
luxury goods. We assume that expenditures on any category of luxury goods move in proportion to
those on all luxury goods. Thus we can use observations on a subset of luxury goods to evaluate the
model.11
   Linearizing the unconditional version of the Euler equation for luxury goods, as in Campbell
(1999), risk aversion can be derived as a function of theoretical moments (details are contained in
Appendix A.3). Rather than assume that time is discrete at the frequency of the observed data, we
assume that the world operates in continuous time leading to an estimating equation
                                                                                       
                              E R +1 − R +1 − Cov ∆ ln(P +1), (R +1 − R +1)
                                              f                                      f

                       ψ = 23
                                      t       t                       t        t     t
                                                                                                            (3.1)
                                     Cov ∆ ln (L +1) , (R +1 − R +1)
                                                         t        t
                                                                           f
                                                                           t



where the factor of     2   is the adjustment for continuous time (see Grossman, Melino, and Shiller
                        3

(1987)). The relative price of luxuries is present in the equation because returns are defined in terms
of the price of basic consumption. There is ample anecdotal evidence that the sales of luxury goods
have benefited greatly from the bull market of the last decade. But higher demand translates into
    These numbers come from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances as calculated and reported in Poterba (2000),
     8

Table 2.
    Anecdotally, Bill Gates saw his wealth drop from $85 billion to $63 billion between 1999 and 2000, a percentage
     9

decrease that closely mirrors that of Microsoft stock. Between 1986 and 2000, the number of millionaires has risen
sharply and the total wealth controlled by households with assets of at least $1 million grew 313% to approximately
$8.8 trillion (including Canada, source: Merrill Lynch-Cap Gemini’s 2000 World Wealth Report). During the same
period, the US stock market rose by 405%.
    These figures are from Heaton and Lucas (1999).
    10

    The primitive assumptions needed to ensure this are the same aggregation results across goods implicitly assumed
    11

to employ aggregate consumption data and imply homothetic Engel curves among luxury goods.

                                                        12
higher consumption of luxury goods only to the extent that the supply is elastic enough so that price
inflation does not completely crowd out the increase in nominal consumption of luxury goods.12 On
the basis of equation (3.1), a positive correlation between luxury price inflation and positive returns
reduces, other things equal, the coefficient of relative risk aversion required to reconcile the equity
premium and luxury consumption data. And a relatively inelastic supply of luxury goods tend to
make the denominator of equation (3.1) small and the covariance in the numerator large and positive.
    The empirical counterparts to the theoretical moments on the right-hand side of equation (3.1)
are used to estimate risk aversion. Appendix B describes the construction of sample moments and
standard errors for each estimating equation. In particular, we note that we use all available data to
calculate each moment of interest. That is, for our shorter series, we do not mistakenly assume that
                                                                                       
the recent high returns were largely expected but instead calculate E R +1 − R +1 from returnst
                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                    t

from 1947 to 2000.
    In addition to analyzing risk aversion, we estimate the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
from a linear version of equation (2.11):
                                 ∆ln(L ) = − ρ + 1 r − 1 ε
                                               t+1
                                                         ψ ψ
                                                                    L
                                                                    t+1
                                                                            ψ   t+1                (3.2)
where, as shown in Appendix A.3, ρ ≡ −ln(β) is the discount rate and r +1 ≡ ln(R +1)−∆ln(P +1)
                                                                                          L
                                                                                          t          t         t


is the real rate of return in terms of the luxury good. While E [ε +1] = 0, it is in general the case
                                                                                t   t


that E [r +1ε +1] = 0. Hence estimation treats r +1 as endogenous and uses instruments dated t − 1,
             L
             t   t
                                                         L
                                                         t

so that we are estimating
                                ∆ln(L ) = − ρ + 1 E r − 1 ε
                                            t+1
                                                      ψ ψ       t
                                                                     L
                                                                     t+1
                                                                                ψ   t+1         (3.3)
and E [E [r +1]ε +1] = 0.
         t   t
                 L
                 t   t


   The difficulty in evaluating the risk of equity using these equations is that good measures of the
consumption of luxury goods do not exist.
 12
      Some luxury goods have highly inelastic supply so that ∆ ln (Lt+1   ) = 0; we analyze them separately.




                                                          13
4         Risk Aversion and the Consumption of Luxury Goods

This section describes the construction of measures of the consumption of luxury goods and presents
risk aversion estimated from each series using equations (3.1) and (3.3). A complete description of
the source and our use of each series of luxury consumption is contained in Appendix C. Excess
returns are calculated as the return on the S &P 500 less the return on the 3-month treasury bill.13
We exactly align returns with each of our measures of consumption growth, whether it be monthly,
quarterly, or annual, rather than lagging it. This maintains the comparability of our results to
previous empirical work.
         We construct new series on the consumption of luxury goods because NIPA consumption data
is not classified into luxury and basic consumption. Moreover, available household survey data is
not suited for this task. While there are a host of issues that arise with all household surveys, the
main shortcomings of the most used surveys are as follows. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) measures only the consumption of food and housing, has only infrequent measures of wealth,
and undersamples the wealthy. The Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), while oversampling the
wealthy, does not collect consumption data beyond the stock of some consumer durable goods and
has very little panel dimension and a small time dimension. The Consumer Expenditure Survey
(CEX) covers very limited categories of wealth, has poor measurement of those that is does cover,
and topcodes both consumption and wealth (wealth consists of four categories each topcoded at
$100, 000 for most of the survey). The burden of detailing all consumption, as the CEX requires, is
so large as to suggest very few high wealth households are in the survey or provide a full accounting
of consumption.14
    We previously used the value-weighted NYSE portfolio available from CRSP instead of the S&P 500 and the results
    13

were very similar. We use the S&P 500 when extending our time series because more recent data was more readily
available.
    The SCF and PSID take great pains to minimize the costs to participants. Since the CEX is designed to collect
    14

the distribution of expenditures across goods (although not classified by luxuriousness), complete compliance is quite
costly to participants.




                                                         14
4.1   Results from NIPA, BEA and Trade data

To begin, we examine publicly-available government series which provide some evidence on the risk
aversion implied by the consumption of luxuries. These series are not entirely satisfactory, so, as
described in the next subsection, we construct better series for measuring the consumption of luxury
goods.
    We first estimate risk aversion from NIPA data on consumption of nondurable goods and services
during the post-War period. The first two rows of Table 1 present the details of this exercise. The
columns report the number of observations, the correlation between excess returns and the series,
the standard deviation of the series, the point estimate of risk aversion, ψ, and the standard error
of the estimate, which we compute from the empirical moments as described in appendix B. As is
well known, annual or quarterly aggregate consumption data imply implausibly high estimates of
risk aversion, 1096 and 169 respectively.
    Two subcategories of NIPA personal consumption expenditures (PCE) capture luxury consump-
tion to some extent: “jewelry and watches” and “boats and airplanes.” Unfortunately, both of these
series are expenditures on durable goods rather than consumption, and both series contain some
consumption of basic goods. The consumption of watches includes a significant amount of non-
luxury consumption, while boats and planes also includes expenditures on sports and photographic
equipment. The advantage of these series however is their long time dimension. Our main series
are less than half this length. The second through fifth rows of Table 1 show that these series are
significantly more volatile than the basic consumption series. Consumption of jewelry and watches
however is negatively correlated with excess returns, leading to a negative estimate of risk aversion
(a rejection of the model). While the NIPA series on boats and planes leads to an implausibly high
or negative risk aversion depending on the frequency. These results are consistent with the findings
of Poterba and Samwick (1995), but we report these results to be clear on our starting point.
    The last three rows of table 1 display our results using government data on retail sales and imports
of jewelry. Data on retail sales of jewelry are available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
at a monthly frequency. Data on the imports of jewelry are collected by the US International Trade
Commission. To help isolate luxury jewelry, we sum the imports of jewelry to the U.S. from France,
Italy, and the U.K. These series have shorter time dimensions than the NIPA data, but probably

                                                  15
provide better measures of luxury goods.
    The monthly retail sales of jewelry has a 0.57 correlation with excess returns, still below that of
quarterly NIPA consumption data, but a significantly higher volatility. This leads to a point estimate
for risk aversion of 69, below that of the NIPA data but still implausibly extreme. Focussing more
on luxury goods, last two rows report the result using U.S. imports of jewelry. Here, we find still
high but somewhat lower risk aversion. Given a fair amount of statistical uncertainty, we are unable
to reject reasonable levels of risk aversion.
    We now turn to the analysis of several series of luxury goods that we construct ourselves and
that provide better evidence on the importance of nonhomothetic utility for understanding the risks
of equity.

4.2   Results from Sales of High-End Luxury Goods

In this section we present the results of analyzing three categories of luxury goods: luxury automo-
biles, sales of high-end luxury retailers, and (tax adjusted) charitable contributions of households
with incomes over one million dollars.
    We begin by measuring luxury consumption as the sales of luxury automobiles from Ward’s
Automotive Reports. This series contains a large amount of what we view as basic consumption and
not luxury consumption, but we are able to break out sales of Porsches and consider this category
separately. While more focussed on luxury goods, automobile sales measure expenditures on a
durable good rather than flow consumption, to which our model refers. We postpone directly tackling
the issue of durability, and instead present results from our automobile purchases in rows three and
four of table 2. To the extent that retail sales of luxury automobiles measure the consumption of
luxury goods, risk aversion is significantly lower than estimated from NIPA data. Whether or not
these expenditures measure flow consumption, evidence for the importance of luxuries is given by
the fact that risk aversion declines, as it did in Table 1, as we move from less to more luxurious
measures of expenditures on otherwise similar goods.
    All of the measures considered so far are imperfect along two dimensions. First, the measures
include basic goods purchased by middle class households and do not focus purely on the super-rich,
as our theory requires. Second, as noted, due to durability, these series may have a weak mapping
between consumption expenditures and marginal utility. We partly deal with this second issue by
                                                  16
checking that our findings are not driven by the volatile response of expenditures to wealth for any of
the series: in section 5.1, we redo our analysis with the change in expenditures over the four periods
following the innovation to the market. As we discuss, our main conclusions stand, but this approach
is not a perfect fix.
    Thus we turn to sales from the extremely high-end market for luxury consumption goods directly.
By doing so we are measuring by definition consumption of very expensive luxuries. Durability is
also likely to be less of an issue as fashion is fickle: an Hermès tie, Gucci bag or designer dress lasts
only one season for those who can afford them. We collect retail sales data from luxury retailers.
We do this in two ways.
    First, an organization of French high-end luxury producers collects information on the exports
of 70 French producers of luxury goods to the United States. This group, Comité Colbert, shared
with us the total annual exports to the United States from 1984 to 1998. This series covaries
significantly with US excess returns. Figure 3 displays the time series of excess returns and many of
our consumption series. Panel A shows the low covariance between consumption and excess returns
that is at the heart of the equity premium puzzle. NIPA consumption varies little and covaries less.
Panel B shows the series for Porsche sales and the significantly higher covariance of these sales with
excess returns. Finally, panel C shows the strong relationship between excess returns and our series
on the imports of luxury goods from the Comité Colbert. As reported in the fifth row of Table 2,
consumption of high-end French luxury goods imply a risk aversion of the wealthiest households of
only 12.7. While 12.7 is still implausibly large, the estimate is more than an order of magnitude
lower than that estimated on NIPA data and could easily be biased upward by the slow adjustment
of the flow of international goods.
    Second, we collect data on U.S. sales from the annual reports of high-end luxury retailers. Of the
32 companies so defined by two major investment banks, we are able to collect data for two major
U.S. retailers — Saks and Tiffany — and five European retailers — Bulgari, Gucci, Hermès, LVMH,
and Waterford Wedgewood. We aggregate sales growth across these seven retailers weighting by
market share to create a common series from an unbalanced panel of firm sales. The averaging
lessens the measurement error which arises from the fact that individual companies may misprice
products, produce poor products, and so forth, and so suffer sales movements not indicative of total
consumption of luxury goods. The construction of this series requires assuming that the one-month
                                                   17
differences in fiscal years among companies listed on different exchanges does not affect our results.
    Panel D of Figure 3 displays the close relationship over time between excess returns and sales data
from these seven luxury retailers. The sixth row of Table 2, labelled Luxury Retail Sales presents
the correlation and risk aversion estimated from this series. The results are striking: estimated risk
aversion is 3.6, an estimate 1/300th and 1/47th respectively of the estimates from NIPA annual and
quarterly consumption series.
    To check that this series is not contaminated by the aggregation of sales data across slightly
different reporting periods, we construct a consumption of luxuries series from only the sales of
Gucci, Saks, and Tiffany, which trade on the NYSE and so report on a common fiscal year ending
in January. This series, Luxury Retail Sales (US Retailers), has a correlation with excess returns
of 0.356 and implies an estimate of risk aversion of 3.2. The data that generate such a plausible
estimate of risk aversion are those presented in Figure 1 in the introductory section of the paper.
    As our last measures of high-end luxury goods, we consider sales data for Tiffany by itself since it
is the company for which we have the longest and most consistent series. It is consistent in the sense
that the nature of the business for the company has not changed significantly over time, which is
not the case for a company like Saks which has gone through numerous mergers and acquisitions. In
addition, besides studying annual sales, we have been able to gather data on sales at the New York
city flagship store, and data on US sales at the quarterly frequency. We are somewhat concerned
about the shorter time horizon since by looking only at the last 14 years for the N.Y. series and
8 years for the quarterly data, some of the unexpected comovement of the two series, caused by
high returns over the most recent period, may be treated as expected. To the extent this is true,
we underestimate the covariance and overestimate risk aversion. Nevertheless, as shown in the next
three rows of Table 2, these series, while suggesting higher risk aversion than the series for all luxury
goods, still suggest a much lower risk aversion than typically found. Panel E of Figure 3 displays
the shortest Tiffany time series, the quarterly sales data.
    Our final measure of the consumption of luxuries captures more purely expenditures that give
utility to the extremely wealthy. We construct a measure of luxury consumption from the charitable
contributions of households with (adjusted gross) incomes over a million dollars. This is not a
standard measure of consumption, but it is the leading theory to explain charitable bequests to
model gifts of medical care to the suffering, chairs in economics, art to a museum, and so forth
                                                   18
provide “warm glow” utility to donors.15 One strength of this series is its length. The data is
available from the Internal Revenue Service biannually from 1952 through 1972 and annually since
1973. The price of charitable giving is the tax-price of charitable giving and varies with the average
marginal tax rate of the households in this category.
    The final Panel of Figure 3 and the final row of table 2 shows that luxury consumption of charitable
donations are highly correlated with returns, implying a level of risk aversion of 4.7. While slightly
higher than most economists would believe, a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 2 is within one
standard deviation of our point estimate.
    In sum, our estimates based on high-end luxury consumption suggest an entirely different picture
of the risk of equity. We turn now to robustness and extensions.

5         Extensions

This section first present results that suggest that durability is not driving the findings of the previous
section. Second, our data on luxury consumption is used to estimate the conditional Euler equation
and so provide estimates of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of the very rich. The final
subsection derives a method for estimating the equity premium implied by the price of luxury goods
when these goods are in fixed supply. This method is applied to the price of pre-War Manhattan
co-op apartments, central London real estate, and high-end Bordeaux wines.

5.1         Durability

As noted, many of the publicly available series measure the expenditures on expenditures that include
some durable goods rather than being entirely flow consumption. To some extent, this criticism
contaminates all empirical work in this area, as even NIPA consumption of nondurable goods and
services contains items like shoes, financial services, health care, and items that may not be easily
adjusted as discussed in section 2.4. One might be concerned that this problem is present even in our
measures of sales of high-end luxury goods. In this section we provide some evidence that durability
is not driving our results.
    15
         Indeed treating the provision of public goods as a commodity generating a “warm glow” passes revealed-preference

tests (Andreoni and Miller (forthcoming)).




                                                             19
      Suppose that utility comes from the service flow from the stock of a durable good,         K.
                                                                                                  t   The
durable good is related to expenditures as

                                             K +1 = (1 − δ) K
                                               t                      t   + Lt                        (5.1)

where δ is the rate at which the durable depreciates. If there are no adjustment costs on the stock,
then expenditures (L ) are volatile as they increase or decrease to adjust the stock, while the stock
                         t


is relatively stable. If this were the case, we would underestimate risk aversion since risk aversion
decreases with the covariance of expenditure growth and excess returns.
      If the growth rate of consumption is stationary, equation (5.1) implies that the stock of the good,
and so its service flow, is cointegrated with expenditures. This suggests that we look not at the
instantaneous change in expenditures following an innovation to the market, but rather at a longer-
run increases in expenditures. To the extent that a large positive return leads to an upwards revision
in the stock of a durable, this is still apparent a few years later in higher expenditures. Thus we do
exactly this. In practice our exercise is limited by the length of our sample, so we choose to look at
the increase in expenditures from immediately before the excess return to four periods out. That is,
we provide alternative estimates of risk aversion from the equation16
                                                                                          
                                E R +1 − R +1 − Cov ln( +4 ), (R +1 − R +1)
                                              f                       Pt                 f

                                                                            .                         (5.2)
                                       t                                             t
                             ψ=
                                              t                        Pt                t
                                                                  
                                       Cov ln +4 , (R +1 − R +1)
                                                       Lt
                                                        Lt            t
                                                                                 f
                                                                                 t


    Table 3 provides evidence that our main findings are not driven by durability. Panel A displays the
results for the government statistics of Table 1 and shows that, if anything, the estimated coefficients
of risk aversion are more reasonable. The absolute value of the coefficients of relative risk aversion
tend to be lower, but the only estimate that is at all plausible is that of annual imports of jewelry,
which is 5.
    Turning to our main series, displayed in Panel B of Table 3, for every series except the sales of all
luxury automobiles, the coefficients of risk aversion estimated from these long-differences are lower
than those in the Table 2 and more plausible. The one estimate that seems driven by durability is the
coefficient of relative risk aversion estimated from luxury automobile sales, which becomes negative.
The remainder of Panel B shows that estimates of risk aversion are more reasonable than the baseline
 16
      Note that we correctly make no continuous time adjustment.




                                                             20
results in Table 2. Despite their robustness to durability, these estimates are not necessarily better
than those in Table 2. By taking a long difference we have reduced the effective time dimension of
our series.
    Our main results are not simply driven by the volatility of expenditures, but by a high covariance
of long-lasting movements in sales and excess returns. We conclude that the consumption of luxury
goods implies that much lower estimates of risk aversion are required to rationalize the premium on
equity.

5.2      Results from the Conditional Euler Equation

We turn from measuring risk aversion from unexpected returns to estimating its inverse from the
relationship between the growth in the consumption of luxury goods and predicable returns using
the conditional Euler equation (3.3). As is well-known, the coefficient on the real interest rate in the
conditional Euler equation estimates the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). In preferences
more general than those we specify, it is possible that the IES differs from the inverse of the coefficient
of relative risk aversion.
       Table 4 presents results from estimation of the conditional Euler equation on the same series of
measures of luxury goods analyzed in the previous two sections. To predict returns, we use the second
lags of: NIPA consumption growth, the return on equity, the return on the Treasury bill, and the log
price-dividend ratio. The first column of results gives the estimated IES when the key independent
variable is the predictable return on equities, and the second column gives the associated specification
tests based on the orthogonality of the residuals and the instruments. The last two columns present
the IES and specification test when the independent variable is the predictable variation in the return
on Treasury bills. Given the concerns about durability, there is little information in the rows with
the results based on the NIPA subcategories (“Jewelry . . ” and “Boats . . ”) as well as the
results from jewelry and automobile sales. We present these results for completeness and focus on
our high-end luxury sales measures and charitable contributions.17
       The results based on high-end luxury retail sales typically find significantly higher IES than the
NIPA data, with the exceptions of Tiffany NY series and the shorter quarterly series. Although we
  17
    We also experimented with nonlinear GMM estimation. Estimates were unstable and the discount factor tended to
be estimated greater than one. We suspect that this is due to the short time series available for many of our measures.
                                                          21
do not have long time series, we are able to obtain somewhat tight estimates for the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution for many of our series. These results imply that wealthy households have
higher IES than the typical household.18
      While not the main focus of our paper, these results suggest that low estimates of the IES in
aggregate data may in part be due to the use of basic consumption rather than luxuries. Indeed, there
is significant evidence from household survey data that the IES rises with the level of consumption of
the household (Attanasio and Browning (1995) , Vissing-Jorgensen (2001)). Economists have been
less concerned by the low IES estimated on aggregate data than with the equity premium implied by
the covariance of returns and consumption. But for many applications, it is likely to be important
that wealthy households have higher IES than the typical household.


5.3      Results from the Prices of Luxury Goods Assumed in Fixed Supply

In addition to using data on sales, we can also use the price movements of high-end luxury goods
that are in perfectly inelastic supply to evaluate the equity premium. Intuitively, when a luxury
good is in fixed supply, its price rises when excess returns are positive as household demand for the
goods increases. When there is no increase in supply, this price change can be used as a measure of
the change in marginal utility. In this section, we use the covariance of excess returns and the prices
of luxury goods in fixed supply to construct the implied equity premium.
      Letting   Lt   = Lt+1 = L, the stochastic discount factor for these goods is                              β (M +1 = β), so that
                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                    t

the Euler equation (2.11) becomes
                                                   
                                                        P
                                           0=E
                                                       P +1 (R +1 − R +1)
                                                            t                           f
                                                                     t                  t
                                                        t


Using the definition of covariance, this implies that the equity premium is given by
                                                                                                       
                                                                Cov           Pt
                                                                                    , R +1 − R +1   f

                                 E [R +1 − R +1] = −                                                                            (5.4)
                                                                                            t
                                                                                                            .
                                               f                             Pt+1                   t
                                      t                                                        
                                               t
                                                                               E         Pt
                                                                                        Pt+1


Note that equation (5.4) does not give information about risk aversion. Instead, our data on the
prices of luxury goods directly imply a given premium on equity that is independent of the specific
 18
      See Vissing-Jorgenson (2001) and the discussion therein.




                                                                22
choice of within-period utility function.19
    We construct price series from three sets of goods that are in close to fixed supply. Our first good
is pre-War Manhattan Co-ops, which represent the high end of the Manhattan apartment market.
Our data are price series for pre-War coops in Manhattan at an annual frequency from 1989 on.
We consider four average price series: 1) all pre-War coops in Manhattan, 2) all pre-War coops in
Manhattan with four or more bedrooms, 3) all pre-War luxury-location (Central Park West, Park
Avenue, Fifth Avenue) coops, and 4) all pre-War luxury-location coops with four or more bedrooms.
    The second price series we use measures real estate prices in central London. We employ returns
on the London stock exchange’s FTSE index to calculate the implied equity premium.
    The final data on the price of luxury goods is the price of great Bordeaux wines. We create
indexes from raw data provided by Ardmore and Ashenfelter based on cases of wine sold at US
auctions from 1989 to 1997 at a quarterly frequency. The index includes only the best vintages:
1961, 1966, 1970, 1975, 1978, 1982, 1983, 1985, and 1986. The “fine” index includes the nine best
château’s Lafite, Latour, Margaux, Mouton, Cheval Blanc, Ducru Beaucaillou, Leoville Lascasses,
Palmer, and Pichon Lalande. The “finest” series includes only the first five of these château’s. The
“great” index includes only Lafite and Latour. To give an idea of the quality, in 1997, the average
price of a case of wine in the fine index is over $2 200 and over $2 600 for the finest and great index.
                                                        ,            ,


More detailed information on each index is contained in Appendix C.
    The weakness of each measure is that there are close substitutes to each product. A wealthy
Manhattanite can live on Park Avenue West or choose to live in a mansion in Greenwich, CT or
Chappaqua, NY, instead... There are fine California wines and new vintages that are close to those
that we single out in quality, as well as other high-end alcoholic beverages. To the extent that when
wealth levels rise, the price increase of the items that we study is limited by the increase in the supply
of substitutes, our method underestimates the equity premium implied by these price movements.
    Figure 4 plots the time series of these prices of luxury goods and excess returns. While the
high frequency fluctuations in the series are not matched by returns, there is a fair amount of lower
frequency correlation. That said, it is insufficient to rationalize the equity premium. Table 5 reports
our findings for prices of pre-War Manhattan coops, London real estate, and fine wines. All price
series on luxury real estate imply equity premia that are quite small, although still significantly larger
 19
      Note also that we do not make a continuous time adjustment.
                                                        23
than would be implied by NIPA consumption data with risk aversion of unity. A concern with the
real estate data is that there are significant adjustment costs for households changing their stock
of housing, and this could reduce the estimated premium by reducing the correlation between price
and returns.20 Of course, the effect of adjustment costs are mitigated by the fact that housing is an
asset so that its price should reflect future demand.
    While the premia implied by real estate prices are small, the price series for wine are inconsistent
with a positive premium on equity. This rejects some combination of our assumption of fixed supply
or our model. Indeed, since much good wine is ultimately drunk, the assumption of fixed supply for
this series may fail not only due to the presence of substitutes but due to consumption of wine.
    Our findings using data on the prices of luxuries in fixed supply are inconsistent with the marginal
utility of the rich rationalizing the equity premium.21 We suspect that our assumption of fixed supply
does not properly account for close substitutes, but we present the results of our investigation and
let the reader decide.

6        Conclusions

Evaluating the risk of equity for a given household requires measuring the marginal utility of that
household. We argue that aggregate consumption fails to measure the marginal utility of the repre-
sentative agent because the poor are quite risk averse and the rich do not vary their consumption of
basic goods, only their consumption of luxuries. We find that the marginal utility of the rich, who
hold most US equity, moves significantly with the return on equity. The covariance of luxury goods
and excess returns implies coefficients of relative risk aversion more than an order of magnitude lower
     Based on information from the firm constructing the price indexes for NY co-ops, we lag the price series two
    20

quarters to best capture when the sale, rather than the closing takes place. While this may in general bias down our
estimates, slightly different choices or working with annual data do not change our conclusions. The London real-estate
series is lagged only one period and different choices lead to slightly lower equity premia.
     For high-end luxury goods in fixed supply, our assumptions imply a unit elasticity between the price change of
    21

these goods and the predictable variations in return in the stock market:
                                            ∆ln(P ) = −ρ + E [R ] − ε .
                                                 t+1            t   t+1    t+1                                    (5.5)


Thus we can run a conditional Euler equation and test whether the coefficient on the returns is unity. Not surprisingly

given the results on risk aversion, the coefficients are all below unity, and some are even negative.




                                                           24
than the covariance of NIPA consumption and excess returns. Our main point estimates suggest a
level of risk aversion only slightly higher than most economists would believe plausible. Confidence
intervals contain plausible estimates of risk aversion.
    It is quite possible that our estimates are biased upward since our main series on luxury goods
are significantly shorter than data typically used to estimate excess returns. During the second half
of the 1990’s, excess returns were unusually large and our estimate of the covariance of returns and
luxury consumption might as a result be biased down as some of what is unexpected is measured as
expected.22 Consistently with the empirical evidence on the faster increase of the income and wealth
of top 1% relative to the rest of the population, the growth rate of the luxury goods market has far
exceeded that of aggregate consumption over the past decade.
    While the marginal utility of the rich moves nearly enough with the market to justify the equity
premium, we do not completely answer why the basic consumption equation implies such high risk
aversion for the bottom two thirds of the consumption distribution. Is it enough that necessities
imply that these households have high risk aversion? Or are there sufficient costs to adjusting
consumption to rationalize the lack of consumption movement? Alternatively, are background risks
or costs to participating in the equity market substantial enough to explain the consumption and
investment behavior of these households?




 22
      As detailed in the appendix, we take steps to minimize this.


                                                           25
References
Anderson, T. W. (1971): The Statistical Analysis of Time Series, Wiley, New York.
Andreoni, james and John Miller (forthcoming): “Giving According to GARP: An Experimental Test
of the Consistency of Preferences for Altruism,” Econometrica.
Attanasio, Orazio, and Martin Browning (1995): “Consumption Over the Life Cycle and Over the
Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 85(5), 1118-1137.
Attanasio, Orazio, James Banks and Sarah Tanner (1998): “Asset Holding and Consumption Volatil-
ity,” NBER Working Paper No. 6567.
Bakshi, G. S., and Z. Chen (1996): “The Spirit of Capitalism and Stock-Market Prices,” American
Economic Review, 86(1), 133—57.
Brav, A., G. M. Constantinides, and C. Geczy (1999): “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers
and Limited Participation: Empirical Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. W7406.
Browning, M., and T. F. Crossley (2000): “Luxuries are Easier to Postpone: A Proof,” Journal of
Political Economy, 108(5), 1022—26.
Campbell, J. Y. (1999): “Asset Prices, Consumption, and The Business Cycle,” in Handbook of Macroe-
conomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1C, chap. 19, pp. 1231—1303. Elsevier Press.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(2), 205—51.
Constantinides, G. (1990): “Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle” Journal of
Political Economy, 98(3), 519—43.
Constantinides, G. M., and D. Duffie (1996): “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers,” Journal
of Political Economy, 104(2), 219—40.
Dynan, K., J. Skinner, and S. P. Zeldes (2000): “Do the Rich Save More?,” working paper, Columbia
University.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin (1991): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, andthe Temporal Behavior
of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 99(2), 263—86.
Grossman, Sanford J., Angelo Melino, and Robert Shiller (1987): “Estimating the Continuous-
Time Consumption-Based Asset-Pricing Model,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 5(3), 315—27.
Guvenen, Muhammet F. (2000): “Mismeasurement of the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution: The
Role of Limited Stock Market Participation,” working paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Hanoch, G. (1977): “Risk Aversion and Consumer Preferences,” Econometrica, 45(2), 413—26.
Heaton, J., and D. Lucas (1996): “Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing and
Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(3), 443—87.
Heaton, J., and D. Lucas (1999): “Stock Prices and Fundamentals,” in N.B.E.R. Macroeconomics Annual,
ed. by B. Bernanke, and J. Rotemberg, pp. 213—242. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Huggett, M., and G. Ventura (2000): “Understanding Why High Income Households Save More Than
Low Income Households,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 45(2), 361—97.
Mankiw, N. G., and S. Zeldes (1991): “The Consumption of Stockholders and Nonstockholders,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 29(1), 97-112.
Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics, 15(2), 145—61.
Poterba, J. M. (2000): “Stock Market Wealth and Consumption,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
14(2), 99—118.
                                                 26
Poterba, J. M., and A. Samwick (1995):       “Stock Ownership Patterns, Stock Market Fluctuations, and
Consumption,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (2), 295—357.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1969): “Behavior Towards Risk with Many Commodities,” Econometrica, 4(37), 660—67.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (1998): “Limited Stock Market Participation,” working paper, MIT.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2001): “Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of Intertemporal
Substitution” working paper, University of Chicago.




                                                 27
                                                                   Appendix
A       Proofs and Derivations
A.1     Limiting Consumption Shares
We claim
                                                   lim C = 0          E →∞ E
                                                 lim PL = 1
                                                E →∞ E
    Let C̃ = C −a, L̃ = L+b, and Ẽ = E −a+Pb, then the intratemporal first-order condition is C̃−φ = L̃−ψ /P
and the budget constraint is Ẽ = C̃ + P L̃. It follows that
                                           C̃ =               1                                         (A.1)
                                           Ẽ        1 + P /ψC̃φ/ψ−
                                                           −                                1 1                          1

                                         P L̃ =              1                                          (A.2)
                                          Ẽ         1 + P − L̃ψ/φ−
                                                           /φ                               1          1                 1


As Ẽ → ∞ either C̃ → ∞ in which case equation (A.1) implies that C̃Ẽ → 0 or C̃ is bounded and so C̃Ẽ → 0.
Finally, since limẼ→∞ ẼE = 1 and 0 < C̃ < C ,
                                   0 = Ẽlim C̃ = lim C + a = lim C .
                                          →∞ Ẽ E→∞ E E E→∞ E
Similar logic demonstrates the second claim in equation (2.8).
A.2     First Order and Envelope Conditions in the Presence of Two Types of Con-
        sumption Goods
With the period utility function v(C, L) in (2.7) written as v(C, L) = (C)+ υ(L), the value function Jt(Wt)
satisfies
                            Jt (Wt ) = {C max
                                          ,L ,ω }
                                                  { (Ct ) + υ(Lt )+ Et [βJt (Wt )]}                   (A.3)                   +1          +1
                                                  t       t   t


where Wt = (Wt − Ct − PtLt) R̃t . The optimal controls Ct∗(Wt), L∗t (Wt) and ω∗t (Wt) are the solutions of
the three first order conditions with respect to the three controls {Ct, Lt, ωt}
           +1                                +1

                                                     
                         
                             C   −  βE  J +1 W +1 R̃ +1
                                  (
                                        
                                        t)                t
                                                                 t   (        t       )       t           = 0



                          υ L   −  βE  J    W    P  R̃
                          E J +1 W +1 W − C − P L R +1 − R +1
                                (       t)+1   +1       +1            (                )                    = 0                                             (A.4)

                         
                                                      t       t            t               t       t
                                                                                                                                      f
                                t       t     (       t       )(      t            t               t   t)        t                    t           = 0



Replacing the optimal controls in (A.3), yields


                        Jt Wt
                          (     ) =           (   Ct∗ Wt  (       )) +    υ L∗t Wt
                                                                           (           (           )) +     Et βJt+1 Wt∗+1 Wt     (           (        ))   (A.5)


where


                              Wt∗+1 Wt ≡ Wt − Ct∗ Wt − Pt L∗t Wt R̃t∗+1 Wt
                                        (     )               (                        (           )                 (       ))           (        )


                              R̃∗t+1 Wt ≡ Rtf+1 Rt+1 − Rtf+1 ω∗t Wt .
                                        (     )                           +(                                     )       (        )




                                                                                       28
Differentiating (A.5) with respect to the state variable                                                                    Wt          then yields



      Jt Wt                       Ct Wt ∂W
                               ( ∗(       ∂Ct∗ υ L∗ W ∂L∗t E βJ  W ∗ W ×
        (         )   =                    ))             +
                                                            ∂Wt t t+1 t+1 t
                                                                       (        (           ))                          +                                   (                 (           ))

                                                                                               ∗ 
                                                      t   t
                                              t


                                   1
                                      ∂Ct
                                         ∗      ∂L ∗
                                                   t                                        ∂ω
                                    − ∂W − Pt ∂W R̃t+1 Wt Wt − Ct Wt − Pt Lt Wt Rt+1 − Rt+1 ∂Wt
                                                        ∗         ∗        ∗            f
                                                                                            (                   )+(                                     (       )                         (     )) (            )
                                         t          t                                          t


                                                                                   t
which after simplification using (A.4) and the fact that all variables subscripted with                                                                                                                  are contained in the

information set at            t,   reduces to the envelope conditions

                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                 Jt Wt
                                                      (        )           =            βEt Jt+1 Wt∗+1 Wt R̃∗t+1 Wt        (               (           ))                (           )                                (A.6)


                                                                           =            β  Ct∗ Wt  (               (           ))                                                                                     (A.7)

                                                                           =            βυ L∗t Wt Pt
                                                                                                    (           (               ))/                                                                                    (A.8)


Evaluating the expressions for                  Jt Wt
                                                  (        ) given by the envelope conditions at                                                                              t   + 1, and suppressing the superscript

∗   and the dependence of the optimal policies on current wealth, the system of first order conditions (A.4)

becomes                                               
                                                          C − βE
                                                                                
                                                      
                                                                   (C +1 R
                                                                            t) +1
                                                                                                           t               (       t       )
                                                                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                                                                    t           = 0



                                                       υ  L  −  βE  υ L    P R                                                                      f


                                                       E J +1 W +1 R +1 − R +1
                                                                   (     +1 t)  +1                                      (               )                        = 0

                                                      
                                                                                                        t                       t               t    t
                                                                                                                                                     f
                                                                   t        t           (           t           )               t                    t               = 0


which yields the set of conditional Euler equations (2.9). From this it follows that

                                                      
                                                       E β (C(C+1) ) Rt+1 − Rtf+1
                                                                                    
                                                                                                t
                                                                   t                                                                                            = 0

                                                       Et β υυ ((LL +1)P)+1P Rt+1 − Rft+1
                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (A.9)
                                                                                            t                   t
                                                                                                                                                                    = 0
                                                                                            t           t


i.e., equations (2.10)-(2.11).




A.3     Estimating Equations
                 ( )/ ( ) denote the marginal rate of substitution
      Mt+1 ≡ βυ Lt+1 υ Lt
       L                                                               for luxury consumption, which is
the stochastic discount factor in this case. With υ(L) ≡ (L + b) /(1 − ψ), it follows that M ≡
Let
                                                                  −                                                                                                 (1    ψ)                                          L

β(L + b)− /(L + b)− . From (2.9), we have that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t+1
                      ψ                ψ
      t+1                 t

                                                                  
                                            P
                              1=E M P R =E M P R                P          L                t
                                                                                                (A.10)      f                                           L             t                f
                                                           t               t+1                              t+1                         t               t+1                            t+1
                                                                                        t+1                                                                          t+1


since R is known at t. Thus
            f
            t+1

                                                            1
                                                           
                                       E M P    P     =E R .                            L
                                                                                                (A.11)          t
                                                                                        t+1                                                          f
                                                                                                            t+1                                      t+1

Then the unconditional version of (2.11) is
                                                 
                0 = E M PP (R − R )         L
                                            t+1
                                                           t

                                                          t+1
                                                                           t+1
                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                    t+1
                                                                                  
                    = E M PP E R − R + Cov M PP , (R − R )
                                                      
                                            L              t                                                        f                                           L                 t                     f
                                            t+1                                     t+1                             t+1                                         t+1                            t+1      t+1
                                                          t+1                                                                                                             t+1

                             1
                                                                               
                    = E
                                               
                                   E R − R + Cov M            P   , (R − R )                    f                                                   L            t                                f

                                           Rft+1                       t+1                      t+1                                                 t+1
                                                                                                                                                            Pt+1                      t+1         t+1




                                                                                                                    29
     We then employ a fairly standard linearization (see e.g., Campbell (1999)). With our choice of utility
function for luxury goods consumption,
                   M PP = β υυ(L(L ) ) PP = β exp(−ψ∆ln(L + b) − ∆ln(P ))
                                       
                        L
                        t+1
                                t

                               t+1
                                                          t+1

                                                              t
                                                                       t

                                                                      t+1
                                                                                                    (A.12)                  t+1                               t+1



with the notation ∆ln(X ) ≡ ln(X ) − ln(X ) for any positive X. Under the under the reasonable approx-
imation that b/L ≈ 0, equation (A.12) implies that
                              t+1                     t+1                     t

                  t



                              M PP ≈ β exp(−ψ∆ln(L ) − ∆ln(P ))
                                        L
                                        t+1
                                                      t
                                                                                                    (A.13)      t+1                       t+1
                                                  t+1

                                            ≈ β [1 − ψ∆ln(L ) − ∆ln(P )] .                          (A.14)    t+1                    t+1


where the linearization approximation consists of ψ∆ln(L )+ ∆ln(P  ) 1. This       type of approximation
is true more generally; it follows from the Taylor expansion υ (L ) ≈ υ (L ) + υ(L )(L − L ) which in
                                                                                                          t+1                       t+1


our case gives
                                                                                                                      t+1                     t                t     t+1    t


                                υ (L ) = −ψ (L + b)− − = − ψ ≈ − ψ .                          ψ    1

                                υ (L )        (L + b)−        (L + b) L
                                                  t                       t
                                                                                                 ψ
                                                  t                           t                                       t                        t

     Therefore we have from (A.14) that
                                     −
                                1
                                                    1              
                                         Cov M P , (R − R )
               
E R −Rt+1
            f
            t+1    = −E             R   f
                                                                       L
                                                                       t+1
                                                                                   Pt+1
                                                                                            t
                                                                                                          t+1
                                                                                                                          f
                                                                                                                          t+1
                                        t+1
                                                 −1
                      ≈ βE
                               
                                        1                 
                                                              ψCov
                                                                      
                                                                       ∆ln(L ) , (R             t+1             t+1   − R +1)   f
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                          + Cov ∆ln(P ), (R         t+1    t+1   − R +1)
                                                                                                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                                                                                                          

                                    Rf
                                     t+1
                                                                                                                                t                                                   t




Finally, we assume that βE 1/R − ≈ 1 and make the adjustment as if our model were in continuous time
                                                      1
                                             f
                                             t+1

(see Grossman, Melino, and Shiller (1987)), yielding equation (3.1).
    The conditional Euler equation (2.9) is
                                   1 + ε = M PP R , E [ε ] = 0.
                                                          t+1
                                                                          L
                                                                          t+1
                                                                                            t

                                                                                           t+1
                                                                                                        t+1           t    t+1



Taking logs, it follows from (A.13) that
                           ln(1 + ε ) ≈ ln β − ψ∆ln(L ) − ∆ln(P ) + ln(R )
                                             t+1                                                    t+1                     t+1                         t+1


which itself is approximated (under |ε | 1) by            t+1


                               ε ≈ ln β − ψ∆ln(L ) − ∆ln(P ) + ln(R )
                                     t+1                                                   t+1                        t+1                     t+1


Rearranging gives equation (3.2).
B      Empirical Moments and Inference
B.1     The Unconditional Euler Equation
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
The unconditional
          
                    Euler equation (2)for
                                      
                                          quantities involves estimating E[R −R ], Cov ∆ln(L ) , (R − R )                             t+1
                                                                                                                                                        f
                                                                                                                                                        t+1                 t+1         t+1
                                                                                                                                                                                               f
                                                                                                                                                                                               t+1

and Cov ∆ln(P ), (R − R ) . In practice, to estimate these moments we use all available post-war
                  t+1     t+1
                                            f


data to construct each sample moment. The last few years have seen unusually high excess returns; by using
                                            t+1


all available data we can minimize the small-sample
                                                      bias associated with this unusual occurrence.
     Regarding inference, define the vector X ≡ R − R , ∆ln(L ) , ∆ln(P ) and assume that X ≡ {X }
                                                                  t                    t
                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                                      t                   t
                                                                                                                                                  

                                                                                                                                                                                   t t=2,..,T +1

is covariance-stationary. With x denoting the i component of the vector X i = 1, 2, 3, it is clear that the
                                                                                                    t
                                                                                  th
                                            it                                                                                                    it,



                                                                                                30
asymptotic properties of the three moment estimators we are considering, and ultimately the estimator of                                                                                                     ψ
based on equation (2), can be deduced from those of the vector

                                                                                                                                                                          
                                          MT ≡ T −1
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                         x1t ,               x2t ,             x3t ,                x1t x2t ,                x1t x3t                                   (B.1)



                                                                                                         x4t ≡ x1t x2t                               x5t ≡ x1t x3t
X̃t ≡ x1t , x2t , x3t , x4t , x5t  .
by judicious use of the delta method.                             Let us define                                                         and                                      and the extended vector

         (                                )     Further, define the vector and the matrix                                                            .
                                                                                                
                                                                 µ ≡ E X̃t                                                                                                                             (B.2)
                                                                                                                                           
                                                            Γj           ≡ E X̃ − µ X̃ − − µ         t                      t       j                                                                  (B.3)




and assume that the autocovariance matrices are absolutely summable, i.e.,
                                                                                                                                                             +      ∞ | | < ∞.
                                                                                                                                                                          Γj             The natural esti-
                                                                                                                                                                 j =0

                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                           ∞α ε −
mators of these quantities are the corresponding sample moments. Under a number of reasonable assumptions
                                                                                                                                                                                         +
on the time series dependence of the process                                         X̃t                            , such as for example                                X̃t µ   =   +
                                                                                                                                                                                          j =0   j t   j with

εt   i.i.d.,   E ε2t < ∞,
                   [   ]
                                    +   ∞ |α | < ∞,                                             t=2,..,T +1
                                                             the Central Limit Theorem (see e.g., Anderson (1971, )) implies that
                                     j =0      j

                                                                                                                                                
                                                            √                 +∞
                                                                              
                                                             T M − µ −→ N  ,
                                                                     (       T               )                      0                       Γj   .                                                    (B.4)

                                                                              =−∞                                           j


      The quantities of interest are


                                                                              E Rt+1 − Rtf+1
                                                                                     [                              ]           =       M1T
                                                                                            
                                              Cov
                                                   ∆ ln (   Lt+1        )   , Rt+1 − Rft+1
                                                                                 (                             )                =       M4T − M1T M2T
                                                                                                                
                                              Cov
                                                            Pt+1 , Rt+1 − Rft+1
                                                        ∆ ln (           )       (                             )                =       M5T − M1T M3T
and the delta method yields the asymptotic distribution of our unconditional estimator of                                                                                                 ψ   given by the

empirical counterpart of equation (2), that is:

                                                                                                                                                        
                                         E Rt+1 − Rft+1 − Cov
                                          [                     ]  Pt+1 , Rt+1 − Rtf+1  ∆ ln (                 )       (                                )
                                                                                                                                                                         M1T − M5T − M1T M3T
     ψ̂UNC ≡ ψ̂ MT                   2
                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                     2               (

                                                                                                                                                                            M4T − M1T M2T
                                                                                                                                                                                                         )


                                                            Lt+1 , Rt+1 − Rtf+1
                       (       ) =                                                                                                                               =
                                     3
                                                  Cov
                                                                ∆ ln (                      )   (                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                     3


                                                                                                                                                                                                       (B.5)

from which it follows that

                                                                                                                                                                      
                                          √                                                                                             +
                                                                                                                                            ∞
                                              T ψ̂UNC − ψ
                                               (                     )        −→ N  , ∇ µ                 0        (       )
                                                                                                                                                   Γ j  ∇(µ)                                       (B.6)

                                                                                                                                        j =−∞
                                                   
where     ∇ µ ≡ ∂ ψ̂ MT ∂MT | M =µ
               (   )            (        )/                          can be estimated consistently by                                                    ∇ MT .
                                                                                                                                                             (       )
                               T
      As noted, we use all available data for our point estimates. Let                                                                  T   be the number of periods of available data

on returns and the price of luxuries, and                            N       be the number of periods of available data on luxury consumption.




                                                                                                         31
Note that for most series T > N . Our point estimates of M and M are                                     1,t             4,T


                                         = 1  R −R
                                                                                  T

                                  M                    1,T
                                                                                                             f
                                                                            T      t=1
                                                                                                 t           t




                                                                    = N1  ∆ln(L )
                                                                                    N

                                                   M2,T                                                  t
                                                                                   t=1


                                                                    = 1  ∆ln(P )
                                                                                    N

                                                   M3,T
                                                                            N      t=1
                                                                                                         t




                                                                    = N1  ∆ln(L ) R − R
                                                                                   N    
                                                   M4,T                                                  t           t
                                                                                                                             f
                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                   t=1


                                                                    = 1  ∆ln(P ) R − R .
                                                                                   N    
                                                   M5,T                                                                      f
                                                                            N      t=1
                                                                                                         t           t       t



    As with our point estimates, we use all available data to construct an estimate of each sample element of
the variance covariance matrix. The variance covariance matrix is constructed using Newey-West triangular
weighting with 1 lag.
    For prices of luxury goods in fixed supply, the unconditional Euler equation (5.4) requires estimating
moments of P /P and R − R which we do using T periods. The asymptotic properties of the implied
                                                   f

estimator of the risk premium follow using the same method as above.
                   t   t+1             t+1         t+1




B.2      The Conditional Euler Equation
With respect to the linearized conditional Euler equations, we estimate the first-stage with as much data
as is available and then the second-stage with the smaller amount of luxury consumption data. Let Z =
(Z , ...Z − ) be the T × k matrix where Z is the k × 1 column vector of instruments known at time period
                                                                                                                                                                                     T


0 appropriate for use to instrument R where i
  0            1                                                       0
                                                                                      R R , ...R
           T
                                                           i                                                                                                     i       i       i 
                                                           1                    denotes risk-free or equity return. Let
                                                                                                                                                                 T = (   1       T ) be

      T×                                                                                             X           1 ,R                     T×                             1           T×
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                         i
the        1 column vector of the available returns and let                                          T =                             an            2 matrix where            is an        1
                                                                                                                         T
vector of ones. Let      ZN      and    X    N be the same matrixes truncated to the                                                 N   periods in which we have data on

luxuries. Finally, let       L   N = (∆ ln(       L1 , ...,
                                                       )           ∆ ln(   LN      ))
                                                                                        
                                                                                            be the vector of data on the growth of the consumption

of luxuries.

      An optimal two-step instrument variables estimator is

                                                                                      −1
                                               δ 1
                                                                           X Z V̂ −1Z  X X Z V̂ −1Z  L
                                                               


                                  γ̂   =     −ψ, ψ                 =
                                                                             
                                                                             T      T                T       T           T       T             N    N



where
                                                                             ∞
                                                                             
                             V̂ →p V         =   E Zt εt εt Zt
                                                   [                   ] +              E Zt εt εt+j Zt+j        
                                                                                                                         + E [Z                ε ε Zt ]
                                                                                                                                          t+j t+j t
                                                                                                                                                         


                                                                                 j =1

and
                                                 εt = Lt − γ Xt .
    To construct this estimator, we first take V̂ = ZT ZT and construct a preliminary estimate of γ. We then
                                                                                            


use this estimate to construct a vector ε̂N = LN −γ̂XN and then V̂ is calculated using a Newey-West
                                                                                                 estimator
                                                                                                       
as for the unconditional inference. With V̂ in hand, we apply the above formulae to calculate −ψδ ,ψ1 and
its variance-covariance matrix.
     To test the model based on the degree of overidentification, the statistic ε Z V̂ − Z  ε is distributed                              1                1
chi-squared with degrees of freedom equal to the degree of overidentification under the null that the model is                            N    N     N           N N


correct.
                                                                                                32
C     Data
A detailed description of the source and our use of each series on luxury goods follows. We seasonally adjust
the monthly/quarterly data by regressing consumption growth on indicator variables for month/quarter and
using the residuals in place of consumption growth. In every case, using the raw, unadjusted data leads to the
same substantive conclusions.
    Equity returns compared to consumption growth between t − 1 and t are the price at the end of period t
plus dividends during period t both divided by the price at the start of the period t. The nominal quarterly
risk-free rate of return is the return on 3 month treasury bills reported for the first month of the quarter. We
use post-war data only, returns from 1947 to 2000 on 2001Q1.
C.1     Quantity Data for Luxury Goods in Elastic Supply
C.1.1 BEA Data
We make use of real PCE of nondurables and services, jewelry and watches, and boats and planes. Non-       23
durables and services is available at both an annual and quarterly frequency since 1946, and the latter series
are available since 1959. Unfortunately, PCE of jewelry and watches includes many non-luxury items. For
instance, most of the PCE-measured consumption of watches is unlikely to represent high-end luxury. Hence,
we also use the real retail sales of jewelry published by the BEA as a measure of aggregate consumption of
jewelry. This series is available at a monthly frequency since 1967.
C.1.2 U.S. Imports of Jewelry
Another measure of luxury consumption at an aggregate level is U.S. imports for consumption of jewelry
(SITC 897), made available through the U.S. International Trade Commission. To isolate the luxury items,
we only consider imports from France, Italy, and U.K. Our choice of these European countries is motivated by
our list of foreign luxury retailers, which is described below. In 2000, France accounted for 1.3% of total U.S.
jewelry imports, Italy 23.4%, and U.K. 0.9%. Hence this series that we construct is mainly driven by imports
from Italy. To deflate the nominal value of imports, we use BEA’s price index for retail sales of jewelry stores.
C.1.3 Luxury Cars Sales
We have obtained data on total U.S. sales of luxury vehicles from Ward’s Automotive. Luxury vehicles includes
cars and light trucks with a list price over $24, 800, SUV’s over $26, 500, and minivans and vans over $26, 000.
We also have data on sales of Porsches. Both series are available since 1980. For price deflation, we use BEA’s
price index for retail sales of automotive dealers.
C.1.4 Comité Colbert Data: French Luxury Exports to the U.S.
Comité Colbert is a consortium of seventy French companies that specialize in luxury products. We collected
data on their total U.S. sales from 1984 through 1998. Among the Comité Colbert members, the sixty compa-
nies with U.S. sales are Baccarat, Bernardaud, Champagne Bollinger, Boucheron, Breguet, Bussière, Caron,
Céline, Chanel, Parfums Chanel, Château Cheval Blanc, Château Lafite-Rothschild, Château d’Yquem, Chris-
tian Dior, Parfums Christian Dior, Christofle, D. Porthault, Daum, Ercuis, Faı̈enceries de Gien, Flammarion
Beaux Livres, Givenchy, Parfums Givenchy, Guerlain, Guy Laroche, Hédiard, Hermès, Parfums Hermès, Jean
Patou, Parfums Jean Patou, Jean-Louis Scherrer, Jeanne Lanvin, John Lobb, Champagne Krug, La Chemise
Lacoste, Lalique, Lancôme, Parfums Lanvin, Champagne Laurent-Perrier, Lenôtre, Léonard, Champagne
Louis Roederer, Louis Vuitton, La Maison du Chocolat, Mauboussin, Mellerio dits Meller, Nina Ricci, Par-
fums Nina Ricci, Pierre Balmain, Pierre Frey, Puiforcat, Rémy Martin, Revillon, Robert Haviland & C. Parlon,
Rochas, Champagne Ruinart, Cristal Saint-Louis, Souleı̈ado, S.T. Dupont and Champagne Veuve Clicquot
Ponsardin.
  23
     Specifically, the boats and planes category includes ”wheel goods, sports and photographic equipment, boats and
pleasure aircraft.”


                                                        33
C.1.5 U.S. Sales of Luxury Retailers
We initially targeted sales data for a list of 7 U.S. and 25 European luxury retailers based on the list of luxury
retailers contained in Morgan Stanley’s “Luxury Goods Weekly” (June 9, 2000) and Merrill Lynch’s report
“Luxury Goods” (June 16, 2000). Of the 32 companies in our list, we consider the sales data for two U.S.
retailers and five European retailers. The U.S. retailers are Saks (1983) and Tiffany (1983). The European
retailers are Bulgari (1992), Gucci (1992), Hermès (1984), LVMH (1993), and Waterford Wedgwood (1992).
The years in parentheses indicate the first year in which we were able to obtain sales data. Nine of the
companies in our list are not public and hence do not disclose sales information. Six of the companies have
been public for less than five years and hence we do not have enough observations in order to reliably measure
correlations. Nine of the companies are yet to respond to our request for information. The remaining company
is Neiman Marcus whose sales data we have since 1983. However, we do not use Neiman Marcus because
their fiscal year ends in July rather than December or January for all the other retailers. Hence, we cannot
reliably aggregate their sales data with our other retailers.
     We construct two measures of aggregate sales of luxury retailers. The first, which we call Sales of All
Luxury Retailers, is constructed from the sales data for the seven luxury retailers we mention above. The
second, which we call Sales of US Luxury Retailers, is constructed from Gucci, Saks, and Tiffany. These three
companies trade in the NYSE and report on a fiscal year which ends in January. The remaining retailers trade
in European stock exchanges and report on a fiscal year which ends in December. So our second measure of
sales is a robustness check for our first measure which we construct on the assumption that the difference of a
month does not influence our results. To give a flavor for our cross section of data, in 1993 Saks accounted for
16% of total sales, Tiffany 22%, Bulgari 2%, Gucci 5%, Hermès 5%, LVMH 34%, and Waterford Wedgwood
15%. In 1999, it was Saks 72%, Tiffany 8%, Bulgari 1%, Gucci 4%, Hermès 1%, LVMH 9%, and Waterford
Wedgwood 5%. In 1997, Proffitt’s merged with Saks Holdings to become the current Saks Incorporated.
Hence, although individual firms may go through changes, we take care to compute growth rates in sales over
the same firms in adjacent periods to assure that our series is as consistent as possible.
     We take sales data from the annual reports for all companies. For Tiffany, we obtained the quarterly data
from the 10-Q filings. For all European retailers, we isolate sales in the U.S. In the initial annual report, a
retailer typically reports sales for five or so years before the company became public, but do not report the
share of sales attributed to the U.S. In those cases, we compute the average percentage of sales in the U.S.
for years in which that figure is available to estimate U.S. sales. Sales data reported in foreign currencies are
converted to U.S. dollars using the average exchange rate over the fiscal year. Since jewelry is the main line
of business for many of the companies on our list, we use the price index for retail sales of jewelry stores to
deflate nominal sales.
C.2     Charitable Contributions by the Very Rich
As a proxy for charitable contributions of the wealthy, we use the average contributions data for households
with adjusted gross income (AGI) over $1 million, which is taken from the IRS publication Individual Income
Tax Returns. The data is available biannually from 1952 through 1972 and annually since 1973. The nominal
values are deflated by the CPI of All Urban Consumers. The price of a charitable contribution is its tax price.
That is, the relative price of luxuries in this case is 1 − τ . We compute the marginal tax rate for households
with AGI over $1 million as
                                                            t


                                                   T ax − T ax
                                             τ =                                                          (C.1)
                                                      1m        0.5m

                                                   AGI − AGI
                                             t        1m         0.5m

where T ax (T ax ) are the average taxes per capita for households with AGI over $1 million (with AGI
           1m       0.5m
from $0.5—1 million) and AGI and AGI are the correspondingly defined average AGI’s for each group.
                               1m           0.5m
The tax adjustment makes little difference to the results.



                                                       34
C.3     Price Data for Luxury Goods in Fixed Supply
C.3.1 Manhattan Pre-War Coop Apartments
We have obtained the average closing price of pre-war coops in Manhattan at a quarterly frequency since
1989. Pre-war coops are especially appropriate for our analysis since they are in fixed supply. We consider
four average price series: 1) all pre-war coops in Manhattan, 2) all pre-war coops in Manhattan with four
or more bedrooms, 3) all pre-war luxury (Central Park West, Park Avenue, Fifth Avenue) coops, and 4) all
pre-war luxury coops with four or more bedrooms. Since the price data that we have is the price recorded at
the time of closing, there is delay between the time a sale price is negotiated and the time the price is recorded.
Hence, in our calculations in Table 5 lag the price series 6 months which is the time frame recommended by
our data provider. In other words, we assume that the recorded closing price in the third quarter of 1999 is
the effective price of real estate in the first quarter of 1999.
C.3.2 London Real Estate
Real estate prices for central   London are produced by the Nationwide Building Society in London. The price

series is seasonally adjusted, and is available at the quarterly frequency since 1973:4.    For stock returns, we

use the FTSE all-share returns.



C.3.3 Fine French Wine, US Auction Prices
The fine and finest are the Ardmore-Ashenfelter indexes for the finer and finest wines, reconstructed so as to

reflect hammer price per dozen 750ml bottles at US auctions only. For more information on the raw data see:

www.liquidassets.com.   The finest index covers wines from the Château’s Lafite, Latour, Margaux, Mouton,

and Cheval Blanc.    The Finer Index covers also Ducru Beaucaillou, Leoville Lascasses, Palmer, and Pichon

Lalande.   The “great” series covers only the top two:    Lafite and Latour.   All three indexes use wines from

quite good vintages only: the 1961, 1966, 1970, 1975, 1978, 1982, 1983, 1985, and 1986 vintages.        The price

index is constructed from regressions of log-price on year, month, vintage and chateau dummies.         The series

are log of nominal price of a constant-quality basket of wines.




                                                        35
Figure 1: Growth in luxury Consumption, Growth in Basic Consumption,
and Excess Returns, 1986-2000
                     Panel A: Consumption growth against Excess Returns

    0.70
    0.60
    0.50
    0.40
    0.30
    0.20
    0.10
    0.00
   -0.10
   -0.20
        -0.1        -0.05     0      0.05     0.1           0.15      0.2      0.25         0.3      0.35
                             NIPA Consumption                  US Luxury Sales



                  Panel B: Consumption Growth and Excess Returns over Time

   0.70
   0.60
   0.50
   0.40
   0.30
   0.20
   0.10
   0.00
  -0.10
  -0.20
           1986                        1991                          1996                         2001


           S&P500 Excess Returns              US Luxury Retail Sales            US NIPA Consumption



Note: All data are annual growth rates. Both figures display returns at the frequency of annual reports, from
February 1985 to January 2001.



                                                 36
                   Figure 2: Expenditure Shares

C, L




          Basic Consumption (C)




                                    Luxury Consumption (L)



       
                                                                X




                                  37
Figure 3: Luxury Consumption Growth and Excess Returns
                                                      Panel A: NIPA Consumption
   0 .4 0


   0 .3 0


   0 .2 0


   0 .1 0


   0 .0 0


  -0 .1 0


  -0 .2 0


  -0 .3 0


  -0 .4 0
            1 9 4 8       1 9 5 3      1 9 5 8         1 9 6 3       1 9 6 8      1 9 7 3        1 9 7 8          1 9 8 3      1 9 8 8         1 9 9 3        1 9 9 8

                                              S & P 5 0 0 E x c e s s R e tu r n s                      N IP A    C o n s u m p ti o n G r o w th




                              Panel B: U.S. Sales of Luxury Automobiles, Porsche
   0 .6 0


   0 .4 0


   0 .2 0


   0 .0 0


  -0 .2 0


  -0 .4 0


  -0 .6 0


  -0 .8 0
              1 9 8 1                                  1 9 8 6                                1 9 9 1                                    1 9 9 6

                                                   S & P 5 0 0 E x c e s s R e tu r n s                    P o r s c h e S a le s G r o w t h




                        Panel C: U.S. Sales of French Luxury Group, Comité Colbert
   0 .4 0



   0 .3 0



   0 .2 0



   0 .1 0



   0 .0 0



  -0 .1 0



  -0 .2 0
               1 9 8 5    1 9 8 6   1 9 8 7      1 9 8 8   1 9 8 9   1 9 9 0    1 9 9 1     1 9 9 2     1 9 9 3     1 9 9 4   1 9 9 5     1 9 9 6   1 9 9 7     1 9 9 8

                                          S & P 5 0 0 E x c e s s R e tu r n s                    C o m i t e C o lb e r t U S     S a le s G r o w t h




                                                                           38
Figure 3 (Continued)
                                         Panel D: U.S. Sales from All Luxury Retailers
    0 .5 0


    0 .4 0


    0 .3 0


    0 .2 0


    0 .1 0


    0 .0 0


   -0 .1 0


   -0 .2 0
               1 9 8 5                                            1 9 9 0                                              1 9 9 5

                                         S & P 5 0 0 E x c e s s R e tu r n s                    A ll L u x u r y   R e t a i le r s S a le s G r o w t h




                                               Panel E: U.S. Sales from Tiffany (Q)
    0 .2 5


    0 .2 0


    0 .1 5


    0 .1 0


    0 .0 5


    0 .0 0


   -0 .0 5


   -0 .1 0


   -0 .1 5
             1 9 9 4           1 9 9 5            1 9 9 6              1 9 9 7              1 9 9 8              1 9 9 9              2 0 0 0               2 0 0 1

                                                  S & P 5 0 0 E x c e s s R e tu r n s                     T iffa n y      S a le s G r o w t h




                                     Panel F: Charitable Contributions of the Rich
    0 .4 0


    0 .2 0


    0 .0 0


   -0 .2 0


   -0 .4 0


   -0 .6 0


   -0 .8 0
        54



                 58



                          62



                                  66



                                           70



                                                   73



                                                             75



                                                                       77



                                                                                  79



                                                                                        81



                                                                                                   83



                                                                                                            85



                                                                                                                      87



                                                                                                                                 89



                                                                                                                                         91



                                                                                                                                                   93



                                                                                                                                                             95
      19



                19



                         19



                                19



                                          19



                                                  19



                                                            19



                                                                     19



                                                                                 19



                                                                                       19



                                                                                                 19



                                                                                                          19



                                                                                                                     19



                                                                                                                               19



                                                                                                                                        19



                                                                                                                                                  19



                                                                                                                                                            19




                                         S & P 5 0 0 E x c e s s R e tu rn s                      C h a r it a b le C o n t r ib u t io n s G r o w t h



Note: Figures present time series of returns and aligned sales/consumption. See text and appendix for details on the
series. Quarterly data is seasonally adjusted by removing the component of the series correlated with quarter
indicator variables.

                                                                            39
Figure 4: The Prices of Luxury Goods in Fixed Supply
                                             Panel A: Pre-War Manhattan Co-op Apartments
     0 .4 0


     0 .3 0


     0 .2 0


     0 .1 0


     0 .0 0


    -0 .1 0


    -0 .2 0


    -0 .3 0


    -0 .4 0
               1989         1990            1991         1992         1993            1994          1995         1996         1997            1998         1999         2000

                                             S & P 5 0 0 E x c e s s R e tu rn s                         N Y L u x u r y C o o p s P r ic e C h a n g e

                                                              Panel B: London Real Estate
     0 .2 0



     0 .1 0



     0 .0 0



    -0 .1 0



    -0 .2 0



    -0 .3 0
        75

                76

                      77

                            78

                                  79

                                        80

                                              81

                                                    82

                                                          83

                                                                84

                                                                      85

                                                                            86

                                                                                  87

                                                                                        88

                                                                                               89

                                                                                                     90

                                                                                                            91

                                                                                                                  92

                                                                                                                        93

                                                                                                                              94

                                                                                                                                    95

                                                                                                                                          96

                                                                                                                                                97

                                                                                                                                                      98

                                                                                                                                                            99

                                                                                                                                                                   00
      19

               19

                     19

                           19

                                 19

                                       19

                                             19

                                                   19

                                                         19

                                                               19

                                                                     19

                                                                           19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                              19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                       F T S E E x c e s s R e tu rn s                       L o n d o n L u x u r y R e a l E s t a te P r ic e C h a n g e

                                                        Panel C: Finest Wines Price Index
      0 .3 0



      0 .2 0



      0 .1 0



      0 .0 0



     -0 .1 0



     -0 .2 0



     -0 .3 0
                1990              1991                  1992               1993               1994                1995                  1996               1997

                                                        S & P 5 0 0 E x c e s s R e tu rn s                F in e s t W in e P r ic e C h a n g e




Note: Figures present time series of returns and aligned price changes (Tables lag price change of closing prices as
described in the text). Quarterly data is seasonally adjusted by removing the component of the series correlated
with quarter indicator variables. See text and appendix for details on the series.




                                                                                       40
                                 Number Corr. with Standard Risk Standard
  Series                         of Obs. Returns Deviation Aversion Error
  NIPA PCE Nondur. & Serv.            54     0 000     0 014 1095 8 4945 8
                                                                 .            .              .             .

  NIPA PCE Nondur. & Serv. (Q)       215     0 177     0 013  169 0
                                                                 .     75 5   .              .             .

  NIPA PCE Jewelry & Watches          39   −0 125      0 066 −26 7
                                                                 .     27 1   .              .             .

  NIPA PCE Jewelry & Watches (Q)     161   −0 019      0 082 −133 5
                                                                 .    254 6   .              .             .

  NIPA PCE Boats and Planes           39     0 039     0 074 −93 4
                                                                 .    217 5   .              .             .

  NIPA PCE Boats and Planes (Q)      161     0 099     0 070   70 5
                                                                 .     79 2   .              .             .

  Retail Sales of Jewelry (M)        408     0 057     0 118   69 0
                                                                 .     61 7   .              .             .

  Imports of Jewelry                  11     0 336     0 084   13 3
                                                                 .     12 1   .              .             .

  Imports of Jewelry (Q)              47     0 038     0 154   50 5
                                                                 .    137 5   .              .             .




           Table 1: Risk Aversion Implied by NIPA Data and Jewelry Imports

Note: Based on estimation of the unconditional Euler equation for luxury goods. (Q) denotes quarterly and

(M) denotes monthly frequency. Series are at an annual frequency unless otherwise noted. Standard deviation

of series is reported at an annual rate.   (For instance, by multiplying the quarterly rate by 2.)   See text for

further description of series and estimating equations.




                                                       41
                                            Number Corr. with Standard Risk Standard
  Series                                    of Obs. Returns Deviation Aversion Error
  NIPA PCE Nondur. & Serv.                       54     0 000  .  0 014 1095 8 4945 8
                                                                             .             .            .

  NIPA PCE Nondur. & Serv. (Q)                  215     0 177  .  0 013  169 0
                                                                             .    75 5     .            .

  Luxury Automobile Sales                        19     0 240  .  0 085   15 4
                                                                             .    15 0     .            .

   Porsche Sales                                 19     0 134  .  0 343    99.    15 8     .            .

  US Sales of French
    Luxury Group (Com. Colbert)                   14          0 184
                                                               .           0 116
                                                                             .           12 7
                                                                                           .          12 9
                                                                                                        .

  Luxury Retail Sales                             15          0 363
                                                               .           0 168
                                                                             .            36
                                                                                           .           28
                                                                                                        .

   Luxury Retail Sales (US Retailers)             16          0 356
                                                               .           0 230
                                                                             .            32
                                                                                           .           22
                                                                                                        .

    Tiffany                                       16          0 241
                                                               .           0 085
                                                                             .            87
                                                                                           .           66
                                                                                                        .

    Tiffany NY                                    13          0 063
                                                               .           0 085
                                                                             .           24 5
                                                                                           .          32 5
                                                                                                        .

    Tiffany (Q)                                   31          0 512
                                                               .           0 098
                                                                             .            55
                                                                                           .           43
                                                                                                        .

  Charitable Contrib. of Rich                     34          0 370
                                                               .           0 211
                                                                             .            47
                                                                                           .           33
                                                                                                        .




          Table 2: Risk Aversion Implied by the Consumption of Luxury Goods

Note:   Based on estimation of the unconditional Euler equation for luxury goods.      (Q) denotes quarterly

frequency. Series are at an annual frequency unless otherwise noted. Standard deviation of series is reported

at an annual rate. (For instance, by multiplying the quarterly rate by 2.) See text for further description of

series and estimating equations.




                                                       42
                                                   Number Corr. with Standard    Risk
         Series                                     of Obs. Returns Deviation Aversion
                                                  Panel A
                                Government Series on Luxury Goods
         NIPA PCE Jewelry & Watches                36       -0.047                0.091         -11.6
         NIPA PCE Jewelry & Watches (Q)           158        0.076                0.079         112.0
         NIPA PCE Boats & Planes                   36        0.047                0.092         -15.3
         NIPA PCE Boats & Planes (Q)              158        0.150                0.085          32.8
         Jewelry Retail Sales (M)                 405        0.131                0.092          29.4
         Imports of Jewelry                         8        0.790                0.055           5.0
         Imports of Jewelry (Q)                    44        0.084                0.106          16.5
                                                  Panel B
                                Constructed Series on Luxury Goods
         Luxury Automobile Sales                    16       0.015                0.117        -260.0
          Porsche Sales                             16       0.047                0.492          14.0
         US Sales of French
           Luxury Group (Com. Colbert)              11       0.285                0.071           9.7
         Luxury Retail Sales                        12       0.197                0.255           2.5
          Luxury Retail Sales (US Retailers)        13       0.146                0.355           1.6
           Tiffany                                  13       0.403                0.129           2.7
           Tiffany NY                               10       0.320                0.120           5.4
           Tiffany (Q)                              25       0.336                0.063           3.1
         Charitable Contrib. of Rich                31       0.282                0.178           3.8

Table 3: Risk Aversion Implied by Change in Sales Luxury Goods Over Four Periods

Note:   Based on estimation of the unconditional Euler equation for luxury goods without adjustment from

continuous time. (Q) denotes quarterly and (M) denotes monthly frequency. Series are at an annual frequency

unless otherwise noted.   Standard deviation of series is reported at an annual rate.   See text for a complete

description of estimation and data.




                                                      43
                                                        NYSE                     T-Bill
                                    Number Inverse of        Test of    Inverse of      Test of
 Series                              of Obs. Risk Aversion Overident. Risk Aversion Overident.
 NIPA PCE Nondur. & Serv (A)            51        0.073       4.45        0.352          2.82
                                                (0.037)      (0.22)      (0.210)        (0.42)
 NIPA PCE Nondur. & Serv (Q)           213       -0.066       2.74        0.143          7.98
                                                (0.052)      (0.43)      (0.100)        (0.05)
 NIPA PCE Jewelry & Watches (A)         39        0.403       0.80        0.544          5.71
                                                (0.211)      (0.85)      (0.541)        (0.13)
 NIPA PCE Jewelry & Watches (Q) 161              -0.035       3.03        0.021          3.19
                                                (0.133)      (0.39)      (0.423)        (0.36)
 NIPA PCE Boats & Planes (A)            39        0.295       2.82        0.376          4.54
                                                (0.180)      (0.42)      (0.409)        (0.21)
 NIPA PCE Boats & Planes (Q)           161        0.012       12.34       0.844          12.43
                                                (0.165)      (0.01)      (0.452)        (0.01)
 Jewelry Retail Sales (M)              393       -0.082       2.50        0.012          2.59
                                                (0.262)      (0.47)      (0.910)        (0.46)
 Imports of Jewelry (A)                 11        0.020       5.23        0.167          4.99
                                                (0.034)      (0.16)      (0.202)        (0.17)
 Imports of Jewelry (Q)                 44       -0.051       5.30        0.286          4.72
                                                (0.125)      (0.15)      (0.419)        (0.19)
 Luxury Automobile Sales                19        0.162       5.76        0.126          6.36
                                                (0.131)      (0.12)      (0.894)        (0.10)
  Porsche Sales                         19        0.400       2.01        -2.596         1.40
                                                (0.390)      (0.57)      (3.209)        (0.71)
 US Sales of French                     14        0.146       5.30        0.117          6.46
   Luxury Group (Com. Colbert)                  (0.066)      (0.15)      (0.195)        (0.09)
 Luxury Retail Sales                    15        0.202       5.35        1.032          5.23
                                                (0.076)      (0.15)      (0.356)        (0.16)
  Luxury Retail Sales (US Retailers) 16           0.265       3.39        1.776          3.64
                                                (0.063)      (0.34)      (0.409)        (0.30)
   Tiffany (A)                          16        0.174       5.17         0.709         5.43
                                                (0.080)      (0.16)      (0.354)        (0.14)
   Tiffany NY (A)                       13        0.020       3.15        0.174          3.21
                                                (0.031)      (0.37)      (0.197)        (0.36)
   Tiffany (Q)                          24       -0.073       12.61       -0.176         12.59
                                                (0.099)      (0.01)      (0.215)        (0.01)
 Charitable Contrib. of Rich            34        0.496       1.14        1.442          0.43
                                                (0.365)      (0.77)      (1.014)        (0.93)

                   Table 4: Estimates from the Conditional Euler Equation

Note: Based on estimation of the conditional Euler equation for luxury goods. Standard errors are reported in

parentheses below coefficients and p-values are reported in parentheses below tests of overidentification based
        2
on the χ (3) which has 95 percent critical value 7.82. . Instruments include second lags of NIPA consumption

growth, T-Bill return, stock return, and the log price-dividend ratio. See text for complete description of series

and estimating equations.
                                                       44
                                 Number Corr. with Standard Equity Standard
   Series                        of Obs. Returns Deviation Premium Error
   NIPA C & ψ = 1                    215     0.177     0.013   0.000   0.000
   Pre-War Manhattan Coops            45     0.190     0.253   0.005  0.002
    NY Coops (4+ bedrms)              45     0.340     0.396   0.015  0.004
    NY Luxury Coops                   45     0.296     0.340   0.011  0.004
     NY Luxury Coops (4+ bedrms)      45     0.322     0.558   0.024  0.008
   London Real Estate                102     0.275     0.073   0.003  0.001
   Fine Wine                          32    -0.206     0.225  -0.004   0.002
    Finest Wine                       32    -0.227     0.225  -0.004  0.002
     Great Wine                       32    -0.119     0.214  -0.002   0.002

  Table 5: The Equity Premium Implied by Prices of Luxury Goods in Fixed Supply

Note: Based on estimation of the unconditional price relation for luxury goods with fixed quantities. All series

are at a quarterly frequency. The standard deviation of series, estimated equity premium, and standard error

of the estimate are reported at an annual rate.   (For instance, by multiplying the equity premium by 4 and

standard error by 2.) See text for further description of series and estimating equations.




                                                      45
