  % ##   

  
    
         
 
 !"#$ &'('
)$*++,,,-  "+$$ +,&'('
      
./0/1)22
3- 4"5/6.(&
2"2

                !"   
  # $ % $  &  '(()*+ ,-./ 0     
1   "   %   2'3 (()*      $ +
 +0         !  +$ "  &/  +
      /    '3((4*    %    
    ! $ 5         !& ,  / #  
6  /  -   7   $       !    
899! !99 ! 9   !&  :         
   ,  - .   !
;/ 3!< !     !/    : +  :    +
=   :            +   ; +     !

)278  -29-4)  212 9"  1):27- 23
 
  !"#$ &'('
2"26//.
(.56'5;'56'

  
)31)9 31784,"4 341 7<45$ 78$37
3=-4, ! :2784 "9 31778991213>$7 )25
14  1):27- 23 3,)4"2:2784 -29 =-4, ! 
),) 1):27- 23,)41 7<4,"">)->1 72$$79
9  =-49  , !   5)  92437-,)4 4,"?
"149 99172$$789=-@4, ! A,?44 1)3474)
14 :2 49 9913>9=-4, !  74 )991," 212 5
1 $ $ )41 7<4," 212 472),79 4$ 4218"
93"991," 212 23 17> 1),)1 7<4- ""-,
7- 243$78 194  ) 212 9,"13$ $ 42184
,79 -813$ "=-? 74,"499 7

 
 42 1)792
 89)1"
../.0&WK  
)1"5 ;/;(B
4
7*@BB(AB/6?B(.6
>*@BB(AB/6?/'0&
37*=4C"-=421)1"42

I. Introduction
The employment relationship between a ﬁrm and worker often gives rise to rents or
quasi-rents. These rents may arise because it is costly to form a successful ﬁrm-worker
match or because of speciﬁc investments undertaken by ﬁrm and worker after match formation. Alternatively, rents may derive from the ﬁrm’s product market power, its ability
to secure nonlabor inputs on favorable terms, or employer responses to eﬀort elicitation
and other incentive problems.
When the ﬁrm and worker make investment decisions that inﬂuence the amount of
rents to be split, privately optimal choices potentially diverge from joint wealth-maximizing
(or socially optimal) outcomes. Grout (1984) analyzes the prototypical situation of a
ﬁrm and a union that bargain over employment and wages after the ﬁrm undertakes an
investment with a sunk cost component. The ﬁrm, rationally anticipating that the union
will extract some of the incremental quasi-rents generated by the investment, chooses less
than the joint wealth-maximizing amount of investment. If the ﬁrm and union can enter
into a binding agreement that speciﬁes investment, as well as employment and wages, joint
wealth-maximizing outcomes result.
The literature on speciﬁc capital in the employment relationship identiﬁes contract
enforcement and asymmetric information problems as important reasons for separation outcomes that fail to maximize joint wealth.1 The same contract enforcement and asymmetric
information problems that induce ineﬃcient separation behavior are also likely to induce
ineﬃcient investment in match-speciﬁc capital. Becker’s (1975, pp. 26-37) discussion,
for example, stresses the need for long-term contracts with an appropriate compensation
1

Parsons (1986, especially pages 819-827) reviews this literature. Hall and Lazear (1984)

catalog a variety of contracting arrangements that potentially achieve eﬃcient separation
behavior but are rendered infeasible by informational constraints.
1

structure to achieve wealth-maximizing behavior with respect to separation decisions and
speciﬁc human capital investment.
This paper analyzes a diﬀerent, but related, reason for potentially ineﬃcient investment outcomes. The analysis rests on two observations. First, trade in the labor market
is a costly economic activity for both ﬁrms and workers. As remarked above, these costs
imply the existence of ex post rents or surplus upon the formation of a desirable match
between a ﬁrm and worker. Second, many of the investment decisions that inﬂuence the
size of the ex post rents associated with a particular match take place prior to match
formation.
As examples of these prior decisions, ﬁrms choose particular locations, they build
facilities with certain characteristics, and they choose particular production processes. Individuals choose whether to participate in the labor market, whether and where to relocate,
and whether to undergo speciﬁc training to improve their suitability for a particular job or
type of job. In this paper, these prior investment decisions govern the quality distribution
of jobs and the quality distribution of workers that emerge in the labor market equilibrium. Here, “job quality” means any attribute of a job that workers care about including
productivity, working conditions, location, and so forth. Likewise, “worker quality” means
any attribute of individuals that ﬁrms care about.
To capture the idea that match formation is costly, I cast the analysis in the framework
of search theory. To capture the role of prior investment decisions, I assume that ﬁrms
undertake costly job creation activities prior to forming a match with a worker. Section
II develops a bare-bones model along these lines that illuminates the central insight in
the paper. The analysis considers a one-period search model of the Diamond-MortensenPissarides variety.2 Firms and workers meet randomly according to a bilateral matching
2

Diamond (1981,1982), Mortensen (1982ab), and Pissarides (1984, 1990) are some of the
2

process and split the surplus associated with successful meetings according to a simple
sharing rule. Unlike previous work in this vein, the model incorporates the costly creation
of jobs that are heterogeneous ex ante.
The analysis reveals that the quality distribution of jobs is generally ineﬃcient in the
decentralized search equilibrium, with an excessive relative supply of inferior jobs. The
analysis also highlights a fundamental tension between the condition for an eﬃcient mix
of jobs and the standard condition for an eﬃcient total supply of jobs in two-sided search
models. The tension arises from the mixing of heterogeneous jobs that are endogenously
supplied to the search environment. This mixing feature is the key characteristic that
distinguishes the search environments considered here from most other search models.
Section III extends the eﬃciency analysis of the job quality distribution in several
directions. Section III.A considers endogenously determined search intensity on the part of
ﬁrms and search costs that vary with job type. This environment leads to a modiﬁcation
of the relative supply eﬃciency condition, but it does not eliminate the basic tension
between relative and total supply eﬃciency conditions. Section III.B shows that perfect
ex ante sorting of heterogenous jobs into separate search markets does remove the tension
between relative and total supply eﬃciency conditions. Section III.C extends the analysis
to encompass endogenous quality determination on both sides of the market. It turns
out that two-sided endogenous quality determination compounds the incompatibility of
eﬃciency conditions in the search equilibrium with decentralized wage bargaining.
Section IV investigates whether there exists any wage structure that simultaneously
achieves an eﬃcient number and mix of jobs. The analysis provides an aﬃrmative answer,
shows that eﬃciency requires a uniform (expected) wage across jobs, and explains why this
wage structure is unlikely to result from a decentralized wage determination process. When
principal references in this literature.
3

the quality distribution is endogenous on both sides of the market, eﬃciency requires equal
expected wages across jobs of diﬀerent productivities (where the expectation is calculated
over the distribution of worker types) and wages that fully reﬂect expected productivity
diﬀerences that stem from worker traits. Relative to the eﬃcient wage structure, decentralized wage bargaining entails too much compression of worker-related productivity
diﬀerentials and too little compression of job-related productivity diﬀerentials.
Section V develops an analytical solution to the basic model with heterogeneous jobs
and homeogeneous workers under isoelastic schedules for the cost of job creation. The
analytical solution facilitates a quantitative analysis of the potential productivity and
welfare consequences of alternative wage-setting regimes.
Section VI inquires into the nature of an optimal employment tax and and subsidy
structure, i.e., an industrial policy, given that wages are determined by decentralized bargaining in the basic model. The analysis derives the structure of an optimal industrial
policy and shows that this structure induces a spreading of wage diﬀerentials across jobs
relative to the decentralized equilibrium with no industrial policy. It follows from the analysis in sections IV and VI that (i) wage compression under an optimal wage determination
mechanism and (ii) wage spreading induced by an optimal industrial policy layered on
top of decentralized bargaining provide alternative mechanisms for achieving an eﬃcient
number and mix of jobs.
Section VI also considers solutions to parametric versions of the model that are designed to assess the welfare implications of alternative wage-setting and industrial policy
regimes. Reasonable parametrizations of the model suggest that an eﬃcient wage or optimal tax structure can substantially alter the job distribution and thereby bring about a
large increase in average labor productivity. However, sizable wage and productivity differentials among identical workers do not imply large welfare gains associated with a move
4

to an eﬃcient job distribution. As a related point, the size of welfare improvements that
result from a movement to the eﬃcient job distribution exhibits little connection to the
size of productivity improvements. Higher unemployment and greater job creation costs
generate this wedge between the productivity gains and welfare gains associated with the
move to an eﬃcient job distribution.
The contrast between outcomes under decentralized wage determination and outcomes
under the eﬃcient wage structure points toward an eﬃciency-enhancing role for a centralized wage-setting institution. Section VII considers an institution in which a labor union
and an employer confederation bargain over the parameters of the wage structure prior
to job creation and search. Numerical calculations indicate that centralized wage determination exhausts much, sometimes nearly all, of the potential eﬃciency gains associated
with moving to ﬁrst-best outcomes. Under reasonable constraints on wage-setting and enforcement powers, the centralized bargaining authority substantially compresses the wage
structure relative to outcomes under decentralized bargaining. The analysis provides an
eﬃciency rationale for centralized wage-setting institutions and an explanation for why
they tend to compress the wage distribution.
Section VIII brieﬂy discusses the relationship between the analysis in this paper and
related work. Section IX oﬀers some concluding remarks.

II. The Quality Distribution of Jobs

A. A Bare-Bones Search Model with Costly Job Creation
Real-world economies present a wide range of potential job creation opportunities. Potential jobs diﬀer in the attractiveness of their attributes and in the costs of their creation.
To model these aspects of the job creation process, assume that ﬁrms competitively sup-

5

ply I types of jobs according to the cost-of-creation schedules C i (J i ), i = 1, 2, . . . I, where
C i (J i ) denotes the total cost of creating J i jobs of type i. The marginal cost schedules
are positive and increasing for positive values of J i .
These assumptions about the cost-of-creation schedules admit a range of interpretations regarding ex ante heterogeneity among ﬁrms. One interpretation posits ex ante
identical ﬁrms and a job creation technology that requires a job-type speciﬁc input subject
to a rising supply price. Another interpretation posits ﬁrms that have diﬀerent job creation
costs and some scarce factor at the ﬁrm level. Under this interpretation, the degree of heterogeneity amongs ﬁrms determines the convexity of the cost-of-creation schedules. This
second interpretation also implies positive expected rents for infra-marginal job-creating
ﬁrms.
The analysis below presumes that job types diﬀer in terms of anticipated productivity,
but the form of ex ante heterogeneity is inessential for the central results. It will be
convenient to order job types by y i , the ouput of a type-i job when matched to a worker.
Unﬁlled jobs produce nothing.
The economy also contains L workers, each of whom produces y i when matched to a
type-i job in the market sector. Unmatched workers receive an imputed income z in the
nonmarket sector.
Workers and ﬁrms engage in a single round of search, during which they meet randomly in pair-wise fashion. The aggregate number of meetings obeys the CRS matching
technology
M (L, J) = aL1−α J α ,

0 < α < 1,

(1)

where J equals the total supply of jobs, and where the parameter a is such that aL1−α J α <
L, J in equilibrium.3 It follows from this technology and the random meeting assumption
3

Equation (1) is the standard speciﬁcation of the matching technology that underlies mod6

that each worker ﬁnds a job with probability Pw = a(J/L)α , each ﬁrm ﬁlls a vacancy with
probability Pf = a(J/L)α−1 , and that (J i /J) equals the fraction of meetings involving
type-i jobs.
Upon meeting, workers and ﬁrms engage in a (nonsymmetric) Nash bargain to determine the division of the match surplus. In particular, wages solve
max
wi

(wi − z)β (y i − wi )1−β ,

for i = 1, 2, . . . , I,

where β, 0 < β < 1, is a parameter that determines the fraction of the match surplus
obtained by the worker.4
This completes the speciﬁcation of the model. Equilibrium entails an equality – for
each job type – between the expected proﬁt associated with a vacancy and the cost of
creating the marginal vacancy.
B. The Eﬃciency Condition with a Single Job Type
Consider the eﬃciency properties of job creation behavior when there is a single job
type. To compute equilibrium job creation, observe ﬁrst that the value of a vacancy is
given by
V = Pf (y − w) + (1 − Pf )0 = a(J/L)α−1 (1 − β)(y − z),

(2)

using the deﬁnition of Pf and the wage equation implied by the Nash bargaining problem,
w = βy + (1 − β)z = z + β(y − z).

(3)

In equilibrium, the value of a vacancy equals the cost of creating the marginal job,
Pf (1 − β)(y − z) = a(J/L)α−1 (1 − β)(y − z) = C  (J),

(4)

ern interpretations of the Beveridge curve relationship between unemployment and vacancies. See Blanchard and Diamond (1989) and Pissarides (1990).
4
This parametrization of the bargaining solution is common in search equilibrium models;
see, e.g., Pissarides (1990). Kalai (1977) provides an axiomatic justiﬁcation.
7

which implies the equilibrium job supply function
J = J( a , L , α , β , y , z ).
(+) (+) (?) (−) (+) (−)

(5)

To determine the eﬃciency properties of (4) and (5), consider a social planner who
chooses job creation to solve
max
J

aL1−α J α y + [L − aL1−α J α ]z − C(J).

(6)

The ﬁrst-order condition to this problem states that the socially optimal supply of jobs
satisﬁes
Pf α(y − z) = a(J/L)α−1 α(y − z) = C  (J),

(7)

Comparing (4) to the social optimality condition (7), we obtain the following eﬃciency
characterization of equilibrium job creation:


β < 1 − α ⇒ equilibrium job supply is too high;
β = 1 − α ⇒ equilibrium job supply is socially optimal;
β > 1 − α ⇒ equilibrium job supply is too low.

(8)

Condition (8) reproduces the standard condition for eﬃcient participation behavior in twosided search models with a CRS meeting technology. This condition extends directly to
inﬁnite-horizon models that encompass capital accumulation, endogenous search intensity,
stochastic match quality, and a variable labor force (Hosios, 1990, and Pissarides, 1990,
chapter 7).
To interpret the eﬃciency condition, observe that ﬁrms’ job creation decisions involve
negative and positive trading externalities: each additional job reduces the match probability for ﬁrms, Pf , while simultaneosly increasing the match probability for workers,
Pw . The relative size of these externalities depends on α, which can be interpreted as the
elasticity of ﬁrm-worker meetings with respect to the number of jobs created. Thus, the
8

creation of one additional job causes gross output to rise by the fraction α of the expected
surplus associated with an additional job. It is socially optimal to create an additional job,
if this increment to expected gross output exceeds the cost of creating the job. In equilbirum, ﬁrms create additional jobs to the point where their fraction, (1 − β), of expected
match surplus equals the cost of an additional job. Thus, the wage determination process
induces eﬃcient job creation behavior by ﬁrms only when (1 − β) = α.
C. The Eﬃciency Conditions with a Multiplicity of Job Types
With multiple job types, equations (2)-(4) generalize directly, yielding
V i = Pf (y i − wi ) = a(J/L)α−1 (1 − β)(y i − z),
wi = βy i + (1 − β)z = z + β(y i − z),

and

Pf (1 − β)(y i − z) = a(J/L)α−1 (1 − β)(y i − z) = C i (J i ),

(2 )
(3 )
(4 )

for i = 1, 2, . . . , I.
Equation (4 ) governs the equilibrium quality distribution of jobs. To evaluate the
eﬃciency properties of this quality distribution, consider the net social beneﬁt of converting
one type-l job to a type-h job, where h > l:
a(J/L)α−1 (y h − y l ) + C l (J l ) − C h (J h ).

(9)

To determine whether the equilibrium quality distribution is eﬃcient, evaluate (9) at the
decentralized outcome. From the equilibrium job supply conditions (4 ),
C l (J l ) − C h (J h ) = a(J/L)α−1 (y l − y h )(1 − β) = Pf (y l − y h )(1 − β).

(10)

Substituting this condition into (9) yields
a(J/L)α−1 (y h − y l )β
9

(11)

as the net social beneﬁt of upgrading the quality distribution of jobs, evaluated at the
decentralized equilibrium outcome. This expression is positive under any wage bargain
that provides workers with at least part of the match surplus. Thus, we have proved that
equilibrium job creation produces an excessive relative supply of inferior job types in the
following sense: Holding the total number of jobs ﬁxed, eﬃciency improves by shifting the
mix of jobs towards higher productivity types.
The reason for an excessive relative supply of inferior jobs is clear. According to (10),
ﬁrms obtain only a fraction (1−β) of the extra expected surplus generated by upgrading the
quality distribution, but they incur all of the additional costs. In consequence, the private
incentives confronting job creators confer an inadequate premium on quality. Ironically,
greater bargaining power on the part of workers worsens the quality distribution of available
jobs.
We can now appreciate the fundamental tension between the condition for an eﬃcient mix of jobs (β = 0) and the standard condition for an eﬃcient total supply of jobs
(β = 1 − α). If government policy and labor market institutions channel job surpluses to
ﬁrms so as to produce an eﬃcient job mix, ﬁrms will devote too many resources to job creation. Conversely, if government policy and labor market institutions support a bargaining
environment that balances the positive and negative trading externalities implied by (1),
ﬁrms will create an excessive relative supply of inferior jobs. Beginning from a situation
where workers have substantial bargaining power (β ≥ 1 − α), a further increase in their
bargaining power worsens eﬃciency along both dimensions.
To complete this discussion and lay the groundwork for later results, I draw on the
preceding analysis to fully specify the socially optimal and decentralized equilibrium job
supply behavior. The socially optimal supply of jobs is the solution to the I-equation

10

system of eﬃcient relative supply conditions,

α−1
I
k
a
J /L
(y i+1 − y i ) + C i (J i ) − C i+1 (J i ) = 0,

i = 1, 2, . . . , I − 1,

(12.a)

k=1

and the eﬃcient total supply condition,

α−1 
I
I
I

k
k k
a
J /L
α
J (y − z) =
J k C k (J k ).
k=1

k=1

(12.b)

k=1

Using (4 ) and (10), the decentralized equilibrium supply of jobs is the solution to the
parallel system:

α−1
I
k
(1 − β)a
J /L
(y i+1 − y i ) + C i (J i ) − C i+1 (J i ) = 0,

i = 1, 2, . . . , I − 1, (13.a)

k=1

α−1

I
I
I


k
k k
J /L
(1 − β)
J (y − z) =
J k C k (J k ).
a
k=1

k=1

(13.b)

k=1

Equations (12) and (13) will prove useful in the analysis below.
III. The Quality Distribution in Alternative Environments
A. Search Technology and Search Intensity as a Function of Job Quality
Because the opportunity cost of an unﬁlled job increases in job quality, ﬁrms with
better jobs are motivated to search more intensively. In addition, ﬁrms oﬀering better jobs
may ﬁnd it easier to attract workers at any given level of search expenditures. Introducing
these factors into the model clearly shifts the equilibrium quality distribution toward better
jobs. One might suspect, then, that plausible modiﬁcations to the search technology would
overturn the eﬃciency characterization developed in section II. I now show that section
II’s central eﬃciency result continues to hold under a simple and natural formulation of
the search intensity decision.
11

To develop the argument, modify the bare-bones model as follows. Let M (L, sJ) =
aL1−α (sJ)α , 0 < α < 1, be the number of meetings between ﬁrms and workers, where sJ
equals the aggregate eﬃciency units of search eﬀort supplied by ﬁrms. Let si denote the
eﬃciency units of search for a ﬁrm oﬀering a type-i job. For each eﬃciency unit supplied,
there is a probability M (L, sJ)/sJ of meeting a worker, so that the meeting probabilities
become

α−1


Pfi = si /sJ M (L, sJ) = asi sJ/L
,

i = 1, . . . , I,


α
and Pw = a sJ/L .

Firms choose search intensity to maximize the net vacancy value

α−1 i i
s (y − wi ) − σ i (si ),
V i = a sJ/L

i = 1, . . . , I,

where σ i (·) is positive, increasing and strictly convex for each i with σ i (0) = 0. To capture
the idea that search is less costly for better job types, assume σ h (x) ≤ σ l (x) for h > l
and x ≥ 0.
Under these assumptions, the search-intensity behavior of ﬁrms obeys the ﬁrst-order
condition,
σ i (si ) = a(sJ/L)α−1 (y i − wi ) = a(sJ/L)α−1 (1 − β)(y i − z),

i = 1, . . . , I.

(14)

According to this condition, optimal marginal search cost is higher for ﬁrms with better
jobs. It follows that eﬃciency units of search per job rise with job quality for two reasons
– greater incentive to search and lower search costs.
Endogenous search intensity leads to the slightly modiﬁed equilibrium job supply
conditions,

α−1 i∗
V i∗ = a sJ/L
s (1 − β)(y i − z) = C i (J i ) + σ i∗ ,

i = 1, . . . , I,

(15)

where an asterisk denotes a function evaluated at the privately optimal search intensity.
12

We can now analyze the eﬃciency properties of the equilibrium quality distribution in
the same manner as before. Holding search intensities and the supplies of other job types
ﬁxed at equilibrium levels, consider the net social beneﬁt from converting one type-l job
to a type-h job, h > l:
 
 


a(sJ/L)α−1 sh∗ (y h − z) − sl∗ (y l − z) − σ h∗ + C h (J h ) + σ l∗ + C l (J l )

+(sh∗ − sl∗ )

I


J i (y i − z)

i=1

∂Pfi
| i i∗ .
∂s s =s

Evaluating at the equilibrium outcome, this expression becomes proportional to


I  i∗ i 
 h∗

s J
l∗
s (y − z) − s (y − z) β − (s − s )(1 − α)J
(y i − z) ≡ Φ(β),
sJ
i=1
h∗

h

l∗

l



where Φ is a continuous function of β, satisfying Φ(0) < 0 and Φ(1 − α) > 0.
The ﬁrst term of Φ, analogous to (11), captures the direct eﬃciency gain from upgrading job quality. This eﬃciency gain now reﬂects the greater productivity and greater
search intensity of the better job. The second term captures the eﬃciency loss implied
by greater search for the upgraded job. The resulting increase in aggregate search intensity reduces the match probabilities for all ﬁrms. This eﬃciency loss equals the expected
reduction in the number of matches times the average ex post surplus on ﬁlled jobs.
Using the properties of the Φ(·) function, we can now see how endogenous search
intensity modiﬁes the eﬃciency characterization. First, with endogenous search intensity,
channeling all match surplus to ﬁrms (β = 0) no longer produces an eﬃcient mix of
jobs. Instead, β = 0 now leads to an excessive relative supply of better jobs. Conversely,
β = 1 − α implies Φ > 0 and an excessive relative supply of inferior jobs. Second,
applying the intermediate value theorem, there exists a β ∈ (0, 1 − α) that produces an
eﬃcient job mix. Hence, there remains a fundamental tension between the condition for
13

an eﬃcient number of jobs (β = 1 − α) and the modiﬁed condition for an eﬃcient mix of
jobs (β < 1 − α). I conclude from this analysis that the central eﬃciency result in section
II does not stem from unduly restrictive assumptions regarding the search technology.5
B. Ex Ante Sorting of Jobs into Separate Search Markets
Neither endogenous search intensity nor easier search by better ﬁrms resolves the basic
tension between relative and total supply eﬃciency condtions. These modiﬁcations to the
search environment leave intact the crucial feature of the bare-bones model: the mixing of
endogenously supplied heterogeneous jobs. To appreciate the crucial nature of the mixing
feature, it is helpful to consider a model in which ﬁrms are perfectly sorted along the
quality dimension into separate search markets. Location, for example, is an important
job attribute that may be easily distinguished ex ante.
Suppose that workers are initially distributed among locations. Prior to searching
for a job, workers can migrate between locations at a cost that may diﬀer among workers
and that may be contingent on destination and initial location. Job quality diﬀers across
locations, but – the critical assumption – it is identical for all ﬁrms at a particular location.
After migration, job creation and search take place as in the bare-bones model.
Modifying the previous analysis to incorporate equilibrium conditions for intermarket

5

The analysis in this section, and elsewhere in the paper, presumes that ﬁrms cannot

eﬀectively announce and commit to wage oﬀers prior to meeting as an instrument for
increasing arrival rates of workers. Barring an inﬁnite elasticity of worker arrivals with
respect to the promised wage (which would eﬀectively restore an auction market), it does
not appear that ex ante wage oﬀers will generally produce an eﬃcient job mix in search
equilibrium. However, ex ante wage oﬀers have a potentially important bearing on the size
of the equilibrium departure from socially optimal outcomes.
14

mobility, one obtains the following conditions for eﬃcient equilibrium job supply:
β i = 1 − αi ,
where i indexes location and job quality. These conditions are simply the multi-market
version of the standard condition (8), and they reduce to (8) when the available search
technology is the same across locations. These conditions simultaneously achieve eﬃciency
along relative and total supply margins under perfect ex ante sorting of jobs. The ex ante
sorting eliminates the mixing of heterogeneous jobs that caused the tension between relative
and total supply eﬃciency conditions in the previous models.
This brief discussion provides some insight into how other modiﬁcations to the search
environment would aﬀect the tension between total and relative supply eﬃciency conditions. Reputational mechanisms, for example, might facilitate the ex ante sorting of jobs
in an environment with repeated transactions by the ﬁrm. Informational imperfections
related, for example, to the experience-good nature of job quality would hamper ex ante
sorting. In general, any mechanism that failed to achieve perfect ex ante sorting of jobs
along all dimensions that workers care about would fail to eliminate the tension between
relative and total supply eﬃciency conditions in the decentralized equilibrium. As a further point, since ﬁrms’ incentives to advertise or disguise their quality depend on their
relative position in the job quality distribution, there would seem to be considerable scope
in richer models for a variety of equilibria with endogenously determined degrees of ex ante
sorting.
C. Endogenous Quality Distributions on Both Sides
The eﬃciency analysis extends straightforwardly to endogenous quality determination
on both sides of the market. Consider, ﬁrst, a symmetric speciﬁcation that incorporates
heterogeneity in worker quality and participation costs in a manner that mirrors the treat15

ment of heterogeneity in job types and creation costs. Let Ln denote the number of type-n
workers who choose to participate, and let L denote the total number of worker participants. Let f ni denote the output produced by a match between a type-n worker and a
type-i job.
In this environment, nonsymmetric Nash bargaining implies the wage equations
wni = z + β(f ni − z),

i = 1, . . . , I and n = 1, . . . , N.

(16)

Hence, wages reﬂect job-related and worker-related productivity diﬀerentials with equal
force in the equilibrium with decentralized wage determination.
Evaluated at the equilibrium outcome under decentralized Nash bargaining, upgrading
the job quality distribution enhances eﬃciency whenever
α−1

βa(J/L)

N


(Ln /L)(f nh − f nl ) > 0

for any i = h, l;

n=1

and upgrading the worker quality distribution enhances eﬃciency whenever
(1 − β)a(J/L)α

I

(J i /J)(f mi − f pi ) > 0 for any n = m, p.
i=1

It follows that relative job supplies are eﬃcient if, and only if, β = 0; whereas relative
worker supplies are eﬃcient if, and only if, β = 1.
The same tension between eﬃciency requirements arises when workers make human
capital investment decisions prior to job matches. To see this point, assume that workers
can achieve human capital level h at a cost K(h), where K(·) is increasing and convex. Let
f i (h), f  (·) > 0, denote worker output on a type-i job. Under these assumptions, privately
optimal worker investment decisions satisfy


K (h) = z + βa(J/L)

α

I

i=1

16



(J i /J) f i (h) − z ,

but socially eﬃcient human capital investment requires


K (h) = z + a(J/L)

α

I




(J i /J) f i (h) − z .

i=1

Clearly, too little human capital investment occurs unless β = 1.
Thus, the basic message is the same in both the participation and human capital
investment models. When wages are determined in a decentralized manner, there is a
fundamental tension between the requirement for an eﬃcient mix of workers and the requirement for an eﬃcient mix of jobs. Both the eﬃcient worker mix and the eﬃcient job
mix conditions diﬀer from the standard condition for an eﬃcient total supply of workers
and jobs. Since both workers and ﬁrms are likely to extract part of the match surplus,
both worker quality and job quality are too low in the decentralized equilibrium.
IV. The Eﬃcient Wage Structure
A. Eﬃcient Wages with an Endogenous Job Quality Distribution
Thus far, the eﬃciency analysis of the job quality distribution assumes that wage
determination occurs in a decentralized manner as the outcome of independent Nash bargains. A natural and important line of inquiry considers how the eﬃciency characteristics
of the job quality distribution are aﬀected by alternative bargaining solutions and by labor market institutions that facilitate centralized wage determination. Here, I address
an important question related to this line of inquiry: What are the properties of a wage
structure that induces an eﬃcient number and mix of jobs? I consider the consequences
of centralized wage bargaining between ﬁrms and workers in section VII.
We can represent an arbitrary wage determination mechanism by a set of parameters
{β i }Ii=1 that govern the sharing of match surplus for each job type. Positive levels of
participation by workers and jobs require 0 ≤ β i ≤ 1 for all i. In terms of these sharing
17

parameters, private job supply decisions in the bare-bones model satisfy
Pf (1 − β i )(y i − z) = a(J/L)α−1 (1 − β i )(y i − z) = C i (J i ),

i = 1, 2, . . . , I.

(4 )

As before, (9) expresses the net social beneﬁt from converting one type-l job to a
type-h job, h > l. Combining (4 ) and (9) yields a restriction on any pair {β h , β l } that
induces an eﬃcient relative supply of the two job types; namely, β h /β l = (y h − z)/(y l − z).
More generally, the complete set of sharing parameters brings about an eﬃcient mix of
jobs if, and only if,
β i+1 /β i = (y i − z)/(y i+1 − z),

i = 1, 2, . . . , I − 1.

(16)

An eﬃcient number of jobs requires equivalence between the total supply condition
(12.b) and a suitably generalized version of (13.b),

α−1 
I
I
I

k
k
k k
a
J /L
(1 − β )J (y − z) =
J k C k (J k ).
k=1

k=1

k=1

Thus, a set of sharing parameters brings about an eﬃcient total supply of jobs if, and only
if,
α

I


k

k

J (y − z) =

k=1

I


(1 − β k )J k (y k − z).

(17)

k=1

The unique set of surplus sharing parameters that solve (16) and (17) is given by
i

β = (1 − α)

I
k
k
k=1 (J /J)(y
(y i − z)

− z)

i = 1, . . . , I.

(18)

This equation generalizes the standard eﬃciency condition (8) in Diamond-MortensenPissarides models to encompass multiple, endogenously supplied job types. (See Hosios
(1990) and Pissarides (1990).) The new term in this condition multiplies (1 − α) by the
ratio of the weighted-average match surplus to match surplus for a type-i job. Hence,
18

under an eﬃcient wage structure, better jobs grant a smaller share of match surplus to
workers than inferior jobs. There is no apparent reason for a wage structure with this
characteristic to emerge in a fully decentralized setting.
It is useful to translate (18), which is a statement about the structure of eﬃcient
sharing parameters, into a direct statement about the wage structure. Since wi = z +
β i (y i − z), the eﬃcient wage structure implied by (18) is

i

w = z + (1 − α)

I


(J k /J)(y k − z),

i = 1, . . . , I.

(19)

k=1

Hence, under the eﬃcient wage structure, all job types oﬀer a wage equal to the opportunity cost of workers’ time, plus the fraction (1 − α) of the average match surplus. Here,
the “wage” is appropriately interpreted as encompassing nonpecuniary aspects of worker
compensation; in other words, the eﬃcient wage structure entails full equalization of jobrelated utility diﬀerences.
At ﬁrst sight, the result that an optimal wage structure completely compresses productivity diﬀerentials might appear to violate the classical eﬃciency dictum that wages
fully reﬂect productivity diﬀerentials. But the classical dictum pertains to productivity
diﬀerentials associated with worker traits, whereas (19) pertains to productivity diﬀerentials associated with job characteristics. Complete wage compression generates an eﬃcient
job mix in this model, because it enables ﬁrms to capture all rents that derive from upgrading job quality. As we saw in section II.C, the inability of ﬁrms to capture these rents
under decentralized bargaining induces an excessive relative supply of inferior jobs. Wage
compression resolves this problem.
The favorable consequences of wage compression in this search model contrast sharply
with their adverse consequences in eﬃciency wage models based on eﬀort elicitation prob19

lems.6 Bulow and Summers (1986), for example, develop a model with imperfect monitoring of worker eﬀort in primary sector jobs and costless monitoring in secondary sector
jobs. If it is infeasible for workers to post performance bonds or otherwise “buy” jobs, the
resulting equilibrium entails a wage premium for primary sector jobs and, consequently,
an ineﬃciently low level of primary sector employment. In this type of eﬃciency wage
model wage compression causes secondary sector employment to expand at the expense of
primary sector employment (Bulow and Summers, 1986, page 392), which further worsens
the already ineﬃcient composition of economic activity.
Table 1 illustrates how various factors inﬂuence the eﬃcient sharing parameters, the
wage, and the resulting distribution of job types. The table entries are computed from
(4 ), (18) and (19) assuming that C i (J i ) = g i (J i )γ , g i , γ > 0 for i=1,2. This speciﬁcation
implies positive job creation for both types in the equilibrium with decentralized wage
determination.
Row (7) of the table shows that lower quality jobs are sometimes squeezed out entirely
by an eﬃcient wage structure. It can be eﬃcient to eliminate lower quality jobs, even when
these jobs entail large amounts of surplus ex post. The remaining rows indicate how the
job supply elasticity parameter (γ), the elasticity of matches with respect to job creation
(α), and the opportunity cost of worker time aﬀect the eﬃcient distribution of job types
and the range of the eﬃcient sharing parameters among active job types.
To sum up, the eﬃcient wage structure entails full compression of job-related productivity diﬀerentials – that is, equal wages among identical workers. Eﬃcient wage
compression involves a smaller fraction of match surplus accruing to workers on better
jobs. Relative to the equilibrium outcome under decentralized bargaining, the eﬃcient
wage structure induces larger relative supplies of better jobs and, possibly, a truncation
6

Stiglitz (1987) and Weiss (1990) review the theoretical literature on eﬃciency wages.
20

from below of the job quality distribution. In the light of these results, section VII below
considers the potential eﬃciency-enhancing role of centralized wage-setting institutions.
B. Eﬃcient Wages with Two-Sided Endogenous Quality Distributions
Although the algebra is tedious, one can generalize the preceding analysis of the eﬃcient wage structure to accommodate two-sided endogenous quality distributions. For the
symmetric, two-sided quality model in section III.C, the eﬃcient wage structure exhibits
the following properties:
N


n

(L /L)w

i+1,n

=

n=1
I

i=1

i

(J /J)(f

N


(Ln /L)win ,

i = 1, . . . , I − 1, and

(20)

n=1

i,n+1

in

−f )=

I


(J i /J)(wi,n+1 − win ),

n = 1, . . . , N − 1.

(21)

i=1

According to (20), the eﬃcient wage structure equalizes expected wages across jobs with
diﬀerent productivities, where the expectation is calculated over the distribution of worker
types. This condition is a simple and natural generalization of condition (19). According to
(21), the eﬃcient wage structure fully reﬂects expected productivity diﬀerences that stem
from worker traits. Putting the pieces together delivers the following theorem: relative to
the eﬃcient wage structure, the wage structure under decentralized bargaining entails too
much compression of worker-related productivity diﬀerentials and too little compression of
job-related productivity diﬀerentials.
V. Analytical Solutions for Parametric Versions of the Model
With suitable assumptions about the form of the job creation cost functions, one can
obtain explicit analytical solutions for the quality distribution of jobs and the structure
of wages in the decentralized equilibrium of the basic model. One can also solve for the
eﬃcient wage characterized in section IV and the resulting quality distribution.
21

Figure 1 displays the decentralized equilibrium and eﬃcient quality distributions of
jobs under the assumption that the creation cost schedules satisfy
C i = g i (J i )γ ,

i = 1, . . . , 100.

In constructing the ﬁgure, I have chosen the g i parameters to produce a uniform distribution of job types in the decentralized equilibrium. (g1 is set to one – a normalization.)
The search eﬃciency parameter (a) is set to achieve a 5% unemployment rate in the decentralized equilibrium with Nash wage bargaining (β = .5). The least productive job is
set to 110% of the workers’ reservation value, and the most productive job is set to deliver
a value of roughly .43 for the standard deviation of log wages in the decentralized Nash
outcome. This value corresponds to the standard error of the residual in a regression of
log hourly wages on an extensive set of experience, education and sex controls for the U.S.
manufacturing sector in 1987. See Figure 1 in Davis and Haltiwanger (1991).
Table 2 displays other outcomes that correspond to the job distributions displayed
in Figure 1. Table 3 shows that the welfare gains aﬀorded by an eﬃcient wage structure
are much smaller than the gains in average labor productivity. For example, consider the
decentralized equilibrium with β = α = .5, so that the total supply eﬃciency condition
holds. Relative to this decentralized equilibrium, an eﬃcient wage structure raises average
labor productivity by more than ﬁve percent (from 126.8 to 133.4), but it raises net per
capita income by less than one-half percent (from 119.12 to 119.66). The main reason
for this large gap between productivity and welfare gains is the much higher level of
unemployment under the eﬃcient wage structure.
VI. Tax Policy with Decentralized Wage Determination
A. The Structure of the Optimal Policy
As in many other models that generate wage diﬀerentials among identical workers,
22

the search models in this paper imply an eﬃciency-enhancing role for employment tax
and subsidy policies that alter the composition of economic activity. In the bare-bones
model, the optimal tax structure achieves the same number and mix of jobs as the eﬃcient
wage structure, but it magniﬁes rather than eliminates pre-existing wage diﬀerentials.
In contrast to models where eﬀort elicitation problems underlie wage diﬀerentials among
identical workers (e.g., Bulow and Summers, 1986), optimal policy in the search model
need not entail an absolute subsidy to high wage/high productivity jobs. Nor is the size
of the welfare improvement induced by an optimal policy closely related to the magnitude
of pre-existing wage diﬀerentials.
To derive the optimal tax structure in the basic model, ﬁrst reformulate equations
(3 ) and (4 ) to incorporate type-contingent employment taxes (subsidies, if negative):
wi = β(y i − T i ) + (1 − β)z = z + β(y i − z − T i ),

and

Pf (1 − β)(y i − z − T i ) = a(J/L)α−1 (1 − β)(y i − z − T i ) = C i (J i ),

(22)
(23)

for i = 1, 2, . . . , I.
As before, expression (9) describes the net social beneﬁt of ugrading the job quality
distribution. Evaluating (9) at (23), and setting the resulting expression to zero, implies
that the optimal tax structure satisﬁes


T i = T i+1 + β/(1 − β) (y i+1 − y i ),

i = 1, . . . , I − 1.

(24)

According to (24), the optimal tax structure favors more productive jobs, and the size of
the diﬀerential subsidy increases in the workers’ share of match surplus and in the size of
the productivity diﬀerential.
It follows from (22) and (24) that wage diﬀerentials equal
wi+1 − wi =

β
(y i+1 − y i )
1−β
23

(25)

under the optimal tax structure, but they equal
wi+1 − wi = β(y i+1 − y i )

(26)

in the decentralized equilibrium with no taxes and subsidies. Thus, the optimal tax structure causes job-related productivity components of wage diﬀerentials to increase by a factor
of (1 − β)−1 relative to the no-tax equilibrium.
The level of optimal taxes is pinned down by the eﬃcient total supply requirement,

α

I


k

k

J (y − z) = (1 − β)

k=1

I


J k (y k − T k − z).

k=1

This restriction, in combination with (24), implies
I

−1

T = (1 − β)

(1 − β − α)

I


k

k

(J /J)(y − z) − β

k=1

I−1


(J k /J)(y I − y k ) .

(27)

k=1

Recall that the eﬃcient job distribution is the solution to (12.a) and (12.b). Equations
(24) and (27) determine the tax structure that sustains this eﬃcient distribution in the
equilibrium with decentralized wage determination.
B. Numerical Experiments under Alternative Tax Policy and Wage-Setting Regimes
Table 3 displays equilibrium outcomes under the optimal tax structure when wages are
determined according to decentralized bargains. For comparison, the table also displays
outcomes under two alternative regimes – decentralized wage bargains with no taxes and
the eﬃcient wage structure with no taxes. As in Table 1, the job creation cost schedules
are C i (J i ) = g i (J i )γ for i=1,2. The welfare measure in Table 3 is per capita income net
of job creation costs.
Several aspects of the table merit discussion. First, in line with equations (25) and
(26), the optimal tax structure causes wage diﬀerentials to expand, often by large amounts.
24

As the table veriﬁes, the eﬃcient wage structure achieves the same job distribution and
per capita income level as the optimal tax structure, but it eliminates pre-existing wage
diﬀerentials among identical workers. Thus, if earnings equality is viewed as desirable,
wage compression dominates the optimal tax policy as a tool for achieving socially desirable
outcomes.
Second, an eﬃcient wage or optimal tax structure can substantially alter the job
distribution and thereby bring about a large increase in average labor productivity. For
example, in row (2) of the table an eﬃcient wage or optimal tax structure reduces lowproductivity jobs’ share of the total from 37% to 21%, resulting in a 3.7% increase in
productivity.
Third, sizable wage and productivity diﬀerentials among identical workers do not
imply large welfare gains associated with a move to the eﬃcient job distribution, as illustrated by row (7). As a related point, the size of welfare improvements that result from a
move to the eﬃcient job distribution exhibits little connection to the size of productivity
improvements. Compare, for example, rows (3) and (4).
Fourth, gains in per capita income typically fall well short of gains in average labor
productivity as a result of moving to an eﬃcient wage or optimal tax structure. The
relatively small improvement in per capita income can be understood as follows. Equation
(4 ) implies that better jobs cost more to create in the ineﬃcient, no-tax equilibrium. The
relative cost of creating better jobs rises further as the economy moves toward the eﬃcient
mix of jobs. Thus, the gains from higher average productivity at the eﬃcient job mix are
partly oﬀset by the higher average cost of job creation. In addition, when α = 1 − β,
unemployment is always higher at the eﬃcient outcome.7 Holding ﬁxed the number of
7

More generally, unemployment is typically higher at the eﬃcient outcome unless α is

substantially less than 1 − β.
25

jobs, an increase in average job productivity raises the expected cost of the congestion
externality associated with creating one more job of either type. Thus, upgrading the
quality distribution of jobs implies a decline in the eﬃcient number of jobs and a rise
in unemployment. On net, the increase in average job creation costs and the rise in
unemployment oﬀset much of the gain in average labor productivity.
Fifth, the scope for welfare improvements engineered by an eﬃcient wage or optimal
tax structure is greater when the total supply eﬃciency condition (α = 1 − β) fails to hold.
To see this point, compare rows (1), (3), (5) and (6) in Table 2 with rows (2), (4) and
(7). In the ﬁrst set of rows α = 1 − β, and welfare gains range from 1.5-3.5% of initial per
capita income; in the second set of rows α = 1 − β, and welfare gains range from .1% to
.7% of initial per capita income.
Finally, and unlike eﬃciency wage models based on eﬀort elicitation problems, the
optimal subsidy for high wage jobs is not closely related to the size of the wage diﬀerential.
Indeed, the optimal policy sometimes calls for a tax on employment in both job types. This
outcome can arise when weak bargaining power by workers (β < 1 − α) results in too much
job creation and overly congested search by ﬁrms. While this particular outcome might
seem implausible, the general point is that the size of the optimal employment subsidy
depends crucially on the search technology and relative bargaining power, as well as on
the size of the productivity diﬀerentials between job types.
VII. Wages and Job Quality with Centralized Wage Determination
In the context of the basic model, consider a labor union and an employer confederation that bargain over the wage structure prior to job creation and search. All workers
belong to the union, and all ﬁrms belong to the employer confederation. Assume that the
labor union and employer confederation act as perfect agents for their respective member-

26

ships.
Since workers are risk-neutral and identical, it follows that the labor union wants to
maximize wages plus the imputed value of leisure. In contrast, the employer confederation
consists of ﬁrms that may diﬀer in terms of both job creation costs and job quality.8 This
heterogeneity implies potential conﬂict among ﬁrms regarding preference orderings over
alternative wage structures. I assume that the employer confederation fully circumvents
these conﬂicts and seeks to maximize aggregate net proﬁts. In principle, side payments
within the employer confederation can be used to insure that all ﬁrms share in the proﬁt
gains from centralized bargaining.
Given these preferences, the labor union and employer confederation engage in a
(possibly nonsymmetric) Nash bargain over the wage structure, with threat points deﬁned
by outcomes under decentralized bargaining. Denote the threat point outcomes for workers
and ﬁrms by W (β) and F (β), respectively, where β equals the worker’s share of match
surplus in the decentralized Nash bargaining outcome. Let β c denote workers’ share of the
(additional) surplus that results from centralized bargaining.
Formally, the centralized wage bargaining problem is
max
I
wi i=1

W (w1 , . . . , wI ) − W (β)

βc

F (w1 , . . . , wI ) − F (β)

1−β c

,

(28)

subject to the competitive job creation schedules,
a(J/L)α−1 (y i − wi ) = C i (J i ),

i = 1, . . . , I,

(29)

where
1

I

W (w , . . . , w ) = La(J/L)

α

I




(J i /J)wi + Lz 1 − a(J/L)α ,

and

i=1
8

Recall from section II.A that ﬁrm heterogeneity is one interpretation of convexity in the

cost-of-creation schedule for jobs.
27

1

I

F (w , . . . , w ) = a(J/L)

α−1

I

i=1

i

i

i

J (y − w ) −

I


C i (J i )

i=1

for i = 1, . . . , I.
I have been unable to make much progress in deriving general characterizations of the
solution to (28)-(29), so I turn immediately to the results of a numerical analysis. Table 4 shows wage structure, per capita income, job distribution, and average productivity
outcomes for a particular parametrization of the model under three alternative wage determination regimes. The top row of the second panel reports outcomes under the eﬃcient
wage structure. Remaining rows report outcomes under decentralized or centralized Nash
wage bargaining for diﬀerent values of β and β c . Recall that β, workers’ share of match
surplus in the decentralized wage bargain, determines the threat points in the centralized
Nash bargain and thereby inﬂuences the wage structure outcome.
Three results stand out in Table 4. First, centralized bargaining increases average
labor productivity to the level that prevails under the ﬁrst-best outcomes with an eﬃcient
wage structure. Second, centralized bargaining exhausts a large fraction of the potential
gains in net per capita income associated with a move to ﬁrst-best outcomes. Indeed, when
bargaining power is equally distributed in the underlying decentralized bargaining regime
(β = .5), centralized bargaining reaps essentially all potential eﬃciency gains. Third,
centralized bargaining has dramatic eﬀects on the wage structure. Wages diﬀerentials
diminish sharply as a result of centralized bargaining when β equals or exceeds .5. For
small values of β, centralized bargaining produces large wage diﬀerentials opposite in sign
to the diﬀerentials that prevail under decentralized bargaining.
To understand this last result, note that the centralized wage structure eﬀectively
punishes ﬁrms that create low-quality jobs by granting a relatively small portion of match
surplus on these jobs. This pattern arises for all values of β and β c . Evidently, when ﬁrms
28

garner most of the rents in the decentralized bargaining regime (i.e., when β is small), this
punishment aspect of the centralized wage structure manifests itself in especially stark
fashion.
The wage structure results in Table 4 bear out one problematic aspect of the centralized bargaining problem as formulated in (28) and (29). For example, to implement
the wage structure outcomes illustrated in Table 4 for β = .2, the bargaining authority
must ﬁrst identify low-productivity jobs and then force these jobs to pay higher wages. In
practice, limitations on available information, veriﬁcation ability, and enforcement powers
are likely to render these wage structure solutions infeasible. Motivated by these considerations, it would be useful to formulate centralized wage bargaining problems that entail
weaker informational and enforcement requirements.
VIII. Related Work
This paper was originally presented at a conference in honor of Assar Lindbeck that
took place in Stockholm in June 1995. Earlier drafts of the paper were circulated in
1992 and 1993. The current draft is essentially identical to the 1995 version, except for
this section and an improved ordering of the material in earlier sections. At this juncture
(August 2001), some brief remarks on how this paper ﬁts with concurrent and later research
are in order.
Between the ﬁrst draft and the 1995 draft, I became aware of three other papers
that also model search environments with endogenously supplied heterogeneous types.
Published versions of these papers appeared as Acemoglu (1996), Bertola and Caballero
(1994) and Sattinger (1995). Portions of the analysis in Acemoglu (1996) overlap closely
with this paper. In particular, he independently proved that a search equilibrium with
decentralized bargaining leads to under investment in job and worker quality. See his

29

Proposition 2. More generally, the mixing of heterogeneous types that are endogenously
supplied to search environments is an important theme in Acemoglu (1996) and several of
his other papers.
Ljungqvist and Sargent (2000, pages 582-589) study an inﬁnite-horizon version of the
bare-bones model in Section II. They show that several of my results carry over to the
steady state in an inﬁnite-horizon setting. In particular, (a) the search equilibrium with
decentralized wage setting exhibits an excessive relative supply of inferior jobs (unless ﬁrms
capture the entire match surplus), (b) there is a fundamental tension between the relative
and total job supply eﬃciency conditions of the same form as derived above, and (c) perfect
ex ante sorting of diﬀerent job types into separate search markets eliminates the excess
relative supply of inferior jobs and resolves the tension between total and relative supply
eﬃciency conditions. Following Moen (1987), they also show that under certain conditions
competitive wage announcements by ﬁrms prior to search can eﬀectively separate the
markets in the optimal way and achieve an eﬃcient total and relative supply of jobs.
Another related line of work, associated most closely with an important series of papers by Caballero and Hammour (1998, e.g.), explores the macroeconomic implications of
relationship-speciﬁc investments by capital and labor. These investments – which may but
need not derive from costly match formation – give rise to hold-up problems, or “appropriability” problems in the language of Caballero and Hammour. As they show, unresolved
appropriability problems can lead to a number of bad macroeconomic outcomes including
under investment by appropriated factors, undesirably slow adoption of new technologies,
delayed job creation and excessive unemployment in response to bad shocks, and bottleneck problems in response to good shocks. They also emphasize that the failure to resolve
appropriability problems at the micro level often gives rise to policy and institutional
responses at the macro level.
30

It is useful to relate selected results in this paper to the perspective and analysis of
Caballero and Hammour. First, the excessive relative supply of inferior types in search
equilibrium with decentralized wage setting can be seen as one manifestation of the generic
tendency to under investment in environments with unresolved hold-up problems. Second,
the fundamental tension between relative and total supply eﬃciency conditions shows that
it can be impossible to achieve eﬃcient factor supplies with decentralized wage setting.
While ex ante sorting mechanisms relax this tension, they are unlikely to operate perfectly in real-world settings. Third, industrial policy (Section VI) and centralized wage
determination (Section VII) are two possible institutional responses to the appropriability
problems created by costly match formation. My analysis shows that these institutions
can improve upon fully decentralized outcomes, but it should be emphasized that they
bring their own problems that are largely ignored in this paper.9 Fourth, the eﬃcient wage
structure analysis in Section IV suggests that the requirements for fully eﬃcient factor
supply patterns are highly demanding and hard to achieve for any institution.
My analysis also points to a potentially important limitation of the models emphasized
by Caballero and Hammour. In their models, labor typically appropriates a portion of the
quasi-rents generated by capital, or vice versa. While each factor is susceptible to appropriation, only one factor suﬀers appropriation in equilibrium. In contrast, my analysis
shows that search environments with two-sided endogenous heterogeneity exhibit simultaneous appropriation of each factor by the other, but along diﬀerent investment margins.
In other words, countervailing powers to appropriate by capital and labor do not fully net
out when match formation is costly and both sides undertake speciﬁc investments. As a
consequence, there is under investment on both sides of the market.
9

For empirical evidence that centralized wage bargaining compresses the wage structure

and thereby alters the distribution of jobs, see Davis and Henrekson (2001).
31

In this regard, the Caballero and Hammour paradigm seems quite apt for traditional
industrial settings in which capital or labor is fairly homogeneous. However, modern
production and employment relationships often involve highly speciﬁc investments by ﬁrms
and workers along several distinct dimensions, as well as costly match formation and
breakup. Hence, institutional and policy responses that achieve a rough “balance” between
the appropriation powers of capital and labor may work reasonably well in traditional
industrial setting but quite poorly in other settings that seem increasingly important in
modern economies.
There are also other diﬀerences between the consequences of appropriation problems
emphasized by Caballero and Hammour and results in this paper. For example, the appropriating factor is typically under employed or partially excluded from the joint production
sector in the models of Caballero and Hammour. In contrast, under employment of the
appropriating factor is not a general feature of the search models considered here. Table 2
illustrates this point for the basic model with heterogeneous jobs and homogeneous workers. Under decentralized wage setting, labor appropriates quasi-rents from ﬁrms, which
leads to under investment in job quality but higher – not lower – employment for the
appropriating factor.
IX. Concluding Remarks
The basic logic developed in this paper can be summarized in a few sentences. In
search equilibrium with decentralized wage determination, ﬁrms recover only a fraction
of the increases in ex post surplus that they generate by improving job quality ex ante,
but they incur all of the costs. Hence, ﬁrms under invest in job quality from a social eﬃciency standpoint. Likewise, workers’ inability to fully capture increases in match surplus
generated by their ex ante investments lead them to under invest in human capital. The

32

resulting search equilibrium exhibits excessive relative supplies of inferior jobs and inferior
workers.
Absent some policy intervention or institutional response, it is generally impossible
to achieve eﬃcient supplies of heterogeneous workers and jobs in a search environment
with decentralized wage bargaining. The restriction on wage bargaining required for an
eﬃcient total supply of workers and jobs conﬂicts with the restriction required for an
eﬃcient relative supply of diﬀerent job types, and both conﬂict with the restriction required
for an eﬃcient relative supply of diﬀerent worker types. Interventions in the form of an
optimal tax and subsidy policy or a centralized wage-barganing authority can, in principle,
substantially improve matters and drive the economy to more eﬃcient or even ﬁrst-best
outcomes.
The details of a particular search model are likely to represent a very crude approximation to the costly transaction process that takes place in actual labor markets. But
the key feature of the search models in this paper seems important in real-world labor
markets; namely, that ﬁrms and workers incur substantial sunk costs that aﬀect job and
worker quality prior to meeting (or prior to negotiating worker compensation). This paper works out some key implications for the quality distributions of jobs and workers,
the wage structure, and the potential eﬃciency-enhancing role of centralized wage-setting
institutions that follow from the existence of these sunk costs in search equilibrium.
While the models in this paper facilitate the transparent development of these implications, they are too simplistic to provide a solid basis for assessing their quantitative
importance. In some work in progress, I explore the eﬀects of alternative bargaining environments and government policy choices in dynamic search models with endogenous job
quality distributions. The analyis focuses on expected job duration, rather than productivity, as the aspect of quality that diﬀerentiates jobs. This focus is motivated by the
33

apparently strong desire for stable jobs by workers in many sectors of the economy, and by
the observation that job loss often entails large pecuniary and nonpecuniary losses. In this
type of dynamic search environment, there is a natural policy role whereby job creation
subsidies and job destruction taxes can be used to improve the mix and number of jobs.

34

References

Acemoglu, Daron, 1996, “A Microfoundation for Social Increasing Returns in Human
Capital Accumulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (August), 779-804.
Becker, Gary, 1975, Human Capital, New York: Colombia University Press.
Bertola, Giuseppe and Ricardo J. Caballero, 1994, “Cross Sectional Eﬃciency and
Labor Hoarding in a Matching Model of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies,
61, no. 3 (July), 435-456.
Blanchard, Olivier and Peter Diamond, 1989, “The Beveridge Curve,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1989:1, 1-60.
Bulow, Jeremy I. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1986, “A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian Unemloyment,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 4, no. 3, part 1 (July), 376-414.
Caballero, Ricardo J. Mohamad L. Hammour, 1998, “The Macroeconomics of Speciﬁcity,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, no. 4, 724-767.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1991, “Wage Dispersion Between and Within
U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1963-1986,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 115-200.
Davis, Steven J. and Magnus Henrekson, 2001, “Wage-Setting Institutions as Industrial Policy,” NBER Working Paper No.

7502.

Revised version available at

http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/steven.davis/research.
Diamond, Peter A., 1981, “Mobility Costs, Frictional Unemployment, and Eﬃciency,”
Journal of Political Economy, 89, (August) 798-812.
Diamond, Peter A., 1982, “Wage Determination and Eﬃciency in Search Equilibrium,” Review of Economic Studies, 49, (April) 217-227.

35

Grout, Paul A., 1984, “Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts,”
Econometrica, 52 (March), 449-460.
Hall, Robert and Edward Lazear, 1984, “The Excess Sensitivity of Layoﬀs and Quits
to Demand,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2 (April), 233-257.
Hosios, Arthur J., 1990, “On the Eﬃciency of Matching and Related Models of Search
and Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 57, 279-298.
Kalai, E. (1977) “Nonsymmetric Nash Solutions and Replications of 2-Person Bargaining,” International Journal of Game Theory, 6, 129-133.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent, 2000, Recursive Macroeconomic Theory.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Moen, Espen, R., 1997, “Competitive Search Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, no. 2, 385-411.
Mortensen, Dale T., 1982(a), “The Matching Process as a Non-Cooperative Bargaining Game,” in J.J. McCall, ed., The Economics of Information and Uncertainty, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mortensen, Dale T., 1982(b), “Property Rights and Eﬃciency in Mating, Racing, and
Related Games,” American Economic Review, 72, (December) 968-979.
Parsons, Donald O., 1986, “The Employment Relationship: Job Attachment, Work
Eﬀort, and the Nature of Contracts,” in Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds.,
Handbook of Labor Economics, II, Amsterdam: North-Holland Press.
Pissarides, Christopher A., 1984, “Search Intensity, Job Advertising, and Eﬃciency,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 2, (January) 128-143.
Pissarides, Christopher A., 1990, Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Basil Blackwell,
Inc.: Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Sattinger, Michael, 1995, “Search and the Eﬃcient Assignment of Workers to Jobs,”
36

International Economic Review, 36, no. 2 (May), 283-302.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1987, “The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality
on Price,” Journal of Economic Literature, 25 (March), 1-48.
Weiss, Andrew, 1990, Eﬃciency Wages: Models of Unemployment, Layoﬀs, and Wage
Dispersion, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press

37

Table 1. Eﬃcient Sharing Parameters, Wage, and Job Distribution
Under Alternative Parametrizations with Two Job Types
α

γ

g 2 /g 1

z

y1

y2

β1

β2

J 1 /J

Wage

(1)

.5

2.0

1.0

50

90

100

.58

.46

.39

73.07

(2)

.5

2.0

2.0

50

90

100

.55

.44

.56

72.19

(3)

.5

1.2

2.0

50

90

100

.53

.42

.79

71.03

(4)

.5

1.2

1.0

50

90

100

.62

.49

.08

74.62

(5)

.5

2.0

1.0

60

90

100

.61

.46

.35

78.25

(6)

.5

2.0

1.0

50

80

100

.76

.46

.21

72.93

(7)

.5

2.0

1.0

50

75

100

1.00

.50

.00

75.00

(8)

.3

2.0

1.0

50

90

100

.82

.66

.29

82.95

(9)

.7

2.0

1.0

50

70

100

.68

.27

.15

63.66

Note:
Table entries are computed from (4 ), (19) and (20) assuming that job creation costs
are given by C i (J i ) = g i (J i )γ for i = 1, 2.

38

Table 2. Outcomes Under Isoelastic Cost of Job Creation
100 Job Types and 100 Workers
Leisure Value (z) = 100,

γ=2

α = .5

Workers’ Firms’
Surplus Surplus
10404
1492

Net Per
Average
Capita Unemp. Labor
Mean
Income Rate
Prod.
Wage
118.96
0.0
126.8
110.7

St. Dev.
Log Wage
.35

Decentralized
Equil. (β = .5)

10475

1437

119.12

5.0

126.8

113.4

.43

Decentralized
Equil. (β = .6)

10529

1364

118.93

12.2

126.8

116.1

.51

Eﬃcient Wage
Structure

11155

811

119.66

29.9

133.4

116.7

0.0

Regime
Decentralized
Equil. (β = .4)

Notes:
(i) The job creation cost coeﬃcients are set to achieve a uniform distribution of job types
in the decentralized equilibria.
(ii) The search eﬃciency parameter is set to deliver a ﬁve percent unemployment rate in
the decentralized equilibrium with Nash bargaining (β = .5).
(iii) The lower bound of the job productivity distribution is set to 110% of workers’ reservation value. The upper bound is set so that the standard deviation of log wages
equals .43 in the decentralized equilibrium with Nash bargaining (β = .5).
(iv) See Figure 1 for a display of the job quality distribution in the various regimes.

39

Table 3. Outcomes Under Three Alternative Regimes:
Decentralized Bargaining, Optimal Tax Structure, and Eﬃcient Wage Structure
Parameter Settings

Avg. Prod.

Per Capita Income

α

γ

g 2 /g 1 z

y1

y2

β

Decent.Eﬀ.

Decent.Eﬀ.

(1)

.5

2.0

1.0

50

80

100

.25

92.5

95.9

73.86 75.55

(2)

.5

2.0

1.0

50

80

100

.50

92.5

95.9

74.96 75.55

(3)

.5

2.0

1.0

50

80

100

.75

92.5

95.9

73.11 75.55

(4)

.5

2.0

1.0

50

75

100

.50

91.7

100.0 73.95 74.23

(5)

.3

2.0

1.0

50

90

100

.50

95.6

97.1

75.91 77.18

(6)

.7

2.0

1.0

50

70

100

.50

91.4

95.5

74.26 75.72

(7)

.5

2.0

2.0

50

90

100

.50

93.8

94.4

74.03 74.13

Wage, Job Distribution, and Tax Outcomes
Decent. Bargaining

Optimal Tax/Subsidy Policy

Eﬃcient Wage Structure

J 1 /J

w1

w2

J 1 /J

T1

T2

w1

w2

J 1 /J

w1 = w2

(1)

.37

57.5

62.5

.21

20.6

13.9

52.4

59.0

.21

72.9

(2)

.37

65.0

75.0

.21

15.9

−4.1

57.1

77.1

.21

72.9

(3)

.37

72.5

87.5

.21

1.7

−58.3 71.2

131.2 .21

72.9

(4)

.33

62.5

75.0

.00

25.0

0.0

50.0

75.0

.00

75.0

(5)

.44

70.0

75.0

.29

25.9

15.9

57.1

67.1

.29

83.0

(6)

.29

60.0

75.0

.15

7.3

−22.7 56.3

86.3

.29

63.7

(7)

.62

70.0

75.0

.56

4.4

−5.6

77.8

.56

72.2

67.8

Notes:
(i) The decentralized outcome is the solution to the model in section II with two job types.
It solves equations (3 ), (13.a) and (13.b). The optimal tax/subsidy outcome solves
the same model with a tax/subsidy policy that produces an eﬃcient distribution of job
types. It solves equations (12.a), (12.b), (22), and (23). The eﬃcient wage structure
outcome solves (12.a), (12.b) and (19).
(ii) Table entries are computed assuming that C i (J i ) = g i (J i )γ for i = 1, 2. In solving
for per capita income, additional parameters are scaled as follows: L = 10, a = .7 and
g 1 = 1.
40

(iii) Per capita income is calculated net of job creation costs.
(iv) The invariance of the job distribution with respect to β in the decentralized equilibrium
is a special implication of the functional form chosen for job creation costs.

41

Table 4. The Eﬀects of Centralized Wage Determination
Parameter Settings

(1)

α

γ

g1

g2

z

y1

y2

a

L

.5

2.0

1.0

1.0

50

80

100

.7

10

Outcomes Under Alternative Wage-Determination Regimes
Parameters

Labor

Per Capita Income

Regime

β

βc

J 1 /J

w1

w2

Prod.

Total

Labor

Firms

Eﬃcient

–

–

.21

72.93

72.93

95.86

75.55

67.03

8.52

Decentralized
Centralized
Centralized
Centralized

.2
.2
.2
.2

–
.2
.5
.8

.37
.21
.21
.21

56.00
68.67
68.75
68.83

60.00
56.62
56.92
57.23

92.50
95.86
95.86
95.86

73.36
73.89
73.95
74.00

57.79
57.92
58.13
58.33

15.57
15.97
15.82
15.67

Decentralized

.5

–

.37

65.00

75.00

92.50

74.96

66.64

8.32

Centralized
Centralized
Centralized

.5
.5
.5

.2
.5
.8

.21
.21
.21

72.76
72.87
72.98

72.29
72.70
73.11

95.86
95.86
95.86

75.55
75.55
75.55

66.76
66.94
67.11

8.79
8.61
8.44

Decentralized
Centralized
Centralized
Centralized

.8
.8
.8
.8

–
.2
.5
.8

.37
.21
.21
.21

74.00
75.37
75.84
76.22

90.00
82.29
84.06
85.53

92.50
95.86
95.86
95.86

72.07
74.74
74.35
73.95

69.62
69.90
70.15
70.26

2.45
4.84
4.20
3.69

Notes:
(i) Wages obey (20) and quantities solve (12.a) and (12.b) in the eﬃcient wage-structure
regime. Wages obey (3 ) and quantities solve (13.a) and (13.b) in the decentralized
bargaining regime. Wages solve the constrained optimization problem (33)-(34) in the
centralized bargaining regime, and quantities then follow from (34).

42

Decentralized Equilibrium
(beta={.4,.5,.6} from top to bottom)
Efficient Distribution

J o b3 .s0

Z=100, alpha=.5, gamma=2
2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
100

110

120

130

140

150

Productivity
-- Job creation cost coefficients set to yield a uniform distribution of types in the decentralized outcomes.
-- Search efficiency parm (a) set to achieve 5% unemp. rate in the decentralized equilbirum with beta=.5.

-- Upper bound of prod. dist. set so that sd(log wage)=.43in decentralized equilibrium with beta=.5.

