                                       !"                 




                                               


                                                


                                            #$$%
                                   &''())*))#$$%


                         + +  ,                            -
                               ./0/ ,1&'' 2
                                 3*45 , /%.6#
                                     '




           
 


 !"# $ % &  '    (   &  ( 
)         (  & ( &  
7  1'1'8 
  
     #$$%
' %//.
   05 9



                                                


         &  41 '& '15 '8 4 131 71' '&' 4 ' 7 
1'1'8 1  %/// 4 %//. ' * '&  41 7 '&  7 7  1'1'8
'1' 4 13'' 3 ' '& 41 '& '1' 7 '& & 4 ' 3'
4 1'4 '' ''' 1'4  .99:;9# 4 '& 731 7 '& ''' 4
'& 7' ' 8 7 ' & 41 7 '& 1'1'8 1  '& 12'8 * 4
' '& &( <= ,8 %/// '&& '3* %///5 <*= 1'* %/// '&& >13* %///5
8 %//. ' '&  %//. 1& &  414  ' &  114 '&  41
7  *' 1'1'8 3' *?' 4 73 '& 1' @1  7




  
>'3' 7 131
 0%;%#/
,
3*45 , /%.$%
4  
AB3'4
                         CALIFORNIA’S ELECTRICITY CRISIS

                                          Paul L. Joskow1
                                                MIT
                                           July 21, 2001

INTRODUCTION

        The collapse of California’s electricity restructuring and competition program has

attracted attention around the world.            Prices in California’s competitive wholesale

electricity market increased by 500% between the second half of 1999 and the second

half of 2000. For the first four months of 2001, wholesale spot prices averaged over

$300/Mwh, ten times what they were is 1998 and 1999. Some customers have been

required involuntarily to curtail electricity consumption in response to supply shortages.

While wholesale prices rose dramatically, retail prices were fixed until early in 2001.2 As

a result, California’s two largest utilities --- Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) and Southern

California Edison (SCE) --- were paying far more for wholesale power than they were

able to resell it for at retail. Both effectively became insolvent in January 2001 and

stopped paying their bills for power and certain other financial obligations. PG&E

declared bankruptcy on April 6, 2001 and its reorganization is now before a federal

bankruptcy court.

11
   Elizabeth and James Killian Professor of Economics and Management and Director of the MIT Center
for Energy and Environmental Policy Research (CEEPR). I am grateful for financial support from the
CEEPR and for detailed comments from Denny Ellerman. I have benefited from discussions with Severin
Borenstein, Frank Wolak, Ed Kahn, and Bill Hogan. Erich Muehlegger provided excellent research
assistance.

2
  California has three major Investor-Owned Utilities (IOUs): Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), San Diego
Gas and Electric (SDG&E) and Southern California Edison (SCE). PG&E and SCE are about four times
larger than SDG&E. SDG&E’s retail prices were allowed to adjust to changes in wholesale market prices
beginning in January 2000, but special state legislation subsequently capped its retail prices as well.
                                              2


       As utility credit problems became evident, unregulated suppliers of wholesale

power began to stop selling power to them. For a short period of time, emergency orders

issued by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and federal courts required generators

subject to federal jurisdiction to continue supplying until the mess could be sorted out.

The State of California eventually stepped into the breach (through the California

Department of Water Resources - CDWR) and used state funds to buy power from

unregulated wholesale suppliers to avoid widespread blackouts. It spent roughly $8

billion doing so between January and May 2001 and has also negotiated long term

contracts with suppliers stretching out as long as twenty years into the future. These

contracts are reported to involve commitments of about $50 billion more. Retail price

increases of 30 to 40% went into effect in June 2001 and retail prices are likely to remain

high for many years to come as the long term contracts negotiated by the State are paid

off. Although wholesale prices began to moderate significantly during June 2001, the

future of California’s experiment with electricity restructuring, wholesale and retail

competition program remains murky at best.

       This was certainly not what California planned would happen by reforming its

electricity industry! And while many analysts predicted that there would be problems

resulting from a variety of market design and regulatory decisions made during the new

system’s formation, nobody predicted that California’s electricity restructuring and

competition reforms would lead to such a huge mess. This paper discusses the political,

regulatory and economic factors that led to California’s electricity crisis. It begins with a

discussion of the origins of California’s electricity restructuring programs. It then discusses
                                                       3


the structure of the wholesale and retail markets and associated transition institutions

created in 1996-98 and the performance of these institutions during their first two years of

operation.3 The discussion of the electricity crisis is then conveniently broken down into

three phases: (a) May 2000 through September 2000, (b) October 2000 through December

2000, January 2001 to the June 2001. Each phase is discussed in turn. The paper

concludes with a discussion of lessons about electricity market liberalization gained from

the recent experience in California.



CALIFORNIA RESTRUCTURING PROGRAM: 1994 - 1999
           For nearly a century, California’s electricity industry was organized around three

regulated private vertically integrated monopolies (IOUs) which owned and operated

generation, transmission and distribution facilities to provide for the electricity needs of

all consumers in their exclusive franchise areas: Pacific Gas & Electric Company

(PG&E), Southern California Edison Company (SCE), and San Diego Gas & Electric

Company (SDG&E).4 Their prices, costs, and service obligations were heavily regulated

by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC), an independent state regulatory

agency. While utilities in California owned and operated generating plants to supply a

large fraction of their retail customers’ needs, they also depended on purchasing

significant amounts of power in the long-standing wholesale market from utilities in other




3
    A more detailed discussion of the pre-2000 period can be found in Joskow (2000).

4
  PG&E and SDG&E are also gas distribution companies. PG&E, SCE, and SDG&E account for about
75% of the electricity sold in the state. The rest is supplied by municipal utilities, irrigation districts, and
public water agencies. The state’s municipal utilities, irrigation districts and water agencies have not
participated in the electricity restructuring and competition program.
                                                        4


Western states, Canada and Mexico.5                     (Together this region comprises a single

synchronized electric power network that operates under the supervision of the Western

System Coordinating Council or WSCC.) During the 1960s and 1970s, utilities in

California built long transmission lines to gain access to power supplies in the Northwest

and Southwest. While California was primarily an importer of power from these regions,

it also sold power to them when it was economical to do so. For example, California

purchased large quantities of energy from hydroelectric facilities in the Northwest during

the Spring and Summer seasons and sold energy to the Northwest during off-peak periods

in the Winter.6

           Regulatory responsibilities for electricity supplied by private firms in the U.S. are

split between individual state public utility commissions and the Federal Energy

Regulatory Commission (FERC).7 State commissions regulate retail prices and

traditionally relied on the total costs of vertically integrated utilities providing service in a

state to set retail prices. They also traditionally were responsible for oversight of utility

planning and reviewing the reasonableness of their costs. In California, the California

Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) regulates retail electricity prices and other terms

5
  The Western states of the U.S., British Columbia, Alberta and portions of Mexico are part of the same
synchronized AC network --- the Western States Coordinating Council (WSCC), made up of about 35
control areas. California had 7 control areas prior to restructuring: The three IOUs, two municipal
utilities, one irrigation district, and a small piece of an IOU operating primarily in Oregon in the northern
corner of the state. Active wholesale electricity markets built around bilateral contracts between utilities
have existed in the U.S. for several decades. However, as of 2000, California was the only Western state to
restructure its electric power sector. Utilities in other Western states bought and sold power in the
wholesale market, but their obligations to retail customers were largely covered by the generating plants
that they owned and whose prices were regulated using traditional cost-of-service principles.

6
  California and the Southwest peak in the summer and the Northwest peaks in the winter. The Northwest
has extensive hydroelectric resources. Cheap energy was typically available during the Spring and early
summer in the Northeast as snow melted, dams filled and had to spill water.

7
    A more detailed discussion of the pre-reform structure and regulation of the U.S. electric power industry
                                                      5


and conditions of retail service. FERC is responsible for regulating prices and other

terms and conditions of sales of power made by one utility to another (“wholesale” power

transactions) and sales of unbundled transmission service required to support wholesale

power transactions.          As long as the industry was made up primarily of vertically

integrated utilities that owned generation, transmission and distribution facilities to serve

retail demand in their franchise areas, the vast bulk of utility revenues and costs were

subject to state commission regulation. In those states, like California, where industry

restructuring has separated and “unbundled” generation, transmission, distribution and

retail supply, market sales of power made by previously integrated generating facilities

and sales of the transmission service to support it become subject to FERC regulation.

           FERC too traditionally regulated wholesale power and transmission prices based

on cost of service principles. However, beginning in the late 1980s, FERC began to

encourage the further development of competitive wholesale markets and began to grant

wholesale power producers the authority to sell at “market-based rates” if they could

show that they lacked market power and that the prices at which they sold power would

reflect the interplay of supply and demand in well-functioning markets.8

           In early 1993, the CPUC launched a comprehensive review of the structure and

performance of California’s electricity industry.9 It was motivated primarily by pressure

from industrial consumers to reduce electricity prices which were among the highest in



can be found in Joskow (1989) and Joskow (2000).
8
    See Joskow (2000) for a discussion of these developments.
9
  The CPUC issued a report in 1993, generally called the “Yellow Book,” committing itself to reforms.
See Joskow (2000) for a discussion of the political economy of electricity restructuring in California and
other states.
                                                       6


the U.S. and much higher than those in neighboring states in the West.10 High electricity

prices in turn were blamed on failures of the existing system of regulated vertically

integrated monopolies: the high costs of nuclear power plant investments, expensive

long-term contracts with independent power suppliers, excess generating capacity, costly

and ineffective regulatory institutions. There was broad agreement that the existing

industry structure and regulatory system needed to be reformed. The nature of the most

desirable reforms was very controversial, however.

         In April 1994, the CPUC articulated what was then viewed as a radical reform

program for the electricity sector in a report known as the “Blue Book.”11 It was built

around a new industry structure in which the production of (wholesale) electricity from

existing generating plants and the entry of new plants would be deregulated and their

power sold in a new competitive wholesale market. Retail consumers would have the

choice of using the transmission and distribution wires of their local utility to obtain

“direct access” to these new competitive wholesale markets or continuing to receive

power from their local utility at prices reflecting the costs the utilities incurred to buy or

produce it. This vision for reform was heavily influenced by reforms implemented in

Britain in 1990.

         In early 1996, after two years of debate among interests groups about the

proposed reforms and transition arrangements, the CPUC issued its long-awaited


10
   Most of the other states with high retail electricity prices were in the Northeast. California is the only
state in the West to adopt this type of radical restructuring program.

11
  Proposed Policy Statement on Restructuring California's Electric Services Industry and Reforming
Regulatory Policy, April 20, 1994. Several of the then sitting Commissioners have also told me that their
visit to England and Wales in early 1994 to study the competitive electricity system that had been created
there in 1990 greatly influenced their decision to endeavor to create a similar system in California.
                                                    7


restructuring decision.12 Later that same year, the California legislature passed a

restructuring law (AB 1890) that largely followed the architecture delineated by the

CPUC’s restructuring order, but that also included a number of significant refinements.

Taken together, the major provisions of AB 1890 and CPUC electricity sector

restructuring regulations include:

           1. Retail “customer choice” or retail wheeling: effective in 1998, all retail

customers were given the ability to choose a competitive electricity service provider (ESP)

to provide them with generation services. If they did not choose an ESP they could

continue to receive “default service” from their local utility distribution company (UDC) at

prices determined by the CPUC and the provisions of AB 1890. It was expected that most

retail customers would gradually migrate to ESPs during the four-year transition period.

           2. IOUs were required to provide open access to their transmission and distribution

networks to competing generators, wholesale marketers, and ESPs at prices determined by

FERC and the CPUC.

           3. Each UDC’s default service energy price, charged to customers who did not

choose an ESP, was (effectively) set equal the wholesale spot market prices for power

determined in the day-ahead and real-time markets (see below), adjusted for physical

losses, plus avoidable billing and metering costs. This was the “price to beat” for ESPs.

           4.   Provisions were made for utilities to recover their stranded costs, which

included incentives to divest generating assets and to renegotiate QF contracts. Stranded

costs associated with most utility generating assets had to be recovered within a four-year

transition period during which retail rates are generally frozen at their 1996 levels, with


12
     Decision 95-12-063 (December 20, 1995) as modified by Decision 96-01-009 (January 10, 1996).
                                                      8


the exceptions noted below. The assumption was that wholesale power prices would be

significantly below the prevailing price of generation service reflected in regulate retail

rates; after all, the primary motivation for the reforms was the prospect of consumers

getting access to the “cheap power” expected to be available in wholesale markets.

Nobody broached the possibility that wholesale prices could possibly be higher than the

regulated price of generation service reflected in prevailing retail prices.                     The entire

rationale for the reforms was that wholesale prices would be lower than the regulated

retail price of generation service. And, of course if wholesale prices were higher that the

regulated cost of generation service there would be no stranded costs to worry about!

Accordingly, what were assumed to be huge stranded utility generation costs were to be

recovered from the difference between the regulated retail prices in effect in 1996, the

utility’s actual distribution and transmission costs, and the wholesale spot market price of

generation service for a period of up to four years. If stranded utility generation costs

were recovered sooner than four years, then the rate freeze would end immediately and

retail prices would “fall” to reflect prevailing wholesale market conditions.13

         5. AB 1890 enabled utilities to “securitize” a fraction of their stranded costs by

issuing bonds whose interest and amortization is guaranteed by the state to be paid out of

stranded cost charges that utilities are authorized to include in their distribution charges.

Essentially, these provisions made it possible for utilities to refinance a portion of their

generating assets with 100% highly rated debt instruments, replacing the roughly 50/50


13
  Prior to 2000, the CPUC’s primary concern was to see that the rate freeze would end as quickly as
possible and went to great efforts to ensure that utilities did not extent the rate freeze beyond the time
necessary to recover stranded costs. Note that the 4-year limit on stranded cost recovery applied only to
utility generating assets. Stranded costs related to QF contracts could continue to be recovered after the
rate freeze period ended through a non-bypassable distribution charge.
                                               9


debt to equity ratio with which the generating assets had been financed and the associated

financing costs reflected in the regulated prices upon which the rate freeze are based.

Securitization was designed to reduce the utilities’ cost of capital and income taxes

associated with carrying stranded costs.

        6. Residential and small commercial customers received an immediate 10% price

decrease from then prevailing regulated prices, financed by the cost savings from

securitization. (So, the maximum bundled retail prices for these customers were frozen for

up to four years at 10% less than the prices in effect in 1996.)

        7. Distribution and any remaining state-jurisdictional transmission charges were

regulated using incentive regulation mechanisms, or what is now referred to in the U.S.

regulatory arena as Performance Based Regulation (PBR).

        8. The IOUs were directed to help to create two new non-profit transmission

network operation and wholesale market institutions.               The first is the California

Independent System Operator (CAISO), that would operate the transmission networks

owned by the three major California IOUs and would be responsible for running various

energy balancing, ancillary service, and congestion management markets that I will

discuss presently. The second is the California Power Exchange (CALPX), which would

run day-ahead and hour-ahead hourly public wholesale markets for sales of energy. Both

CAISO and CALPX are non-profit corporations with governing boards that include

representatives of major interest groups as well as “public interest” members.

        9. The two largest IOUs were ordered to divest at least half of their fossil

generating capacity in California and strongly encouraged to divest all of their generating

capacity to mitigate horizontal market power problems and to provide a simple valuation
                                                    10


of stranded costs. All three IOU’s eventually divested all of their fossil-fueled generation

in California. However, they retained their nuclear plants, their hydro-electric plants, and

their existing long-term contracts.14 The three IOUs were required to meet their default

service obligations by purchasing all of their remaining customers’ requirements in the

day-ahead and real-time spot wholesale markets operated by the PX and ISO.

Mechanically, the utilities sold power from their remaining generating assets (including

long-term contracts) into these markets and then bought it back to meet their default

service demand. They were effectively “short” the difference between default service

demand and what they could supply from their remaining generating assets. Requests by

the utilities to hedge their short position beginning in 1999 were either denied or so

restricted by the CPUC that little forward purchasing took place before 2001. As I will

discuss, despite earlier predictions, no more than 12% of retail demand migrated to ESPs.

As a result, the three utilities had a default service demand that was much higher than

expected and, after divestiture, their net short position was much larger than expected.




14
  In addition, SCE owns coal plants in Nevada and New Mexico and has entitlements to hydroelectric
energy from Hoover Dam in Nevada. Altogether, the utilities retained about 18,000 Mw of firm power
supply resources. In addition, their control areas were responsible for dispatching about another 6,000 Mw
of generating capacity owned by municipal utilities whose demand is included in their control areas. The
aggregate peak demand of the IOUs and municipal utilities within their control areas is about 45,000 Mw
and the average hourly demand is about 27,000 Mw.
                                                     11


WHOLESALE MARKET INSTITUTIONS15

         The process of designing the details of California’s wholesale and retail market

institutions was extremely contentious. Different interest groups presented different reform

“models.”       The CPUC was itself divided about the appropriate wholesale market

framework, with one group preferring a “Poolco” model very similar to that introduced in

England and Wales in 1990 and another preferring a “bilateral contracts” model based very

loosely on the structure of natural gas markets and the interactions between pipelines,

producers, marketers, and industrial and local gas distribution system buyers. Ideological

rhetoric played a bigger role than serious analysis or practical experience drawn from other

countries. In the end, the ultimate design of the wholesale market institutions represented a

series of compromises made by design committees including interest group representatives,

drawing on bits and pieces of alternative models for market design, congestion

management, transmission pricing, new generator interconnection rules, and locational

market power mitigation. The process went from bad to worse in 1997 once the ISO and

PX were constituted (on paper) and a Trustee and staff were appointed to push the process

forward. Getting it done fast and in a way that pandered to the many interests involved

become more important than getting it right. The end result was the most complicated set

of wholesale electricity market institutions ever created on earth and with which there was

no real-world experience.




15
  The discussion that follows reflects the structure of the market as it was originally designed and, more or
less, operated until early 2001. On January 2001, the PX stopped operating and eventually filed for
bankruptcy. Since then, there has been no public organized power exchange in California. Buyers and
sellers rely either on bilateral contracts which are scheduled with the ISO, self-supply in the case of the
portion of utility load that can be served from their remaining resources, or purchases from the ISO’s real-
time imbalance market.
                                                   12


        California’s restructuring program required the IOUs in California to create an

Independent System Operator (CAISO) and a Power Exchange (PX) and to turn the

operation of their transmission networks over to CAISO. The PX and CAISO in turn were

required to operate public markets with transparent hourly market clearing prices for

electric energy and operating reserves (ancillary services), and to manage congestion using

market mechanisms. The institutional structure adopted by California is quite ambitious

compared to the designs that characterize wholesale markets created earlier in England,

Chile, and Argentina. It relies more on individual generator owners making decentralized

unit commitment and dispatch decisions to supply energy and ancillary services and to

manage congestion based on their own self-interests, and provides more bidding, dispatch

and pricing flexibility than do most of the earlier organized electricity markets.16

        The California ISO (CAISO): It will be useful to refer to Figure 1, which depicts

the structure of the California wholesale electricity market institutions, to follow the rest of

the discussion in this section. CAISO is the core institution that governs the operation of a

large portion of the transmission system in California and the system’s use as a platform for

wholesale and retail market trading of electricity.17 CAISO is a non-profit public benefit

corporation organized under the laws of California. However, it is subject to regulation by

FERC under its rules governing transmission operators (Orders 888 and 889) as well as a

set of “independence” criteria applicable to Independent System Operators. CAISO is

responsible for operating the transmission networks owned by the three major investor-

16
  In this regard it is closer to the New Electricity Trading Arrangements (NETA) introduced in England
and Wales in 2001.

17
  LADWP, Pasadena, and the Imperial Irrigation District maintain their own control area, accounting for
about 7,500 Mw of peak demand that is scheduled and dispatched separately from the CAISO. It was
hoped that municipal transmission owners in California would also join CAISO, and that it would expand
                                                      13


owned utilities in California, is responsible for coordinating these operations with

interconnected transmission systems in the Western System Coordinating Council

(WSCC)18 and operates a control center to do so.

         The peak load served within the CAISO is about 45,000 Mw and there is roughly

44,000 Mw of generating capacity connected directly to its network.19 The generating

resources are a mix of gas, nuclear, hydroelectric, coal, and long-term contracts with QFs.

Importantly, nearly 40% of this generating capacity is relatively old gas-fired steam and

combustion turbine capacity. This capacity is generally at the top end of the supply stack

and gas fired capacity was historically the “marginal” marginal supply source that balanced

supply and demand about 80% of the time. All of this gas-fired capacity was divested by

the IOUs to five independent generating companies in 1998 and 1999.20 During peak

periods, supply and demand must be balanced with imports or interruptible contracts with

industrial customers (or rolling blackouts). CAISO has adopted protocols that allow (G)

generators directly connected to the transmission facilities it operates, as well as generators

that can move their power over neighboring transmission systems to points of


to include transmission owners in neighboring states. This has not yet happened.
18
  The WSCC is a regional reliability council that covers all of the states (roughly) west of the Rocky
Mountains, western Canada, and portions of northern Mexico. Significant imports of energy into
California and (less significant) exports of energy from California occur continuously. The volume and
direction of trade varies widely with changing demand patterns in the WSCC and the availability of
supplies from generating facilities, especially hydroelectric supplies.
19
   This includes both the demand and resources of several municipal utilities that were previously
integrated physically into SCE and PG&E’s control area network as well as SCE’s generating resources in
Nevada, Arizona and New Mexico which are dynamically scheduled by the ISO.
20
   The companies buying this capacity were primarily affiliates of electric utilities with retail service areas
in Texas, Georgia and North Carolina --- Southern, Duke, Reliant. A Texas-based gas marketing company
(Dynegy) was also a purchaser of some of these assets. AES, and independent power producer, also
purchased assets in Southern California. It subsequently entered into a tolling agreement with Williams (a
energy marketer and pipeline company) and it is Williams that has been marketing the power produced
from these facilities and apparently controls their dispatch.
                                                   14


interconnection with CAISO’s network, to be scheduled to serve demand (or load- L)

supplied over CAISO’s network through intermediaries called Scheduling Coordinators

(SC).

        CAISO accepts hourly schedules from SCs on a day-ahead basis and an hour-ahead

basis, and then manages the operation of the system in real time based on market

information it receives from sellers and buyers and the physical constraints of the network.

Demand and supply realized in real time can vary from day-ahead or hour-ahead schedules,

and CAISO is responsible for balancing supply and demand in real time. To do so, it

operates a real time energy balancing market into which generators can submit bids to

supply more energy or to reduce the energy they have scheduled to supply to the network.

CAISO also manages transmission congestion through its day-ahead scheduling process

and in real time. To manage congestion economically, it relies on hourly adjustment bids

and supplemental energy bids submitted by generators.                  When congestion arises, the

marginal supply cost at different nodes on the network will vary (Joskow and Tirole

(2000)). California has adopted a “zonal” congestion management system which allows

separate market clearing energy and ancillary services prices to emerge in Northern and

Southern California (separated by a transmission path called “path 15”)21 and at each point

of interconnection between the CAISO’s facilities and those of neighboring transmission

operators.22    SC’s scheduling supplies from one zone to another must make congestion



21
  In early 2000, CAISO created a third congestion zone (ZP 26) that lies between the original Northern
and Southern zones.

22
  The Pennsylvania-New Jersey- Maryland (PJM) ISO and the New York ISO have implemented full
nodal pricing systems. New York’s wholesale market and congestion management system first became
operational on November 17, 1999. The New England ISO also intends to implement a nodal pricing and
congestion management system. These systems follow closely the nodal pricing models developed by Bill
Hogan (1992,1993).
                                                    15


payments to the ISO during periods of congestion. These payments are equal to the

difference in the clearing prices, based on adjustment bids, on either side of any congested

interface times the quantity being scheduled across it. These payments are then rebated to

the entities that hold firm transmission rights on the congested paths.23

          CAISO is also responsible for purchasing various operating reserve services

(“ancillary services”) from generators -- frequency regulation (also called Automatic

Generator Control or AGC), spinning reserves, non-spinning reserves, and replacement

reserves -- to respond to unanticipated changes in demand or plant outages in order to

maintain the short term reliability of the network. It operates day-ahead and hour-ahead

markets for each of these reserve services for each hour of the day. These markets select

generators that agree to hold generating capacity with specified physical attributes

(primarily adjustment speeds and communications capabilities) in reserve to be available in

a particular hour to respond to instructions from the ISO to supply energy. Generators

selected in these ancillary services auctions are paid a uniform hourly market-clearing

reservation price to hold the capacity in reserve and are then paid for the energy they

supply if they are subsequently called on by the ISO to supply energy.

          Finally, the ISO is responsible for developing protocols for financial settlements

between generators supplying to the network and agents for consumers using energy from

the network, effectively determining energy and ancillary services imbalances and the

associated financial responsibilities of each SC that schedules over the facilities operated

by CAISO.




23
     CAISO ran its first Firm Transmission Rights (FTR) auction during the week of November, 1999.
                                                  16


        The California Power Exchange (PX): California’s restructuring program created a

separate “voluntary” public market for trading energy for each hour of the day on a day-

ahead and hour-ahead basis.24 This organization is the California “Power Exchange” or

PX. The PX is a non-profit corporation organized under the laws of California and is also

an SC for purposes of interacting with CAISO. Pursuant to California’s restructuring

legislation (AB 1890, passed in 1996), the IOUs in California must place all of the day-

ahead demand from their default service customers through the PX on an hourly basis.

They must also bid all of the energy supplied from any generating units they continue to

own or power supplied to them under pre-reform long term contracts into the PX as well.

Other generators and other demand-serving entities (e.g. marketers, municipal utilities in

California or utilities in other states) may voluntarily trade in the PX if they choose to do

so.

        The PX took the hourly day-ahead supply and demand bids and “stacked them up”

to form aggregate supply and demand curves for each hour. The hourly market clearing

price was then determined by the intersection of these aggregate supply and demand

curves. All buyers paid the uniform market clearing price and all sellers were paid this

uniform market clearing price. The winning supply bidders in each hour then constituted

the PX’s preferred day ahead schedule submitted to the ISO. The PX is essentially a short-

term forward market. Winning suppliers take on a financial obligation based on the market

clearing price in each hour, but not a physical supply obligation. However, prices in the

PX and the ISO’s real time and ancillary services markets are linked by arbitrage


24
  The existence of a separate PX distinguishes the California structure from most other organized
electricity markets. ISO-New England, PJM, and New York ISO operate both day-ahead energy and
ancillary services markets. That is, there is no separate public PX in these regions.
                                            17


opportunities. If the real time price is expected to be higher that the day-ahead price,

suppliers will withdraw supplies from the day-ahead market and wait to bid them into the

ISO’s real time energy market and vice versa. Similarly, suppliers of ancillary services are

effectively being paid to hold some capacity in reserve just in case they are needed by the

ISO. The opportunity cost of holding this capacity in reserve is roughly equal to the

difference between the expected day-ahead or real time price and the marginal cost of

production.

       Other Scheduling Coordinators (SC):        A Scheduling Coordinator (SC) is any

wholesale entity that has been licensed to schedule power on the CAISO network and

agreed to abide by its operating rules and payment obligation.   Non-utility generators and

wholesale marketing intermediaries marketers may register as SCs with CAISO if they

agree to abide by CAISO’s terms and conditions for scheduling power on its network.

They must adhere to the ISO’s operating and payment rules and meet credit requirements.

An SC can organize its own portfolio of supply resources and load obligations and

schedule its portfolio for physical delivery with CAISO. SCs rely on bilateral financial

contracts with buyers and sellers (or owned-generation) to assemble their portfolios and are

then supposed to submit balanced schedules (supply schedule = demand schedule) for each

hour to the CAISO. The prices SCs pay to generation suppliers or charge to buyers and the

methods they use to manage congestion are internal to each SC and such information is not

public. The marketing affiliates of the owners of the divested generating capacity, larger

municipal utilities, vertically integrated utilities in other states in the WSCC (as well as

Canada and Mexico), and wholesale marketers without generating assets at all have

registered as SCs.
                                                   18


        Entry of new generating capacity: The reform program “deregulated” entry of new

generating capacity. Independent power producers were free to apply for environmental

and siting permits and to sell power to eligible wholesale and retail buyers. However, the

reform program did not reform the process for obtaining siting approvals from the

California Energy Commission (CEC) and local authorities. These processes had been

designed for an era when utilities engaged in long term planning, carried large reserve

margins, and long and controversial approval processes were built into the planning and

investment process. Moreover, since few new plants had required CEC siting approvals in

many years, the approval processes were “rusty” and understaffed.                 Generators trying to

build new power plants soon found obtaining all necessary siting permits to be a slow and

frustrating process.


INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF WHOLESALE MARKET PERFORMANCE : 1998-1999
        The new competitive wholesale and retail electricity markets began operating in

April 1998. Several important software functionalities were not ready at the time the

markets opened in April 1998, there was poor coordination between the PX and the ISO,

and the limitations placed on the ISO’s ability to play an active role in energy markets and

through forward contracts led to numerous problems well before the more visible

meltdown that began in May 2000. Flaws were identified in the congestion management

system, with the contracts designed to mitigate local market power problems,25 the

protocols for planning and investment in transmission and the interconnection of new

generating plants, the real time balancing markets, the ancillary services markets, under-

25
   The “local market power problem” in California is very similar to the “constrained-on plant” problem
that emerged in the early years of the new electricity market arrangements in England and Wales. Office of
Electricity Regulation (1992).
                                                    19


scheduling before real time operations, and other areas.                  These market design flaws

increased the costs of ancillary services far above projections, led to scheduling and

dispatch inefficiencies, slowed down investment in new power plants, increased the costs

of managing congestion, increase spot market price volatility, and increased wholesale

market prices generally.

         In addition, there was evidence of episodic horizontal market power problems that

emerged from time to time during very high-demand periods.26 During low and moderate

demand conditions, the energy markets appeared to be quite competitive, with day-ahead

prices observed to be reasonably close to estimates of marginal cost. This was generally

the case whether or not there is congestion observed on Path 15 or the ties with other

systems.27 When demand gets very high, however, it is clear that the market is clearing at

prices far above the marginal cost of the most expensive generators in the region. Since

there is virtually no real demand elasticity yet in these markets, a during peak periods most

demand is satisfied with purchases in the spot markets, it is evident that as demand grows

and supply gets very tight, generators realize that a small amount of capacity withholding,

even with moderate levels of concentration, can lead to large price increases.                   All of the



26
  The performance of California’s electricity markets has been subject to extensive scrutiny because the
institutional arrangements approved by FERC (wisely) included a requirement that the ISO create a Market
Surveillance Committee (MSC) and that the PX create a Market Monitoring Committee (MMC). Both
committees have independent members, primarily academic economists. They have issued several reports
and produced several papers based, in part, on proprietary data available only to the PX and the ISO.
CAISO MSC Report, October 1999, Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak, July 1999, Bushnell and Wolak, July
1999. The performance assessments are reviewed in Joskow (2000).
27
   Historically, congestion on California’s transmission network tends to occur in the North to South
direction as a result of abundant suppliers of hydroelectric energy in the Northwest and Northern California
in the Spring and early summer, when demand is relatively low. Congestion tends to occur in the South to
North direction in the fall and winter at night when cheap energy from the Southwest is (effectively) being
exported to the Northwest through California. The high priced periods in the summer of 1998 did not
generally coincide with significant congestion. Demand was high everywhere in the WSCC, and there was
little energy for export to California from the Northwest and Southwest.
                                                  20


studies that were conducted prior to the crisis found that during very high demand periods,

unilateral behavior leads to prices that are significantly above competitive levels.28           The

ISO has had bid caps in effect on real time balancing energy since the markets began

operating and imposed price caps on ancillary services markets in July 1998, when prices

reached $10,000/Mw.29 However, prior to Summer 2000, the effects of horizontal market

power on prices was small and the supply and demand conditions when it emerged short-

lived.

           By 1999, a number of additional concerns began to emerge.             The ISO began to

express concerns about the slow pace of completion of new power plants, the rapid growth

in demand and the rapid reduction in reserve margins. The unexpected spot market price

volatility, the small number of retail customers who had shifted to ESPs (see below), and

the slow progress on new power plant projects began to lead to concerns about California’s

heavy reliance on spot markets to meet retail demand.

           When the California wholesale and retail market institutions were being created

FERC gave considerable deference to California government officials and the outcomes of

stakeholder negotiations, despite FERC staff’s reservations about many of the details. As

more and more problems began to emerge, FERC gradually began to reject some proposals

forthcoming from California and to provide more “guidance” for resolving them. Within

the first two years of operation, the ISO had filed about 30 major revisions to its protocols

with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).30                    The PX had filed for



28
     ISO Annual Report, Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (1999), CAISO MSC Report, October 1999.

29
     ISO Annual Report, Chapter 3
30
     California ISO Annual Report.
                                                     21


numerous changes in its operating protocols as well.        FERC did allow the ISO to price

caps on prices for energy and ancillary services in 1998 to respond to a variety of market

imperfections. The level of these caps varied over time, but price caps were in effect until

mid-December 2000. Responding to a never-ending series of problems and proposed fixes

for them, in late 1999 FERC ordered the ISO to seek to identify and implement

fundamental reforms rather than just piecemeal fixes to individual problems as they arose.

This reform process was not completed prior to the more serious problems that began in

May 2000.

           Much has been made in the press about the alleged failure of California utilities to

add new generating capacity for as much as 13 years. The facts are somewhat different.

Beginning in the early 1980s, California aggressively implemented the provisions of the

Public Utility Regulatory Policy Act (PURPA) passed by the U.S. Congress in 1978.31

PURPA required utilities to purchase power from certain qualifying (QF) cogeneration

and small power producers using renewable fuels.             California wanted to encourage

cogeneration and renewable energy and required utilities to purchase power produced

from such facilities under long-term contracts with very high prices. Roughly 7,000 Mw

of QF generating capacity began operating in California between the late 1980s and the

early 1990s. So much QF capacity was completed that there was very significant excess

capacity by the early 1990s. The high-priced QF contracts and the excess generating

capacity helped to drive up regulated retail prices which passed these costs along to retail

consumers.         The excess capacity situation that existed when the discussions of

restructuring began in 1993 was expected to last for another next decade.


31
     See Joskow (1989) for a more extensive discussion.
                                           22


         After the QF projects came into service by the early 1990s, no new generating

capacity was added in California and little new generating capacity was added anywhere

in the Western United States for the rest of the decade. There are two primary reasons.

First, there was excess capacity in the early 1990s that was expected to last for many

years.    Second, during the contentious discussion about electricity restructuring in

California and other Western states during the second half of the decade, the rules under

which new power plants would be built and their owners compensated were in flux. In

California, utilities were already effectively precluded from building new power plants.

It is not surprising that investors would not commit funds to build new plants until the

new rules of the game were clear. Once these rules were defined, developers quickly

applied for permits to build many new power plants in California, only to confront a time

consuming state siting review process and local community opposition to power plants

located near where they lived or worked. This slowed the pace of investment in and

completion of new power plants.

         Electricity demand in California and the rest of the WSCC grew much more

quickly between 1996 and 2000 than had been anticipated. The excess capacity situation

that contributed to the pressures for reform in 1993 gradually disappeared as electricity

demand grew and no new generating capacity was completed during the four-year period

of uncertainty over the new rules of the game. By 1999, it was clear that generating

supplies had tightened considerably.    While there was a significant amount of new

generating capacity in the permitting and construction pipeline in California and some
                                                    23


other Western states, the first new plants did not emerge from this pipeline until early in

the summer of 2001.

           At the state level, nothing was done to speed up the siting review process or to

otherwise facilitate completion of new generating plants. Nor did the CPUC endeavor to

make reforms in retail market institutions and wholesale purchasing rules in the face of a

growing amount of energy being purchased on the spot market as the utilities completed

the divestiture of their gas-fired power plants. Moreover, relations between FERC, the

CPUC and the ISO began to deteriorate as FERC began to put more pressure on the

California parties to implement reforms that more closely reflected FERC’s views on how

to fix the problems. Faced with forecasts of potential shortages over the next few years, in

1999 the ISO did initiate a program to contract with new peaking plants if they could be in

operation by summer 2000. This program was not successful.

           Despite the problems experienced in 1998 and 1999, competitive wholesale

market prices for power were reasonably close to pre-reform projections between April

1998 and April 2000.32 Table 1 displays the average monthly day-ahead price in the PX

for the period April 1998 through January 2001. The PX stopped operating after January

2001 and the prices for the February through May 2001 period are the average hourly

prices for energy purchased by the ISO to balance the system.        (In this section I will

focus on the prices from April 1998 through April 2000, prior to the “crisis”.) These

prices roughly reflect expectations at the time the restructuring process began prior to

May 2000. It was expected that average hourly wholesale prices would start at about




32
     Plus about 10% for ancillary services costs.
                                                 24


$25/Mwh and rise to about $30/Mwh as excess capacity was gradually dissipated.33

Ancillary services prices were expected to be much lower than were realized, about 2%

of the cost of generation service rather that the 10-15% realized in practice. All things

considered, wholesale prices prior to May 2000 were perhaps 15% higher than they

would be in a system without these design flaws. Indeed, the retail rate freeze for

SDG&E’s customers ended at the end of 1999, and they received the benefits of lower

wholesale prices during the first five months of 2000. In March 2000, the California

Energy Commission continued to publish projections of wholesale market prices in the

PX for 2000 and beyond which were in the $28 to $35/Mwh range.34 California officials

did not express much concern about the slow pace of new power plant developments, the

growing dependence of spot markets to meet default service obligations, or the growing

evidence that more fundamental reforms in wholesale and retail market institutions were

necessary.


RETAIL MARKET PERFORMANCE
           An important component of California’s restructuring program was to give retail

customers “choice” of their ESP.            If customers did not choose an ESP, they could

continue to buy generation service from their local utility at a regulated default service

rate. However, the default service pricing formula effectively capped the retail prices of

generation service at about $65/Mwh for up to four years. Accordingly, it is inaccurate to

characterize the associated reforms as “deregulation.” Wholesale market prices were

deregulated, subject to FERC’s ongoing supervision and responsibilities under the

33
     California Energy Commission (2001).
34
     California Energy Commission (2001).
                                                     25


Federal Power Act,35 but retail prices were fixed for up to four years. The utilities were

forced to sell their generating plants, in order to facilitate the creation of a truly

competitive wholesale market with several additional independent suppliers and to value

any prudent costs “stranded” by competition. But they also retained the obligation to buy

power in the new wholesale market for retail consumers who did not choose a

competitive retail supplier and to resell it to them at a fixed price regardless of its cost for

up to four years.

         Despite predictions that retail consumers would quickly switch to ESPs offering

lower priced-service, in reality only about 3% of retail electricity consumers, representing

about 12% of demand switched to ESPs, leaving the utilities with the responsibility to

provide “default service” for about 88% of electricity demand. The share of customer

demand served by ESPs by September 2001 is displayed in Table 2.36 As it became clear

that they had a large unhedged retail default service obligation, the utilities (in early

1999) requested authority to enter into longer term forward contracts with wholesale

suppliers in order to hedge their short positions.37 The CPUC initially rejected these

requests and subsequently sharply restricted the kinds of forward contracts they could



35
   The U.S. Congress has never “deregulated” wholesale power prices. The Federal Power Act requires
FERC to ensure that wholesale prices are “just and reasonable.” FERC has chosen to allow suppliers to sell
at “market based rates” when they can demonstrate that they do not have significant market power. FERC
then interprets wholesale prices as “just and reasonable” if they reflect the interplay of supply and demand
in a competitive market without significant market power.
36
  These data are representative of most of the 1998-2001 situation. However, after September 2001, as
wholesale prices continued to rise far above the regulated retail default service price, most of these
customers were returned to utility default service. As this is written the CPUC is considering a proposal to
abandon customer choice completely.

37
  The utilities nuclear, coal, and hydroelectric plants that had not been divested provided a partial hedge.
However, this amounted to only about 12,000 Mw of capacity, of which 6,000 Mw of hydro was energy
limited. The QF contracts were not a good hedge since the contracts provided for energy prices that were
indexed to gas prices and AB1890 gave the QFs the ability to switch to being paid for energy based on the
                                            26


sign and delayed required approvals of those forward contracts they did sign. As a result,

a large fraction of California’s electricity demand was being served through the utilities’

purchases in a volatile wholesale spot markets; the utilities in turn were selling at a

regulated fixed retail price.


CALIFORNIA MARKET MELTDOWN: 2000-2001
        As the year 2000 began, the general view of policymakers in California was that

there were a variety of wholesale and retail market problems that had to be addressed, but

that there was no rush to fix them. After all, wholesale prices for generation service were

lower than regulated cost-based prices had been, utilities were amortizing their stranded

costs, there was a long queue of new generation projects trying to get permits to enter the

market, and a number of reform initiatives were being discussed. In reality, California’s

new market arrangements were an accident waiting to happen. And in mid-2000 the

flawed wholesale market institutions and the partial deregulation program suddenly

confronted a run of very bad luck.

        Phase I of the Market Meltdown: May through September 2000

        In mid-May 2000 wholesale electricity prices began to rise above historical peak

levels. (See Table 1) Prices increased dramatically in June and stayed high for the rest of

the summer months. The wholesale prices prevailing between June and September 2000

where much higher than the fixed retail price that the utilities were permitted to charge

for retail service. SCE and PG&E began to lose a lot of money: the losses mount up fast

when you are buying at $120/Mwh and selling at $60-$65/Mwh! SDG&E’s retail prices

had been deregulated at the beginning of 2000. During the first half of 2000, SDG&E


PX price.
                                                 27


bought electricity in the wholesale spot markets and passed along the associated

wholesale market costs to its default service customers (in addition to regulated

distribution, transmission and other charges for non-competitive services). However, as

retail prices rose along with wholesale prices during summer 2000, there was a loud

negative public reaction which ultimately led the California legislature to cap SDG&E’s

default service prices at $65/Mwh.38

        By September 2000, SCE and PG&E were pleading with the CPUC to lift the

retail rate freeze and to allow them to charge customers for the full cost of purchasing

wholesale power on their behalf. They argued that the market value of their remaining

plants now exceeded their book value, declared their generation-related stranded costs

collected, and requested the end of the rate freeze that was supposed to take place when

stranded cost recovery was completed based on power plant sales or alternative market

valuation of remaining generating assets. The CPUC refused to do so and there were no

retail price increases permitted for the balance of 2000.               In an effort to constrain

wholesale prices, the California ISO reduced the exiting real-time price cap from $750 to

$500 in July 2000 and to $250 in August with FERC’s approval. This $250 price cap

stayed in effect until early December 2000.

        Why did wholesale prices rise so quickly and dramatically above projected

levels? There are five primary interdependent factors: (a) rising natural gas prices, (b) a

large increase in electricity demand in California, (c) reduced imports from other states,

(d) rising prices for NOx emissions credits, and (e) market power problems.

38
  Unlike SCE and PG&E, SDG&E will theoretically be permitted to recover the difference between their
wholesale market purchases and the $65/Mwh cap sometime in the future. The terms and conditions under
which such recovery would take place have not been determined and SDG&E carries these costs as a
“regulatory asset” on its books.
                                                     28


           Beginning in May 2000 natural gas prices began to rise and eventually soared to

unprecedented levels across the country. Figure 2 displays spot market natural gas prices

at Henry Hub (the most important natural gas trading hub located in Louisiana) and the

spot price for natural gas delivered to the Southern California border. While natural gas

prices soared throughout the U.S. during the second half of 2000, for reasons that are still

not well understood, spot prices for natural gas delivered to California rose to levels as

much as five times higher than those in the rest of the U.S. by December 2000. Rising

natural gas prices have a direct effect on spot market prices for electricity in California

because California has a lot of natural gas fired generating capacity and it is the gas-fired

plants that typically balance supply and demand in the wholesale market during most

hours during the summer months.

           Electricity demand also increased significantly throughout the Western U.S. due

to abnormally hot weather in May and June,39 and strong economic growth.                     Table 3

displays the average monthly demand in the California ISO for 1999 and 2000. It is

evident that demand in California increased dramatically during the first eight months of

2000 compared to 1999.40 Since retail consumers did not pay prices that responded to

movements in wholesale market prices, they had no incentive to reduce demand as

wholesale prices soared. Moreover, ESPs could not compete with the fixed utility retail

default service rate and had incentives to return the customers with whom they had




39
  Peak demand in California was no higher in 2000 than it was in 1999. However, average demand
increased significantly during May and the summer months.
40
     The extremely large increases in May and June are due to unusually hot weather.
                                                        29


contracts to the utility default service so that they could increase profits by selling their

power in the wholesale market.41

            The rest of the WSCC experience a similar surge in demand during Summer

2000, and the heat waves in May and June were spread across the entire region. This

reduced supplies available for export to California from other states, supplies upon which

California has historically depended to balance supply and demand. Unusually low water

levels in the Northwestern U.S. further reduced the availability of imported hydroelectric

power into California.42            Table 4 displays the average monthly imports of power into

California for 1999 and 2000. While wholesale prices are much higher in 2000, imports

were much lower.

           In the early 1990s, the South Coast Air Quality Management District

(SCAQMD), which covers Los Angeles and surrounding areas, implemented an

innovative “cap and trade” system (RECLAIM) to control emissions of NOx and some

other air pollutants from power plants and other large stationary sources (e.g. oil

refineries). Under this system, a plant had to turn in enough permits or “credits” to cover

its emissions each year addition. Each plant was allocated a (declining) number of

permits each year. These permits were tradeable, so a source that did not require all of

the permits it needed could sell than to other sources that had to cover emissions

exceeding its permit allocations. Since there is a market for these permits, they represent


41
  Let’s say that an ESP has agreed to supply a retail customer for a year at $60/Mwh, lower than the utility
default service price of $65/Mwh. Assume has well that the ESP had hedged its supply obligation by
entering into a contract with a generator at $58/Mwh. When wholesale prices rose to $120/Mwh, it became
profitable for the ESP to return the retail customer to utility default service, compensate her for the $5/Mwh
difference between the default service price and the contract price, and then resell the wholesale power
under contract at $58 for $120 in the wholesale market.

42
     California also depends on a significant amount of in-state hydroelectric generating capacity.
                                                  30


either a direct variable cost or an opportunity cost to generators that increases the costs of

producing electricity by plants covered by the cap and trade program by their emissions

rate times the prices of NOx emissions permits.

        Until early 2000, the market prices for these permits were very low and the

number of permits allocated to power plants generally exceeded their emissions.

However, between April 2000 and September 2000, the price of pollution permits

required to cover NOx emissions from power plants in the Los Angeles area increased by

a factor of nearly ten as the supply of permits continued its planned decline under

RECLAIM and demand for permits increased as the gas-fired generators were running

more than they had in recent years in response to a large increase in the residual (net of

imports) demand for electricity in the CAISO area.              By September 2000, NOx permit

prices increased marginal supply costs from a gas-fired steam unit in the SCAQMD by

$30 to $40/Mwh and increased the marginal supply costs from a peaking turbine by $100

to $120/Mwh.43 The RECLAIM program affects only the fossil generating units in the

SCAQMD, which account for about 60% of the gas-fired capacity in the state. However,

the spot market in California (indeed the entire WSCC) typically clears based on the

highest unit with the highest marginal cost in Southern California when there is not

congestion between Northern and Southern California.

        All of these supply and demand factors are integrated together in a simple fashion

in Figure 3. This figure represents the marginal costs curve for all of the gas-fired

generating units in California given the specified assumptions about natural gas and NOx

43
  A conventional gas-fired steam unit without special NOx controls, emits roughly 1 pound of NOx per
Mwh. A combustion turbine emits 3 to 4 pounds of NOx per Mwh. A conventional gas-fired steam
generating unit with with Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) technology to reduce NOx emissions would
emit about 0.1 pounds of NOx/Mwh.
                                                  31


credit prices which roughly reflect the situation during July 2000. These gas units lie at

the top of the competitive electricity supply curve. The lowest marginal cost curve

depicted in Figure 3 reflects gas prices prevailing in summer 1999. The next highest

marginal cost curve reflects gas prices prevailing in early summer 2000. The highest

marginal cost curve incorporates the effect of NOx permit prices on marginal generation

costs. The inclusion of the NOx permit costs leads gas-fired units in Southern California

to move toward the top of the supply curve and both shifts the supply curve upward and

makes it more inelastic at higher output levels. Figure 3 makes it clear that tt any given

demand level, competitive market prices would have risen significantly as a result of

higher input prices. Reduced imports would have increased the residual demand on

California supply resources, pushing production further up the supply curve and leading

to increased prices in a competitive market. Higher demand in California in 2000 pushed

production even further up the supply curve and increases competitive prices further. No

new generating capacity had entered the market to shift the supply curve outward and to

moderate competitive prices.

           Accordingly, even if California’s wholesale market had been perfectly

competitive, wholesale prices would have risen considerably due to changes in supply

and demand conditions. However, previous analysis by the ISO’s market surveillance

unit and other analysts had already made it clear that California’s wholesale spot markets

where not perfectly competitive during relatively tight supply conditions.44           As

previously noted, during low and moderate demand conditions, the energy markets

appeared to be quite competitive, with day-ahead prices observed to be reasonably close


44
     CAISO MSC Report, October 1999; Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (1999).
                                                  32


to estimates of marginal cost. When demand got very high, however, it was clear that the

market clearing prices in the spot market were far above the marginal cost of the most

expensive generators in the region. Since there is virtually no real demand elasticity yet

in these markets, a during peak periods most demand is satisfied with purchases in the

spot markets, it is evident that as demand grows and supply gets very tight, generators

realize that a small amount of capacity withholding, even with moderate levels of

concentration, can lead to large price increases.              The combination of (completely)

inelastic demand and tight supplies created opportunities for individual suppliers to

exercise market power without engaging in collusion, driving prices up still higher.

           These market power problems and associated strategic behavior by suppliers

became more severe during Summer 2000 than they had been in 1998 and 1999. Work

that I have done with Ed Kahn indicates that about a third of the wholesale price can be

attributed to market power during June, July, August, and September 2000, after

accounting for changes in fundamental supply and demand conditions.45 Other studies

have found similar results for the balance of 2000.46

           These factors all contributed to an explosion in wholesale market prices during

the summer of 2000. By September, utilities were paying nearly three times as much for

power in the wholesale market than they could charge for at retail and began to confront

serious cash flow problems requiring them to borrow increasing amounts in short-term

credit markets.


45
     Joskow and Kahn (2001a, 2001b)

46
  For example, see Eric Hildebrandt, “Further Analyses of the Exercise and Cost Impacts of Market Power
In California’s Wholesale Energy Market,” March 2001. This studies apply and extend methods similar to
those developed by Wolfram (1999).
                                                      33


           The Meltdown Continues: October through December 2000

           Many government officials expected to see wholesale prices fall as the peak

summer season came to an end. Federal and state government officials hoped that a drop

in wholesale market prices during the off-peak Fall, Winter, and Spring months would

give them time to figure out what they needed to do in order to respond to market

behavior and performance problems and the utilities’ growing financial problems.

However, wholesale electricity prices did not fall as expected. While demand fell as

usual after the summer months, natural gas prices continued to rise, imports remained

low, NOx credit prices remained high and, most importantly, unusually large amounts of

generating capacity was out of service and unavailable to supply electricity. Figure 4

displays the difference in outages between 1999 and 2000 for October and November.47

Power suppliers argue that their plants were not supplying because they had run them so

hard during the summer that they had broken down, that some were down to have new

NOx emissions control systems installed, and others were down due to other

environmental constraints. California government officials argue that the plants had been

withdrawn from service at least partially for strategic reasons.48 Whatever, the reasons,

from November 2000 until May 2001, as much as 16,000 Mw of the generating capacity

within the CAISO area (about 35% of total capacity) was not in service and was




47
     I am grateful to Frank Wolak for providing these data to me.

48
  In response to these allegations, FERC “audited” several of these plants, many through telephone
inquiries, and concluded that there was no evidence that they were down for strategic reasons. However,
the quality and conclusions of this study was recently criticized by the General Accounting Office, an
independent investigative arm of the U.S. Congress. See General Accounting Office (2001).
                                                      34


unavailable to supply electricity during this period. This is roughly double the typical

historical planned and forced outage rates.

         Wholesale prices fell modestly in October 2000 and then soared to new heights in

November and December 2000. By mid-December, the utilities were paying almost

$400/Mwh for power in the wholesale market and reselling it for $65/Mwh at retail. By

the end of December, the utilities were losing about $50 million per day. The utilities’

continuing requests for permission to increase retail prices to provide revenue to finance

their growing debts to wholesale suppliers were either rejected or deferred for further

consideration by the CPUC. Similarly, repeated requests to FERC to deal with market

power problems and other market failures were also ignored until mid-November 2000.

         In a report and order issued on November 15 (and a subsequent order issued

December 15), FERC concluded that the California markets were fundamentally flawed,

and pursuant to its legal responsibilities under the Federal Power Act, found that

wholesale prices were “unjust and unreasonable.”                     It proposed a number of short,

medium, and long-term changes in California’s markets. These included a misguided

effort to shrink the spot market by requiring the utilities to self-schedule their own

remaining generating capacity against their retail default service demand, buying only

their net short in the PX and ISO, replacing the “hard” $250 price cap then in place with a

“soft” $150 cap, and imposing a $100/Mwh under-scheduling penalty in an effort move

more transactions from the real time market into forward markets.49                           Reflecting an


41
  FERC ordered the utilities to “self-schedule” their own remaining generating capacity and contracts
against their default service demand. This requirement reflected FERC’s confusion about how the
wholesale markets worked, since the utilities were already effectively doing this. FERC required the
utilities to purchase only their “net short” in the wholesale market, preferably through bilateral contracts
rather than through the PX and ISO’s spot markets. The primary effect of these actions was probably to
put the PX out of business. FERC also imposed a large “underscheduling” penalty to encourage more
forward contracting. Under the “soft cap” proposal, sales made to the PX or ISO at prices less than or
                                                    35


increasingly hostile and angry relationship between federal and state regulators, FERC

also made it clear that it was within California’s power to deal with many of the causes of

the growing crisis, in particular the utilities’ growing credit problems, and that it expected

California to act swiftly to take actions to respond to the emerging crisis. These actions

included increasing retail prices to reflect wholesale market prices, introducing real time

prices at the retail level, allowing utilities to enter into forward contracts, speeding up

permitting of new power plants, etc. Unfortunately, California government officials did

nothing during 2000 to respond to the emerging crises, blaming lax FERC oversight and

the unregulated suppliers’ strategic behavior as the primary cause of the rising wholesale

prices, and suggesting that the utilities were not being truthful about their credit

problems.      Moreover, the relationship between FERC and government officials in

California deteriorated even further.

         After FERC’s new price mitigation rules were implemented in mid-December,

wholesale market prices soared to $400 cents/Mwh.                     With no retail price increases

permitted by the CPUC, PG&E and SCE were quickly approaching insolvency as they

found it increasingly difficult to finance the huge uncollected wholesale power charges

they had incurred over the previous 12 months --- reported to be about $12 billion by the

end of December 2000.50 It should be noted, however, that there is a roughly 60-day lag



equal to $150/Mwh were deemed to be reasonable. Sales made above $150/Mwh had to be “cost justified”
by the suppliers. This was accompanied by filing requirements. This new cap probably made things worse
rather than better. By December, gas prices had risen so high that few gas units could cover their fuel and
NOx credit costs at $150. Moreover, suppliers could “cost justify” their sales to the PX and ISO based on
the purchase price of the power. Accordingly, the regulations could be evaded by a generator simply by
selling power first to a marketer and then the marketer could resell it to the PX or ISO. This created
incentives to daisy-chain the power sales around the WSCC. In the end, FERC did not have the resources
to review all of the information filings justifying the bulk of transactions which took place above the
$150/Mwh soft cap.

50
  SDG&E was in a better situation since it had a separate law which committed California to allow it to
                                                     36


between when wholesale purchases are made and when the bills must be paid. So, while

the utilities had incurred substantial financial obligations to power suppliers, the large

obligations accrued in November and December had not yet been paid as the year 2000

ended. During December, several suppliers claimed that they were running up against

their internal credit limits and would not provide further supplies to the market unless

payments were accelerated to reduce their accounts receivable.                        Accordingly, credit

problems may have further reduced supplies available to the market, contributing to the

continued increase of wholesale prices during December 2000.

         The State Takes Over: January 2001 through June 2001

         By the first week in January 2001, it became clear that California regulators

would not raise retail prices sufficiently to restore the utilities’ credit.51 Both the PX and

the ISO are non-profit entities whose credit depended entirely on the credit worthiness of

the utilities which were the primary buyers using these entities. Power suppliers began to

refuse to offer supplies to them for fear of never getting paid. In Mid-January PG&E and

SCE announced that they did not have enough cash to pay power suppliers as bills from

the PX and ISO became due.                 They ceased making payments for power supplies,

including payments owed for supplies delivered in November and December 2000, as the

associated bills became due. They also stopped making payments on commercial paper

and some other financial obligations as they became due.


recover these balances from customers sometime in the future. This was a good enough promise for it to
get private financing to cover its wholesale power procurement debts.
51
   On January 3, the CPUC finally responded to utility requests for retail price increases to help to pay for
wholesale power costs. It approved a temporary 1 cent/Kwh surcharge on retail prices. Later in the month
it approved accounting changes that effectively recaptured net revenues that have previously been used by
the utilities to amortize their stranded costs. The surcharge was not nearly enough to pay ongoing
wholesale power costs, let alone any of the debts to power suppliers accumulated over the previous month.
                                                     37


           PG&E and SCE were effectively insolvent by early January 2001.                            Supply

shortages and involuntary curtailments of supplies to individual consumers soon

followed.       The PX ceased operating its day-ahead markets on January 31, 2001 in

response to utility credit problems and new FERC rules regarding utility scheduling of

their remaining generating capacity and contracts.52                 DOE emergency orders and then

federal court orders requiring generators in California to continue to supply were the only

thing that kept the lights from going out in California at the end of 2000 and in early

2001. In just six months, what had been a modestly successful electricity reform program

had completely collapsed.

           By the end of January, it became clear that if the State of California did not take

action, the lights would go out as suppliers would refuse to generate electricity unless

they were assured of payment by a credit-worthy entity. The Bush administration, which

took office on January 20, 2001, indicated that it would no longer use federal authority to

force generators to keep supplying electricity without assurances that they would be paid.

Since the utilities had no funds to pay them (since retail rates remained much too low to

cover ongoing wholesale power supply costs and the utilities could no longer finance

their rapidly growing debt in the credit markets), the state of California, through

California Department of Water Resources (CDWR), began to buy power to meet some

of the utilities’ net short positions sometime in January 2001 and continues to do so

today.53 CDWR spent about $8 billion through May 2001 doing so.



52
     The PX filed for bankruptcy on March 9, 2001.
53
  It was unclear for several months whether the CDWR was buying enough power to cover all of the
utilities’ net short position. At first, CDWR indicated that it was only buying power that was offered at a
“reasonable” price. By June CDWR indicated that it would pay for all of the power needed to cover the
utilities’ net short position, though not for power purchased under contract from QFs.
                                              38


       At the direction of Governor Davis, CDWR also began to negotiate long-term

contracts (up to 20 years) with generators and marketers. The motivations for entering

into long-term contracts was to obtain better prices than were expected to be available in

the spot market, to provide incentives to generators to make their plants available to

supply electricity, to mitigate incentives to exercise market power, and to facilitate

completion of new generating plants.        The details of these contracts are still being

released, but in the aggregate they appear to involve commitments of about $50 billion

spread primarily over the next ten years. It is quite clear, however, that the terms and

conditions of these contracts would have been much more favorable if the state had

encouraged the utilities to enter into longer term contracts in 1999 or even during the

summer of 2000 when they requested this authority.          Moreover, earlier contracting

activity likely would have mitigated some of the problems that emerged during the late

fall and Winter of 2000/2001. Generators would contracts would have been more likely

to firm up gas supplies and led more gas to have been placed in storage earlier. The

Governor also announced a number of measures to speed siting approvals for new

generating plants and to encourage conservation. On March 27, the CPUC announced

that retail prices would be increased by about 40% and retail consumers began to see

these price increases in their bills in June 2001.

       Despite these efforts, as much as a third of the generating capacity in the

CAISO’s areas remained out of service for most of the Winter and Spring of 2001 and the

availability of imports remained low. As a result, electricity supply emergencies were in

effect for most of this period, and there were several days of rolling blackouts.
                                                     39


Predictions made during Spring 2001 for the coming Summer were bleak as well.54

There was a serious drought in the Northwest which meant that little electricity would be

available for export to California during the peak summer months.          Demand was

projected by the ISO to continue to grow from 2000 levels under normal weather

conditions, while little new generating capacity was expected to be completed until the

end of the summer. Forward prices for natural gas remained high. Forward prices for the

summer months were as high as $500-$700/Mwh during this period.55 The ISO and

WSCC predicted that there would be hundreds of hours of blackouts in California and

other areas of the WSCC during the coming summer with normal weather conditions.

           In response, the California government intensified its conservation efforts,

intensified efforts to speed up the completion of new plants, and continued to enter into

forward contracts with suppliers for up to 20 years. The SCAQMD effectively took

electric generating plants out of the RECLAIM program, ending their participation in the

cap and trade program and replacing the NOx credit trading system with a $7.50/pound

penalty for exceeding emissions limits.

           With predictions of hundreds of hours of blackouts for the coming summer, and

extremely high forward prices for electricity, during Spring 2001 California and other

Western states also put heavy pressure on the Bush administration to restore caps on

wholesale prices and to force generators to make all the electricity they could produce

available to the market. FERC responded slowly to the political pressure as it considered

whether or not to adopt some type of effective price mitigation program to replace the


54
     California Independent System Operator (2001)
55
     MegawattDaily, April 11, 2001, page 5.
                                                    40


soft cap that had been put in place in December 2000. On April 26, FERC adopted a new

price mitigation plan that requires generators to bid all available supplies that had not

already been scheduled into the ISO’s real time auction market. It also adopted bid caps

for these real time supply offers when operating reserves fell below 7% (Stage 1

emergency condition). Each generator’s bid was capped at its marginal generating cost.

The bids were then stacked up lowest to highest and the highest bid to clear the market

determined the market-clearing price in that hour. This mechanism had a number of

loopholes that were likely to make it ineffective, including the ability of resellers to easily

evade the caps. On June 18, FERC modified this price mitigation plan by applying it to

all hours and to all spot sales of electricity in the WSCC. The new plan went into effect

on June 20.56 Finally, FERC instituted a proceeding to resolve claims by California that

they were overcharged for power in 2000 and 2001 and held out the possibility of

substantial refunds.

         During the first week in June 2001, spot and forward wholesale prices finally

began to drop quickly. By the end of June spot prices had returned to levels that had not

been seen since mid-May 2000 and forward prices for the rest of the year dropped

dramatically. Indeed, they fell well below the prices in the contracts negotiated by

CDWR. This price break was accompanied by relatively low seasonal demand reflecting

moderate weather throughout the West, as well as customer conservation efforts in

California, significantly lower natural gas prices, large amounts of generating capacity


56
   This new plan has a number of deficiencies. It does not adjust the price cap quickly enough to reflect
changes in the spot market price of natural gas and does not adequately distinguish between gas prices at
different locations in California. It is also unclear whether the CAISO is implementing the FERC
mitigation plan as intended, since there have been almost no supply emergencies since the June 19 FERC
order as this is written.
                                                     41


returning to service after being out of service for most of the Winter and Spring, and

more imported power available from the Northwest and Southwest than had been

expected. Consumers appear to have begun to respond to the publicity surrounding the

crisis, expected price increases, and new energy efficiency programs sponsored by the state

by reducing demand significantly from predicted levels beginning in February and continuing

into the summer. Table 5 displays the average demand in the CAISO for the first six months

of 2000 and 2001. Demand in 2001 is significantly lower than Demand during 2000.57 In

early July, three new power plants began operating in California, the first new generating

capacity in nearly 10 years. Additional generating capacity will come on line later this

summer and much more is due to be completed next year. It is fairly clear that FERC’s

latest price mitigation program, and the intense scrutiny that suppliers are now under in

the regulatory arena, the courts and the media, have provided powerful incentives for the

suppliers to be on their best behavior during June and July 2001 as generating unit

availability has been relatively high and bidding behavior is generally more

competitive.58

           By July 2001, many in California had concluded that the crisis was over. Actions

taken by California and FERC have clearly had a favorable impact on wholesale

electricity prices, supply, and demand in California and the rest of the West. However, a

few weeks of experience during a period when demand was unusually low, should not be

interpreted as demonstrating that the system has been fixed.59 California has still not


57
  My preliminary analysis suggests that the reduction in demand is much larger during peak than off-peak
periods.
58
  California ISO Market Monitoring Report, July 5, 2001. “The analysis shows that instances of bidding in
excess of operating costs have declined significantly since the last report.” Page 2.

59
     During the first week of July 2001, temperatures rose throughout the WSCC and demand rose rapidly.
                                                  42


addressed the fundamental market and network management design problems that were

identified before and during the crisis. State funds are providing the financial resources

to keep the system operating on a day-to-day basis and the state is now saddled with tens

of billions of dollars in long-term contracts that are likely to carry prices well above

market levels. The costs of these contracts will be paid either through future electricity

prices, or state tax revenues, or a combination of both. Retail prices are now much higher

than they were in 1996 when the restructuring process began. Moreover, the vision for

the future of California’s electricity sector remains murky as this is written as the State of

California has effectively taken over the state’s electric power industry. Stay tuned for

further details.


LESSONS LEARNED
    The problems in California are not inherent problems with “deregulation,” but result

from the way that California implemented its reforms, combined with a good deal of bad

luck and ineffective government responses to its effects.                Similar reforms in other

countries and other regions of the U.S. have been more successful in achieving their

goals. The most important things to learn from the California experience about designing

and implementing competitive market reform programs for electricity are:



    •   Electricity has unusual physical attributes that make the design of well
        functioning competitive wholesale power markets a significant technical
        challenge. Effective market design requires substantial technical expertise and
        careful application of lessons learned from international experience.                  Market
        institutions and residual regulatory mechanisms need to be designed to be robust


There were Stage 1 and Stage 2 emergencies in California on July 2 and July 3. The subsequent period
(through July 22, 2001) remained cool and CAISO peak demand quite low.
                                         43


    to extreme contingencies.      Market power problems must be addressed both
    initially and as evidence about actual market performance and supplier behavior
    emerges as the markets operate. Responsible regulators need to be in a position to
    evaluate alternative market design frameworks and to approve only those that are
    likely to perform well. They must have the capabilities to identify serious market
    performance problems and to develop and apply reforms to fix them. California
    relied on “market design by committee” and allowed mindless free-market
    rhetoric and interest group politics, to ignore technical realities, international
    experience and common sense.              It did not take into account extreme
    contingencies. Responsible state and federal officials were not sufficiently
    engaged with the details of this process and responded too slowly to problems.


•   Competitive electricity markets will not work well if consumers are completely
    insulated by regulation from wholesale market prices. California deregulated
    wholesale prices, but failed to deregulate retail prices or to allow the utilities to
    use forward contracts to hedge their default service supply and pricing
    obligations. The terms and conditions of default service made it necessary for
    utilities to buy at an unregulated hourly wholesale spot market price and to sell at
    a fixed regulated retail price for up to four years. Not only did this drive the
    utilities to the point of insolvency after wholesale prices rose above the fixed
    retail price in June 2000, but it has also made it very difficult for competing retail
    suppliers to attract customers or for consumers to respond to high prices by
    reducing consumption.


•   Spot electricity markets work very poorly when supplies are tight; the
    combination of relatively tight supplies and extremely inelastic demand means
    that prices can rise to extraordinary levels and are much more susceptible to
    market power problems than when supplies are abundant. One way to help to
    protect consumers from volatile and excessive spot markets for electricity is to
    ensure that a large fraction of consumer demand is covered by longer term fixed
    price contracts negotiated under competitive conditions well in advance of spot
                                        44


    market crises. These contracts both protect consumers from price volatility (they
    act like an insurance policy) and reduce incentives suppliers have to exercise
    market power when supplies get tight. Such contracts can also facilitate financing
    of new power plants. A good retail procurement framework, whether it relies of
    utility distribution companies, competitive electricity service providers (ESPs), or
    a combination of both, must assure that a large fraction of retail demand is being
    met with longer term fixed price contracts and only a small fraction fully exposed
    to the spot market.


•   In addition, the default service option for larger commercial and industrial
    consumers should be to purchase their electricity at real time prices. Real time
    pricing at the retail level allows consumers to express their individual preferences
    for reliability, introduces demand elasticity into the spot wholesale market and
    this in turn dampens price volatility and helps to mitigate supplier market power.
    (These customers should also have the option of hedging some or all of their
    demand with contracts purchased from electricity marketing intermediaries or
    their distribution company.) California both refused to allow the entities (the
    utility distribution companies) with the responsibility to procure supplies for 85%
    to 90% of the retail demand to enter into forward contracts and ignored proposals
    for demand response programs that would allow customers to respond to
    wholesale price spikes by reducing consumption.


•   The primary benefits of electricity sector reform will occur in the long run as a
    consequence of investments in new more efficient power plants, the introduction
    retail risk management, demand management and energy efficiency services, and
    continuing innovations on both the supply and demand sides. Speeding the ability
    of developers to site and build new generating plants and providing good
    incentives to expand transmission networks, all of which meet reasonable
    environmental standards, is essential for good long run market performance.
    Removing unnecessary administrative barriers to entry allows supply to increase
    more quickly as market conditions make it profitable to do so and will reduce the
                                         45


    likelihood of extreme contingencies. California focused too much on illusive
    short run gains from low-priced power that was available when there was excess
    capacity and focused too little on creating sound institutional arrangements to
    support investments in new generation and transmission facilities.


•   All electricity market reform programs have experienced some problems at the
    outset. Mid-course corrections have almost always been necessary to mitigate
    market performance problems.        When market performance problems emerge,
    government officials must act quickly and decisively to fix the problems.
    Ongoing market reforms and regulatory “mitigation” initiatives designed to
    remedy serious market performance problems should be an expected feature of
    the process of creating efficient competitive wholesale electricity markets. If the
    California and federal regulators had done so in September 2000 when the current
    problems became crystal clear, they would have reduced significantly the ultimate
    magnitude of the crisis. Unfortunately, both the CPUC and FERC acted too
    slowly and ineffectively as the crisis deepened and spent most of their energies
    pointing fingers of blame at one another rather than working together
    cooperatively to find a solution.
                                            46


                                    REFERENCES



Borenstein, Severin, James Bushnell and Frank Wolak, “Diagnosing Market Power in
       California’s Deregulated Wholesale Electricity Market,” University of California
       Energy Institute Working Paper PWP-064, July 1999.

Bushnell, James and Frank Wolak, “Regulation and the Leverage of Local Market Power
      in the California Electricity Market,” Presented on the 1999 NBER Summer
      Industrial Organization Workshop, July 1999.

California Energy Commission, “Market Clearing Prices Under Alternative Resource
       Scenarios 2000-2010,” March 2000.

California Independent System Operator, Annual Report on Market Issues and
       Performance, June 1999. (“CAISO Annual Report”)

California Independent System Operator, “Report on Redesign of California Real-Time
       Energy and Ancillary Services Markets,” Market Surveillance Committee, Frank A.
       Wolak, Chairman, October 18, 1999. (“CAISO MSC Report, October 1999”)

California Independent System Operator, Summer Assessment 2001, March 2001.

Hildebrandt, Eric, “Further Analyses of the Exercise and Cost Impacts of Market Power In
       California’s Wholesale Energy Market,” March 2001.

Hogan, William (1992), "Contract Networks for Electric Power Transmission," Journal of
      Regulatory Economics, 4(3), 211-242.

Hogan, William (1993), "Markets In Real Networks Require Reactive Prices," The Energy
       Journal,14(3), 171-200.

Joskow, Paul L., "Regulatory Failure, Regulatory Reform and Structural Change In The
      Electric Power Industry," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
      Microeconomics. 1989.

Joskow, Paul L., "Introducing Competition into Regulated Network Industries: From
      Hierarchies to Markets in Electricity," Industrial and Corporate Change, Volume
      5, No. 2, 1996.

Joskow, Paul L., "Restructuring, Competition and Regulatory Reform in the U.S.
      Electricity Sector," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer, 1997.
                                            47


Joskow, Paul L. “Deregulation and Regulatory Reform in the U.S. Electric Power Sector,”
      in Deregulation of Network Industries: The Next Steps (S. Peltzman and Clifford
      Winston, eds.), Brookings Press, 2000

Joskow, Paul L. and Jean Tirole, “Transmission Rights and Market Power on Electric
      Power Networks,” Rand Journal of Economics, 31(3) Autumn, 2000.

Joskow, Paul L. and Edward Kahn, “A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior In
      California's Wholesale Electricity Market During Summer 2000,” January 15,
      2001, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8157.

Joskow, Paul L. and Edward Kahn, “Identifying the Exercise of Market Power: Refining
      the Estimates,” mimeo, July 5, 2001. http://web.mit.edu/pjoskow/www/ .

Newbery, David, and Michael Pollitt, “ The Restructuring and Privatization of Britain’s
      CEGB – Was it Worth It?” Journal of Industrial Economics, 45(3), September
      1997, 269-303.

Office of Electricity Regulation, “Report on Constrained-On Plant,” October 1992.

United States General Accounting Office (GAO), “Results of Studies Assessing High
       Electricity Prices in California,” June 2001.

Wolfram, Catherine, “ Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot Market,”
      American Economic Review 89(4), 805-826, September 1999.
                                                                      $/mmbtu




                                                            10



                                                                 20



                                                                        30



                                                                                40



                                                                                     50



                                                                                                   60
                                                        0
                                               01/04/1999

                                               02/04/1999
                                               03/04/1999

                                               04/04/1999

                                               05/04/1999

                                               06/04/1999




                                                                                            1999
                                               07/04/1999




                                                                                                    Southern California and Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Prices
                                               08/04/1999

                                               09/04/1999

                                               10/04/1999
Daily NG Spot Price at Henry Hub
Daily NG Spot Price at SoCal, Average




                                               11/04/1999

                                               12/04/1999

                                               01/04/2000




                                                                                                                        1/1/1999-6/25/2001
                                               02/04/2000




                                                                                                                                                                FIGURE 2
                                               03/04/2000




                                                                                                                                                                           49
                                        Date




                                               04/04/2000

                                               05/04/2000

                                               06/04/2000

                                               07/04/2000                                   2000

                                               08/04/2000

                                               09/04/2000

                                               10/04/2000

                                               11/04/2000

                                               12/04/2000

                                               01/04/2001

                                               02/04/2001
                                               03/04/2001
                                                                                          2001
                                                                                          2001




                                               04/04/2001

                                               05/04/2001

                                               06/04/2001
                                                        50



                                                   FIGURE 3


                                    Marginal Cost for Gas Units

                         MC at $2.50/MCF   MC at $6/Mcf           Mcat$6/Mcf+$25/lb NOX in LA

        250




        200                                                                                             D2
                                                                                                   D1
          P4

        150
$/Mwh




          P3
        100

         P2


        50
         P1


         0
              0   2000   4000      6000      8000        10000          12000      14000        16000        18000
                                            Cumulative Capacity
   51



FIGURE 4
  52



TABLE 1
  53

TABLE 2
                        TABLE 3

         AVERAGE CAL ISO HOURLY DEMAND
                      (MW)

MONTH          1999               2000     CHANGE %

JANUARY        24,013             25,516        6.3

FEBRUARY       24,194             25,585        5.7

MARCH          24,469             25,523        4.3

APRIL          24,166             25,329        4.8

MAY            24,271             26,883       10.8

JUNE           26,609             29,981       12.7

JULY           28,878             29,501        2.2

AUGUST         29,055             31,104        7.1

SEPTEMBER      27,930             28,639        2.5

OCTOBER        26,822             26,125       -2.6

NOVEMBER       25,144             25,912        3.1

DECEMBER       25,919             26,091        0.7
                                                   55


                                             TABLE 4

                       NET IMPORTS INTO CALIFORNIA60
                            (AVERAGE MW/HOUR)

        MONTH                              1999              2000             DIFFERENCE

        May                                6,127             4,481            -1,647

        June                               5,740             3,367            -2,373

        July                               6,551             2,183            -3,738

        August                             6,358             1,578            -4,779

        September                          6,814             2,962            -3,852

        October                            5,641             4,621            -1,020

        November                           6,741             4,040            -2,702

        December                           7,680             3,211            -4,469




60
  Based on Hour-head import schedules reported by the California ISO as provided on the University of
California Energy Institute’s web site.
                                      56



                                    TABLE 5

                   AVERAGE LOAD IN THE CAISO AREA
                             (MW/HR)

1. Actual Average Load


MONTH                      2000               2001     % CHANGE

January                    25,516             25,229    -1.1%

February                   25,585             24,558    -4.0%

March                      25,523             24,001    -6.0%

April                      25,329             23,974    -5.3%

May                        26,883             26,427    -1.7%

June                       29,981             27,378    -8.7%



2. Weather Adjusted Load


MONTH                      2000               2001

January                    25,324             25,436    -1.0%

February                   25,559             24,547    -4.0%

March                      25,501             24,017    -5.8%

April                      25,222             23,881    -5.3%

May                        26,247             25,049    -4.6%

June                       28,751             26,333    -8.4%
