 

&'   

   
 

               
  
 
 !"#
$!%())*
#++%,,---.,%%/,-())*
   0  0    
1232//"#4/++/ 54
6.!7 281*(
44/+



                           
   !"#  $    %
    " &   #'  (
)  "  $   ( * +$  *! * (! * , 
  -  .  / & - / (!  . "- 
, " , ,"   !  0#,)1       "      
   2   +" "   / #
3&!#+
 -. $  + $#$  #      1   1
)   $  &4"  )  " 1        "  " $3 $
  "#

+-9+-9 :
#++!9+ !"!99!"!/+#9!+ 6!!/++!
  !"#
 $!%())*
44/+8221
*

  
5!-9 :+#6+ !"!9%9!"!/+#9!+6!!/++!-!+#
"4/+#/+99%9!" 7+#;!"/"47+#/%/++# /!"!/!/7+#.+5
6+#!++!9!"!9"#!+"+4#!9-"/!+#9!/7!+/+/
!/+!+4+!/!+#649+!%9!" 746%#/!/#!/!/+!+4+!/7/%"!!"99 #%/96!!/++!56+/99-+#/4 %+6++;"!/44/499
!6%++ !94"!+#59%6++#/%9!"!/#!/99-/+!/!6%+.
/4  6 "6!  +# 6$+/ + /+9  !94" +# 649+!  +# !++!9
6+ !"!9%9!"!/4!+#9!+ /

 
%+6+"6!"/
0!5/!+ 9!!
$9 7 <)=82

9>".$9 4

 !"#
%+6+"6!"/
0!5/!+ 9!!
$9 7 <)=82

!"#>".$9 4

Between Meltdown and Moral Hazard:
The International Monetary and Financial Policies of the Clinton
Administration1
J. Bradford DeLong (delong@econ.berkeley.edu) and Barry Eichengreen
(eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu)
University of California at Berkeley and NBER
July 2001

I. Introduction
There was no reason at the outset for thinking that international monetary and financial
questions would feature so prominently in the activities of the Clinton administration. They had
absorbed far less time and attention during the presidency of George Herbert Walker Bush than
the budget deficit, the trade deficit, the 1990-1 recession, and any number of other strictly
economic problems.2 International monetary and financial issues were hardly mentioned in a
campaign whose final months coincided with an episode of serious currency-market instability
in Europe. Yet, the Mexican rescue, the Asian crisis, and reform of the international financial
system turned out to be major preoccupations of the new president and his advisors.

1

Prepared for the conference on the Economic Policies of the Clinton Administration, Kennedy
School of Government, 26-29 June. Sam Saddigh and Salah Mattoo provided valuable research
assistance. We thank, without implicating, Caroline Atkinson, Fred Bergsten, Stanley Fischer,
Jeffrey Frankel, Jeff Frieden, Timothy Geithner, Peter Kenen, David Lipton, Sherman Robinson,
Dani Rodrik, Jeffrey Shafer, Larry Summers, Dan Tarullo, Ted Truman, and Janet Yellen.
2
Not to mention Operation Desert Storm, German reunification, and the collapse of the Soviet
Union.
1

It has been suggested that there is a regular cycle in the term of a political leader in
countries like the United States. 3 First is the naive phase in which international monetary and
financial concerns (and perhaps also trade) are essentially ignored because the leader has
typically won his office by courting exclusively domestic constituencies and is not fully aware of
the connections between domestic and international issues (including the constraints imposed on
his domestic ambitions by international factors). There then follows the more mature phase, as
the leader becomes more aware of international economic relations and international diplomacy
offers a useful diversion of popular attention from domestic conflicts. In the case of the Clinton
administration, although the president and his staff wanted to focus on health care, welfare,
public investment, education, and the information superhighway, in its first two years the
Clinton White House failed to win the support of a divided Senate for major domestic initiatives
other than the 1993 Clinton-Mitchell-Foley deficit-reduction package. And following the loss of
Democratic control of the Congress in 1994, all ambitious domestic initiatives were obviously
dead in the water. If this didn’t exactly create a political vacuum and a demand for newspaper
headlines that could only be filled by international events, it at least facilitated the efforts of
Treasury and other economic agencies to bring these issues to the attention of the president and
his core political advisors.
But there were also fundamental structural reasons for this within administration shift,
notably the growing importance of international financial markets. Portfolio capital flows to
emerging-market countries had begun growing explosively, reflecting the effects of the Brady
Plan restructurings in clearing away problem debts and the progress of economic reform in Latin

3

See Bergsten (1986) and Frankel (1994).
2

America, at about the same time the Democratic candidates started spending significant amounts
of time and money in New Hampshire (see Figure 1). The information and communications
revolution that would become the subject of so much attention and hubris was already quietly
underway; among its effects was to greatly reduce the cost, and thereby stimulate the volume, of
foreign-exchange trading and cross-border financial flows generally. 4 Moreover, domestic
deregulation in many countries had already made it more difficult to halt capital flows at the
border by opening up new channels for response and evasion by financial institutions. And the
recognition in the 1980s that capital controls were better at redistributing wealth to friends of the
ruling party than at allocating scarce foreign currency to the most developmentally-productive
uses had undermined support for their utilization. Reflecting both the fact and the ethos of
financial liberalization, controls on capital flows in both advanced-industrial and developing
countries were already on their way out. 5 As video terminals displaying real-time financial
information began popping up on the desks of senior political staff all over Washington,
international financial problems acquired a political salience that they had not possessed in many
years.

4

The Bank for International Settlements, in its triannual survey of the level of foreign exchange
turnover, estimated that the volume of foreign exchange trading worldwide rose by 42 per cent
between 1989 and 1992, by a further 48 per cent between 1992 and 1995, and by a slower but
still substantial 25 percent between 1995 and 1998.
5
Naturally, this shift first became evident in the advanced-industrial countries. There, the
turning point was the Single European Act of 1986, which required its signatories to dismantle
their remaining capital controls in order to forge a single financial market, something they did in
the run-up to 1992. In developing countries, the prevalence of capital controls, multiple
exchange rates and export surrender requirements reached a local maximum in 1991 before
declining sharply and monotonically thereafter. See Eichengreen and Mussa et al. (1998),
Figure 7.
3

In this paper we analyze how it was that this potential for salience became actual, review
the efforts of the Clinton administration to grapple with the monetary and financial
consequences, and assess the results of its policies. It is often said that this was an
administration that thrived on or even was defined by crises. It is thus no surprise that our
analysis of its international monetary and financial policies should focus on the Mexican peso
crisis, the Asian financial crisis, and the crisis of confidence and legitimacy of the international
monetary and financial system.6
There was also a broader context, however, for the decisions taken in response to these
events. That context was an economic and political strategy that emphasized private investment
as the engine for U.S. economic growth. (See Figure 2.) Both components of this term,
"private" and "investment," had implications for the administration’s international economic
strategy. From the point of view of investment, it was important that international events not
pressure on the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates, since this would have curtailed capital
formation and vitiated the effects of the administration’s signature achievement: deficit
reduction. A strong dollar -- or rather a dollar that was not expected to weaken -- was a key
component of a policy which aimed at keeping the Fed comfortable with low interest rates. In
addition, it was important to create a demand for the goods and services generated by this
additional productive capacity. To the extent that this demand resided abroad, administration
officials saw it as important that the process of increasing international integration, of both trade

6

Space constraints require us to be selective about the issues we consider. Thus, we do not
consider a variety of additional topics and episodes ranging from support for Russian reform at
the start of the decade to the Turkish crisis at its end.
4

and finance, move forward for the interest of economic development in emerging markets and
therefore in support of U.S. economic growth. 7
This was all part of a "New Democratic" agenda that placed more faith in and emphasis
on the private sector -- on market forces -- than had been true of previous 20 th century
Democratic administrations. In an era of financial liberalization, this in turn meant relying on
financial markets. Symbolic of this commitment was the President’s reliance on Robert Rubin,
an individual possessing long experience in those markets, first as head of his National
Economic Council and then as his Treasury Secretary. Rubin’s experience in the markets
informed the administration’s support for financial liberalization, capital account liberalization
as well as domestic financial liberalization, which extended to emerging markets as well as the
United States.
Indisputably, the policy of moving forward with the liberalization of domestic and
international financial transactions, even though corporate governance and prudential
supervision remained underdeveloped in many of the emerging markets participating in this
trend, comprised part of the setting for the financial crises that so disrupted the 1990s. While the
U.S. was not solely responsible for the adoption of these policies, which also reflected the
operation of the deeper forces described above, the administration at least acquiesced to their
pursuit. At the same time, Rubin’s long experience in the markets had rendered him somewhat
skeptical of their efficiency. In his view, markets reach for yield and are prone to excess (Rubin

7

"Open markets work. Open societies are resilient and just. And together they offer the best
hope for lifting people’s lives," as Secretary of State Madeline Albright put it during the Asian
crisis. South China Morning Post (29 July 1998), http://special.scmp.com/AsianCrisis/
5

2002), tendencies which render periodic crises all but inevitable. 8 This view that markets
provided the best approach to economic development, but that they still succumb to crises from
time to time, informed the Clinton Treasury’s approach to crisis management and shaped its
efforts to strengthen the international financial architecture.
Before proceeding, it behooves us to make a few comments on methodology. The
literature on the political economy of policy making is organized around the tripartite distinction
between ideas, institutions, and interests. It asks whether policy choices are shaped mainly by
intellectual outlook and ideological predisposition, by institutional and bureaucratic constraints,
or by the lobbying efforts of special interest groups. Given the difficulty of measuring the
influence, quantifying the importance, and testing the significance of these factors, scholars
generally attribute some role to each. For better or for worse, our analysis is subject to these
same limitations and, predictably, adopts this same synthetic posture. But, relative to other
historical analyses of the same events (once they come to exist), we place disproportionate
emphasis on the first two of the three "i’s" (ideas and institutions). Try as we may, we find it
hard to frame our discussion of the international monetary and financial policies of the Clinton
administration as a response to special interest politics -- to tell the story of exchange rate
politics in terms of lobbying by export and importing-competing interests or the story of bailouts
as a response to the pressure applied by self-interested investment and commercial banks. On
many of the policy issues under review here, otherwise cohesive lobbies were divided. And the

8

This is very similar to the view of Alan Greenspan, another individual whose views strongly
informed and shaped the economic policies of the 1990s (as described in Gregory Mankiw’s
chapter in this volume).
6

technical nature of nature of financial issues -- in contrast to trade, for example -- provided those
responsible for policy with a degree of natural insulation. 9
It is tempting to dismiss our emphasis on the role of ideas as the predictable
preoccupation of academics who habitually exaggerate the importance of the scribbling of
defunct economists.10 That said, the Clinton administrative was distinctive for the participation,
at the highest levels, of academics who had helped to shape the scholarly literature and were in
turn receptive to the arguments of the academic community. This was an administration and an
issue area where ideas mattered more than most.
But the overarching theme of our paper, if it has one, is the role of institutional
constraints in shaping the Clinton administration’s international monetary and financial policies.
In any administration the Treasury Department, as the listening post for Wall Street and the
agency vested with responsibility for U.S. exchange-rate policy, will play a prominent role in the
formulation of international monetary and financial policies. It will possess both agenda-setting
and veto powers. But what was distinctive about the Clinton administration was Treasury’s

9

To be sure, that insulation was less than complete. An example is administration initiatives to
see that the private sector was “bailed in” rather than “bailed out” when officials came to the
rescue of crisis countries. Evaluating the influence of “Wall Street” on the administration’s stance
on this question is difficult. On the one hand, Treasury was constantly at odds (one insider
characterizes it as “at war”) with the Institute of International Finance (IIF), the organization that
spoke for the banks. Treasury viewed the IIF’s analyses as underdeveloped and obstructionist.
On the other hand, Treasury backed away from its initial enthusiasm for mandating changes in
contractual arrangements in favor of the voluntary approach preferred by the IIF, and in the end
there was a strong similarity between Treasury’s views and those of the various IIF working
group reports. Whether this reflected common intellectual influences or the pressure applied to
the official sector by financial interests is hard for outsiders to say. We describe the evolution of
this policy in more detail in Section 5.
10
As Keynes went on to say in the same famous passage we paraphrase,”I am sure that the power
of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual encroachment of ideas.”
7

disproportionate influence. In part this reflected the growing importance of market sentiment in
an era of financial liberalization. No policy was workable that would not be favorably received
by the markets; consequently, a Treasury department attuned to market sentiment, led by much
of the period by a Secretary with long experience in the markets, had more agenda-setting and
veto power than most. In addition, analytical capacity, when it came to international monetary
matters, was heavily concentrated at 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue. The White House lacked the
staff and rival departments lacked the expertise to develop ideas sufficiently to argue them
persuasively.11 Treasury could thus exercise its veto simply by demanding a full-blown,
coherent proposal, knowing that one would not be forthcoming. Among other things, our story
thus illustrates how policy is affected when an administration allows one agency to become so
disproportionately powerful.

11

How this situation came about is properly regarded as the subject of another paper. But we
cannot resist a few words. In part, the creation of the National Economic Council defined the
natural counterweight to Treasury within the executive branch, but one that, as it happened, was
grossly understaffed particularly on the international financial side. The NEC’s occasional
Treasury detailees provided no solution to this problem given their knowledge that they would
not get good assignments back at the Treasury if they were too tough on their home agency
during their detail to the White House. And rivalry between the NEC and the Council of
Economic Advisors prevented the latter from providing the needed input. Treasury, for its part,
had little interest in addressing this problem. While Treasury staff had a high regard for NEC
staff, they also knew that the Clinton NEC staff were more interested in the substance of policy
than the typical staffer belonging to the White House Office of Policy Development. Treasury
staff feared what would happen under some future administration if the White House staff’s voice
in international economic policy was amplified. They had only to look to the relationship between
the State Department and the National Security Council. The half-century-long bureaucratic war
between State and the NSC had led to some notable foreign policy disasters as underbriefed NSC
staff shut State department expertise out of the policy-planning process. Consider for example
the U.S. tilt toward the genocidal dictator Yahya Khan when he decided to kill everyone with a
college education in what was then East Pakistan or the transfer of weapons to Iran in the 1980s.
8

2. The Strong Dollar Policy
When President-Elect Clinton assembled a star-studded cast of experts in Little Rock
during the interregnum between the election and the inauguration, he did not question them
about the problem of managing capital flows and averting threats to international financial
stability.12 His concerns, indicative of the times, were rather with the trade and budget deficits,
and his predispositions, unsurprisingly for a Democrat, were activist. One prominent academic
well known to this audience won no points with the President Elect when he responded to a
question about what should be done about the trade deficit by saying, in essence, "nothing."
Clinton’s eventual choice to head the Council of Economic Advisors, Laura Tyson of the
University of California, Berkeley, arrived in Washington with a reputation for advocating the
aggressive use of trade policy to pry open foreign markets with the goal of bringing down the
trade deficit.
There were impediments, of course, to the aggressive use of trade policy. 13 The United
States had already concluded a major free trade agreement with Canada. It had its GATT
commitments. The promise of closer trade relations were an obvious way of supporting
economic liberalization and democratization in Latin America and the former Soviet bloc.
Candidate Clinton had already opted to support NAFTA and the Uruguay Round during the
1992 campaign out of a conviction that the economy had to move forward and not backward
(where "forward" in part meant embracing globalization) and in order to define himself as a New

12

Although there was one prominent exchange over the dollar, as we describe below.
Trade policy is properly the subject of the chapter by Robert Lawrence in this volume. We
touch on it here it provides part of the context for the subject of this section, namely, the
evolution of the strong dollar policy.
13

9

Democrat (thereby distinguishing his views from those of the then-prevailing Congressional
Democratic position). The traditional constituency for protection, the import-competing
manufacturing belt, figured less importantly in the U.S. economy and therefore in the political
debate than it had a decade before, while U.S. exporters of goods and services, financial services
in particular, had gained additional voice and were unlikely to look sympathetically on the use of
trade-unfriendly measures. Although the administration made use of anti-dumping measures,
both those to which it was entitled under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and
unilateral measures such as Super 301 (Section 301 of the 1988 Omnibus Trade and
Competitiveness Act), its commitment to free trade was never in doubt. 14
The one instrument obviously available for addressing the trade deficit and the concerns
of import-competing producers was the level of the dollar. There were several reasons for
thinking that the new administration might try to talk or push down the dollar. This had been the
observed behavior, or at least the imputed temptation, of previous incoming Democratic
Presidents: Franklin D. Roosevelt had depreciated the dollar to deal with the macroeconomic
problems he inherited, and it was widely (but mistakenly) thought that John F. Kennedy would
do the same when he took office in 1961. Treasury secretaries hailing from Texas (James Baker
and John Connolly), closer to the country’s commodity-producing heartland than its financial
center, had a record of favoring a weak dollar; thus, Clinton’s selection of Lloyd Bentsen as his
treasury secretary was taken in some circles as a signal of the administration’s prospective
approach to the exchange rate.

14

The incidence of antidumpting actions fluctuated with the level of the dollar, falling between
1992 and 1995, along with the currency, and rising thereafter (Knetter and Prusa 2000).
10

Nor can it be argued that anything that could remotely be called a "strong-dollar policy"
was in place in the early Clinton years. The dollar declined from Y125 when Clinton took office
to Y80 two years later, an exceptionally sharp swing in a short period even by the standards of
the 1970s and 1980s.15 (See Figure 3.) The "economic populists" in the White House (George
Stephanopoulos, for example) saw a weaker dollar as useful for enhancing U.S. international
competitiveness. Secretary Bentsen saw it as potentially helpful for solving the trade-deficit
problem.16 U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor saw a weaker dollar as giving him
leverage in trade negotiations, since he could argue that it was Japan’s "unfair advantage" due to
barriers to imports of automobiles and parts that was responsible for the weak currency that
found disfavor among foreign governments.
That said, there were several causes for concern over the weakness of the dollar. The
currency’s decline hurt rather than helped with the trade deficit in the short run due to the JCurve effect (that is, the tendency for import prices to rise before import volumes began to fall).
Its slide threatened to fan inflation. Fears of inflation and about the sustainability of the external
deficit combined to raise the specter of higher interest rates, which unsettled the financial
markets.17 The dollar’s continued decline created financial volatility and increased the cost of

15

While the dollar strengthened against the Mexican peso and the Canadian dollar, moderating
the decline in the (trade-weighted) effective exchange rate, it was the yen-dollar rate that drew
the attention of financial-market participants and the concern of policy makers.
16
Bentsen’s reputation for favoring a weaker dollar resulted from an off-hand response to a
reporter’s question about whether he would like to see the dollar fall, to which he responded that
he wouldn’t mind seeing the yen rise. Seeing how such comments could be interpreted, Bentsen
then shifted course and made every effort to cultivate the image of a strong-money man. But the
damage was done.
17
See for example "Weaker Greenback Campaign Heats Up," Capital Markets Report, Dow
Jones News Service, 10 December 1996.
11

credit by inflicting losses on financial firms (hedge funds, among others) that had shorted the
yen and deutsche mark in late 1993 and early 1994. 18
At a deeper level, the strong dollar policy was part and parcel with the administration’s
overall fiscal and monetary strategy. Clinton had fought the election on the basis of a middleclass tax cut and additional public spending on infrastructure and skill formation, but his
administration inherited an exploding budget deficit that left little room for such initiatives. The
only hope was that deficit reduction would bring down interest rates and create an environment
conducive to faster economic growth and therefore to the shared prosperity that the candidate
had promised the middle and working classes. As a result of a series of internal struggles
(colorfully recounted by Woodward 1994 and Reich 1997), the decision was made to eschew
substantial new spending programs and middle-class tax cuts and to focus instead on fiscal
consolidation in order to create a financial environment conducive to investment and growth.
How was the level of the dollar related to this choice? Reducing the interest rates on
which investment depended was the key to stimulating faster growth. 19 The Federal Open
Market Committee, it was hoped, would see fiscal consolidation as implying a reduction in
inflationary pressure and respond by cutting rates. Its members were most likely to do so if the
financial markets perceived things the same way -- that is, if bond prices responded positively.
From this perspective, a weak exchange rate was a danger. In a world of international mobile

18

See International Monetary Fund (1994).
Within two years of the President’s inauguration, the Council of Economic Advisors was
highlighting the close connection between investment and productivity growth, thus suggesting
that the lower interest rates needed to boost investment were the key to faster growth. Council
of Economic Advisors (1995), pp.27-28. Lower interest rates also had the ancillary advantage
of addressing the problem of chronic budget deficits by reducing debt-servicing costs.
19

12

capital, U.S. interest rates would inevitably exceed foreign interest rates to the extent that the
dollar was expected to fall (by virtue of the arbitrage condition known as interest parity).
Moreover, since expectations of higher import prices were something to which the Federal
Reserve looked when forecasting inflation, the prospect of a falling dollar fanned fears among
financial-market participants of rising Federal Reserve discount rates.
For these and other reasons, the belief that the administration might push the dollar
down, perhaps in response to pressures emanating from domestic auto and steel producers, had
to be vanquished in order to reap the full benefits of deficit reduction and to implement its
investment-led growth strategy. The President himself appears to have instinctually understood
the connections between the stability of the dollar and his administration’s fiscal-cum-growth
strategy, as the press noted when covering the Economic Summit held in Little Rock during the
Interregnum.20 Under Secretary Summers saw the linkage between exchange rate policy and
interest rate policy from his arrival at Treasury and was the main opponent in these early days of
arguments in favor of pushing down the dollar. 21 Deputy Secretary Roger Altman gave these

20

“A strong dollar and a relatively conservative fiscal policy seem likely to form a central part of
the Clinton administration’s strategy for improving long-term economic performance, the
Financial Times led its story covering the economic conference on December 16, 1992. “‘I’m for
a strong dollar,’ declared president-elect Bill Clinton during a debate about exchange rate policy
at the economic conference...Mr. Clinton, however, added the proviso that the dollar could be
strong in the long term only if supported by ‘the underlying competitive reality of our
economy’....Mr. Clinton’s remarks on the dollar were a response to Professor Rudi Dornbusch of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who urged a substantial devaluation of the dollar
against Asian currencies over the next three years. Mr. Dornbusch said financial markets were
likely to anticipate a stronger dollar as the US economy recovered but that ‘we cannot afford
that’.”
21
Summers reportedly clashed with U.S. Trade Representative Kantor and Commerce Secretary
Ronald Brown in a closed-door meeting, after they had mused publicly that a weaker exchange
rate might not be so bad. Business Week (March 20, 1995, p.45). Summers publicly stated as
early as August 1993 that a strong yen (a more convenient name to attach to the phenomenon, in
13

arguments a name -- the strong dollar policy -- at a meeting in Summers’ office in the summer
of 1994. The relative strength of the Treasury Department vis-à-vis Commerce and others
within the Clinton administration also played a role, as the standard arguments put forth in every
administration by Treasury staff and principals had greater weight in the 1990s.
Bold public advocacy of a strong-dollar policy was inaugurated by the transition from
Secretary Bentsen to Secretary Rubin at Treasury at the beginning of 1995. 22 Rubin, while head
of the National Economic Council, had been central to the campaign for lower interest rates as a
way of energizing U.S. economic growth, and Summers’ analytical arguments against pushing
down the dollar coincided with Rubin’s instincts honed by years of experience in financial
markets and with the views of Treasury staff. In his confirmation hearings before the Senate
Finance committee, Rubin stated that a strong dollar was in the best interest of the U.S. economy
and warned that the exchange rate should not be used as an instrument of U.S. trade policy.
The new approach acquired prominence as a result of three events in the spring of 1995.
First, there was the prime-time news conference on April 19 th during which Clinton stated that
the U.S. "wants a strong dollar" and that it "has an interest over the long run in a strong
currency." Second, there was the extraordinary statement on April 25 th by G-7 finance ministers,

the tradition of Bentsen, than a weak dollar) was not in the interest of the U.S. economy. All
this makes it peculiar that Summers’ commitment to the policy was questioned when he
succeeded Rubin as Treasury Secretary in 1999.
22
Bentsen had asserted in a July 1994 speech in New York that the administration favored "a
stronger dollar," but any impact on the markets was offset by the President’s statement at the G7 summit in Naples a few days later that "it is important not to overreact" to the currency’s
weakness. Combined with Bentsen’s jawboning of the Fed not to raise interest rates, the
impression, according to financial commentary, was that the administration still favored a
weaker dollar. See Wall Street Journal Europe (July 12, 1994), p.10; Economist (July 16,
1994), p.74.
14

meeting under Rubin’s chairmanship, who overcame their normal reticence about addressing
such delicate matters and declared that a reversal of the decline of the dollar against the yen was
now desirable. Finally there was prominent intervention in the foreign exchange market by the
U.S. and Japan, with the cooperation of Germany and other G-7 countries, to support the
currency, starting in March and April of 1995 (accompanied by comments by Rubin that the
intervention reflects "a shared commitment to a stronger dollar" and a common view that a
stronger dollar "is in the most general interest of the economies of the world"). 23
By August the dollar had reversed course. 24 The Federal Reserve began lowering interest
rates in a trend that similarly dates from the summer of that year. 25 That the administration
preferred a strong dollar became the regular mantra of officials, and discipline was imposed to
ensure that pronouncements about the currency would be made by the Treasury alone. Still, it
took a surprising amount of time for the existence of a new policy to be recognized. Figure 4,
which shows the number of Nexis-Lexis hits on "strong dollar" and "strong-dollar policy,"
suggests that while this realization first dawned in 1996 (leading the National Association of
Manufacturers and U.S. auto producers to complain that currency appreciation was hurting their
exports), it took hold only two years later.

23

Wall Street Journal (April 6, 1995), p.C11. The published history of U.S. intervention
suggests that the U.S. was buying dollars already in 1993, although the prominence of the spring
1995 interventions was what drew so much attention to the policy.
24
It then moved up to nearly Y120 (a 42 month high) by the time of the November 1996
election.
25
The strong dollar and the anti-inflation effects of its appreciation were only one factor behind
the adjustment of monetary policy; more important surely were signs of distress in financial
markets and worries about an economic downturn.
15

Expectations of a stable or strengthening dollar were key to the Clinton Administration’s
entire macroeconomic strategy. The rising dollar helped to keep inflation subdued. By
encouraging the Fed to maintain low interest rates, it helped create a favorable climate for the
investment that fueled a decade of rapid growth. This explains how the administration was able
to sustain a posture of benign neglect toward the trade deficit through its two terms: if the deficit
reflected a high level of productive investment rather than simply a low level of saving, then it
was not a problem -- the rapid productivity growth and economic growth generally financed by
foreign capital inflows, which were the flip side of the trade deficit, would enable those foreign
obligations to be easily financed. If the trade deficit cum capital inflow reflected the
attractiveness of investing in the United States, then there was little reason to worry. 26
If there was a downside to the strategy, it was the competitive pressure that was felt by
emerging markets that pegged to the dollar, de facto or de jure. As the dollar rose against the
yen, Asian countries that pegged to the U.S. currency found their exports priced out of third
markets, notably Japan’s, and their profit margins squeezed. 27 But, in fact, the first instance of
this phenomenon was in Mexico in the first half of 1994, when a modest rise in the dollar
brought to the fore that country’s competitiveness problems.

26

This was the so-called Lawson doctrine -- that a current account deficit was not a problem if it
reflected the attractiveness of investment, an argument associated with one-time British
Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson. It rears its head again in our discussion of the
Mexican and Thai current account deficits (below).
27
This is not a criticism of the U.S. policy or its architects, since they were not responsible for the
decision by other governments to peg their currencies to the dollar, although some have argued
that the U.S. might have done more to alert other countries to the potential adverse
consequences.
16

3. The Mexican Rescue
The context for the Mexican crisis was the successful conclusion of the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), negotiated and signed by the Salinas and the Bush
administrations in 1992 and amended and implemented by the Salinas and Clinton
administrations in 1993. NAFTA offered Mexico two major benefits. It guaranteed that U.S.
protectionism would not disrupt Mexican growth. 28 And, by tying reform to an international
agreement, it reduced the odds that Mexico would abandon efforts to restructure its economy.
But there was also a third, unintended benefit. The violence of the political fight over
NAFTA, and thus the status of the agreement as one of the Clinton administration’s two
significant accomplishments of 1993, meant that the administration had a considerable
investment in NAFTA's success and thus in Mexico’s. Winning approval for NAFTA was
supposed to be easy -- resistance was supposed to be minimal and pro-forma -- yet somehow
opposition caught fire. 29 The political fight to ratify the agreement was bitter and close. In the
aftermath of the ratification vote, the White House found that it had acquired a strong political
interest in seeing that the policy was a success.
The start of 1994 saw a rise in political risk. The January 1994 uprising in Chiapas,
scattered incidents of terrorism in Mexico City, the forthcoming Mexican presidential election in

28

Ironically, NAFTA did not offer any significant increase in access to the U.S. market, since the
U.S. market was already almost completely open to imports from Mexico.
29
Raising the minimum wage, restricting the use of replacement workers, health care reform,
better ways to look for jobs, and programs to subsidize education and training each promised to
do more to boost the standard of living of union members than whatever minimal
Stolper-Samuelson-driven reduction in U.S. working-class wages would follow from additional
competition from Mexican workers. In any case, objections missed the essential point that
Mexico was dismantling far higher barriers against U.S. goods than vice versa.
17

August, and rumblings that the cadres of the then-ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI)
were unhappy with the dismantlement of Mexico’s corporatist system and sought a reversal of
reform caused observers to wonder whether Mexico’s economic future was as bright as
commonly suggested. GDP growth in 1993 turned out to be a deeply disappointing 0.4 per cent.
Still, there were few signs of significant capital flight in early 1994, although the peso did
weaken by about eight percent in the first two months of the year. When Secretary Bentsen
visited Mexico City in mid-February, he gave no public indication of concern, telling reporters
that Mexico’s economic policies had "become an example for all of Latin America." 30 Mexico's
economic fundamentals -- a balanced federal budget, a successful privatization campaign, and
financial liberalization among them -- were strong enough to similarly elicit a strong
endorsement of the country’s economic management by the IMF in the spring. In neither case
were the principals being more optimistic than their staffs: both Treasury and IMF staff were
optimistic about the sustainability of Mexican economic reform and economic growth.
March saw the assassination of the PRI's designated presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo
Colosio. The announcement of a special $6 billion foreign currency swap agreement with the
U.S. Treasury and the Fed and the rapid naming of Ernesto Zedillo to replace Colosio limited
the market impact.31 The American financial press still wrote that political risk was limited:
30

Washington Post (February 13, 1995, p.A1).
This bilateral arrangement employed the model of the U.S. portion of a multilateral
contingency facility established the previous November to deal with trouble if the NAFTA vote
had gone wrong. Treasury and Fed officials had also begun to discuss the need for a standing
consultative mechanism to anticipate exchange rate problems within the North American free
trade area already in late 1993, allowing them to launch the North American Framework
Agreement and North American Financial Group with Canada in April 1994. Another
multilateral contingency arrangement was put in place in July and August in anticipation of
possible post-election troubles (but never activated, as we describe below).
31

18

"modernization in Mexico has developed its own momentum," Zedillo "shares the reformist
vision," and the PRI would not "reverse...[its] commitment to a more open social and economic
structure."32 But following a poor showing by Zedillo in a nationally televised campaign
debate, the Bank of Mexico, notwithstanding the stautory independent it had gained on April 1st,
stepped up the rate of credit creation in order to "pump up the economy and ensure a PRI
victory."33 As the peso drifted toward the lower edge of its trading band, the Bank was forced to
undo its previous expansionary initiative, boosting short-term interest rates to 18 percent in order
to prevent the currency from falling further.
Already in 1993 the Congressional Budget Office issued a warning about the Mexican
economy.34 The Federal Reserve Board was monitoring conditions south of the border, and
warned incoming administration officials that they were likely to face a crisis on their watch. 35
Now prominent economists such as Rudiger Dornbusch, Alejandro Werner, Guillermo Calvo,
Leo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart chimed in. 36 They warned that while the Mexican
government was doing most things right -- the budget deficit had been wound down, businesses
were being privatized, and tariffs were being reduced -- growth remained disappointingly slow.

32

David Asman (1994), "Zedillo Follows Salinas Model for Mexico," Wall Street Journal
(March 30, 1994). In contrast, a classified estimate by the National Intelligence Council,
circulated in mid-summer, gauged the probability of a smooth election and orderly transition as
less than 50 per cent.
33
Washington Post (Feburary 13, 1995, p.A1). Allan Meltzer, in testimony to the Senate
Committee on Banking Housing and Urban Affairs (on March 9 th, 1995), traced the roots of this
monetary expansion back to 1993. U.S. Senate Banking Committee (1995), p.220.
34
See CBO (1993).
35
The reader may wonder how we have access to so much inside information about the Mexican
crisis. Much of this information was unearthed and published in the course of the subsequent
Congressional investigation.
36
In Dornbusch and Werner (1994) and Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1994).
19

Dornbusch and Werner blamed the nearly fixed peso-dollar exchange rate, coupled with
persistent inflation, which had saddled the country with a currency overvalued in real terms.
Their remedy was to devalue the peso by 20 percent and to then allow it to drift down even
more, to the extent that Mexican inflation continued to exceed U.S. inflation. The
counterargument was that the slowly-crawling band within which the peso was allowed to
fluctuate was critical for the success of Mexico's disinflation program. To suddenly abandon the
nominal exchange rate anchor, even with good reason, might revive doubts about policy
credibility and rekindle inflationary expectations.
Dornbusch and Werner presented their arguments to heavily-attended seminars at the
Federal Reserve Board and elsewhere around town in the spring, summer and fall of 1994. The
reaction in administration circles was: "Perhaps." An internal June 1994 Federal Reserve Board
staff memorandum concluded that a peso devaluation of around 20 per cent was "quite likely
within the next several years -- but is not...necessarily imminent." 37 Although Mexican inflation
was outrunning U.S. inflation, so too might productivity growth, assuming that the government
followed through on reform. 38 This held out the promise of lower inflation in the future. That
no acceleration in productivity growth was evident yet was not necessarily disturbing, since such
things took time. The fundamental value of the peso was that at which Mexico's trade deficit
was equal to desired long-term net investment in Mexico. To the extent that markets were
37

Wall Street Journal (July 6, 1995), p.A1.
The skeptics of Dornbusch and Warner’s thesis also argued fast productivity growth in Mexico
might also help to reconcile relatively fast inflation there with the pegged rate of the peso
through the operation of the Balassa-Samuelson effect (which predicts that the price of
nontradables, and therefore the overall inflation rate, will rise faster in more rapidly growing
countries, even in equilibrium). The problem was that, by most measures, the rate of increase of
traded goods prices in Mexico was also running well in excess of comparable U.S. rates.
38

20

expecting reform to continue and productivity to pick up, desired long-term net investment in
Mexico might be large, and the true fundamental value of the peso might be high. It followed
that there was no necessary reason to worry about the country’s considerable current account
deficit, which reached 8 per cent of GDP in 1994, to the extent that this gap reflected an excess
of investment over savings, reflecting in turn the attractions of investment in a country with
considerable upside productivity potential.39
To be sure, if the current account reflected booming consumption as much as investment,
and if the productivity payoff of the latter was still uncertain, there was more reason for
concern.40 But "uncertain" is the operative word; in the absence of stronger evidence it was not
prudent for Treasury to urge a risky devaluation on a foreign sovereign, especially one so
dependent on market confidence. Treasury issued warnings of "greater urgency as the year
progressed," then-Under Secretary Summers later told a Senate panel. 41 But warnings were,
39

The Lawson doctrine was emphasized by Mexican Finance Minister Pedro Aspe in his
discussions with U.S. officials. Wall Street Journal (July 6, 1995, p.A1).
40
The validity of the general point, whether or not it applied to Mexico, is evident in the fact that
current account deficits have only a weak ability to predict currency crises (Edwards 2001). From
this point of view it is not surprising that alarm over the size of Mexico’s external deficit was less
than universal. One wonders whether U.S. officials, encouraged to dismiss the dangers of their
own deficit by the Lawson Doctrine, were led by analogical reasoning to underestimate the risks
implicit in the Mexican deficit.
41
In particular, Summers discussed his concerns over the magnitude of the current account with
Aspe’s deputy, Guillermo Ortiz. Secretary Bentsen raised the issue with a number of Mexican
officials. Wall Street Journal (July 6, 1995, p.A1). "Senator, there were many conversations
between Treasury officials and Mexican officials, Treasury officials at all levels and their
counterparts in the Mexican government, and between U.S. central bank officials and the
Mexican central bank," Summers later told Senator D’Amato in testimony before the Senate
Banking Committee. "Those conversations by the fall emphasized that Mexico’s policy path
was in our judgment unsustainable; that unless they were prepared to take some other substantial
policy action, that it would be necessary for them to devalue, but that it was possible that with
other substantial policy action, a devaluation might not be necessary." Federal News Service
(March 10, 1995), p.4.
21

understandably, not demands. The "policies that Mexico pursued...were Mexico’s," as Summers
put it in his testimony.
And even if Dornbusch and Werner were right, it was not clear in the spring and summer
of 1994 that dire consequences would follow. The peso might have to be devalued by 20 per
cent, but there the story would end. Currency crises with devastating consequences for
economies only happen -- or so economists thought back then -- when governments have
allowed their macroeconomic policies to run out of control and lack the political wherewithal to
change them fast enough when the speculative attack begins. The Mexican budget was not in
significant deficit. (There were deficits hiding in the accounts of the development banks, but
this was not known at the time.) The central bank was not frantically printing money.
With benefit of hindsight, we now know that this model neglected a key point: that
financial sources of vulnerability can be every bit as important as macroeconomic ones in a
world where domestic and international financial markets have been liberalized. Part of the
Mexican government's strategy for coping with investor jitters had been to replace conventional
short-term borrowing with the famous "tesobonos," short-term securities whose principal was
indexed to the dollar, as a means of retaining the funds of investors who feared devaluation. 42
Effectively, this was a double-or-nothing bet. While the policy succeeded in attracting
and retaining some $23 billion of financing, it meant that if devaluation did come it would be an
order of magnitude more dangerous and destructive. In particular, it would greatly increase the
burden of dollar-denominated public debt. Even if the public finances were otherwise sound, the

42

The Mexican government acted on the advice of the Weston Group, a New York-based group
of financiers that specialized in peso investments.
22

fact that so much of the debt was dollar-linked meant that they would not remain sound if the
currency crashed.43 That this risk was inadequately appreciated is no surprise. In 1994
observers inside the U.S. government dismissed the possibility of a major financial crisis in
Mexico by pointing to evidence from the recent record that major crises happened only when
governments ran huge persistent deficits and pursued unsustainable policies. No one was
preoccupied by the risk of issuing tesobonos, since everyone’s worst-case scenario was a peso
devaluation of 20 per cent, nowhere large enough for the balance-sheet effects to be seriously
destabilizing.44
Only in the aftermath of the devaluation did it become clear that because Mexico had
floated so much short-term debt, a major crisis could materialize out of thin air, and because so
much of that short-term debt was dollar linked, the macroeconomic fallout could be severe.
Thus large-scale foreign-currency borrowing robs exchange rate depreciation of its usefulness as
a stabilization device. A standard reaction when a country suddenly finds that foreign demand
for its current-account goods and services exports has fallen, or that foreign demand for its
capital-account exports -- for investments located on its territory -- has fallen, is to allow the
exchange rate to depreciate. When demand for a private business's products falls, one natural
response is for the business to cut its prices. When demand for a country's products---and that is

43

This is an example of the logic behind so-called “second generation models” of balance-of
payments crises, whose relevance to the case at hand was not fully appreciated before the fact.
44
There had been discussion of Mexico’s tesobono innovation at Treasury and the Federal
Reserve Board already in July, but that discussion turned on how to interpret the willingness of
investors to buy these assets (what this said about exchange rate expectations), more than
whether the existence of these assets implied a more serious crisis in the event of a devaluation.
As late as December 16th (four days prior to the devaluation), a group of nearly 50 U.S.
intelligence analysts, Wall Street financiers and academic experts gathered at the State
Department "for an unusual, closed-door discussion of the Mexican economy" concluded that the
negative fallout would be minimal. Washington Post (February 13, 1995, p.A1).
23

what exports plus capital inflow are, demand for a country’s products---falls, the natural response
is for a country to cut its prices. And the easiest, simplest, and most straightforward way to
accomplish this is through an exchange rate depreciation. But this is not the case if the country’s
banks and operating corporations have borrowed abroad in hard currencies. Then a depreciation
writes up the home-currency value of their debts, erodes their entrepreneurial net worth, and sets
in motion the debt-deflation process.
In a sense, then, the basic ingredients of the Asian crisis that erupted in 1997 were
already evident in Mexico in 1994. In particular, how the current account deficit was financed
later became a central consideration for those attempting to forecast crises in emerging markets.
1994 was the first time this variable appeared on official radar screens. Thus, it is not surprising
that many of the reforms of the international financial system proposed by the Clinton
Administration following the outbreak of the Asian crisis were already tabled in the wake of the
Mexican crisis some three years earlier.45 What is disappointing, in retrospect, is that more was
not done after the Mexican crisis to implement those recommendations quickly and head off
future crises of a very similar sort.
But this was not the view in the middle of 1994. Rather, the assumption was that while a
modest exchange rate depreciation might be a political embarrassment, it hardly heralded an
economic disaster. The problem was that among those ending up with red faces might be
administration officials, since a visible change in the exchange rate would give additional
ammunition to the opponents of NAFTA, who already argued that low Mexican wages meant
unfair competition for American workers. Thus, it is hardly surprising that the administration

45

As described in Section 5 below.
24

did not place more pressure on the outgoing Salinas government to devalue. 46 Treasury did
suggest that Mexico might wish to widen the band for the peso and allow the currency to
fluctuate more widely in order to allow the loss of competitiveness to be made up. In other
words, it might contemplate a "limited devaluation." But it was not clear that this could be done
without disturbing investor confidence, since Mexico’s entire disinflation strategy was anchored
by the exchange rate peg. It was not clear that there existed such a thing as a "limited
devaluation," in other words, in the 1990s world of high capital mobility. Not surprisingly,
Treasury’s prodding produced no concrete result. In a sense, Mexico was the first example of
another problem that would become chronic as the 1990s progressed: the dangers of not having
an exit strategy from an ostensibly temporary currency peg.
The summer of 1994 saw the beginnings of capital flight as nervous investors
contemplated the aftermath of the August election. By the beginning of August, capital flight
had reached perhaps $150 million a week, depressing the exchange rate to 3.4 pesos per U.S.
dollar. The fear was that Zedillo might win the election in dirty and unconvincing fashion, and
that such a win would be followed by chaos. But as the election results came in and pointed to a
solid and reasonably fair win, administration officials breathed a sigh of relief. The peso rose 4
per cent from the bottom of its trading band in the wake of the election. Forecasters raised their
estimates of Mexican growth in 1994 to 3 per cent (and of future economic growth to 4 per
cent), and the stock market jumped. 47 The Bank of Mexico signaled that short-term interest rates

46

In addition there was the fact that the White House was sponsoring Salinas to head the newlycreated World Trade Organization and that an embarrassing devaluation might be seen as raising
questions about his economic competence (although this probably did more to discourage
Salinas from contemplating adjustment than the Treasury from pushing for it).
47
Mexican export and GDP growth continued to be strong throughout the fall.
25

would decline, as observers awaited the arrival of "...the famous investments from the NAFTA
that never came because of Chiapas and the Colosio assassination..."48
Then the situation deteriorated again. The assassination of senior PRI member Jose F.
Ruiz Massieu in October seemed to demonstrate that Mexico still had a problem of political
stability, and financial capital started hemorrhaging out of the country. This came as a surprise
to official Washington, which had expected capital inflows to resume following the election. 49
Slowly the view that "limited adjustment" of the exchange rate was necessary gained adherents
in Washington, along with the realization that simply urging the Mexican government to
undertake it would not accomplish the task. Rather, the U.S. had to make clear its unwillingness
to help sustain an unsustainable currency peg. In November, Under Secretary Summers
memoed his treasury colleagues that Mexico should not be allowed to borrow from the U.S. to
support an overvalued peso. Chairman Greenspan’s staff reportedly reached the same
conclusion.50
When the Federal Reserve raised interest rates by more than expected in November, the
issue came to a head. The peso came under pressure, leading to a weekend of consultation
between U.S. and Mexican officials. Bentsen told Pedro Aspe, the finance minister, that as far

48

Craig Torres (1994), "Mexico Could Post Its Strongest Growth in Five Years," Wall Street
Journal (August 25, 1994).
49
The unexpected nature of this event was one reason for the deer-frozen-in-the-headlights
posture of the U.S. government in October and November. "As an official who participated in
interagency meetings in Washington throughout this period recalled, ‘I don’t remember...any
economic bells ringing.’" Washington Post (February 13, 1995, p.1). In addition, the
administration was preoccupied by preparations for the lame-duck session of Congress at which
approval of the Uruguay Round negotiation would be obtained. Zedillo met with Secretary of
State Warren Christopher during a November 1994 visit to Washington, and Treasury Secretary
Bentsen met with Zedillo in Mexico City following the election, but there was reportedly no
State Department-Treasury Department joint meeting on Mexico until after the peso devaluation
in December (Ibid).
50
Wall Street Journal (July 6, 1995), p.A1.
26

as he could see Mexico had no choice but to adjust the exchange rate. Aspe rejected the advice,
and Bentsen wished him "good luck."51
All this is consistent with the belief that the Mexican government unwisely put off the
inevitable day of reckoning -- that it compounded the problem by waiting too long. From nearly
$30 billion before the assassination of Colosio, foreign exchange reserves had fallen to barely $5
billion when the decision was taken to abandon the pegged rate against the U.S. dollar in
December. At each stage the Mexican government, preoccupied with the election campaign, bet
that the loss of reserves was temporary -- that it reflected a passing disturbance to market
conditions rather than a permanent change in investor sentiment. But up until late summer it
was hard to say with any conviction that the Salinas government was wrong. While inflows of
foreign portfolio investment had stopped in the wake of political assassinations and the Chiapas
rebellion, they had also stopped when the U.S. Congress looked ready to reject NAFTA, only to
resume after the NAFTA implementation votes.
Could the administration have done more to force the issue? Did it compound the
problem by issuing repeated public expressions of support and providing contingency finance in
advance of the 1994 presidential election? Given the historical association of peso crises with
Mexican elections, to make no financial contingency plans in 1994 would have been reckless, to
say the least. Morever, the conditions attached to the multilateral contingent credit line would
have required Aspe to reconsider Mexico’s exchange rate policy in the event that the finance was
drawn (which it was not) and pressure on the peso failed to dissipate. It was the existence of this

51

Washington Post (March 3, 1995), p.A29. The role of a firm exchange rate anchor in
Mexico’s stabilization and adjustment program was personally associated with Aspe, who
threatened to resign whenever the possibility of devaluation was raised in the interregnum
between the election and the inauguration of the new government.
27

arrangement that provided a context in which U.S. officials could consult with their Mexican
counterparts during the interregnum between the election and inauguration of the new
government. But Mexico was a sovereign state; the U.S. could not force it to devalue. Nor was
it appropriate for the U.S. government to attempt to compel it to do so. Public pressure would
have destabilized the markets and been viewed as interfering first with the election and then with
the transition. Bentsen’s wishing Aspe "good luck" is about as blunt as such messages can get.
In December, after a year of political assassinations, a not-very-clean presidential
election, and the appearance of an armed guerrilla movement in Chiapas, Mexico ran to the edge
of its foreign exchange reserves. It was public knowledge that inflows of foreign portfolio
capital had not resumed. Expectations of inflows gave way to expectations of outflows. In a
pattern that would be repeated in the Asian crisis two years later, each investor feared that other
investors would pull their money out, leaving the last investor standing would lose the greatest
amount, through either near-hyperinflation (as the Mexican government frantically printed pesos
to cover its peso-denominated debts), the imposition of capital controls (which would trap
foreign money in the country for an indefinite period of time), or formal default (in a repeat of
1980s-style dealings with commercial banks).
A government possessing only $5 billion in reserves to offset $23 billion of tesebono
liabilities had no good choices. If it pushed interest rates sky-high in an effort to keep capital in
the country, the extraordinary cost of money would strangle investment and employment and
repel inward foreign investment. If, finding itself unable to borrow, it began printing money at a
rapid rate, hyperinflation would do the same. And if it defaulted, the hope of U.S. finance for
Mexican economic development would be dashed.

28

None of this was preordained, of course. If investors had not interpreted the decision of
Zedillo’s newly appointed finance minister, Jaime Serra, to devalue the peso as a repudiation of
Aspe’s promise that the peso band was inviolate (and if Aspe had not repeated that promise in
such unconditional terms in a series of private meetings that closely preceded the change of
government), then the reaction might not have been so violent. If investors had been willing to
roll over the country’s short-term debts, contractionary policies and a moderate devaluation to
reduce imports and encourage exports would have sufficed to cover the Mexican government's
foreign liabilities when they came due. While a moderate devaluation coupled with
contractionary policies might cause a recession, that recession would be shorter and shallower
than what faced Mexico in the absence of funds to roll over its short-term debts.
Thus the peso support package: the United States, the International Monetary Fund, and
other sundry and assorted contributors cobbled together some $40 billion in dollar-denominated
assets. Initially the White House sought to get Congress to approve $50 billion in loan
guarantees. The White House knew that this request was risky; President Clinton was told that
his reelection prospects could be effectively destroyed by this one issue if Mexico failed to pay
the money back. Nothing, more than the decision to nonetheless go ahead, could have made the
commitment to globalization and openness more clear. The Congressional leadership, Newt
Gingrich and Bob Dole, were willing to give the President rope; initially they agreed to support
the loan-guarantee request. The willingness of the executive and legislative branches to work
together to minimize the impact of the peso crisis was unsurprising; after all, economic
engagement with Mexico was the policy of both the Democratic executive and the Republican
legislative majority. Moral suasion was mobilized: Chairman Greenspan telephoned Rush
Limbaugh at his studio to lobby for the package (which he characterized as the "least worst of

29

the various alternatives that confront us"). But the Treasury’s state-by-state analysis of how a
Mexican meltdown would affect U.S. employment was apparently not brought to the attention of
Congressional staffers. And the Congressional leadership badly overestimated its ability to
overcome the reservations of a rank and file that thus failed to see the impact on their individual
districts. Soon Congressional leaders as highly placed as Speaker Gingrich's lieutenant, Majority
Leader Armey, began demanding that the administration gather 100 House Democratic votes for
the package as a precondition for Republican support. Perennial presidential candidate Patrick
Buchanan called the support package a gift to Wall Street, "not free-market economics [but]
Goldman-Sachsanomics." Ralph Nader urged Congress to vote down the support package and to
instead demand that Mexico raise real wages. Wall Street Journal columnists demanded that
support be provided only if Mexico first returned the peso to its pre-December nominal parity.
Isolationist Republicans and protectionist Democrats claimed that NAFTA had caused the crisis
and vowed to fight the package. Almost alone on the other side of the debate was the newlyelected governor of Texas, George W. Bush, who trumpeted his firm support for the rescue on
the grounds that a collapse of confidence in Mexico would be "unbelievably disastrous." 52
Congress’ failure to quickly pass the package meant that discussions of U.S. financial
assistance did more to roil than calm the markets. Barely a month into the 1995, the
Congressional leadership had abandoned any attempt to pass loan guarantees. Treasury staff
developed a plan to take large-scale recourse to the Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF), and
Gingrich et al., chastened by their failure to pass the loan guarantees, responded with a
unconditionally supportive letter.

52

Economist (February 4, 1995), p.24.
30

The original legislation governing use of the ESF had assumed that it would be used for
short-term exchange market interventions to stabilize the value of the dollar against other major
international currencies, not that it might be used by the Executive Branch to stabilize the peso. 53
But the statute was revised in the 1970s to provide that the ESF should be used in a manner
consistent with U.S. exchange obligations under the amended IMF Articles of Agreement.
Indeed, it had been used before, repeatedly, for just this purpose, to help stabilize the currencies
of foreign countries, including prominently the United Kingdom in 1976 and, revealingly,
Mexico in 1982. But the scale on which it was to be utilized in 1995 was unprecedented (both in
terms of amount and duration of the exposure), prompting Treasury to solicit and obtain the
written approval of the Congressional leadership before the fact. In authorizing that the ESF be
used on this scale, Congress effectively abdicated to the White House a substantial measure of its
institutional power over international economic policy. The vitriolic hearings over the Mexican
rescue and over the administration’s use of the ESF that followed in 1995 were to some degree
the Congressional rank and file’s effort to undo the consequences.
In this way the program to support the peso was put in place. The IMF Executive Board,
under strong pressure from Managing Director Michel Camdessus, ponied up a large
contribution over the objections of some European directors. As we noted at the beginning of
this section, there was virtually no chance that the Clinton administration would not respond
rapidly and aggressively to a Mexican financial crisis. The centrality of the debate over NAFTA
in its first year, followed by the legislative disaster of its second, meant that NAFTA had
become, by default, one the administration’s two signature accomplishments. The National
Security team supported an aggressive U.S. response for its own reasons; national security

53

See Schwartz (1997).
31

advisor Tony Lake was among those who argued that the crisis could threaten political stability
in Mexico and that political disorder might mean a wave of illegal immigration into the United
States.54 From this standpoint, it could be argued that the loan was a good investment.
The same argument could be made from a narrowly economic point of view. The
Mexican government was already following sustainable macroeconomic policies -- if it could
only find the money to repay its tesobonos without having to resort to the printing press. In a
matter of months or, at worst, years, New York investors would calm down and recognize that
there was a more than measure of truth in the optimism toward investing in Mexico that had
prevailed in 1993. And then the loan could be paid back, with interest.
This is more or less what came to pass once the tesobono problem was cleared from the
boards. The restoration of external balance was all but immediate as the heavily depreciated
peso boosted exports and made imports unaffordable to Mexicans. The volume of exports rose
by fully 30 percent in 1995, while imports fell by more than 8 percent. The swing in net exports
between 1994 and 1995 was nearly $30 billion, allowing Mexico to register a $7 billion trade
surplus in 1995.
The restoration of internal balance took longer. Real GDP fell by nearly ten per cent in
the year from 1994-Q3. Monetary and fiscal policies did little to support domestic absorption
and therefore Mexican GDP. This raises the question of why the Zedillo government insisted on
such a rapid adjustment. After all, one purpose of a support program is to allow macroeconomic
adjustment to take place in a kinder, gentler fashion (with more monetary and fiscal support for
domestic demand) and to give time for expenditure-switching to take place. In large part the
Zedillo government responded in this way because of pressure from the United States. The Chair

54

Washington Post (February 13, 1995, p.A1).
32

of the Senate Banking Committee, Alfonse D'Amato, spent much of 1995 hunting for the head
of the person responsible for the "Mexican disaster."55 D'Amato believed that he had a winning
case no matter what explanations Treasury officials offered: either the U.S. government had
failed to foresee the Mexican crisis, in which case Treasury officials were incompetent; or they
had foreseen it but failed to warn investors, in which case they had effectively stolen money
from his constituents to prop up the PRI. Pressure from the Senate Finance Committee and the
fear that still-outstanding U.S. government money would become an issue in the 1996
presidential campaign led the U.S. to take part of the peso support package out of Mexico in
1996.56
How successful on balance was the U.S. led rescue of Mexico? A fully adequate answer
requires a paper of its own. While the 1995 recession was deep, the recovery that commenced in
1996 was rapid and sustained. Contrary to worries that Mexico, let off easy with help from its
big brother to the north, would soon be back for another infusion of official finance, the country
did not appeal again to the U.S. for assistance. It did not backtrack on reform. The neo-liberal
model of market opening and reform was not discredited; rather, it continued to spread to other
parts of Latin America. 57

55

See, for example, Federal News Service (1995), "Hearing Before the Senate Banking
Committee: Mexico and the Exchange Stabilization Fund (July 14, 1995). From another
perspective, D’Amato’s lead role in the critique of policy toward Mexico was distinctly odd. He
was the junior senator from New York. Whatever you thought of U.S. loans to the Mexican
government, they were used to pay debts owed to D’Amato’s constituents. To protest that U.S.
money should not be used to make sure that New York companies were repaid was an strange
move for a senator from New York to make. Indeed, D’Amto had initially backed the original
loan guarantee program.
56
As a domestic political strategy this was very desirable: the fact that the U.S. had made a
handsome profit silenced Congressional criticism.
57
But Mexico's financial system continues in disarray. And its distribution of income appears to
have taken an upward leap as a consequence of the 1994-1995 crisis.
33

But did countries elsewhere in the world grow overconfident that they too would receive
exceptional support if they too encountered financial difficulties? Did investors come to
anticipate the extension of official finance for crisis countries and act on this expectation? The
assessment of the Mexican rescue is more negative if it created moral hazard, bred contagion,
and set the stage for the Asian crisis. The quantitative evidence is inconclusive, not surprisingly;
isolating deviations from the efficient prices and quantities that would obtain in the absence of
expectations of official intervention requires a consensus model of asset price determination,
something that we do not have. 58 At some level, it is hard to believe that investors were wholly
unaffected.59 But there is little sign that the Mexican rescue, by itself, constituted in investors’

58

Thus, the attempts of Zhang (1999) and Spadafora (2000) to identify the effects of moral hazard
by estimating an ad hoc model of emerging-market bond spreads, and looking for a pattern of
outliers (that is, spreads narrower than predicted) following the Mexican crisis is not more
convincing than that ad hoc model. It is not surprising in this light that these authors reach
diametrically opposing conclusions. Lane and Phillips (2000) review approaches to identifying
moral hazard in international financial markets. While arguing that “It is inherently plausible that
financing from the IMF generates some element of moral hazard” (p.1), they find that the
evidence is inconclusive (although they are able to decisively reject the limiting hypothesis “that
investors perceive a full guarantee from the Fund” (p.28). And, even if there exists evidence that
the potential availability of Treasury and IMF money to fight international financial crises eased
the minds of investors, inducing them to lend and invest more than would otherwise have been the
case, this is not necessarily a bad thing to guard against. As DeLong, Shleifer, Summers and
Waldmann (1990) pointed out, a well-functioning financial market is one that takes appropriate
account of “fundamental” risk. The risk that investors will panic is not a fundamental in the
relevant sense. A financial market that discounts prices because of this possibility is not setting
prices equal to social marginal value. In this case the level of international lending and borrowing,
absent official intervention, will be inefficiently low. Of course, a pattern of overly frequent,
unconditional intervention can tip the balance the other way, but excessive lending at inefficiently
tight spreads is not the only possible outcome.
59
On the other hand, there is the argument that the backlash against the Mexican rescue on
Capitol Hill gave investors reason to doubt that the experience would be repeated (Willett 1999).
And administration officials could and did argue that Mexico was more a liquidity than a solvency
crisis. Help was justified on efficiency grounds by the predominance of the liquidity element,
where successor countries whose crises had deeper structural roots (and investors in those
countries) should not expect comparable help. Of course, whether investors could draw these
subtle distinctions is an empirical question.
34

minds a pattern of support. The phrase "moral hazard" appeared in the newspapers in 1995, in
the wake of the Mexican rescue, only one-fourth as often as it would appear in 1998, following
Asia. (See Figure 6.) The idea of a "moral-hazard play," that G-10 governments and
multilaterals were prepared to eliminate the downside risk of investing in countries like Brazil
that were too important systemically and like Russia that were too nuclear to be allowed to fail,
became current only in the wake of the Asian loans that followed Mexico by two to three years.
There were concerns about moral hazard in 1995, in other words, but it would take the Asian
crisis (and the Russian crisis after it) to give them resonance.

4. Responding to the Asian Crisis
Coming in the wake of Mexico, Thailand’s crisis was less of a surprise. Indeed, the
kingdom’s problems bore an eerie resemblance to those of its Latin predecessor. A large current
account deficit was raising questions about competitiveness. There were worries that monetary
policy was too expansionary to remain consistent with the exchange rate peg maintained by the
central bank. The baht, according to some estimates, was overvalued by the now customary 20
per cent.60
To be sure, Thailand, like Mexico before it, was not running a large budget deficit; the
problem did not obviously lie in the profligacy of the government. 61 As in Mexico, the

60

This is the retrospective estimate of Chinn (1998). "Customary" refers to the precedent of
Mexico in 1994.
61
It can be argued that the overheated state of the Thai economy implied the need for a substantial
surplus, not just a balanced budget, a point with which, with benefit of hindsight, we would agree.
But the issue here is whether fiscal variables were “flashing red” and sending out early warning
signals of an impending crisis. The answer, clearly, is no. Those who insist that fiscal policy,
while not the problem, could nonetheless have been part of the solution must be able to argue that
higher taxes and lower public spending would have significantly narrowed the current account
deficit (where the “twin deficits” literature suggests that the link here is tenuous) and could have
35

authorities defended themselves by arguing that the strength of the baht and the magnitude of the
current account deficit reflected the country’s admirably high level of investment. But there
were signs that companies were taking on excessive debt burdens: by 1996 companies in
Thailand, excluding banks, were spending the equivalent of 18 per cent of GDP on interest.
And, even more than in Mexico, there were reasons to doubt the productivity of much of that
investment. Valuations on the Bangkok stock exchange had been trending downward since
1996. The inefficiency of infrastructure investment and the frothiness of the real estate market
were notorious. Many construction loans had already gone bad, undermining the solvency of
banks and finance companies and implying a significant fiscal obligation for the authorities (the
government having already announced that it would not allow depositors to suffer when
financial institutions that had gone bad were closed down). Non-performing loans were perhaps
$20 billion by the start of 1997. By the start of 1997 there were whispers that the cost of bailing
out insolvent financial institutions could be as high as six per cent of GDP.
The IMF had been warning for more than a year that the situation in Thailand was
unsustainable. Its managing director, Michel Camdessus, had visited Thailand four times
between July 1996 and July 1997, exhorting the government to "get rid of this very dangerous
peg to the dollar." The existence of these problems was familiar to the Federal Reserve and the
U.S. Treasury: Treasury officials, from Rubin on down, were vocal in insisting on the need clean
up the financial sector and adjust the exchange rate. What came as a surprise was not that
Thailand had a crisis and experienced macroeconomic distress but the severity of the fallout and
the speed and scope of its spread.

raised the average quality of investment.
36

Under most circumstances this tinder box would have ignited even earlier than it did. It
was clear that the banks were bust, rendering the Thai authorities reluctant to use higher interest
rates to defend the currency (given the additional pain this would inflict on the already suffering
banking system).62 That the conflagration only erupted in July of 1997 can perhaps be explained
by the ease with which emerging markets generally, and not merely Thailand, could finance
their external deficits, given the conditions prevailing on global financial markets (and the
perception that they were "miracle economies"). An astonishing $240 billion in private capital
had flowed out of the industrial core into the developing periphery in 1996. More than a quarter
went to the fast-growing economies of East Asia. All signs at the start of 1997 were that this
flow would continue and, if anything, increase. Japanese banks in particular were pouring in
money through the Bangkok International Banking Facility (BIBF), something to which the
Japanese Ministry of Finance paid no mind (despite warnings from the Fed and the U.S.
Treasury).63 That said, there were already some who had begun to worry that the miracle was
oversold, and that financing was too easy to get. 64 Moral hazard emanating the Mexican rescue
could conceivably have supported this financial flow, but more plausible in our view is that
investors found investing in the East Asian miracle irresistible, wanted a piece of the action, and
were confident that they could get out in time if, in Thailand or elsewhere, something finally
went wrong.

62

As in fact turned out to be the case. While the Thai authorities raised interest rates when the
crisis broke out, they lowered them “prematurely” (in the words of Boorman et al. 2000) in early
August and again in mid-September, arguably undermining the confidence of investors in their
commitment to defense of the exchange rate.
63
We return to the political economy of the BIBF below.
64
See for example Krugman (1994).
37

Some critics of the markets go a step further and argue that the origin of the Asian crisis
lay in the major money centers, that the East Asian economies were fundamentally sound, and
that the true source of crisis was an investor panic. We are more inclined to the position staked
out by Summers (1999a): while there would have been no crisis of this magnitude in the absence
of investor panic, an investor panic would not have produced a crisis of this magnitude in the
absence of serious problems of non-performing loans, inadequate and weak financial regulation,
and currency and maturity mismatches, all of which had major implications for future (quasi)
fiscal deficits and hence for sustainable monetary policies. Both the fundamental financial
problems of East Asian economies and an investor panic were needed for the situation to
develop as it did, and it was their interaction that was key. The buildup of short-term, foreigncurrency-denominated debt left East Asia’s economies vulnerable to a sudden collapse of
confidence. Depreciating currencies and falling asset prices exacerbated the strains on
private-sector balance sheets and unleashed a vicious spiral.
In May the Bank of Thailand successfully fought off a speculative attack, using
Singapore’s support to engineer a bear squeeze. The attack convinced the government that
reform could not be further delayed. In June it initiated steps to restructure the financial system,
closing down sixteen insolvent finance companies. But this was too little, too late, what with
capital and reserves continuing to hemorrhage out. On July 2, 1997 the central bank scrapped
the fixed exchange rate and watched the baht fall by one-sixth on that day alone. (See Figure 7.)
The Bank raised short-term interest rates that day by two percentage points, to 12.5 per cent
annualized, to prevent a larger, potentially-destabilizing fall. Observers feared that if the
exchange rate weakened further, many Thai companies with dollar-denominated debts would see
their profits vanish under the impact of higher repayment costs. The consensus estimate of Thai

38

companies' short-term dollar-denominated debt was that $50 billion was maturing within the
year, a sum more than half again as large as the perhaps $30 billion of Thai foreign exchange
reserves. And no one knew how much of this dollar-denominated debt was unhedged.
Yet there was little sense at the very start of July that the Thai situation was as serious as
Mexico’s had been or that the crisis would spread to other East Asian economies. The
government in Bangkok had already taken steps to begin to liquidate insolvent financial
institutions and strengthen the financial system -- steps that the Mexican government had failed
to take. The Bank of Thailand had engaged intervention on the forward foreign-exchange
market, the losses from which would absorb a significant portion of its reserves, but was not
known to the market, since the IMF’s efforts to enhance transparency had not extended to the
off-balance-sheet liabilities of central banks. 65 The dollar value of the Thai stock market fell on
July 2, but by "only" 9 percent, a little more than half as much as the currency.
Suddenly everything changed. On July 6th the Philippine Finance Minister was quoted
by the Straits Times as saying that his country’s peso "might devalue." Five days later the
Philippines, another country with chronic competitiveness problems, had abandoned its fixed
exchange rate, following Thailand down. 66 While this helped the Philippines avoid a more

65

Whether this is feasible remains an open question. To the extent that financial-market rocket
scientists and their customers are always one step ahead of the markets, concocting new
instruments ostensibly exempt from existing disclosure mandates, the IMF has increasingly
focused on codes of transparency for central banks to induce voluntary disclosure and measures
to strengthen corporate governance as a way of promoting disclosure by private-sector entities.
We return to this below.
66
The Philippines’ blessing, as it were, was that no one had mistaken it for an Asian "tiger" or a
"miracle" economy. It had not imported capital on the same scale as Thailand. It had not
experienced the same construction and real estate boom, and the problems in its banking system,
while chronic, were in some sense less acute. But the Philippines exported many of the same
products as Thailand (textiles and apparel, for example), and hence had good reason to follow
the baht.
39

serious crisis, it raised further questions about the stability of other currencies. On July 8 th the
Malaysian ringgit came under heavy speculative pressure. On July 11th Indonesia announced
that it was widening its exchange rate band and then stopped defending the rate. On July 13th
Korea’s eighth-largest chaebol, Kia, and its creditor banks announced an urgent restructuring
designed to avoid bankruptcy (following other failures by smaller chaebol earlier in the year).
And on July 14 Malaysia stopped supporting the ringgit. Now the crisis was in full swing.
Before the end of July the East Asian economies had opened discussions with the IMF for
support, and Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Muhammed had launched his denunciations of
international currency speculators and of foreign exchange markets in general.
Both the Fed and the Treasury saw Thailand as a problem best handled by the IMF in
light of the surprisingly bitter and long-lingering controversy over the Mexican rescue and the
fact that Thailand was hardly in America’s back yard. August saw the IMF assemble and
approve its $17 billion support package, which included parallel bilateral financing, Japan
making the major contribution. 67 The U.S. did not contribute (although it supported the idea of
parallel financing). Treasury was fettered by Senator D’Amato’s rider to the appropriations bill
constraining the use of the ESF, which did not expire until September 30 th (the end of the fiscal
year).68 U.S. inability or unwillingness to participate (the decision was interpreted variously)
created considerable enmity in East Asia.
Any potentially favorable impact on market confidence was immediately destroyed by
the revelation that the Bank of Thailand had $23 billion of outstanding forward dollar sales (and

67

Japan contributed $4.3 billion through a pari pasu arrangement. In addition, there were
contributions from the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, Australia, China, Hong
Kong, Singapore and other Asian countries.
68
We provide more discussion of this below.
40

now associated losses) that it had to cover. This fact had been uncovered by the IMF mission
and was known to the Executive Board (and hence the U.S. government). Treasury and the
Federal Reserve pushed the IMF and the Thais to reveal the position on the grounds that
anything known to the Board was bound to leak. 69
As the shock waves radiated outward, Indonesia abandoned its support of the rupiah. By
the end of September the Korean chaebol Jinro and Kia had gone bankrupt, adding the third
largest economy in the hemisphere to the list of the vulnerable. By late November, Thailand
would have returned to the IMF for a second package (the terms and targets of the first one
having been rendered irrelevant by the collapse of the currency).
During the fall of 1997 proposals for an Asia-only $100 billion bailout fund were shot
down by the U.S. and European governments. 70 Treasury and the Fed worried that a large, freestanding source of funds would undermine the role of the IMF and its conditonality by providing
generous finance on lax terms. They doubted that a different mix of adjustment and financing,
which the existence of a large, free-standing regional fund implied, was appropriate for Asia
than for the rest of the world. And, in practice, this large, free-standing source of funds would
have been dominated by Japan’s Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan.71 Looking at the
course of the Japanese economy from 1989 to 1997, it was impossible to have any confidence in
the ability of those institutions to handle a domestic let alone an international financial crisis.

69

In addition, making public the fact that the Thai reserve position was even weaker than it
seemed provided additional political justification for the large (505 per cent of quota) IMF
package.
70
In addition, China opposed the fund, both for its strategic implications and out of doubts that
softer or unconditoinal money would be helpful for crisis prevention and resolution.
71
Although the latter was not a big fan of the idea, fearing that it would end up having to pay for
the initiative.
41

That U.S. opposition to the Asia-fund idea, on the grounds that national influence would
undermine the role of the IMF, provoked such a hostile reaction in Japan and other parts of Asia
is hardly surprising when one observes how profoundly U.S. influence shaped the actions of that
institution. Just saying "no, no, no" was thus not a feasible political position for the United
States. The U.S. administration’s counterproposal was the Manila Framework Agreement,
launched at a meeting in the Philippines in mid-November. This led to agreement at the Asia
Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Vancouver to strengthen mutual surveillance within
the region, and to create an Asia fund with no dedicated staff, with no specific funding level,
and, critically, with the proviso that funds could be lent only with IMF supervision.Returning to
the crisis itself, what is particularly striking is the failure of all concerned -- in government, in
the markets, in the multilaterals -- to anticipate how widely, quickly and powerfully instability
would spread. Almost no one warned that Indonesia, for example, was at risk of suffering a
crisis like Thailand or Mexico. 72 The country’s current account deficit was less than one-third as
large a share of GDP as Thailand's. Indonesia had never pegged its exchange rate, and the band
within which it allowed its exchange rate was relatively wide (and was widened further after the
Thai devaluation).
Yet Indonesia also suffered from politically-directed lending through state banks, tangled
corporate control, a lack of easily accessible information about corporate finances, insider
lending, and poor banking supervision. Most important, however, was the magnitude of
unhedged foreign hard-currency borrowing. Thus once the rupiah began to lose value,
Indonesia's situation deteriorated very rapidly. Debt owed to foreign banks relative to

72

This despite the fact that G-10 deputies, together with representatives of the emerging markets
and multilaterals, had emphasized the role of weak institutions and flawed structural policies in the
Draghi Report issued in April of that same year (see below).
42

Indonesian GDP quadrupled as the rupiah fell, reaching a peak of perhaps 1 1/2 times a year’s
GDP.
In October the Indonesian government announced that it was seeking IMF assistance, and
by the end of the month a $40 billion support program had been unveiled. Having recognized
that the crisis could spread from region to region like weeds from one backyard to another (and
no longer constrained by the rider to the Treasury appropriation that complicated the use of the
ESF), this time the administration committed (in the face of still Congressional opposition) to
making available a contingent line of credit worth about $3 billion in the event that the IMF
rescue package proved inadequate to stabilize the economy.
However, the Indonesian government’s willingness to carry out the actions needed to
obtain continued IMF funding was unclear. In the late fall of 1997 it did close a few--but not
all--potentially insolvent banks (controversially, in that there was no deposit insurance and the
risk of depositor panic was great), including at least one bank owned by the Suharto family. But
when Suharto’s commitments to restrain government spending on infrastructure projects ran up
against his eldest daughter’s interests, family won. Thus it remained uncertain whether the
Indonesian government truly was willing to take the policy steps that the IMF hoped would
reassure foreign investors. And between the second quarter of 1997 and the second quarter of
1998, Indonesian real GDP fell by 16.5 percent.
Malaysia decided to go its own way, rejecting the conditions sought by the IMF,
Mahathir Muhammed would claim that the financial crisis was all a western conspiracy to
impoverish emerging Asian economies, and that the Malaysian economy was fundamentally
sound. Yet in the summer of 1997 Malaysia’s domestic bank lending was equal to more than one
and two thirds of a year’s GDP, and many feared that much of this lending had gone into

43

unproductive investments. The twin Petronas Towers in Kuala Lampur--the tallest office
building in the world and the set for the Sean Connery movie "Entrapment"--became a symbol
of the claim that Malaysia too had suffered from an investment bubble in the mid-1990s.
One reason Mahathir was so desperate to keep the IMF at bay may have been his fear
that the Fund would demand, as part of structural reform to promote economic efficiency, the
end to the distortions and subsidies that give economic preference to those descended from
Malaysia's indigenous population as opposed to those descended from Chinese immigrants.
Since these policy measures were at the core of Mahathir’s political support, he may have seen
his political career at an end should a structural adjustment mission land at Kuala Lampur. Thus
eventually Mahathir would opt for capital outflow controls rather than IMF-style programs to
contain the crisis.73
The fourth of the severely-afflicted fast-growing East Asian economies was South Korea,
whose problems were exacerbated by politically driven lending. For decades the government
had directed its banks to lend to favored sectors of the economy, encouraging heavy corporate
borrowing and high debt-equity ratios. Even as of the end of 1996, the twenty-five largest
chaebol had a debt-equity ratio of more than four to one. Eight chaebol went bankrupt in 1997,
leaving the banks with a large but uncertain exposure to bad loans. And the country's banks and
operating companies had unknown but staggering unhedged dollar-denominated debts. The
country was thought to have $65 billion of short-term foreign debt, but we now know that the
true figure was at least twice that large.

73

According to Kaplan and Rodrik (2001), it is not clear that Malaysia lost much in terms of
speed of recovery from its heterodox policies. Their methodology is controversial; others would
point to other explanations for the relatively mild nature of Malaysia’s crisis (such as its low
level of international debt).
44

It is striking, then, that everyone was in denial on Korea until early November, when the
crisis spilled over from the rest of Asia. In response, Korea and the Fund agreed on a support
program of $57 billion, the largest IMF-led program ever. 74 But even this super-sized package
proved too small. The failure of the Korean package to staunch the bleeding was particularly
alarming: not only was Korea one of the 12 largest economies in the world, but the inability of
multilateral finance to stability conditions cast doubt on the viability of the entire IMF-U.S. led
rescue strategy, leading to the first time to dire predictions in December of the possible
meltdown of the global financial system.
Korea epitomized the "bailout problem" -- that for every dollar of official money that
was pumped in, the banks could take a dollar of their money out. Not only did this debilitate
efforts to end the liquidity crisis, but it had adverse political consequences (Congressional critics
complained of "welfare for bankers") and heightened concerns about moral hazard (insofar as
international banks that had taken on risky loans were now able to "get off scot free"). But
exhorting the banks to keep their money in the country was ineffectual in a situation beset by
collective action problems. Not only might individual banks decline to participate in concerted
action, but so might individual governments. Thus, as late as mid-December Japan, preoccupied
by the health of its own financial system, was urging that country’s banks to pull out of Korea.
Only when Korea was pushed to the brink of default, on -- to pick a date -- Christmas eve, did
the IMF, in concert with G-7 governments, get them to first roll over their maturing short-term
claims, by offering to accelerate the second line of defense conditional on a successful effort by
a critical mass of Korea’s foreign bank creditors to extend the maturity of their exposure to the

74

The IMF contribution alone came to 2,000 per cent of quota, far exceeding the conventional
ratios of 100 per cent of quota in a year and 300 per cent of quota over the lifetime of a program.
45

Korean banking system and to then to convert these and other short-term obligations into (highly
remunerative) long-term bonds. 75
Ex post evaluations criticize officials for not having moved faster to bail in the banks. It
is argued that if the same steps had were taken at the end of December had in fact been taken in
November, perhaps following the Manila meeting at which the country’s difficulties became
known, then the first IMF package would have had a better chance of working. Preventing so
much bank money from bleeding out would have avoided so demoralizing the markets. But
whether the same steps would have been feasible earlier is questionable. For much of the period,
Korea was still in the heat of a contested election (which took place in the third week of
December). Despite the IMF’s efforts to get all the candidates to endorse its program, it was
uncertain whether the winner would follow through with the prescribed reforms. There was the
danger that attempting to arrange a concerted rollover might so alarm the markets as to spread
the crisis to Brazil and back to Russia. It may have been necessary to allow the least patient
(Japanese) banks to exit before it was possible to obtain the cooperation of the others. Above
all, it is doubtful that the banks -- or, for that matter, the Japanese government -- would have
agreed to act in the collective interest before there was evidence of how truly dire the
circumstances were. A few foreign banks had in fact tried on their own to orchestrate a

75

Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board encouraged William McDonough, chairman of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to convene a meeting of the six largest U.S. banks to
impress on them the urgency of doing so, which he did on December 22nd (Callaghy 2000). The
Bank of England did the same for the UK banks, also on December 24th, while the German
Finance Ministry did so on the 29th. William Rhodes, vice-chairman of Citicorp, worked on behalf
of the U.S. banks to open channels to the Japanese banks and to impress upon them the
importance of participating in the rollover. He and his colleagues contacted each of the top 10
Japanese banks and the Japanese vice-minister of finance, Eisuke Sakakibara. As a result of these
initiatives the Japanese were represented at the next meeting in New York, on December 29th, by
oficials from Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi (Euromoney, March 1998).
46

stay/maturity extension package a week or so before Christmas, but their head offices had
refused to go along.
The winter and spring of 1998 saw the IMF programs begin to work, as the Thai and
Korean governments began to change their economic policies in accord with IMF conditions.
Indonesia was a harder case. The draft budget unveiled by President Suharto in early January
substantially exceeded the IMF’s targets. Suharto gave way, following meetings in Jakarta in
mid-January with IMF First Deputy Managing Director Stanley Fischer and (now-) Deputy
Treasury Secretary Summers, and phone calls from President Clinton, among others. Suharto
signed a revised letter of intent on January 15 th. The event was memorialized by the notorious
photograph showing IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus, his arms folded, standing
behind the Indonesian president (though the IMF claims that film clips show that Camdessus in
fact struck this pose for only a few moments).
President Suharto promised to axe infrastructure projects dear to his eldest daughter, to
phase out tax breaks and loan subsidies to the Indonesian auto companies controlled by his
youngest son, and to eliminate his family's private monopolies. But he continued to look for
running room: promoting the regulation- and government investment-minded Bucharuddin Jusuf
Habibie, and announcing plans to establish a currency board which many observers saw as a
scam to enable Suharto and his family to repay their dollar-denominated debts at an artificiallyhigh exchange rate before the currency board's collapse.
Nevertheless, even in Indonesia the direction of policy began to shift in the way
advocated by the IMF.
Were these policy shifts a good idea? As the critics of IMF intervention pointed out
repeatedly already in 1997, the Asian crisis was very different from the crises that the Fund was

47

used to handling. Asian countries had high saving rates. Asian governments had run budget
surpluses. Asian central banks had inflation under control. Hence, the standard conditions
attached to IMF lending -- raise taxes and cut government spending to shift the budget toward
surplus and reassure observers that the government would not resort to the printing press to
finance its expenditures, curb demand in order to compress imports and generate a trade surplus,
establish a monetary regime that would create confidence that inflation would remain under
control -- were of questionable relevance, except possibly in Thailand.
Is there any validity to the even stronger indictment of these policies -- that they were
they not only of questionable relevance but in fact damaging and counterproductive? Much ink
has been spilled over these questions. There is now widespread consensus, with which we
would concur, that the initial demands for fiscal cuts on the part of the crisis countries were
excessive; by further compressing demand in an already depressed environment, they made postcrisis recessions worse.76 There was no need for sharp fiscal consolidation in the interest of
either confidence or fiscal sustainability in countries that had not entered their crises with large
budget deficits or exploding debts. Here, it can be argued, the IMF’s principal shareholder did
not do enough at the outset to rein in Fund staff’s ingrained habit of associating crises with fiscal
excesses.
On monetary policy, in contrast, there is no such consensus. 77 The critics, from Stiglitz
to Sachs, argued that sharp hikes in interest rates were more destabilizing than stabilizing for
countries with high debt gearing and weak financial systems. The official position, of the U.S.

76

Note for example, the obervation of IMF First Managing Director Stanley Fischer (2001a),
“that the Fund on occasion makes mistakes, of course, we recognized that formally in the Asian
crisis with fiscal policy, which was excessively tight for a few months at the beginning...” (p.5).
77
See, inter alia, Furman and Stiglitz (1998), Kraay (1998), and Tanner (1999).
48

Treasury as well as the Fund, was that avoiding sharp hikes in interest rates was even worse,
since failure to tighten would signal a lack of commitment to defending the exchange rate and
provide no pecuniary incentive for investors to keep their money in the country, causing the
currency to crash and bringing down with it banks and firms with foreign-currency-denominated
liabilities.78
Clearly, this was a Hobson’s choice. Governments finding themselves in this situation
have no good options (as Mexico had learned in 1995). The IMF’s gamble was that high interest
rates would restore confidence quickly, stabilizing the currency and enabling the cost of credit to
be brought down to customary levels before widespread bankruptcy ensued. In addition,
IMF-led financial support clearly allowed governments to have higher exchange rates (and thus
lower hard-currency debt burdens) and lower interest rates (and thus higher domestic
investment) than otherwise, giving time to put in place financial-sector reforms and industrialsector restructurings while awaiting the return of investor confidence.
If the fundamental imbalances underlying old-style crises were the result of bad
macroeconomic policy decisions, the fundamental imbalances underlying new-style crises were
more likely to be the result of bad structural policy decisions: unproductive public investments,
unconditional guarantees for banks and firms, and financial policies that conduced to excessively
high debt-equity ratios. 79 Awareness of this fact led IMF conditionality to take a new and

78

There was no enthusiasm in Treasury for squaring this circle by encouraging the crisis countries
to impose capital and exchange controls, for reasons that we detail in the following section.
79
The major macroeconomic policy failure, in our view, was to continue pegging exchange rates
to the dollar too firmly for too long, providing implicit insurance against currency risk to the
private sector and thereby encouraging accumulation of the unhedged exposures that so
aggravated the crisis when it finally came (and inadvertently aggravating problems of
competitiveness in a period when the dollar was appreciating against the yen). At a deeper level,
however, the distinction between macroeconomic and structural policies is harder to sustain.
Pegging was a corollary of the Asian development strategy of government-led investment,
49

unprecedented turn, in the direction of structural reform, with the active support of the Clinton
Administration.80 Not surprisingly, financial reforms -- closing bad banks, recapitalizing the
survivors, and strengthening prudential supervision -- were key elements of the IMF’s crisis
programs in Asia. But these bad private-sector decisions reflected more than simply the
weakness of prudential supervision and regulation. They reflected a pattern of close ties
between government and powerful corporations, typically family led, in countries otherwise as
different as Indonesia and South Korea. It was not just the ready availability of finance from
poorly regulated banks but also the expectation that the borrowers themselves would be bailed
out rather than closed down when things went wrong that weakened market discipline and
encouraged lax investment decision making. This was the "crony capitalism hypothesis" that led
the IMF by November to festoon its Asian programs with a host of structural conditions.
Like interest rate policy, the efficacy of this new structural policy was questioned: it was
not clear that conditions which pointed to weaknesses in a country’s economic system did more

relying on the banks as the instrument of industrial policy. It can be implicated under this
heading for having encouraged the extension to the financial sector of implicit guarantees that
encouraged lending (by, inter alia, foreigners) without due regard to the underlying risks. But
this discussion takes us beyond the parameters of the present paper.
80
Although the number of structural conditions attached to IMF programs peaked in 1997, the
increase in such measures was not specific to Asia or to its crisis. The number of structural
conditions per program more than doubled between the late 1980s and early 1990s and doubled
again between the first and second half of the most recent decade (Goldstein 2000).
Explanations for the trend include the priority that came to be attached to restoring growth in
highly-indebted countries in the 1980s (complaints that the Fund placed too much weight on
stabilization and therefore was too tolerant of recession led to this emphasis on growth, which in
turn required structural reform) and the emphasis on structural transformation and institution
building in formerly centrally planned economies in the 1990s. While these experiences help to
explain why the Fund became accustomed to giving growth-related advice and applying
structural conditions, they do not justify its preoccupation with micro- and sectoral reforms in
East Asia, a region with an admirable record of growth and no history of deep structural
problems. They do not explain why the conditions attached to the Fund’s 1997 and 1998
programs with Indonesia, South Korea and Thailand were so numerous and detailed.
50

to undermine than to restore confidence. 81 To a considerable extent the skeptical view has
prevailed. Goldstein (2000), in his definitive analysis of the issue, concludes that as far as
structural reforms were concerned, the IMF had "bitten off more... than either it or its member
countries can chew." By 1999 the Clinton Administration was advocating a somewhat
streamlined and simplified loan conditionality that focused more narrowly on macroeconomic
and financial problems.82
As late as the summer of 1998 it was not clear that the crisis had been surmounted. The
U.S. Treasury was relieved that the IMF-led programs had avoided a potentially catastrophic
default in Korea and led to a substantial strengthening of the Thai stock market and currency,
and that the crisis had not spread beyond East Asia. Trade balances had turned around, and
interest rates and exchange rates had stabilized. But there were still no signs of improvement in
Indonesia, where it was not at all clear that the stabilization program would be implemented.
Moreover, even though forecasters were anticipating a rapid turnaround in East Asian
current accounts in 1998, they pushed expectations of a resumption of rapid economic growth
back to the start of 1999. Disappointing export growth, especially exports to Japan, were at the
heart of beliefs that recovery would not come as rapidly as had been expected. The weakness of
the yen and worries that the Chinese renmenbi might be devalued (voiced by administration
officials at a Manila Framework Group meeting in Tokyo in June) reinforced these fears. Poor
export performance was assisted by the fact that the magnitude of dollar-denominated liabilities
and non-performing loans had turned out to be larger than even the most pessimistic estimates as
of mid 1997. In Indonesia real GDP was expected to shrink by as much as 10 per cent (a

81

If it is believed that these weaknesses were generally known, of course, the argument that it is
dangerous to address them on confidence grounds dissolves.
82
As we analyze at more length in the next section.
51

forecast that turned out to be too optimistic). In Thailand real GDP was expected to fall by as
much as 6 per cent (a forecast that turned out to be too pessimistic). In Korea the economy was
expected to shrink by as much as 4 per cent. And in Malaysia growth in 1998 was expected to
be zero.
As news continued to be mixed in the spring and summer of 1998, policymakers at the
IMF, in the U.S. Treasury, and elsewhere took the fact that the news was not worse as evidence
of the positive impact of their policies. There had been no meltdown. A slide into the depths of
a great depression like that started in 1931 with the collapse of Austria’s Credit Anstalt did not
occur in the spring and summer of 1998, notwithstanding the warnings of the Cassandras
(Krugman 1999). But the slowness of Asia’s recovery was worrisome. Swift recovery from the
Mexican crisis had come because the main destination for Mexican exports -- the United States
-- had was growing rapidly, while recovery from the East Asian crisis was likely to be slow
because the main focus of East Asian exports -- Japan -- was stagnating and unprepared to do
anything to solve its problem.
The success of East Asia's recovery therefore required that the Federal Reserve risk some
possible rise in inflation in the U.S. Fed staff continued to oppose further easing, until Russia’s
default and the subsequent flight to quality shocked them out of their complacency. By the end
of August Fed Chairman Greenspan had accepted the need for further loosening and was
actively raising Secretary Rubin’s level of worry over the risk that the crisis could spill over into
U.S. capital markets. Substantial easing of monetary policy in the industrial core, led by the
Fed, then followed.
But continued stagnation in Asia combined with Russia's default to produce a large rise
in yield spreads throughout the world. It was this sharp rise in spreads that was the proximate

52

cause of the financial distress of Long-Term Capital Management. Quickly confidence in Brazil
and its peg began to deteriorate, raising fears of another round of contagion. The financial press
wrote of a "financial firestorm" that had generated the "most baffling currency cris[i]s since the
system of fixed exchange rates crumbled a quarter of a century ago." 83 President Clinton spoke
in September of the gravest financial crisis of the postwar era. Doubts mounted about whether
the IMF had the resources needed to contain its spread.
Fortunately, before long looser credit conditions began to work, and the innate
productive potential of the Asian economies began to reassert itself. By the end of 1998 there
were clear signs of recovery in Korea and Thailand, countries that had basically followed IMF
prescriptions, curbing domestic demand, restructuring their financial systems (even if more
slowly, hesitantly, and incompletely than the IMF had wished), and keeping interest rates high
enough to avoid the extremes of depreciation. But there were also clear signs of recovery in
Malaysia, which had followed its own very different course. Only Indonesia, where the East
Asian financial crisis had segued into the Suharto succession crisis, remained in severe distress.
By early 1999 -- save for Indonesia -- the Asian financial crisis was over.
The last of the major international financial crises confronting the Clinton Administration
-- Brazil in late 1998 and early 1999 -- unfolded differently. Superficially the circumstances
were similar. The currency was overvalued, again by a familiar 20 per cent. The current
account was in deficit; reserves were running down. Treasury officials were less than happy
about having to support another unsustainable peg, but in the fall of 1998 fears of contagion to
other emerging markets and even the United States led them to conclude that there was no
alternative, especially in light of the losses suffered by commercial banks, investment banks and

83

Davis, Friedland, and Moffett, Wall Street Journal (August 24, 1998).
53

other institutional investors due to the combination of Russia and LTCM. They doubted, in
other words, whether the system could "take another hit." And, though they would have
preferred seeing Brazil move to a more flexible exchange rate earlier, as in the case of Mexico
four years previously, U.S. officials lacked the power to compel this.
The U.S.- and IMF-led response was cut from the same cloth as its predecessors: a large
IMF loan (600 per cent of quota) with numerous conditions (but no unconditional demand that
the country alter its currency peg) and a nearly matching amount from the U.S., Japan, the
World Bank, and the Interamerican Development Bank, in November 1998. As in these other
cases, official finance put off the day of reckoning but did not avoid the denouement. Unlike
Mexico and Asia, however, Brazil’s abandonment of its peg and forced shift to floating in
January 1999 did not precipitate a major output decline; contrary to the consensus forecast of a
serious slump, real GDP declined only modestly before recovering robustly in the second half of
the year. It did not spread contagion to other emerging markets. It did not infect the United
States.
Had the Clinton Administration and its collaborators on 19 th Street finally learned the
secret of how to manage an exit from an unsustainable peg? The strong family resemblance of
the Brazilian package to its Asian and Mexican predecessors casts doubt on this Whig
interpretation of recent financial history. It is sometimes said that the very fact that the banks
could see the crisis coming encouraged them to hedge their exposures, which limited the adverse
financial fallout after the fact. But it had also been possible to foresee the Mexican and Thai
crises, and this did not avert the adverse financial consequences, which casts doubt on this
interpretation of events. It is suggested that previous crises had taught the Brazilian government
the importance of building credibility with the markets and of replacing its peg with a clear and

54

coherent monetary policy operating strategy; hence it installed Arminio Fraga and inflation
targeting. But why Brazil should have been faster to learn these lessons than other countries is
far from clear. Brazil was a less dependent on trade than either Mexican or the East Asians,
which meant that a misaligned exchange rate posed less of a threat to its economy. But while
Brazil may have been less open to trade, it was highly open to finance, and it was the financial
fallout that proved surprisingly mild. Finally, it is argued that the combination of the Asian
crisis, Russia’s default and the flight to quality following the near-collapse of LTCM led to a
sharp reduction in leverage in international financial markets, which reduced the scope for
contagion. But while this can help explain the limited spread of the Brazilian crisis, it does not
help us to understand why the macroeconomic consequences in Brazil itself were so mild, in
international comparative terms. The very different aftermath of Brazil’s crisis remains one of
those late-20th century mysteries to be unraveled by future historians.

5. Strengthening the International Financial Architecture
This sequence of events ignited a debate, which still simmers, about how to better
prevent and manage financial crises. Treasury was quick off the mark with speeches by
Secretary Rubin at Georgetown and Brookings in February 1998 on the need to "strengthen...the
architecture of the international financial system." 84 Of course, Rubin’s speech was not the
administration’s first foray into this area. Although the Mexican rescue had not provoked an
equally contentious debate, it had created concerns, both inside and outside the administration,
about moral hazard. And it raised red flags about inadequate transparency and weak financial

84

See Rubin (1998a).
55

systems. In response, the international policy community, with impetus from the Clinton
Treasury, started down the path it has been following ever since.
Mexico’s crisis had highlighted problems of inadequate monetary and fiscal
transparency. Data on the Banco de Mexico’s reserves had come to the market late (in 1994 as
much as six months late), and deficits had been hidden in the accounts of the development banks
(as noted above). The market reaction was abrupt and violent, the conclusion followed, because
deterioration of underlying conditions had been hidden, rendering the devaluation of the peso an
unpleasant surprise. This was an argument for encouraging countries to release such information
in more timely fashion so that investors would curtail the provision of credit more gradually and
ratchet up the pressure for corrective action without precipitating a crisis. Moreover, the
magnitude of the assistance extended to Mexico was unprecedented, reflecting the increased
scope for funds to flow over the capital account, in turn forcing the administration to resort to
the Exchange Stabilization Fund on a large scale to obtain the necessary finance. In response,
the Congress convened hearings and Representative Bernie Sanders of Vermont succeeded in
introducing a bill that would have made it more difficult for the Treasury to again draw on the
ESF for Mexico-style operations. 85 In addition, D’Amato succeeded in adding a rider to the
appropriations bill for fiscal year 1998 that limited the use of the ESF for international rescue.
(The rider required that the president certify that any use of the ESF would not cost the United
States money -- that repayment was guaranteed. In addition, it required that except in an
emergency the president obtain congressional approval for any loan of more than $1 billion for
more than six months. These conditions effectively prevented the use of the ESF in 1997 during

85

While Sanders’ bill never became law, as an indication of Congressional sentiment it surely
added to the reluctance of the administration to again resort to the ESF.
56

the first, Thai, stage of the crisis, as we explained above. 86) If rescue operations were to be
repeated, therefore, their financial basis had to be regularized. And this required international
agreement.
America’s G-7 partners had been ambivalent, to put it mildly, about the Mexican rescue.
The crisis had not erupted in their backyards. Their investors had not held large numbers of
tesobonos. European governments and central banks had always interpreted the lender-of-lastresort doctrine conservatively and taken the moral-hazard critique seriously. For all these
reasons, it was not clear that they would support future Mexico-style rescue operations.
The first time these issues were formally addressed was the G-7 summit in Halifax in
June 1995, at the conclusion of which the heads of state released an unusually detailed analytical
document (G-7 1995). This document reflected each of the lessons drawn by the Clinton
administration from the crisis. Reflecting the belief that many of Mexico’s monetary, fiscal and
financial problems had been hidden, it recommended greater transparency and requested that the
IMF should sharpen its surveillance, issue franker assessments of country conditions, and
establish templates for data dissemination. This last request led to the creation of the IMF’s
Special Data Dissemination Standard in March of 1996. 87
The premise was that market discipline could be relied on to rein in financial excesses
before they got out of hand. Countries would not again be allowed to get into a Mexican-style
bind where they found themselves with $23 billion of short-term foreign-currency liabilities but
only $5 billion of reserves, since the markets would curtail the provision of short-term credit

86

The rider expired after September 30, 1997, the end of the fiscal year (as already noted), and
was not renewed subsequently.
87
It is important to recall, in other words, that this standard was not simply a child of the Asian
crisis. Subscription to the SDDS remains voluntary (that is, IMF members are not obliged to
subscribe).
57

before things got out of hand, and the government would feel the pressure sooner to undertake
the necessary adjustments. With benefit of hindsight we can say that the emphasis placed by the
Treasury’s "financial architects" on the risks of inadequate financial transparency and excessive
reliance on short-term foreign debt were right on the mark; these were the problems that would
return, with a vengeance, in Thailand, South Korea and Indonesia two years later.
But, aided by 20-20 hindsight, we would argue that too much was asked of transparency
and market discipline. Investors’ attention span is limited, causing the application of market
discipline to be uneven.88 Market discipline does not function well in an environment where
other distortions -- implicit guarantees for banks and corporations, for example -- are pervasive.
In addition, efforts to encourage transparency were uneven. Some would say there was
something of a double standard: in the same way that the administration lectured Russia about
democracy but hesitated to do the same to Saudi Arabia, it lectured Latin America about
transparency but was reluctant to do so in Asia. There was a sense, shared in Europe and Japan,
that Asian culture was different, and that Anglo-Saxon style transparency was too much to ask.
Thus, efforts to encourage greater transparency did not prevent Asian governments from
pursuing policies (like the Bangkok International Banking Facility and the Korean government’s
decision to free bank-to-bank borrowing before permitting foreigners access to Korean stock and
bond markets) that greatly heightened their susceptibility to capital-flow reversals. 89

88

Indeed, the example of Long-Term Capital Management suggests that the application of
market discipline is uneven even where the stakes are large, distortions are absent, and the way
that the institutions work is well known. See Lowenstein (2000).
89
As more than one very senior U.S. Treasury official has pointed out, crises had a much higher
chance of striking countries that had significant non-neutralities in favor of hot-money capital
flows.
58

To allow the IMF to respond more adequately to capital account crises, the
administration called for the G-10 (together with other countries not previously involved) to
double the credits they made available to the Fund through the General Agreements to Borrow
and the newly-created New Agreements to Borrow. 90 This call was embraced by the G-7 at its
June 1995 Halifax Summit, and adopted by the IMF Executive Board in a decision taken in
January 1997, although it took until 1998 and the lesson of the Asian crisis for the Congress to
agree to fund the NAB and therefore for the new arrangement to become operational. While the
Europeans continued to warn of moral hazard, they concluded that it was better that such rescue
operations as were mounted should be arranged through the IMF where they could have a say.
The G-7 also asked G-10 finance ministers and central bank governors to review
procedures for crisis resolution. The result was the Rey Report (G-10 1996), which addressed
concerns that large-scale rescue packages were an engine of moral hazard and discussed the
feasibility of alternatives ranging from limited changes in contractual provisions to the creation
of ambitious new institutions (such as an international bankruptcy court for sovereign debts). 91
The report concluded that moral hazard was best addressed by modest changes in the
institutional framework. While there could be occasions when officials, rather than extending
emergency financing, might want to allow the country and its creditors to restructure their debts,

90

The NAB did not replace the existing GAB, but it became the first and principal recourse in
the event that the institution needed supplementary recourses. The new name and separate
arrangement were needed because the expanded arrangement was to include additional countries.
As formulated, it involved 25 members and institutions. The original proposal at the Halifax
summit to double the size of the GAB had not envisaged a separate arrangement because it had
not anticipated the need to draw additional finance from new members.
91
Treasury had wanted to say no to the sherpa proposal in 1995 that eventually resulted in the
Rey Report, not knowing what recommendations such a high-profile international committee,
which clearly possessed the expertise to articulate full-blown, coherent proposals, might table. On
this occasion it was led to reverse its position by White House staff.
59

the feasibility of this should not be taken for granted. It was something that needed to be
facilitated by institutional changes such as IMF lending into arrears (to provide the crisis country
the equivalent of "debtor-in-possession financing") and the introduction of collective action
clauses into bond indentures (as a way of preventing restructuring from being blocked by
opportunistic creditors), a contractual innovation that governments might have to actively
enourage.92
The Rey Report was the product of a G-10 process; some of its limitations reflected the
fact that the emerging markets were not directly involved. This observation led to a second
exercise: the Draghi report, composed by a working party made up of G-10 deputies together
with representatives of emerging markets (Argentina, Indonesia, Korea, Thailand -- it is not as if
officials missed the obvious suspects -- along with Hong Kong, Mexico, Poland, and Singapore),
and the multilaterals. Jeffrey Shafer and Timothy Geithner spoke for the U.S. Treasury, Edwin
Truman for the Federal Reserve Board. Its report, issued in May 1997 (Working Party 1997),
was remarkable for its prescience. Not only did it flag the usual macroeconomic sources of
vulnerability, including debt management as well as monetary and fiscal policies, but it gave
equal weight to "sector-specific sources of vulnerability" (corporate government and
management, market infrastructure and discipline, supervision and regulation -- what the
subsequent literature would refer to as weak institutions and flawed structural policies).
Particular emphasis was placed on the prerequisites for a robust financial system, not only the
macroeconomic requirements but also the legal and juridical framework, accounting and other

92

The IMF Board agreed that its long-standing policy of lending into sovereign arrears on shortterm loans from banks should be applied also to bonded debt. However, no official steps were
taken to sharpen the incentives for the adoption of collective action clauses. We return to this
point below.
60

information systems, stakeholder rights, and limits on the extent of the safety net. Someone
clearly saw the Asian crisis coming, although it is not clear that they saw it coming in Asia. 93 If
there is a criticism of this document, it is that it placed more emphasis on the identification of
problems than their solution and on the design of optimal policies than on the capacity to
administer them. And it lacked a sense of urgency; there was no sense that the relevant reforms
had to be implemented in short order if a major regional crisis was to be headed off.
Be that as it may, the point is that the main issues raised by the Asian crisis were on the
table before that crisis struck. The Clinton Treasury was a prime mover behind the push for
greater transparency, for larger IMF facilities, and for examining the causes and resolution of
sovereign liquidity crises. While rejecting ambitious schemes for an international bankruptcy
procedure on grounds of political feasibility and worries that doing so would simply substitute
one source of moral hazard for another, it acknowledged the need for modest institutional
changes that would permit market-based restructuring as an alternative to large-scale financial
rescues of crisis countries.94
But if the Tequila crisis highlighted the need for institutional changes to cope with the
rapid growth of capital flows, it did not lead the administration to rethink its core strategy of
encouraging the deeper integration of countries into global financial markets as a way of
promoting reform and faster growth. How much responsibility the Clinton Administration
deserves for this push for capital account liberalization is a contentious issue. 95 As already
noted, the initial impetus came from elsewhere. Rubin and Summers themselves had always had

93

As noted above, the exercise did not enable officials to foresee the crisis in Indonesia, the
paradigmatic case of a country with weak institutions and flawed structural policies.
94
See Summers (1996).
95
As our readers, who disagree amongst themselves, have reminded us.
61

relatively nuanced views of the merits of capital account liberalization; as noted above, neither
was an unmitigated believer in the wisdom and efficiency of the markets. But the administration
clearly could have done more to prevent the train from careening down the tracks. Much later
then former-Secretary Rubin acknowledged in an interview that "With the benefit of hindsight I
would say that we should have put more of an emphasis earlier on getting the rest of it right..."
(New York Times, December 12, 2000, p.1) where in referring to "the rest of it" he meant
"making sure countries had a regulatory structure and an understanding of what could befall
them if the world picked up its money and moved it elsewhere."
The administration’s support for capital account liberalization flowed naturally from its
belief in free and open markets. It reflected the experience and predisposition of a Treasury
Secretary with extensive experience in the markets. As Rubin put it in a speech timed to
coincide with the Spring 1999 Bank-Fund meetings, "Our approach...has been informed by the
fundamental belief that a market-based system provides the best prospect for creating jobs,
spurring economic activity, and raising living standards in the U.S. and around the world." 96 It
was a function of the belief that controls on capital flows created opportunities for corruption. It
reflected the view that domestic financial liberalization had profoundly important benefits, but
also the side effect of rendering capital controls that much more difficult and distortionary to
administer and operate. Finally, it followed from the administration’s commitment to trade
liberalization, insofar as trade in merchandise was increasingly superseded by trade in services. 97

96

Rubin (1999), p.1. Or, as he put it on another occasion, "Any discussion of changes to the
global financial system should be, from my perspective, grounded in a fundamental belief that a
market-based global economic system, based on the relatively free flow of goods, services and
capital between nations around the world, will best promote global economic well being in the
decades ahead." Rubin (1998b), p.2.
97
Politically, Treasury could not be significantly less aggressive in attempting to secure national
treatment for American banks than USTR was in pursuing market access for other U.S.
62

This approach reached its pinnacle (some would say its nadir) with efforts to secure an
amendment to the IMF Articles of Agreement to oblige the members to establish the
convertibility of their currencies on capital account. 98 Although this initiative did not originate
in Washington (it emanated from the British and French Treasuries, as we understand it, and was
enthusiastically received by Camdessus’ IMF at both staff and management levels), neither did
the administration oppose it. The administration owed one to the IMF Managing Director after
Mexico: its life had been made much easier by Camdessus’ willingness to turn on a dime and
instantly contribute the lion's share of money for the peso support package in spite of the
opposition of the British and German Executive Directors. And in the aftermath of the peso
crisis, which reflected imprudent debt management by an emerging market country, Treasury
saw the merit in extending multilateral surveillance to the process of capital account
liberalization.

exporters. This led to a curious role reversal during the WTO financial services negotiations,
with the U.S. Trade Representative, hoping to secure a deal, arguing that the U.S. had gone as
far as it should in pushing developing countries to allow commercial banks and insurance firms
to enter their markets, while the Treasury continued to insist that more was necessary and
desirable. Throughout, Treasury sought to draw a distinction between opening the capital
account to financial flows and cross-border business and extending the right of establishment
and national treatment to foreign financial firms in domestic markets. Summers, in a speech
delivered soon after the outbreak of the Asian crisis, insisted capital account liberalization "is
logically separable from the degree of domestic market access enjoyed by foreign financial
institutions" but then went on to acknowledge that in practice the two tend to be linked
(Summers 1997, p.3). A notorious example of linkage is Thailand, where the government
opened the Bangkok International Banking Facility and then announced that it would give the
broadest licenses to those who brought in the most money. With benefit of hindsight, it can be
argued that more attention should have been paid to such dangers.
98
In the language of the declaration of the Interim Committee of the IMF, the amendment would
have made the liberalization of capital movements "one of the purposes" of the Fund. By
analogy to the provision in the Articles of Agreement obliging members to establish the
convertibility of their currencies on current account, governments would still have been able to
delay this step for a transitional period, during which supportive measures were put in place.
Still, the amendment would have ratcheted up the pressure for them to move in this direction.
63

With benefit of hindsight we can say that this initiative was at best poorly timed and at
worst fundamentally misconceived. If there is one lesson of the Asian crisis, it is that premature
capital account liberalization, initiated before prudential supervision is upgraded, corporate
governance is strengthened, and government guarantees for domestic financial intermediaries are
removed, creates conditions that can be described as an accident waiting to happen. However
carefully the amendment to the Articles might have been scripted, and however long actual
implementation of capital-account liberalization was to be delayed -- viewed as an ultimate goal
rather than a current policy -- nevertheless the pressure to adopt it sent the wrong signal. Even
though the administration supported broad deference to supervisory concerns as a legitimate
constraint on capital account liberalization, Camdessus’s speeches on the amendment and the
priority to be attached to the objective were less nuanced; and given the influence of the United
States in the Fund and the fact of close Treasury-IMF links, there was the perception, rightly or
wrongly, that the U.S. was a wholehearted supporter of this push. The rebuttal is that the
problem was not with the policy but with its implementation in Asia: the Koreans opened their
capital account exactly backwards (freeing their banks to borrow offshore before liberalizing
inward direct foreign investment and foreign access to domestic bond and equity markets), and
the Thais subsidized short-term bank-to-bank borrowing by establishing the notorious Bangkok
International Banking Facility. But this ignores the limited administrative capacity and
politicization of policy that were facts of economic life in much of Asia and that should have
more profoundly shaped the Washington consensus.
Learning from the experience, the administration drew back from this position following
the Hong Kong Bank-Fund meetings, adopting a more careful and nuanced position emphasizing
the benefits of "properly sequenced and supported" capital account liberalization. It became

64

"quietly sympathetic" to the use of Chilean-style taxes designed to limit short-term interbank
borrowing.99 By the winter of 1997-8 the amendment to the Articles was off the table, as policy
makers became preoccupied by the Asian crisis.
The recognition that a backlash was brewing against financial globalization and the need
to head off radical proposals for reform were what prompted Secretary Rubin to deliver his highprofile speeches on the subject of architecture in advance of the spring 1998 meetings of the
Fund and the Bank.100 Rubin laid out the three-pronged approach to strengthening the
international financial system that was to characterize Treasury’s efforts in this area for the
remainder of the administration: initiatives to enhance disclosure and transparency, initiatives to
strengthen national financial sectors, and mechanisms to ensure that the market more fully bore
the consequences of its credit and investment decisions (that rather than investors being "bailed
out," they were "bailed in"). While these recommendations echoed the conclusions of the
Halifax and Lyon Summits, they also transcended them. On data and disclosure Rubin pointed
to the problems, raised by the Asian crisis, of obtaining a complete picture of the forward and
derivative liabilities of central banks and the foreign currency liabilities of commercial banks
and corporations. He called for promoting "new, more flexible forms of debt agreements and

99

In the words of a Wall Street Journal report (April 5, 1999, p.A22). Others of us would
instead say "at least acquiescent," and distinguish between Treasury’s tolerance for Chilean-style
measures where they already existed from its reluctance to actively urge their more widespread
adoption. The new approach is incapsulated in the report of G-7 finance ministers to the June
1999 Cologne Summit, which concluded that "the use of controls on capital inflows may be
justified for a transitional period as countries strengthen the institutional and regulatory
environment in their domestic financial systems. Where financial sectors and supervisory
regimes are weak, safeguards may be appropriate to limit foreign currency exposure of the
banking system." G-7 (1999), p.10.
100
Indeed, discussions had begun, within Treasury and between the Treasury, Fed and White
House (represented by the CEA), on the need for fundamental measures to strengthen the
international financial system (a "Halifax II") almost immediately following the outbreak of the
crisis.
65

indentures" to provide a framework for direct negotiations between debtors and creditors. 101
And he proposed the development of "a more complete range of global standards" to guide
governments’ efforts to strengthen their domestic financial systems. 102
This was a more completely articulated agenda for strengthening the international
financial architecture than potential rivals could claim. Camdessus was immediately receptive
to the argument for encouraging transparency and promulgating international standards as a way
of structuring international efforts to strengthen emerging economies’ financial systems. He saw
standards and codes as a vehicle for exerting pressure on member countries to upgrade their
national financial policies and practices while at the same time providing an objective basis for
IMF surveillance and conditionality and freeing the institution from criticism that its
interventions were arbitrary and capricious. Camdessus and his staff recognized that, by placing
the Fund at the center of these efforts to strengthen financial systems, it might be possible to
further expand the mission of the institution. 103 The G-22, an outgrowth of the so-called

101

While not mentioning collective action clauses by name. Actually, the Brookings speech as
printed referred to direct negotiations between "creditors and investors" where it presumably
meant "debtors and investors."
102
The push for standards was not exclusively a U.S. initiative; the UK Treasury and Bank of
England played prominent roles in the formulation of this approach. To be sure, this standardscentered approach had other precedents, notably the Standard for Capital Adequacy for
International Banks promulgated by the Basle Committee of Banking Supervisors. This too had
been a U.S. initiative (we understand it as a U.S. response to the debt crisis of the 1980s, and
specifically to Paul Volcker’s concern that this crisis had revealed the tendency for international
competition to exert competitive pressures that undermined the capital adequacy of international
banks).
103
To be sure, the Fund had already crafted a "Framework for Financial Stability" that essentially
described standards for the supervision and regulation of banks and securities markets. The
Fund had also developed a code for fiscal transparency, also in response to impetus from the UK
Treasury. But there was considerable resistance in its higher echelons to widening the focus of
surveillance from the Fund’s core competencies of monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policies,
resistance that was only overcome in the wake of Rubin’s architecture speeches. Compare, for
example, the absence of any reference to standards in Camdessus’s February 1998 speech to the
Bretton Woods Committee (Camdessus 1998a) with the emphasis placed on this initiative in his
66

Willard Group (an earlier effort by the administration to bring together the developed and
developing countries around a single set of policy recommendations), quickly issued reports on
transparency and disclosure, on strengthening national financial systems, and on private sector
burden sharing, all of which were in line with Treasury thinking. 104 To the extent that the
recommendations differed from those of the Rey Report two years earlier, this reflected the
Treasury’s increased insistency on "voluntary" solutions, which represented a backing away
from Rey.105
It was in the area of crisis resolution that the administration was least successful in
clearing a path. Its role was largely one of vetoing schemes, which it viewed as
counterproductive or worse, to contain and resolve crises by giving national governments or
multilaterals the power to override the markets. Administration officials torpedoed France’s
proposal in 1998 for a "financial safeguard clause" (analogous to the safeguard clauses that exist
in international trade) under whose umbrella countries might impose temporary capital controls.
They resisted Canadian and British calls for an international standstill mechanism for sovereign
debts. If debt standstills and restructurings were to emerge as an alternative to large-scale
financial rescues, they insisted, their feasibility would have to be demonstrated by the markets.
But administration officials did not offer specific suggestions for institutional changes to
facilitate this process. For the proposed changes suggested by others -- mandating the addition
May speech to the Royal Institute (Camdessus 1998b).
104
See G-22 (1998a,b,c). President Clinton’s offer to organize the G-22 meeting originated
with a proposal that Prime Minister Goh of Singapore made while the two were playing golf
before the November 1997 APEC meeting in Vancouver. In a repeat of the pattern when it had
been proposed to create the Rey Committee in 1995 (see above), Treasury opposed the idea,
until it was reformulated by the White House. The G-22 was later expanded into the G-33
(adding the remainder of the G-10) before being slimmed down into the present G-20, which
held its first ministerial meeting in December 1999.
105
One participant in G-22 report drafting reports that it was a struggle to keep “voluntary” out of
every paragraph -- it kept coming back in, in the handwriting of high Treasury officials.
67

to collective action clauses to loan contracts, or establishing standing committees of creditors,
for example -- they showed little enthusiasm. For example, they rejected measures to mandate
the adoption of collective action clauses as a means to this end. In 1996 then Deputy Secretary
Summers had described the case for collective action clauses as "obvious" (Summers 1996, p.6),
and it was anticipated that the U.S. would support some kind of official action to encourage their
adoption. It quickly became apparent, however, that financial-market participants, represented
in this instance by the Institute of International Finance, strongly opposed legislation and
regulations that might require them to modify their contracts. The extent to which this privatesector pressure influenced U.S. policy is unclear. Rubin’s experience with the markets
encouraged in him the belief that, if changes in contractual arrangements were desirable, they
would come of their own volition; this may have been all that was at play. Be that as it may, by
1998 the administration had distanced itself from the idea of providing official incentives for the
more widespread adoption of these provisions, and argued in international fora that the official
sector had no business mandating the provisions of private loan contracts. The G-22 Working
Group on International Financial Crises (G-22 1998c), led by U.S. Under-Secretary David
Lipton, recommended only that governments engage in "educational efforts" in the major
financial centers and that they "examine" the use of such clauses; it did not suggest that the IMF
should key its lending rates and disbursements on their willingness to do so.
Was there any positive result in terms of creating an alternative to large-scale financial
rescues as a way of addressing crisis problems? The scholarly answer would be that it is still too
early to tell. When the IMF lends there is now a presumption that it will ask for a commitment
from investors not to withdraw funds as quickly as the official sector pumps them in. But
whether or not the markets can manage the process of debt restructuring smoothly enough to

68

avert serious output losses and relieve the IMF of pressure to intervene still remains unclear. 106
Institutional innovations like exit consents (pioneered in the case of Ecuador) provide some
grounds for thinking that the markets are up to the challenge. Be that as it may, the transition
from the Clinton administration to the Bush administration may increase the likelihood that we
will have an experiment to see how this works. 107 But if the process is difficult and proves
highly disruptive to the markets, the pressure for IMF intervention in the event of future crises
will only intensify again, reviving the case for institutional changes to facilitate an alternative.
The exchange rate issue played surprisingly little role in these early architecture debates.
To be sure, the issue came up in every official post-mortem of the crises, but it hardly occupied a
place of prominence, and official pronouncements remained weak soup. This seems curious
with hindsight, given the undeniable association of crises with currency pegs starting with
Europe in 1992 and proceeding through Mexico in 1994 before arriving in Asia in 1997 and
Brazil in 1998. Every major financial crisis since Mexico’s in some way involved a fixed or
pegged exchange rate regime, as even the IMF was eventually forced to acknowledge. 108
From this perspective, it is striking that only in April 1999 did a G-7 leader, Rubin, state
outright that the IMF should no longer support shaky currency pegs and that emerging markets

106

We are not arguing that it is desirable to eliminate all output losses following crises -- any more
than it is desirable to eliminate all crises. Dooley (2000) develops the argument that output costs
of misbehavior are necessary in order for lending to occur in the first place but exaggerates the
implications, in our view. If one believes, as we do, that the IMF feels compelled to lend because
these output losses are judged excessive by that institution’s principal shareholders and that the
moral hazard that flows from those loans is a source of inefficiency, then institutional reform that
reduces those output losses and therefore the moral hazard created by a pattern of IMF lending is
a step in the right, efficiency-enhancing, direction.
107
Early experience with Turkey to the contrary notwithstanding.
108
In contrast, countries without pegged rates -- South Africa and Mexico in 1998, for example -while not immune from international capital market disturbances, suffered to a much lesser degree
than countries with pegs (Fischer 2001c).
69

should move away from such arrangements in favor of hard pegs or, in most cases, more flexible
rates. His deputy, Summers, had been pushing this "corner solutions" argument for some
time.109 The argument resonated with Rubin’s experience in the markets, which informed his
view that currency pegs were fragile and accident prone. Indeed, the advocacy by the RubinSummers Treasury of the corner-solutions view (that only hard pegs and relatively free floats are
viable in a world of high capital mobility) was stronger and less conditional than many others in
the administration found to their liking (though right on the mark, in our view).
This was a coherent intellectual position, but the U.S. was not able to assemble the
coalition needed to operationalize it. The Europeans, given their history and their plan to create
a monetary union, were not sympathetic to the case for floating rates; they had blocked frank
discussion of the issue in the deliberations leading up to the Rey Report and again at the time of
the G-22 report on managing financial crises. Asian governments, for their part, were reluctant
to entrust their currency values to the market and resisted calls for greater exchange-rate
flexibility. The IMF, being an institution of many members (and headed by a managing director
who continued, even in the face of the crisis, to favor a return to fixed rates), continued to offer
weak advice to the effect that "no one size fits all" and "what matters above all is consistency
between exchange rate and other policies."110 The U.S. Treasury was unable to overcome this
hesitancy and division.
Here, moreover, the failure to develop alternative mechanisms of crisis resolution came
home to haunt the administration. For countries with balance-sheet mismatches, abandoning a
109

For example, in a speech to the Interamerican Development Bank meetings the month before.
Rubin (1999), p.4.
110
Fischer (2001a) may indicate some change of opinion on this subject among the senior
management of the institution, as may the appointment of a new managing director (although, on
this, only time will tell). More generally, the implications of subsequent changes in the IMF
management team for views on this subject remain to be seen.
70

currency peg could create serious financial difficulties and even widespread bankruptcies, as the
case of Indonesia had shown. The cost of servicing dollar- and yen-denominated loans would
soar if the exchange rate fell by a significant amount, leaving firms, many of whose earnings
were in local currency, no way of keeping current on their debts. Widespread bankruptcy was
the unavoidable result.111 Absent mechanisms for more speedily resolving these problems, this
was not an option that anyone was prepared to contemplate. Not surprisingly, when push came
to shove, as in Brazil in 1998 and Turkey in 1999, the Fund, backed by its principal
shareholders, continued to intervene in support of governments’ efforts to maintain those pegs.
And knowing that they still stood to receive international support, governments were
understandably slow to move to greater flexibility. Notwithstanding this reluctance, there has
been slow but steady movement in the direction of greater exchange rate flexibility in the
developing world, something that has clearly reduced the risk of further financial crises. 112 But
that movement has tended to be involuntary -- the result of a crisis (as in Turkey) rather than a
preemptive step to avert one.
The final item on the architecture agenda was IMF reform. A first issue was the structure
of conditionality. The Fund had been attaching additional structural conditions to its loans since
at least the mid-1980s (the time of the Baker Plan). In Asia in 1997, these conditions were
intended to precipitate "a vast change in domestic business practices, corporate culture, and
government behavior."113 The 1997 Indonesian program typified both the aspiration and the
excesses: the conditions of the IMF program dealt with, among with other things, reforestation,
the national car program, local content programs for motor vehicles, the compulsory 2 per cent

111

As described in more detail in Section 4 above.
See Fischer (2001b).
113
Camdessus (1998), p.3.
112

71

after-tax charitable contribution, restrictive market agreements for cement and paper, the forced
planting of sugar cane, the introduction of a micro-credit scheme for small businesses, and the
elimination of the Clove Marketing Board. While the "Christmas-tree" nature of this program
was a product of the IMF bureaucracy and of Indonesian technocrats, who viewed it as an
opportunity to push through much-needed domestic reform in the shelter of an IMF package but
failed to deliver their principal, we are not aware of strong Treasury warnings of the dangers.
Treasury was sensitive to the danger that any evidence that Fund conditionality was
being used to advance the country’s own agenda (which in this case might have included
opening up sheltered markets to international competition and giving U.S. commercial and
investment banks improved market access) would undermine the legitimacy of IMF
conditionality and the credibility of U.S. policy advice. It therefore resisted USTR pressure to
use the crisis as an opportunity to gain specific concessions on market access for U.S. banks and
corporations. Indeed, it is hard to find structural conditions in the Fund’s programs that worked
to the particular advantage of U.S. banks and firms.
On the intrinsic merits of structural conditionality, Treasury was torn. On the one hand
its own approach to prudential supervision and regulation emphasized the need for competition,
transparency, and arms-length dealing, and it instinctively wished to export these features of
U.S. market structure and organization to emerging markets with the help of the IMF. It saw the
crisis, and the resort of the Asian tigers to the Fund, as an opportunity to apply pressure and to
reinforce domestic support for fundamental opening and reform -- to encourage these countries
to break with crony capitalism, which may have been an appropriate arrangement for getting
industrialization off the ground but was no longer a viable basis for growth in an increasingly
advanced, competitive, financially-deregulated and technologically dynamic region. It saw the

72

crisis, and the IMF programs crafted in response, as a window of opportunity to encourage
much-needed domestic reforms and to support reform-minded elements in various Asian
countries. At the same time U.S. officials could not help but appreciate the danger of a backlash
-- that intrusive conditionality might fuel popular resentment of the Fund, and of the country that
was its principal shareholder.
Whether this emphasis on structural conditions was counterproductive, as authors like
Feldstein (1999) insist, only time will tell. We are of the view that whether it is wise for the
U.S. or the IMF to explore with national leaders which things they would like to be pushed can
only be decided on a case-by-case basis; blanket rules for what should be in or out of IMF
programs are unlikely to be feasible or desirable. If, as a result of the Asian crisis and the
response, countries like Korea are really breaking with crony capitalism, creating capital
markets, and opening up (as some would have it), then the case for at least limited structural
conditionality will look strong. Whatever the answer turns out to be, the administration itself
concluded that the expansion of structural conditionality had gone too far and came out in late
1999 in favor of a simplified and streamlined process (Summers 1999b). 114
Russia’s default and the near-collapse of the Greenwich, Connecticut based hedge fund,
Long-Term Capital Management, by impressing upon the G-7 that financial fragility was not
just an emerging-market problem, lent additional urgency to the architecture debate. Once more
the administration sought to set the international agenda. Clinton, in his speech at the Council
on Foreign Relations on 28 September 1998, warned that failure to act could "put our own

114

Although it never went as far as recommended by such critics as Feldstein (1998) and Meltzer
et al. (2000). Some would suggest that it staked out this position in order to anticipate and
preempt a conclusion of the Meltzer Commission and thus to head off some of its more radical
recommendations.
73

prosperity at risk."115 The main substantive innovation he suggested was the idea of a new
facility to provide emergency financing for countries pursuing strong policies but nonetheless
vulnerable to financial problems occurring elsewhere in the world. Reflecting the perceived
severity of the threat posed by the crisis, the concept was quickly endorsed by the G-7 in
extraordinary out-of-cycle declaration of October 1998 (G-7 1998), and that endorsement led to
creation of the IMF’s new Contingent Credit Line (CCL) in 1999. The CCL was a quick
disbursing facility intended to prevent collateral damage to innocent bystanders in the event of
crises. Limiting access to countries with strong policies addressed the moral hazard concern,
while prequalifying them for assistance promised to shorten the delay between requests for
assistance and their disbursal.
Unfortunately, the new facility delivered less than hoped. Rather than seeing the CCL as
an additional line of defense against market turbulence, emerging-market governments feared
that it would be seen as evidence that they were worried about crisis problems. And because
strong policies could weaken, access to the CCL was never automatic; even countries that
prequalified were subject to a further review by the IMF Board upon their request to actually
draw. For both reasons, the CCL had no obvious advantage over a normal IMF program. At the
time of writing, no country has applied for one. 116

115

In retrospect, this rhetoric can be criticized as alarmist. But its purpose was to ratchet up the
pressure on the Congress to vote a quota increase for the IMF, thereby increasing the resources
available to the institution; in effect, it warned the politicians on Capitol Hill that they would be
held responsible for the crisis if they did proceed accordingly.
116
Although rumor has it that this may have changed by the time our audience receives this
paper. The IMF subsequently attempted to make the CCL more attractive by simplifying access
at the point of disbursal and by reducing the associated interest charges. Defenders of the CCL
have argued that its mere existence may have played a role in preventing Brazil’s end-1998 crisis
from spreading to other countries, but we know of no evidence to this effect.
74

The Asian crisis, like the Mexican crisis before it, underscored the extent to which the
growth of market liquidity had outpaced the growth of IMF resources. This created an obvious
argument for a quota increase. Given Republican control of the Congress and the firestorm of
criticism surrounding the expansion of IMF financial activities, the administration’s success in
pushing through a quota increase in late 1998 was nothing short of miraculous. 117 Officials
testified at least 11 times on the Hill on IMF funding, more than three times as often as on
domestic issues such as tobacco legislation and reform of the Internal Revenue Service. Their
efforts were helped along by press coverage of Russia’s default and the collapse of LTCM as
threatening a global meltdown; Congress clearly didn’t want to run the risk of being held
responsible.118
The price was agreement to the demand to establish a bipartisan commission (ultimately
chaired by Allan Meltzer) to recommend reforms of the international financial institutions. 119
The Meltzer Commission came back with a recommendation that IMF assistance be extended
only to countries with strong policies and at risk of destabilization through no fault of their
own,120 that such loans should be contingent on prior actions rather than conditions regarding
subsequent policies, and that the terms and conditions of IMF loans should be tightened to

117

This increase raised the Fund’s lending capacity from about $130 billion to some $195 billion
(not counting the expansion of the General Arrangements to Borrow into the New Arrangements
to Borrow, something that had been proposed by the administration following the Mexican crisis
and was acted upon by the Congress in 1998). The U.S. contribution was $14.5 billion for the
quota increase and $3.4 billion for the New Arrangements to Borrow.
118
As noted above, the President ratcheted up the pressure they felt in his Council on Foreign
Relations speech, where he characterized their failure to vote the quota increase as
“irresponsible.”
119
In addition, the IMF Authorization and Appropriations Act of 1998 required an annual report
and testimony by the Secretary of the Treasury on the IMF and that the GAO prepare an annual
report on IMF programs and policies.
120
Which would seem to exclude Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia, and Korea, for in all these cases
weaknesses in government policy played some role in setting the stage for the crisis.
75

discourage countries from taking excessive resource to the Fund. 121 The Treasury’s response
challenged the realism of a policy of benign neglect of crises in countries whose policies were
less than impeccably strong, questioned the feasibility of prequalifying countries for assistance,
and rejected the notion that policy conditionality could be eliminated. 122 Treasury was in a
position to dismiss some of the more extreme recommendations of the Commission because it
had already conceded the moderate ones, like the desirability of higher interest rates and shorter
terms to maturity on IMF loans (notably in a speech by Secretary Summers to the London
Business School in December 1999).123
The final issue under this subheading, governance of the international monetary and
financial system, was a delicate one, given the need to give emerging markets greater voice in
order to enhance the legitimacy of the process (and give them "ownership" of the reform agenda)
but also the fact that changes in IMF governance might jeopardize the "U.S. veto" (the fact that
important decisions require agreement by countries accounting for at least 85 per cent of IMF
quotas and that the U.S. possesses more than 15 per cent of those quota rights). Predictably, it
was easier to make changes outside the IMF where financial commitments were not involved. 124
121

See International Financial Institution Advisory Commission (2000).
See U.S. Treasury (2000).
123
See Summers (1999b). This led the U.S. to table proposals for raising interest charges on
Fund borrowing and reducing the term of loans at the time of the IMF’s spring meetings in
2000, most of which were then adopted. Space limitations prevent us from discussing the
efficacy of these changes in any detail. One question is whether higher interest rates and shorter
terms to maturity are efficiency enhancing. Here, reasonable people (like the two present
authors) can disagree; one’s answer depends on whether one things that the main problem with
the status quo ante was moral hazard (in which case higher interest rates and shorter terms may
be desirable) or that governments are often too focused on how to pay back their loans to the
IMF in the next 24 months (in which case they are not). A prior question is whether modest
changes in the term and cost of borrowing will significantly affect the behavior of crisis
countries desperate for external finance.
124
Thus, the U.S. sought in 1999 to build support for a realignment of the constituency system,
reducing the number of Europe-led constituencies in order to free up seats for Asian, African
and Latin American countries, but without success.
122

76

The impetus the Clinton administration provided for the creation of the Willard Group and the
G-22 responded to a real need to create a talk shop for high-level officials and their deputies that
was not limited to the advanced-industrial countries, but it also limited the pressure for a
fundamental reform of IMF quotas. In addition, the administration -- and the Fund itself -emphasized the need for more transparency in IMF decision making and documentation as a way
of holding the Fund more accountable to its ultimate constituents. It made progress in this
direction despite the hesitations of a number of European and emerging-market members.
To what extent, in summary, did the Clinton administration guide the course of the
architecture debate? Our assessment is "very considerably."125 The presumption of the benefits
of international financial liberalization that infused the Rubin-Summers Treasury remained a
given, notwithstanding the reservations of foreign governments and the fact of emerging-market
crises. The enhanced transparency and international financial standards advocated by the
administration (with the strong support of the British) became the centerpieces of efforts to
upgrade financial policies and financial systems. The administration played an important role in
encouraging the IMF to upgrade its surveillance of financial markets. 126 It provided the impetus
for creating the Group of 22 that developed into the Group of 20. It proposed the establishment
of a "Market Conditions Advisory Group" composed of private-sector experts, which was the
seed from which sprang the Capital Markets Consultative Group in which the Fund now takes
such pride. Its recommendations had flaws and were not always clearly successful or even
adopted. (Witness the Contingent Credit Line and the continued muddle with the Europeans and

125

Coeure and Pisani-Ferry (2000, p.34), agree: they write "Over the last three years, the
discussions on reforming the international financial architecture have been by and large an
exercise in American leadership."
126
Thus, it lobbied for the creation of a Capital Markets Department in the Fund that would take
the monitoring of market conditions and gathering of market intelligence as its mandate.
77

Japanese over exchange rate arrangements). Nor were its damage-control efforts always
successful. But it possessed the loudest and most articulate voice.
These initiatives all had the strong support of the U.S. financial community. In contrast,
where the administration had less support from its financial constituency, such as in developing
new approaches to crisis resolution, it was less successful in setting the agenda for reform. By
moving away from its early advocacy institutional changes to facilitate orderly debt workouts,
partly in response, it would appear, to opposition from U.S. financial interests, and by adopting a
more ad hoc approach to involving the private sector in the resolution of crises, it heightened
uncertainty about the process of crisis resolution and reinforced worries about the moral hazard
caused by a pattern of financial rescues, two problems that linger to this day.

6. Conclusion
International economic problems and policies occupied the Clinton White House and
Treasury to a greater extent than anyone had anticipated in 1992. In part this reflected the
failure of the president and his staff to develop domestic initiatives other than deficit reduction
that could command the support of swing votes in the Senate. More fundamentally it reflected
far-reaching changes in the world economy. Falling transport costs raised the benefits of
international trade for developed and developing countries and not least for the United States.
Financial liberalization and the information revolution combined to accelerate the process of
capital market integration, creating new opportunities for those on both sides of the international
investment equation but at the same time heightening the economic and financial risks.
From a domestic point of view, the administration’s monetary and financial policy was
extraordinarily successful. Deficit reduction created space for monetary ease, which in turn

78

supported the investment-led recovery that ended a two decade-long productivity slowdown and
powered one of the longest, strongest expansions in history. 127 Moreover, these events played a
positive role in the rest of the world. European policymakers spent much of the 1990s preparing
for monetary union and grappling with the chronic fiscal problems that were the principal
obstacle to achieving it. They had little room in which to adjust aggregate demand in the interest
of global growth and stability. Japanese policymakers spent the decade trying to minimize the
embarrassment of executives and organizations who had made bad choices in the Bubble
Economy years; they paid little attention to managing aggregate demand even to support their
own growth. Only U.S. policymakers worried about global demand and sought to do something
about it. In this context, they deserve more credit than blame for their willingness to risk the
growth of the U.S. trade deficit and allowing the U.S. to be the importer of last resort.
Others would describe the Clinton administration as blind-sided by a series of
international monetary and financial problems that it should have seen coming. These crises
came as a surprise because economists’ models and half a century of historical experience both

127

The story by which the 1990 Bush-Mitchell-Foley and 1993 Clinton-Mitchell-Foley deficit
reduction packages broke the back of the Reagan deficits, allowed the Federal Reserve to reduce
interest rates, and thus boosted the share of investment spending in GDP in the United States in
the 1990s is well-known. The links between the investment boom and the rapid pace of
productivity growth achieved in the United States in the 1990s are probable, but less certain. A
large component of rapid productivity growth came from the technological revolutions in data
processing and data communications. But such productivity growth does not fall from the air. It
is built from the ground up as businesses slowly and methodically install and learn how to use
the capital goods that embody the new revolutionary technologies. Budget deficits that raise
interest rates discourage this process of investment, and increase the gap between the
standard-installed and the innovative best-practice levels of technology. It is not clear how long
the acceleration in United States productivity growth was delayed by the Reagan deficits in the
1980s. It is clear, however, that productivity growth in the 1990s would have been significantly
slower had the U.S. federal budget deficit remained high. Here the Clinton administration
pursued good policies, and also got lucky as the economic payoff to deficit reduction turned out
to be much larger than anyone had imagined.

79

suggested that crises arise when it becomes impossible to sustain unsustainable policies. The
symptoms of such unsustainability (large budget deficits, rapid inflation) are common
knowledge, as is the medicine appropriate for treating them (monetary and fiscal retrenchment).
But while the Thai, Russian and, arguably, the Mexican and Brazilian crises fit this mold, many
of the other crises of the 1990s did not. In particular, the Asian crisis of 1997-1998 hit countries
that were in broad macroeconomic balance and had been following broadly sustainable policies.
Those crises had structural roots. Lending by Asian banks was often guided as much by
political as economic criteria. Countries in the region had weak systems of corporate
government and opaque forms of financial organization that made it hard for outsiders to
influence and even determine what was going on. And even where macroeconomic imbalances
were present, structural problems accentuated their effects: in Mexico, for example, there was an
overhang of dollar-denominated and dollar-indexed debt coupled with fears of political
instability that rendered policy commitments (including the exchange rate commitment) fragile.
Still, in each of these cases, the afflicted countries’ sins against the gods of macroeconomics
seemed minor compared to the punishment, which was harsh and swift. These aspects of the
crisis problem were all corollaries of the liberalization of domestic and international financial
markets, a policy to which U.S. support actively contributed with what in retrospect can be
criticized as a bit of excessive zest.
Because these crises followed a new pattern, they surprised policy makers. The response
therefore had to be assembled on the run. Unsurprisingly, it can and has been criticized: too
much reliance on the standard monetary and fiscal instruments in addressing crises whose roots
were not fundamentally monetary or fiscal, too much well-meant but ill-timed advice on how
affected countries should reform their economies. At the same time, the IMF and the U.S.

80

Treasury did make substantial loans to crisis-affected countries, these loans did greatly ease the
process of adjustment and recovery, and only one country (Indonesia) suffered more than a short
interruption to its growth. 128 Successful international monetary and financial policies thereby
supported the processes of growth and development that pulled more than four billion people
past the take-off stage and onto the escalator that leads to modern industrial and post-industrial
living standards. In this view, the fundamentally sound international monetary and financial
policies of the United States helped to sustain growth and development worldwide. Compared
to the problems of the dollar cycle and the Latin American debt crisis in the 1980s, or of the oil
shocks and the breakdown of the Bretton Woods System in the 1970s, the 1990s have to count as
a pretty good decade.
Still, workers in Mexico, Korea, and Indonesia paid a price. It can be argued that price
was to a considerable extent avoidable because the crises in which it was incurred were not in
fact that new -- that they really should not have come as such a surprise. During the crises of the
1990s observers rediscovered the dangers of fickle animal spirits causing destabilizing capital
flows, of the vulnerability of investment to crony capitalism, of how poor banking sector
regulation can generate an international financial crisis, and of how the existence of resources to
provide support and rescue funds in a crisis could lead the private sector to hold imprudent
portfolios that increased the risk to the system. But these were issues that had been familiar
from 19th century experience with financial globalization; they had been raised by John Maynard

128

In Indonesia it can be argued that deep political problems rendered the patient immune to the
conventional economic treatment (and even rendered the tender ministrations of the international
money doctors counterproductive). It seems probable that most of Indonesia’s current economic
problems are the result of the Suharto succession crisis, in other words, and thus are analytically
distinct from the East Asian crisis--even if the second did trigger the first.

81

Keynes and Harry Dexter White in the negotiations that culminated in the Bretton Woods
Agreement of 1944.
It is not as though those responsible for the international monetary and financial policies
of the Clinton administration were blind to these risks. U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin
had spent his career at Goldman Sachs making money from the failure of the market to
accurately value securities; he was no naive believer in the efficiency and rationality of the
markets. When still in academia, U.S. Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers had long been an
intellectual opponent of casual reliance on the efficient-markets hypothesis.
So what explains their failure to warn more loudly of the risks of international financial
liberalization? More than anything, the explanation lies in their belief that, if markets were not
perfect, the alternatives were worse. There was a hope that by forcing the pace of financial
liberalization, countries might be compelled to more quickly upgrade their domestic regulations
and institutions. Conversely, encouraging them to open only after the requisite domestic reforms
were well advanced applied no pressure for reform; it was road map to a destination that might
never be reached. The strategy was risky, as the series of financial crises that punctuated the
decade of the 1990s so graphically revealed. But the extent of fundamental reform in much of
Asia and Latin America, and the speed with which growth resumed following crisis in many of
the affected countries, suggests that this may have been a gamble worth taking.

82

References
Bergsten, C. Fred (1986), "America’s Unilateralism," in C. Fred Bergsten, E. Davignon and I.
Miyazaki, Conditions for Partnership in International Economic Management, Report no. 32,
New York: Trilateral Commission.
Boorman, Jack, Timothy Lane, Marianne Schulze-Ghattas, Ales Bulir, Atish Ghosh, Javier
Hamann, Alexandros Mourmouras and Steven Phillips (2000), "Managing Financial Crises: The
Experience in East Asia," IMF Working Paper no. WP/00/107 (June).
Callaghy, Thomas (2000), "The Vagaries of Debt: Indonesia and Korea," in Gregory Noble and
John Ravenhill (eds), The Asian Financial Crisis and the Architecture of Global Finance,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.213-234.
Camdessus, Michel (1998a), "The Role of the IMF: Past, Present and Future," Remarks at the
Annual Meeting of the Bretton Woods Committee (13 February).
Camdessus, Michel (1998b), "Toward a New Financial Architecture for a Globalized World,"
Address to the Royal Institute of International Affairs (8 May).
Chinn, Menzie (1998), "Before the Fall: Were the East Asian Currencies Overvalued?" NBER
Working Paper 6491 (April).
Clinton, W.J. (1998), "Address to the Council on Foreign Relations" (28 September),
www.whitehouse.gov.
Council of Economic Advisors (1995), Economic Report of the President 1995, Washington,
D.C.: GPO (February).
Coure, Benoit and Jean Pisani-Ferry (2000), "Events, Ideas and Actions: An Intellectual and
Institutional Retrospective on the Reform of the International Financial Architecture," Conseil
D’Aanalyse Economique Working Paper No. 04-2000 (July).
Davis, Bob, Jonathan Friedland, and Matt Moffett (1998), "Epidemic?: As Currency Crisis
Spreads, Need of a Cure Grows More Pressing," Wall Street Journal (August 24, 1998).
Dornbusch, Rudiger (2001), "A Primer on Emerging Market Crises," unpublished manuscript,
www.mit.edu.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers and Robert J. Waldmann (1990),
"Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets," Journal of Political Economy 98, pp.703-738.
Dooley, Michael (2000), "Can Output Losses Following International Financial Crises Be
Avoided?" NBER Working Paper no. 7531 (February).

83

Edwards, Sebastian (2001), "Does the Current Account Matter?" NBER Working Paper no. 8275
(May).
Eichengreen, Barry and Michael Mussa, with Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Enrica Detragiache, Gian
Maria Milesi-Ferretti and Andrew Tweedie (1998), Capital Account Liberalization: Theoretical
and Practical Aspects, Occasional Paper no. 172, Washington, D.C.: IMF (September).
Federal News Service (1995), "Hearing Before the Senate Banking Committee: Mexico and the
Exchange Stabilization Fund (July 14, 1995).
Feldstein, Martin (1998), "Refocusing the IMF," Foreign Affairs 77, pp.20-33.
Fischer, Stanley (2001a), "Transcript of a Press Conference," www.imf.org/external (8 May).
Fischer, Stanley (2001b), “Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct?” Distinguished
Lecture on Economics in Government, Delivered at the Meetings of the American Economic
Association, New Orleans (9 January). Forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Fischer, Stanley (2001c), "Asia and the IMF," Remarks at the Institute of Policy Studies,
Singapore, June 1st, www.imf.org.external.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1994), "Exchange Rate Policy," in Martin Feldstein (ed.), American
Economic Policy in the 1980s, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.293-341.
Furman, Jason and Joseph Stiglitz (1998), "Economic Crises: Evidence and Insight from East
Asia," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, pp.1-135.
Goldstein, Morris (2000), "IMF Structural Programs," in Martin Feldstein (ed.), Economic and
Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
(forthcoming).
Greenspan, Alan (1999), "Efforts to Improve the ‘Architecture’ of the International Financial
System," Testimony Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of
Representatives, 20 May, http://www.bog.frb.fed.us.
G-7 Finance Ministers (1999), "Strengthening the International Financial Architecture," Report
of G7 Finance Ministers to the Cologne Economic Summit, Cologne, 18-20 June,
http://www.ustreas.gov.
G-7 Heads (1995), "Examination of the International Financial Institutions," Information of the
Halifax Summit (June).
G-7 Heads (1998), "Declaration of G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors" (30
October), http://www.imf.org/external/np/g7/103098dc.htm.

84

G-10 (1996), The Resolution of Sovereign Liquidity Crises, Basle: BIS (May).
G-22 (1998a), Report of the Working Group on Transparency and Accountability, Washington,
D.C.: G-22.
G-22 (1998b), Report of the Working Group on Strengthening Financial Systems, Washington,
D.C.: G-22.
G-22 (1998c), Report of the Working Group on International Financial Crises, Washington,
D.C.: G-22.
Institute of International Finance (1999), "Report of the Working Group on Financial Crises in
Emerging Markets," Washington, D.C.: Institute of International Finance.
International Financial Institution Advisory Commission (2000), Report, Washington, D.C.:
IFAC.
International Monetary Fund (1994), International Capital Markets Report, Washington, D.C.:
IMF (October).
Kaplan, Ethan, and Dani Rodrik, "Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?" NBER Working
Paper no. 8182 (January).
Knetter, Michael M. and Thomas J. Prusa (2000), "Macroeconomic Factors and Antidumping
Filings: Evidence from Four Countries," NBER Working Paper no. 8010 (November).
Kraay, Aart (1998), "Do High Interest Rates Defend Currencies During Speculative Attacks?"
unpublished manuscript, The World Bank.
Krugman, Paul (1994), "The Myth of Asia’s Miracle," Foreign Affairs 73, pp.62-78.
Krugman, Paul (1999), The Return of Depression Economics, New York: Norton.
Lane, Timothy and Steven Phillips (2000), "Does IMF Financing Result in Moral Hazard?"
Working Paper no.00/168 (October).
Lowenstein, Roger (2000), When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of Long-Term Capital
Management (New York: Random House).
Meltzer, Allan et al. (2000), Report, Washington, D.C.: International Financial Institutional
Advisory Commission.
Nurkse, Ragnar (1944), International Currency Experience, Geneva: League of Nations.
Reich, Robert B. (1997), Locked in the Cabinet, New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

85

Rubin, Robert (1998a), "Strengthening the Architecture of the International Financial System,"
Speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, 14 April, http://www.brook.edu/comm/transcripts
/rubin/htm.
Rubin, Robert (1998b), "Remarks to the Dow Jones/Wall Street Journal Annual Conference on
the Americas," 1 October, http://ibreaudigilib.usia.gov/aug99/usiaweb/regional/ea/asiafin/
rubin101/htm.
Rubin, Robert (1999), "Remarks on Reform of the International Financial Architecture,"
Treasury News RR-3093, 21 April.
Rubin, Robert (2002), "Comment on ‘Industrial Country Policies’," in Martin Feldstein (ed.),
Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press (forthcoming).
Schwartz, Anna J. (1997), "From Obscurity to Notoriety: A Biography of the Exchange
Stabilization Fund," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29:2 (May), pp. 135-153.
Spadafora, Francesco (2000), "The Pricing of Syndicated Bank Loans to Emerging Markets:
Some Further Results," unpublished manuscript, Bank of Italy.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1996), "Introduction," in Peter B. Kenen (ed.), From Halifax to Lyons:
What Has Been Done About Crisis Management? Essays in International Finance 200,
International Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University, pp.1-6.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1997), "Building a Global Financial System for the 21 st Century,"
speech to the Congressional Economic Leadership Institute, 12 August,
http://www.celi.org/summers.htm.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1999a), "Reflections on Managing Global Integration," Journal of
Economic Perspectives 13, pp.3-18.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1999b), "The Right Kind of IMF for a Stable Global Financial System,"
Remarks to the London Business School (14 December).
Tanner, Evan (1999), "Exchange Market Pressure and Monetary Policy: Asia and Latin America
in the 1990s," IMF Working Paper WP/99/114.
U.S. Senate Banking Committee (1995), The Mexican Peso Crisis, Heraings Before the
Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, S. Hrg. 104-164, Washington, D.C.: GPO.
Willett, Thomas D. (1999), "Did the Mexican Bailout Really Cause the Asian Crisis?"
Claremont Policy Briefs, Issue No. 99-01.
Woodward, Bob (1994), The Agenda: Inside the Clinton White House, New York: Simon &
Schuster.

86

Working Party on Financial Stability in Emerging Market Economies (1997), "Financial
Stability in Emerging Market Economies," Basle: Group of Ten, www.bis.org (April)..

87

Figure 1
Daily Turnover in U.S. Foreign Exchange Markets
$350

$300

$250

$200

$150

$100

$50

$0
1980

1985

1990

1995

Date

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Bank for International Settlements, Jeffrey
Frankel.Datafile: http://www.j-bradforddelong.net/Econ_Articles/CIEP/CIEP_data/forex_trading.xls
-

88

Figure 2
Fixed Private Domestic Investment as a Share of Real GDP, 1970-2000
20%

18%

16%

14%

12%

10%
Jan-1970

Jan-1975

Jan-1980

Jan-1985

Jan-1990

Jan-1995

Jan-2000

Date

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis via http://www.economagic.com/.Datafile:
http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/Econ_Articles/CIEP/CIEP_data/inv_share_real*.xls

-

89

Figure 3
Value of the Dollar Against Major Currencies, 1975-2000
150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70
Jan-75

Jan-80

Jan-85

Jan-90

Jan-95

Date

Source: Federal Reserve Board.Datafile: http://www.j-bradforddelong.net/Econ_Articles/CIEP/CIEP_data/weekly_major_curr.xls
-

90

Jan-00

Figure 4
References in Major Newspapers to Strong Dollar Policy

60

Number of Mentions in "Major Newspapers"

50

40

30

20

10

0
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995
Date

91

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure 5
Value of the Mexican Peso, 1993-1997

$0.35

$0.30

$0.25

$0.20

$0.15

$0.10

$0.05

$0.00
Jan-93

Jan-94

Jan-95

Jan-96

Jan-97

Date

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.Datafile: http://www.j-bradforddelong.net/Econ_Articles/CIEP/CIEP_data/peso*.xls
-

92

Figure 6
References in Major Newspapers to Moral Hazard

50
45

Number of Mentions in "Major Newspaper"

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994
Date

93

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Figure 7
Value of the Thai Baht, 1990-1999
4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
Jan1990

Jan1991

Jan1992

Jan1993

Jan1994

Jan1995

Jan1996

Jan1997

Jan1998

Jan1999

Date

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis via http://www.economagic.com/.Datafile:
http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/Econ_Articles/CIEP/CIEP_data/baht*.xls

94

