1

Introduction

Consumers play a central role in solving agency problems. For example, someone who receives
poor service in a restaurant or store can ask to “see the manager”. Similarly, a person incorrectly
denied unemployment benefit or unlawfully arrested has opportunities to appeal the decision to a
higher authority. Consumers feedback to firms comes in a variety of forms, such as customer satisfaction surveys, appeals, suits, complaints machanisms, “focus groups”, market research surveys
etc., and is used for a host of reasons.1 One reason to solicit (or perhaps a byproduct of soliciting)
consumer feedback is to effectively monitor the actions of employees. The purpose of this paper is
to understand how well they do so.
Consumers are a relatively cheap way of getting information on the performance of employees.
Yet agency theory has largely ignored their role: instead, monitoring precision typically appears
as an exogenous parameter of the agency problem. (See Prendergast, 1999, for a review.) I
argue here that a careful focus on consumers can help understand the ability of firms to resolve
agency problems, where their role depends on the congruence in preferences between consumers
and principals.2
The idea can be easily explained by a pair of examples. First, consider a restaurant customer
who receives poor service. Both the customer and the owner of the restaurant likely wish that
the customer has good service, as the restaurant’s success depends on it. I show below that in
this situation, the agent can be effectively monitored by the consumer, as the consumer has the
“right” objectives. In effect, the incentives of the customer are aligned with those of the principal,
which both improves incentives and oversight to correct mistakes. By contrast, now consider an
applicant for unemployment benefits. Here, there is considerable divergence in the preferences of
the Department of Labor and an applicant for unemployment benefit: the applicant always wants to
be approved for benefits, while the Department wishes to deny unqualified candidates. I show below
that in this latter case not only are customers less useful, but more surprisingly, using consumer
feedback can be harmful to efficiency.
The model below has the following features. First, a good has to be allocated to a consumer,
where the optimal allocation depends on some information available to the agent. Second, she can
exert effort to improve the quality of her information. Third, monitoring by the principal is costly,
so he would like some information that an error has occurred before intervening. This is where
1
Such feedback is useful to identifying consumer preferences, pointing out defects in product design, correcting
inadvertant mistakes, and so on.
2
See Aghion and Tirole, 1997, for other work stressing the importance of congruence in preferences, though in
their case they emphasize correlation in preferences between agents and principals.

1

consumers play a role: the firm can give consumers the opportunity to complain, which can help
to focus further investigation. The issue addressed here is whether an equilibrium outcome exists
where this opportunity to complain improves agent incentives.
Initially consider the case where consumers have preferences that correspond closely with those
of the principal. Not surprisingly, I show that an equilibrium outcome always exists where (i)
the ability to complaint increases agent effort, and (ii) complaints serve to focus the attention of
the principal. Thus, when consumers have a similar ranking of preferences to the principal, they
can effectively play “watchdog” on the agent in such a way that their interventions increase social
welfare.3 I also show that more informed consumers increase efficiency in this case, both through
more effort and better oversight of errors.
Now assume that consumers have different preferences to the principal, as in the unemployment
benefits case. In this instance, the consumer benefits from some allocations that the pricipal would
wish to change, in that the consumer does not complain when he inefficiently benefits from the
decision made by the agent.4 This causes three problems. First, when the consumer is given
benefits, he never complains, which makes oversight less effective as the principal no longer knows
when to intervene. Second, incentives to exert effort by the agent are lower, as her errors are less
likely to be pointed out by the consumer.
These first two reasons do not make consumer feedback harmful, merely less useful than in
the congruent case. However, a third problem is that it is no longer guaranteed that consumers
can be used to increase incentives. This is because the agent realises that her mistakes are more
likely to be observed if she denies the benefit to the consumer than if she simply gives him what he
wants.5 But if agents wish to avoid such investigations, as arises in this paper for career concerns
reasons, there is a temptation to simply capitulate to the consumer to avoid investigation. This
incentive gives rise to a truth-telling condition, which must be satisfied in order to induce the agent
to deny benefits to a consumer. Loosely, the agent has to feel that an investigation will not harm
her significantly: otherwise, she cannot be induced to allocate goods according to her information.
Instead, she always gives the benefit to the consumer, which is clearly inefficient. If the truth3

There are two reasons for this. First, consumers (at least probabilistically) point out inefficient allocations, and
the principal can intervene better to correct these mistakes. Second, consumers can be used to heighten incentives
for agents to exert effort, by increasing (reducing) the likelihood of investigations when mistakes are (not) made.
4
For example, not many suspects could be trusted to turn themselves in if the police err in not arresting them,
nor do welfare recipients who do not qualify often send back the checks. Finally, it is rare for a student who receives
a higher grade than they deserve to point this out.
5
For example, an INS official could allow an unqualified candidate to enter the country rather than avoid the type
of case reported in the New York Times, 2000, where the officials were accused of racism. Similarly, consider the
effect of the recent increases in oversight of the IRS. This has resulted in “a sharp roll-off in tax investigations as
auditors, fearing for their bureaucratic lives, proceed timidly..[as]..tax collectors are too worried about their jobs to
be aggressive” (Star Tribune, 2000).

2

telling condition is not satisfied, I show the principal may choose to shut down any feedback from
consumers. Although obviously inefficient, it implies that agents are shielded from the threat posed
by consumers.6
Consumers play a more ambiguous role here than when preferences are congruent. Consider the
effect of consumers becoming more informed. This has two effects on the ability to induce the agent
to deny benefits to the consumer. First, holding agent effort fixed, increasing consumer knowledge
makes truth-telling more difficult to satisfy. The reason for this is intuitive: a more informed
consumer can point out agent errors more effectively than can a less informed consumer. As a
result, the temptation to capitulate to the consumer becomes more attractive the more informed
he becomes. Second, there is a conflicting effect, which is that optimal effort is increasing in the
consumer’s knowledge. This effect relaxes the truth-telling condition (as the agent is more certain
of her opinion, she is less worried about an investigation). This renders the effect of consumer
knowledge on the truth-telling condition ambiguous. Despite this ambiguity, I show that it is
always the case that for sufficiently good consumer knowledge, truth-telling can never be satisfied.
On the other hand, when consumer are sufficiently badly informed, truth-telling is satisfied. As a
result, more informed consumers can harm allocations.
I conclude by studying a case where effort costs are discrete. Not surprisingly, the efficiency
of the congruent outcome is (weakly) increasing in the quality of the consumer’s information. In
the non-congruent case, the outcome becomes more complex in that now where exist a critical
value of consumer knowledge above which effort exert is exerted (as above), but below which truthtelling arises.7 This implies that at best there is a non-monotonic relationship between consumer
knowledge and efficient use of consumers, where they are used up to some quality level, but cannot
be used beyond that level as the truth-telling condition can no longer be satisfied. In this case, less
informed consumers (over some range) improve allocations.
6

See Cannon (2000) for examples of obstacles placed in the path of complaints about police officers, with what
appears to be the implicit sanction of superiors.
7
For levels of consumer knowledge above this level, the agent is sufficiently threatened by the consumer that he
cannot be induced to deny him benefits.

3

2

The Model

An allocation A must be made to a consumer, where A can take on a value of 0 or 1. The social
surplus from the allocation depends on a parameter α and is given by

S(A; α) =



1

if A = α,


0

otherwise.

(1)

Thus social surplus is positive only if A is properly matched to the underlying environment, α.
The true value of α is unknown and can take two values α = 1 or α = 0, which occur with equal
probability.

Information and Objectives There are three actors in this model: a principal, an agent, and
a consumer. First, the agent collects information on α; she observes αa which is correct with
probability q ≥ 21 , where with probability 1 − q, she observes αa 6= α. The precision of the agent’s
estimate depends on an unobserved effort decision by her, where she chooses effort e ≥ 0 at a
disutility of e. Let q(e) be the precision of the agent’s estimate, where q(0) ≥ 12 , q 0 (e) > 0, q 00 (e) ≤ 0,
and q(∞) < 1. The agent’s objective is to maximize wages minus effort costs.
Second, the consumer observes a signal on α, which is correct with probability s, where 1 >
s > 21 , where with probability 1 − s, she observes αa 6= α. The signals of the consumer and agent
are (conditionally) independent. Rents earned by the customer play a central role in their ability
to alleviate agency concerns. Accordingly, let V (A, α) be the utility obtained by the consumer if
his type is truly α and the allocation is A.
Third, the principal is uninformed unless he carries out an investigation. To model a role for
investigations, I assume that the principal chooses a probability of observing a signal on the true
state of nature, α, at some cost. Specifically, the principal chooses a probability ρ with which he
observes α, at a cost κ(ρ), where κ0 (ρ) > 0, κ00 (ρ) > 0, κ0 (0) = 0, κ(0) = 0, and κ0 (1) ≥ 1. For
simplicity, throughout most of the paper I assume that monitoring costs are quadratic: κ(ρ) =

ρ2
2 .

The objective of the principal is to maximize social surplus S.8

Actions and Incentives The agent has two actions: (i) how much effort to exert, e, and (ii) what
allocation to recommend, a(αa ). Based on this recommendation, the consumer can send a message
8

The monetary transfers in this model, wages and the costs of complaint, involve no deadweight loss, so the
principal maximizes static welfare. This also implies that the principal does not internalize the career concerns of
the agent, but as effort is assumed suboptimally low, this will not change the results.

4

m ∈ {n, c} to the principal, where the message n means that no complaint is made and message c
implies that a complaint has been made. I assume that the messages are meant literally, so that
I can ignore the case where message n implies disagreement and a complaint means agreement
with the agent. The principal charges the consumer a price p ≥ 0 to make a complaint (i.e., send
message c). The consumer chooses his message to maximize his utility minus any complaint cost.
The principal chooses (i) when to monitor, where he investigates with probability ρ(a, m), (ii)
the allocation, A, and (iii) the price of making a complaint. He cannot commit to the probability of
monitoring, but instead makes oversight decisions in a subgame perfect fashion.9 If the investigation
turns up evidence that the agent made a mistake, the principal overturns the agent’s decision and
allocates the correct one, A = α. If the investigation concurs with the agent’s findings, or there is
no evidence obtained by the principal, the decision is left unchanged from that suggested by the
agent, A = αa .10

Career Concerns The difficulty with using consumers in this model is that they can focus
investigations on the actions of the agent, which in expectation harm her. This requires that
the agent would like to avoid investigation. I assume, as in most discussions of the incentives of
bureaucrats (such as Wilson, 1989), that career concerns (perceptions of ability) affect the wage of
the agent. However, investigations lead to more information on the agent’s performance in such a
way that the agent would like to avoid the spotlight.
To model this, assume that agents differ in their ability, and is unknown to all parties. The
agents are of two types; those that are always right, and those that are always wrong. The fraction
of agents that are always right is given by q(e).11 The agent’s wage depends on perceptions of
her ability held by the “labor market”,12 and is given by E[q(ê)|Ω]∆, where Ω is the information
available to the labor market and ê is the expected level of effort. The agent’s objective is to maximize Ee [q(ê)|Ω]∆ − de. ∆ is exogenous, and assumed to be sufficiently small that e is suboptimally
low.13 As a result, the principal (and ex ante the agent) prefers higher effort.
9

See Prendergast, 2001, for the case where commitment is possible.
For some values of s and q(e), this allocation mechanism is obviously inefficient, and a more efficient allocation
mechanism could be to allow the consumer to make an allocation which remains unchanged unless the principal
investigates. For the allocation mechanism proposed here to be efficient, it must be the case that either q is large
relative to s or consumers cannot be trusted to allocate the good effiently, due to non-congruent preferences. Assume
that one of these conditions holds throughout the paper.
11
Thus, the return to effort is to increase the fraction of agents who make correct decisions. The interpretation of
this is that effort results in greater capacity to do a task in future, and can be seen as unobserved general training.
12
The “labor market” really refers to any external constituencies that can affect her welfare. For instance, a police
officer accused of using excessive force may face costs in the form of jail time, which is generated by pressure from
the population rather than another potential employer.
13
This would typically be the case whenever there is a marginal cost to using wages as the mechanism of providing
10

5

I assume that the actions of an agent are more observable when an investigation occurs. Formally, if an investigation occurs, outside constituencies (the labor market) observe all information
available to the principal, but if no investigation occurs, the labor market observes nothing of the
agent’s actions. As will be seen below, this asymmetry generates an ex ante incentive to avoid
investigations, as is required for the results.14

Timing

First, the principal chooses p ≥ 0, and nature assigns α to the consumer. Second, the

agent exerts effort. Third, the customer and the agent privately observe their signals. Next, the
agent proposes an allocation a. Following this, the customer send a message m, i.e., he complains
or not. The principal then monitors with probability ρ(a, m) in the ex post optimal fashion. If he
observes α, he allocates A = α and pays the agent according to the contract above. Otherwise, the
agent’s recommendation is implemented.

The Incentive to Complain The efficiency of monitoring depends on the ability of consumers
to credibly alert the principal that a mistake has been made; this is what focuses investigations.
One feature which plays a central role in understanding the role of the consumer is the congruence
in preferences between him and the principal. Accordingly I consider two situations.
• Congruent Preferences: The first case that I consider below is where consumers rank outcomes
similarly to the principal. In this case, I assume that V (1, 1) = V (0, 0) > V (1, 0) = V (0, 1).
• Divergent Preferences: I also consider the case where consumers rank outcomes differently to
the principal. In this case, I assume that V (1, 1) = V (1, 0) > V (0, 0) = V (0, 1). The agent
simply prefers allocation 1 to allocation 0.

Equilibrium The objective here is to characterize pure strategy Bayesian Nash equilibria of the
model. I assume that when a Pareto-dominating equilibrium exists, it will be chosen.

3

Outcomes Where Consumers Induce Effort Exertion

I first consider whether consumers can be used to alleviate the agency problem, by inducing the
agents to exert more effort when they realise that complaints against them will focus investigations.
incentives, where that marginal cost of incentive provision is traded off against its benefits. This assumption is made
merely to illustrate the increased surplus that is likely to arise from improving monitoring.
14
See Milbourn, Shockley, and Thakor, 2001, for other work on how limited observability of outcomes affects career
concerns problems.

6

Complaints are useful in this model if they are sent when the consumer disagrees with the agent’s
recommendation, but not otherwise. To analyze the feasibility of this, I distinguish between two
cases: (i) those where consumers always complain when a mistake has been made (the congruent
preferences case), and (ii) where consumers consumers only complain when denied a benefit (the
divergent preferences case). I consider each in turn.

3.1

Congruent Preferences

I begin by considering the case where consumers can be induced to always complain when their
information disagrees with the recommendation. This arises when V (1, 1) = V (0, 0) > V (1, 0) =
V (0, 1). There are a series of incentives, each of which have to be satisfied for an equilibrium of
this type to exist.

1: The Incentive to Complain The principal would like to know whether the consumer’s signal
agrees with that of the agent. For the signal to be informative, it must be that he complains only
when his signal disagrees: otherwise, the complaint means nothing. Consider how the principal can
make complaints credibly reveal whether the customer disagrees with the recommendation of the
agent.
Let ρ∗ (a, m) be the equilibrium probability of monitoring, and p be the cost of making a
complaint. Then for complaints to be informative when the agent proposes allocation a it must be
the case that the cost of complaint is sufficiently low to warrant making one when the consumer
disagrees, but high enough to deter complaints when he agrees. The necessary condition is
p
(1−s)(1−q)
∗
qs+(1−s)(1−q) [ρ (a, c)

−

ρ∗ (a, n)]

≥ [V (ã, ã) − V (a, ã)] ≥

p
s(1−q)
∗
q(1−s)+s(1−q) [ρ (a, c)

− ρ∗ (a, n)]

.

(2)

To see this, consider first the case where the consumer disagrees with the principal. In this instance,
one and only one of the parties is correct: the likelihood that the consumer is correct is

s(1−q)
q(1−s)+s(1−q) .

Conditional on this, complaining has a marginal return of (ρ∗ (a, c) − ρ∗ (a, n))[V (ã, ã) − V (a, ã)]. In
order to induce a complaint when the comsumer disagrees, the price must be set low enough that
the second condition holds. But equally, the price must be set high enough that the consumer does
not complain when he agrees with the agent’s recommendation. As the likelihood of being both
incorrect in this case is

(1−s)(1−q)
qs+(1−s)(1−q) ,

the price must be set high enough that the first inequality

holds.
As s > 12 , there always exists a price to satisfy both parts of this inequality. As the transfers

7

between the principal and the agent involve no deadweight loss, this means that the principal can
induce revealing complaints for any allocation at no ex ante cost.

2: Truth-telling The next issue to address is whether the agent can be induced to recommend
his true belief, i.e., choose a = αa . When V (a, a) > V (a, ã), truth-telling is not a binding constraint
when monitoring is set at its ex post optimal level.15 Intuitively, this should not be surprising as
the consumer wishes that the agent makes efficient allocations, and is more likely to complain when
the agent chooses the allocation she believes is more likely to be incorrect.

3: The Incentive to Monitor In the case where the consumer complains only when she disagrees, the ex post optimal levels of monitoring for the quadratic case are the conditional likelihoods
of an error, and are given by:
ρ∗ (a, n) =

(1 − s)(1 − q)
qs + (1 − s)(1 − q)

(3)

ρ∗ (a, c) =

s(1 − q)
q(1 − s) + s(1 − q)

(4)

and

Not surprisingly, the principal monitors more after a complaint.

4: Effort Incentives

Consider the incentives of the bureaucrat to collect better information.

There are three wages that the agent can earn. First, if an investigation occurs and she is correct,
she earns w = ∆, as she is revealed to be the agent who is always correct. Similarly, if the
investigation occurs and she is wrong, she earns 0. However, if no investigation occurs, she earns w0 ,
which is the expected ability (times ∆), conditional on no investigation occurring. It is important
to note that the absence of investigation is revealing of the ability of the agent, because it reveals
that probabilistically no complaint was made against her. Specifically,

qs(1 − ρ∗ (a, n)) + q(1 − s)(1 − ρ∗ (a, c))
w0 = ∆
,
(qs + (1 − q)(1 − s))(1 − ρ∗ (a, n)) + (q(1 − s) + s(1 − q))(1 − ρ∗ (a, c))


(5)

which the term in brackets is the probability of being correct conditional on no investigation. This
has a number of features. Let ẽ be the expected level of effort. First, w0 ≥ ∆q(ê): the posterior
is higher than the prior. This is because not being investigated increases the likelihood that the
agent was right. Second, w0 is increasing in s, and ranges from q(ê) as s →
15

1
2

to 1 as s → 1. This

Formally, if the consumer complains if and only if the agent errs, the truth-telling condition is that she reports
α = a rather than a0 only if ((1 − q(e))s + q(e)(1 − s))ρ∗ (a, c) + (q(e)s + (1 − q(e))(1 − s))ρ∗ (a, n) ≥ (q(e)s + (1 −
q(e))(1 − s))ρ∗ (a, c) + ((1 − q(e))s + q(e)(1 − s))ρ∗ (a, n) which will always be satisfied for q(e) > 21 and s > 12 .

8

should not be surprising as more informed consumers strengthen this inference.
Then consider the agent’s incentives. Her expected utility is given by
w0
[(1 − ρ∗ (a, c))(q(e)(1 − s) + s(1 − q(e))) + (1 − ρ∗ (a, n))(q(e)s + (1 − q(e))(1 − s))]+
2
∆
q(e)[sρ∗ (a, n) + (1 − s)ρ∗ (a, c)] − e. (6)
2
The worker then chooses effort e∗ to satisfy
q 0 (e∗ )[w0 (2s − 1)(ρ∗ (a, c) − ρ∗ (a, n)) + ∆sρ∗ (a, n) + ∆(1 − s)ρ∗ (a, c)] = 1

(7)

with the second order condition trivially satisfied.

The Role of Consumers

The importance of consumers can be measured by how well they can

identify an error by the agent. At one extreme, s → 21 , so that the consumer knows no more than
the principal before he investigates. This is the case where consumers play no role in allocating
assets. At the other extreme, consumers know the correct allocation (s → 1). Consider the effect of
increasing s on the efficiency of the outcome. First, holding agent effort fixed, increasing s improves
efficiency for the simple reason that it allows the principal to better identify that an error has been
made, and so improves the focus of investigations. This should be immediately clear from (3) and
(4). But changes in s also affect effort choices. Equation (7) defines the equilibrium effort level,
e∗ (s). Then simple differentiation yields
0
2w0 − ∆ + (2s − 1) dw
de∗
ds
=
> 0,
ds
−2q 00 (e)[w0 (2s − 1)(ρ∗ (a, c) − ρ∗ (a, n)) + ∆sρ∗ (a, n) + ∆(1 − s)ρ∗ (a, c)]

as

dw0
ds

> 0 and w0 >

(8)

∆
2.

Since the incentive to complain and the incentive to reveal information truthfully are not binding
constraints, the principal can use consumers to induce effort exertion. Then as consumers increase
effort (the case of s =

1
2

is equivalent to not using consumers) and improve monitoring, Proposition

1 immediately follows.
Proposition 1 Assume that V (a, a) > V (a, ã). Then there exists a pure strategy equilibrium where
(i) the agent exerts effort e∗ and (ii) allocates a = αa . In this equilibrium, more informed consumers
increase effort and the efficiency of allocations.
This is the best case scenario for using consumers to heighten incentives, and arises for two
9

reasons. First, consumers are willing to reveal all relevant information by pointing out disagreement
when the agent chooses either a = 1 and a = 0. This helps to focus investigations on those cases
where error is most likely. But this has a second effect, which is that it increases incentives, as
consumers serve to increase the likelihood of the agent being rewarded for correct decisions and
penalized for incorrect decisions.

3.2

Divergent Preferences

The key step in the efficiency result above is that the consumer must be willing to report error
in all states. In many situations, this is unlikely, as many benefits are not priced. As mentioned
above, I assume here that the preferences of the consumer are independent of the true state where
V (1, 1) = V (1, 0) > V (0, 0) = V (0, 1). The agent simply prefers allocation 1 to allocation 0. The
difficulty here is that the consumer now ranks outcomes differently to the principal which affects
his incentive to complain. I consider each incentive constraint in turn.

The Incentive to Complain

The consumer can no longer be induced to always complains when

he disagrees with the agent. Instead, at best the consumer complains if an error has been made
when he has been denied the good a = 0. As in the previous section, the principal must choose p,
the cost of complaint, to make complaints credible for this case. It does so by choosing the same
price as in (2): this gives the consumer the incentive to reveal truthfully when denied the asset.16
This the incentive to complain can only be satisfied in one case here.

The Incentive to Monitor Monitoring now depends on the allocation proposed by the agent.
If she allocates a = 1, the consumer never complains as any change in the allocation can only harm
him. In this case, the likelihood of an error in equilibrium is 1 − q(e),17 and so the principal always
chooses
ρ̃(1, n) = 1 − q(e)

(9)

On the other hand, if she allocates a = 0, the principal chooses ρ∗ (0, c) and ρ∗ (0, n) as in (3) and
(4).
16

In general, one could imagine a case where the principal offers a bounty p < 0 which is given if the consumer
“turns himself in”, when given a benefit that he does not deserve. I ignore this here as such bounties have other costs.
For example, consider the example of a police officer making arrests. The objective of the incentives not to commit
crimes is to penalize those who are guilty. Then offering a bounty to suspects to turn themselves in has harmful
incentives to avoid crime. See Prendergast, 2001, for further details on this.
17
The principal does not observe effort and so must make an inference about effort. This inference is, however,
correct in equilibrium.

10

Effort Incentives As above, there are three possible wages that can be earned. First, if an
investigation occurs and she is vindicated, she earns w = ∆, while if the investigation occurs and
she is wrong, she earns 0. However, if no investigation occurs, she earns w0 , which is given by

qs(1 − ρ∗ (0, n)) + q(1 − s)(1 − ρ∗ (0, c)) + q(1 − ρ̃(1, n))
w0 = ∆
,
(qs + (1 − q)(1 − s))(1 − ρ∗ (a, n)) + (q(1 − s) + s(1 − q))(1 − ρ∗ (a, c)) + (1 − ρ̃(1, n))
(10)


which the term in brackets is the probability of being correct conditional on no investigation.
Compared to the case where the consumer always complains when she disagrees, w0 is lower. This
is because the absence of an investigation is less informative of error, as the agent could have been
wrong but gave the benefit to the consumer, and the consumer did not complain. It is also the case
that w0 is increasing in s, and ranges from q(ê) as s →

1
2

to

1+q(ê)
2

as s → 1.

Consider the case where the consumer complaints when denied the asset and disagrees. If the
agent allocates a = αa , she chooses effort to maximize expected utility, which is given by
w0
w0
[(1−ρ∗ (0, c))(q(e)(1−s)+s(1−q(e)))+(1−ρ∗ (0, n))(q(e)s+(1−q(e))(1−s))]+ (1− ρ̃(1, n))
2
2
q(e) ∗
q(e)
∗
+∆
[sρ (0, n) + (1 − s)ρ (0, c)] +
∆ρ̃(1, n) − e. (11)
2
2
The agent’s effort e∗∗ is then given by
q 0 (e∗∗ )[

w0 (2s − 1)(ρ∗ (a, c) − ρ∗ (a, n)) ∆sρ∗ (a, n) ∆(1 − s)ρ∗ (a, c) ρ̃(1, n)
+
+
+
] = 1.
2
2
2
2

(12)

The incentive to exert effort has qualitatively the same features as in (7). However, incentives
are lower than in (7) for the reason that when αa = 1 the marginal return to being correct have
decreased: previously, the consumer would point out errors (which increased incentives), whereas
now there is less incentive in this state of nature.
For consumers to play this role, it must be that the agent reports truthfully, which I deal with
below. If truth-telling can be satisfied, then increasing consumer information results in more effort:
0
2w0 − ∆ + (2s − 1) dw
de∗∗
ds
=
∗
∗ (a,n))
∗
ds
−2q 00 (e)[ w0 (2s−1)(ρ (a,c)−ρ
+ ∆sρ 2(a,n) +
2

as

dw0
ds

> 0 and w0 >

∆
2.

∆(1−s)ρ∗ (a,c)
2

+

ρ̃(1,n)
2 ]

> 0,

(13)

It is simple to show that the marginal effect of consumer information on

incentives is lower than in the case where the consumer always points out errors: this is the first
cost to using consumer feedback to alleviate agency problems.

11

Truth-Telling Unlike the previous section, truth-telling is by no means guaranteed. To see this,
it should be obvious that the agent can be induced to reveal truthfully when αa = 1.18 The case
where αa = 0 is more difficult. Here the agent faces a choice between (i) honestly denying the
consumer, knowing that with probability 1 − q(e), a complaint will be made, and (ii) giving the
consumer his preferred choice, which though inefficient, at least causes no complaint.
If she harms the consumer, her expected utility is given by
q(e)
∆[sρ∗ (0, n) + (1 − s)ρ∗ (0, c)]
2
w0
[(1 − ρ∗ (0, c))(q(e)(1 − s) + s(1 − q(e)) + (1 − ρ∗ (0, n))(q(e)s + (1 − q(e))(1 − s))] − e. (14)
+
2
Some simple manipulations show that this is equivalent to
2q(e)∆ − q(e)∆ρ̃(1, n) − w0 [1 − ρ̃(1, n)] − e.

(15)

The utility from capitulating to the consumer and allocating a = 1 is given by (1 − q)ρ̃(1, n) +
w0 [1 − ρ̃(1, n)] − e. Truth-telling then arises only if
2q(e)∆ ≥ 2w0 − ρ̃(1, n)[2w0 − ∆].

(16)

There is no guarantee that (16) is satisfied. The agent’s incentives now depends on whether
she is made better off by giving the customer what he wants or denying him benefits when αa = 0.
If she lies, the consumer never complains, and the principal is left with the difficult problem of
monitoring cases where the customer has not done him the favor of pointing out that a mistake
has been made. The principal realises that an allocation of a = 1 could be because the consumer
truly deserved the asset or because he was given it unfairly. As a result, the returns to monitoring
are low, because many legitimate monitoring cases are pooled with those where the agent was
correct. On the other hand, if she allocates a = 0 but is wrong, the consumer likely complains,
which is informative that an error has been made. The tradeoff between these effects generates the
willingness of the agent to harm the consumer.
The desire to avoid investigation arises from the assumption that the “labor market”, the
external constituencies that affect the agent’s career prospects, are poorly informed without an
investigation. Consider the agent who believes that the consumer should be denied the good. If
18

This allocation is preferred by the customer, and since q ≥
complaint is lower if she offers the right allocation.

12

1
,
2

the bureaucrat knows that the likelihood of a

no investigation occurs, her wage increases, as it probabilistically reveals that the agent made the
correct decision. But this is true independent of whether the agent recommends denying or giving
the benefit to the consumer, as the labor market is uninformed without an investigation. The
higher likelihood of the no investigation outome by capitulating to the consumer then makes this
prospect potentially attractive.
The tradeoff faced by the agent depends on two important issues, to which I return below.
First, how certain is the agent of her opinion? Increases in q(e) relax (16), so all else equal, more
effort by the agent makes truth-telling more likely. Second, how informative is the absence of an
investigation about the ability of the agent? If monitoring was completely random, the absence
of an investigation would reveal nothing about her ability, and so it would be simple to guarantee
truth-telling. It is the fact that no investigation reveals (positive) information on the agent’s ability
that causes her to be tempted to simply give the consumer what she wants, and hence generates
the truth-telling problem.
Truth-telling is a necessary condition for any equilibrium where consumers play an efficient role:
otherwise the agent simply allocates a = 1 otherwise, in which case exerting effort plays no role.
Proposition 2 then immediately follows.
Proposition 2 Assume that V (1, 1) = V (1, 0) > V (0, 0) = V (0, 1).
1. If 2q(e∗∗ )∆ ≥ 2w0 − ρ̃(1, n)[2w0 − ∆], then there exists an equilibrium where the agent exerts
effort of e∗∗ , and allocates a = αa . In this case, increasing s improves social welfare.

2. If 2q(e∗∗ )∆ < 2w0 − ρ̃(1, n)[2w0 − ∆], there is no equilibrium where the agent exerts effort of
e∗∗ , and allocates a = αa .
Proposition 2 illustrates the role of consumers when assets are not priced to consumers. If the
truth-telling condition holds, the agent can be induced to allocate the asset honestly, and exerts
effort of e∗∗ . Because consumers do not identify mistakes which benefit them, effort is lower than
in the case in Section 3.1. This represents the first cost of not pricing assets to consumers, but at
least results in the agent allocating the asset honestly. If the truth-telling condition holds, more
informed consumers increase social welfare, as in Section 3.1. However, if the truth-telling does not
hold at an effort level of e∗∗ , the agent simply capitulates to the demands of the consumer.

The Role of Consumers

Consumers play a more complex role than in the previous section,

where more informed consumers always increased welfare. As in Section 3.1, increasing s increases
13

effort through (13). This has two implications. First, if 2q(e∗∗ )∆ ≥ 2w0 −ρ̃(1, n)[2w0 −∆], increasing
s increases efficiency for exactly the same reason as in Section 3.1: it focuses investigations, which
increases effort incentives. Second, it makes the truth-telling condition more likely because a more
informed agent is less worried about an investigation. Holding everything else constant, increases in
e∗∗ (s) relax the truth-telling condition.19 These effects yield the outcome that welfare is increasing
in s, conditional on truth-telling being satisfied.
But what differs from the previous section is that holding effort fixed, w0 is increasing in s
and since ρ̃(1, n) is independent of s, this implies that the right hand side of (16) is increasing as
consumers become more informed. From this perspective, more informed consumers reduce the
likelihood of the truth-telling constraint being satisfied. It is in this sense that more informed
consumers can harm allocations, and thus, exacerbate the agency problem. The intuition for
this is simple: as consumers become more informed, the information transmitted from not being
investigated is more revealing of the agent’s talent. In effect, agents feel less threatened by an
uninformed consumer. The response to feeling threatened by a consumer is simply to give the
consumer what he wants.
In general the effect of more informed consumers is ambiguous: the direct effect is to make
truth-telling less likely, but may increase effort by enough to overcome this problem. However, we
can still generate some limiting results in Proposition 3, whose proof is in the Appendix, as s → 1
and as s → 21 .
Proposition 3 Assume that V (1, 1) = V (1, 0) > V (0, 0) = V (0, 1).
1. For s sufficiently low, there is always an equilibrium where the agent exerts effort of e∗∗ , and
allocates a = αa .
2. For s sufficiently high, there is never an equilibrium where the agent exerts effort of e∗∗ , and
allocates a = αa .
This illustrates the tradeoff with consumer feedback. On the positive side, well informed consumers cause agents to exert more effort, as consumers point out their errors more frequently. But
this statement is only true when agents do not fear consumers too much. The negative part of
consumer involvement is that when benefits are not priced to consumers, agents become more worried about denying benefits to consumers, because consumers are good at pointing out their errors.
19

It is also the case that w0 is increasing in effort also. However,
truth-telling constraints.

14

dw0
de

< ∆, so that increasing effort relaxes the

This makes truth-telling more difficult to satisfy, and leads to the temptation to simply capitulate
to the desires of the consumer.

4

Outcomes Where Consumers Do Not Induce Effort Exertion

When the truth-telling conditon is violated, there are two possibly optimal pure strategy equilibria,
which yield lower utility than when truth-telling holds.20

Where the agent reports honestly, but complaints do not affect investigations.

First,

there always exists an equilibrium where the agent reveals his information truthfully, and complaints
never occur. Consider the case where the principal chooses p sufficiently large that the consumer
never complains.21 In that case, he cannot rely on the consumer to point out errors. Instead, the
principal believes that the agent is incorrect with probability 1 − q(ê), where ê is the expected level
of effort in this equilibrium. Accordingly, he chooses a monitoring propensity of ρ∗ (a) = 1 − q(ê)
as the ex post optimal level of intervention. The utility of the agent is then given by
w0 [1 − ρ∗ (a)] + ∆q(e)ρ∗ (a) − e.

(17)

The worker then chooses equilibrium effort e0 to satisfy
q 0 (e0 )∆(1 − q(e0 )) = 1.

(18)

This equilibrium has the benefit that the agent exerts effort, but the principal uses none of the
information available to the consumer to either improve ex post allocations or improve incentives.
Not surprisingly, e0 is lower than when consumers provide feedback. The equilibrium welfare from
this contract is given by

(1 − q(e0 ))2
+ q(e0 ) − e0
2

20

(19)

There is also a pure strategy equilibrium where the agent always reports a = 1. This also involves effort of e = 0.
However, the outcome where the agent always offers a = 1 is (at least weakly) dominated by either of the other two
outcomes. Given the indifference condition described above, this implies that at worst, the principal chooses between
the better of the case where (i) the agent reports truthfully, but the consumer never complains, and (ii) the agent
always denies the consumer the asset.
21
There are other cases where complaints do not pinpoint error. For instance, the principal could charge p = 0, in
which case the consumer always complains, as it focuses attention on the case. But if the consumer always complains,
this reveals nothing about whether the agent made an error, so once again there is no role for complaints in inducing
effort exertion. See Carmichael, 1988, and Friebel and Raith, 2001, for other work emphaisizing the importance of
cutting down communication channels to improve incentives.

15

Where the Consumer is Always Denied the Asset

Second, there is an equilibrium where

the agent always reports a = 0. This equilibrium involves effort of e = 0. To see this, note that for
any actual level of effort e, this yields expected utility to the agent of q(ê)∆, where ê is the level of
effort expected by the principal. But this expected level of effort is independent of the actual level
of effort, and so these equilibria always entail e = ẽ = 0.
Complaints still can play a role here, and the optimal equilibrium of this form allows the consumer to complain if the allocation is incorrect. Specifically, the principal chooses a price for
complaints such that the consumer complains if he believes that a = 1 is efficient, but not otherwise. This price is analogous determined to (2), and always exists. With such prices, monitoring
propensities are ρ̃(0, n) = 1 − s and ρ̃(0, c) = s, with resulting utility of
1 s2 (1 − s)2
+
+
2
4
4

(20)

When no equilibrium exists where consumers induce effort exertion, the principal chooses between these two outcomes. The tradeoff is simply between the value of the consumer’s information
and the agent’s. Specifically, there exists a critical value of q(e0 ), above which it is optimal to allow
the bureaucrat to allocate with no complaints is optimal in this class. The critical value of q(e0 )
is, not surprisingly, increasing in s.22 Also not surprising is that the welfare from these allocations
is lower than either the conguity outcome in Proposision 1, nor the equilibrium with divergent
preferences when truth-telling holds.

5

Discrete Costs of Effort

To get a sense of possible allocations, consider the case where the effort choice is discrete (0 or 1),
where at cost γ the agent can increase the precision of her estimate from q to q. Then consider the
optimal allocations that arise.
22

It is worth pointing out that when preferences are congruent, the outcome where the consumer is always denied
is dominated by an allocation mechanism where the consumer chooses the allocation, which is overturned only if
the principal finds evidence to the contrary. However, those equilibria never occur when preferences are congruent,
but instead only when there are non-congruent preferences. In the case where preferences are non-congruent, the
principal is never better off by allowing the consumer to choose the allocation, as he always chooses a = 1.

16

Congruent Preferences

First consider the case where V (1, 1) = V (0, 0) > V (1, 0) = V (0, 1).

Then the agent will exert effort if
w0
[(1 − ρ∗ (a, c))(q(1 − s) + s(1 − q)) + (1 − ρ∗ (a, n))(qs + (1 − q)(1 − s))]+
2
∆
q[sρ∗ (a, n) + (1 − s)ρ∗ (a, c)] − γ ≥
2
w0
[(1 − ρ∗ (a, c))(q(1 − s) + s(1 − q)) + (1 − ρ∗ (a, n))(qs + (1 − q)(1 − s))]
2
∆
+ q[sρ∗ (a, n) + (1 − s)ρ∗ (a, c)] (21)
2
This defines a critical value of s, say s∗ , above which the agent exerts effort and below which the
agent chooses e = 0. (Of course, s∗ may exceed 1.) This is simply the discrete analog of the
result above that more informed agents induce (in this case, weakly) more effort. Proposition 4
immediately follows.
Proposition 4 Assume that V (1, 1) = V (0, 0) > V (0, 0) = V (1, 1) and let discrete effort costs be
given by γ. Let s∗ solve (21) with equality. Then the agent always allocates a = αa and
1. If s ≥ s∗ , the agent can be induced to exert effort.
2. If s < s∗ , the agent does not exerts effort.

Non-Congruent Preferences

Now consider the case where V (1, 1) = V (1, 0) > V (0, 0) =

V (0, 1). Then the agent will exert effort if
w0
w0
(1 − ρ̃(1, n))
[(1 − ρ∗ (0, c))(q(1 − s) + s(1 − q)) + (1 − ρ∗ (0, n))(qs + (1 − q)(1 − s))] +
2
2
q
q
+ ∆ [sρ∗ (0, n) + (1 − s)ρ∗ (0, c)] + ∆ρ̃(1, n) − γ ≥
2
2
w0
w0
[(1 − ρ∗ (0, c))(q(1 − s) + s(1 − q)) + (1 − ρ∗ (0, n))(qs + (1 − q)(1 − s))] +
(1 − ρ̃(1, n))
2
2
q
q
+ ∆ [sρ∗ (0, n) + (1 − s)ρ∗ (0, c)] + ∆ρ̃(1, n). (22)
2
2
This defines a critical value s∗∗ above which the agent exerts effort and below which the agent
chooses e = 0. Note that s∗∗ ≥ s∗ , because consumers who do not reveal errors in their favor
reduce the incentives of the agent to exert effort. The principal partially compensates for this by
monitoring more, but since the compensation is only partial, total incentives for the agent fall. This
is the first difficulty of providing incentives when consumers have different preferences to those of
the principal.
17

The more subtle problem with the agency relation concerns how consumer knowledge affects
the allocation made by the agent after she observes αa . Next consider the truth-telling constraint
when the agent exerts effort. This is given by
2q∆ ≥ 2w0 − ρ̃(1, n)[2w0 − ∆],

(23)

where w0 is the no-investigation wage when the agent exert effort in equilibrium. As w0 is increasing
in s, this implies that there exists a critical value of s, below which the truth-telling condition holds.
From the previous section, we know that s < 1, as the truth-telling condition is always violated
when the consumer’s information is sufficiently good. Whether the agent can be induced to exert
effort and allocate honestly then depends on s and s∗∗ , as s must exceed s∗∗ to induce effort exertion
and be below s to induce truth-telling.
For values of s below s∗∗ , the agent cannot be induced to exert effort. In this case, the truthtelling condition is given by
2q∆ ≥ 2w0 − ρ̃(1, n)[2w0 − ∆],

(24)

where w0 is the no-investigation wage when the agent does not exert effort in equilibrium. This
condition is satisfied when s is below some value s. Note that s < s, as truth-telling is more easily
satisfied when the agent exerts effort.
Proposition 5 Assume that V (1, 1) = V (1, 0) > V (0, 0) = V (0, 1) and let discrete effort costs be
given by γ. Let s∗∗ solve (21) with equality and let s (s) solve (16) for e = 1(0).
1. If s ≥ s∗∗ then,
• If s∗∗ ≤ s, the agent can be induced to exert effort and choose a = αa for s between s∗∗
and s < 1, but there is no equilibrium where she does so for higher values of s.
• If s∗∗ > s, there is no equilibrium where the agent exerts effort, allocates a = αa , and
where consumers affect the allocation.
2. If s < s∗∗ there is no equilibrium with effort exerted and,
• If s ≤ s, the agent allocates a = αa and the consumer affects the allocation.
• If s > s, there is no equilibrium where the agent allocates a = αa and consumers affect
the allocation.
These results simply illustrate the effect that consumers have on the allocation of under-priced
goods. It can never be the case that better informed consumers always improve allocations: for s
18

sufficiently large, consumers can never be used effectively, as agents feel too threatened by them.
In that case, either consumer complaints are always ignored, or consumers are always denied the
good. Ironically, it is the most informed consumers who are least likely to have their complaints
addressed!

6

Conclusion

Agency theory often treats measurement error in a vacuum, where it is unclear how it relates to
oversight or to the nature of the goods being allocated. The premise of this paper is that consumers
play a central role in resolving agency problems, but do so in complex ways. When the preferences
of consumers line up with the preferences of principal, as would often be the case when goods are
priced, consumers play a helpful role in allocating goods efficiently, both because the improve ex
post allocations and increase ex ante incentives. This part of the paper is, I believe, little more
than fleshing out the value of increased information for various forms of oversight.
Consumers play a more ambiguous role when their preferences differ from those of the principal.
Here agents worry about complaints made by well-informed consumers and become tempted to
simply give them benefits, even when they do not believe that these benefits are warranted. By
doing so, they avoid complaints which could reveal error, and hence, penalty. Even in the case
where these truth-telling problems can be overcome, it remains the case that oversight is less
effective than with congruent preferences, as they point out fewer ex post errors which both harm
ex post allocations and ex ante incentives. Thus, the nature of goods allocated affects the efficiency
of their allocation, through the actions of the consumers that benefit from their allocations.
This implies that agency problems are partly caused by the nature of the goods allocated, which
generates the congruity described above. One important dimension is whether consumers pay for
their allocations. In situations where benefits are not priced, consumers generally prefer to receive
the benefit, even when it is not warranted. For instance, patients prefer their insurance companies to
approve them for health care, applicants always want to be approved for unemployment benefits,
students want higher grades, suspects prefer not to be arrested, and so on. I argue that it is
particularly difficult to resolve agency problems for these goods because consumer feedback is less
reliable than when the consumer and principal agree on desired outcomes. Note also that many of
these goods are allocated through the public sector (police forces, benefit officers, health care in
many countries, etc.) so that this paper offers an explanation for the supposed inefficiency of these
institutions.

19

Appendix: Proofs of Results
Proof of Proposition 3:
Consider the case where consumers are completely uninformed, s → 12 . In that case, w0 → ∆q, as
there is no information transmitted by not investigating and the truth-telling condition becomes
2q(e) ≥ 2q(e) − (1 − q(e))(1 − 2q(e))

(25)

which is satisfied for 21 > q > 1. Therefore, when consumer are poorly informed of the optimal
allocation, the agent worries little about the prospect of a complaint.
On the other hand, when s → 1, then w0 → ∆ 1+q
2 , and the truth-telling condition becomes
2q(e) ≥ 1 + q(e)2 ,

(26)

which is always violated for q < 1. Thus, the agent can never be induced to report honestly if the
principal monitors (ex post) efficiently and consumers are very well informed.

20

References
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole (1997), “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations”,
Journal of Political Economy, 105, 1-29.
Cannon, Lou, “One Bad Cop”, New York Times, October 2, 2000, New York.
Carmichael, Lorne (1988), “Incentives in Academics: Why is There Tenure?”, Journal of Political Economy, 96, 453-72.
Christian Science Monitor, “Frisking the Feds”, August 30, 2000.
The Gazette, “Do You Have Confidence in Our Police Force?” April 20, 1997, Montreal.
Friebel, Guido and Michael Raith, “Abuse of Authority and Hierarchical Communication,”
mimeo, Chicago GSB, May 2001.
Milbourn, Todd, Richard Shockley, and Anjan Thakor (2001) “Managerial Career Concerns and Investments in Information,” forthcoming, RAND Journal of Economics.
New York Times, “Besmirched Deportland Wrestles With the INS” August 31, 2000, New York.
Prendergast, Canice, “The Provision of Incentives in Firms”, Journal of Economic Literature,
1999, 37, 7-63.
Prendergast, Canice, “The Limits of Bureaucratic Efficiency”, mimeo, 2001.
Star Tribune, “Congressional Cures for the IRS Worse than Agency’s Ills”, August 30, 2000.
Tharp, Mike, “L.A.’s Go-to Guy Gets Down To Business”, U.S. News and World Report, 2000,
September 11.
Wilson, James, Bureaucracy, Basic Books, New York, 1989.

21

