                                  $ %  &  




                                           


                                                


                                            ! "#'()(
                                   *++",-- .#!-""#-'()(


                       &      & $& /  0 &
                                    )01*#++&2# #
                                      3.4!#50&67'
                                         #"+#3.#




           
 


 !"# $ % &  '    (   &  ( 
)         (  & ( &  
 #!8 18 !+*#
  
$ ! "#'()(
#"+#3.#6
 9(5 :5 )



                                               


        *""#41## #!8"18 4+*#1+#4#2+ ;# #!8""85# #!8
4#3 45# #!8"1# 4+*# 4+! <+ ;+*#43#+1# #!8 4+#4 !+*#"#4
+*!*6*"#412#+*#++8#;+*##!#$*43 ++  4
+*## +# + 43 ++ *#""#.#! +*.1! 441 ;# #!8""85
1 3"+  4# #!8"18SULRU++*# ++*# "24# 2#2#;+*##2+ ;
# #!83#+ 4# #!8"184 !+*#*41 ;#4.83#4#+#4
41 ;""854#3 4 4".1"1#;;#1+ !+*#"381#;# #!8""8 4
4#3 44 !+*#,"#+#35 +!5##1+1+8515 1## #!85# #.## #!8 4
# #!8#;;1# 18




  
#"+3# +;1 31
)6=6'$
01*#++ +++#;#1* !8
3.4!#50&6(6
 4$
">?3+#4
                      U.S. ENERGY POLICY DURING THE 1990s1


                                         Paul L. Joskow2

                                         MIT and NBER
                                           July 2001

I.      INTRODUCTION3
        This essay discusses U.S. energy policy and the associated evolution of energy
supply, energy demand, energy prices and the industrial organization of the domestic
energy industries during the period 1991 through 2000. This period covers the last two
years of the George H. W. Bush administration and the entire Clinton administration. It
begins with an “energy crisis” stimulated by the invasion of Kuwait and the subsequent
Gulf War and ends with an “energy crisis” caused by significant increases in oil and,
especially, natural gas prices, the collapse of California’s new competitive electricity
markets and the threat of electricity shortages throughout the Western U.S. Both “energy
crises” led the sitting Presidents’ administrations to develop national energy strategies
and to try to convince Congress to enact comprehensive energy legislation to implement
them. Neither “energy crisis” had the severe economic impact or led to the kinds of
dramatic, and often ill-conceived, policy responses observed following the two oil shocks
of the 1970s. The 1990-91 “energy crisis” was short-lived and interest in energy policy
soon faded. It would not be surprising if the latest “energy crisis” follows a similar
course.

       Most of the decade between these two “energy crises” was characterized by
abundant supplies of energy, stable or falling real energy prices, and relatively little
public or political interest in national energy policy issues. Energy demand continued to

1
  This paper was prepared for the conference “American Economic Policy During the 1990s,” sponsored by
the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, June 27 to June 30, 2001.
2
  Elizabeth and James Killian Professor of Economics and Management at MIT, Director of the MIT Center
for Energy and Environmental Policy Research (CEEPR), and a Research Associate of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. I gratefully acknowledge financial support from CEEPR. I have benefited from
discussions with Denny Ellerman, John Deutch, Luis Tellez, Ernie Moniz, and comments from Charles
Curtis, Daniel Yergin, Bill Hogan, Philip Sharp, and participants in recent CEEPR workshops. Erich
Muehlegger provided excellent research assistance.
3
 DATA NOTE: I have relied extensively on data reported in the Energy Information
Administration’s (EIA) publications Annual Energy Review 1999 (July 2000) and Monthly Energy
Review (April 2001). I have included revisions to some data originally included in the Annual Review
which subsequently appeared either in the Monthly Energy Review or in more recent data distributed
by EIA and available on its web site. Unless otherwise indicated, the data utilized and referred to in
this essay come from these sources.
                                            2


grow steadily through the decade, but supply was able to meet it without major increases
in prices until the end of the decade. Because energy prices were stable or falling during
most of the decade and there were no serious supply disruptions, there was little interest
among the voters in energy policy issues and major new energy policy initiatives never
rose very high on the policy agendas of either the Clinton administration or Congress
during the 1990s. After an early failed effort to get Congress to pass legislation to
impose a large BTU tax, the Clinton administration’s energy policy initiatives became
more modest and less urgent, largely working within the existing statutory framework
and budget constraints. No sweeping new energy policy legislation was passed by
Congress after 1992 and efforts to get national electricity deregulation and regulatory
reform legislation passed in the Administration’s final two years were not successful.
Overall, the U.S.’s energy consumption portfolio changed very little during the decade.
Energy demand continued to grow modestly, energy intensity continued to decline
modestly, and the mix of fuels satisfying demand changed remarkably little. This should
remind us that the energy supply and consumption infrastructure changes slowly in
response to economic forces and public policies as a consequence of sunk investments in
long-lived assets on both the supply and demand sides.

        The Clinton administration’s energy policies were heavily influenced by concerns
about the environmental impacts of energy consumption and production, including
impacts of greenhouse gas emissions and climate change.                In particular, the
Administration trumpeted programs to encourage renewable energy, energy efficiency,
alternative-fuel vehicles, and increased use of natural gas in electricity generation and
vehicles. However, some of these efforts were hampered first by federal budgetary
constraints which limited increased R&D expenditures and tax subsidies, then by a
Republican Congress that restricted the administration’s efforts to tighten vehicle and
appliance efficiency standards and provide larger tax incentives for renewable energy,
electric fuel cell and hybrid vehicles, and finally by an unexpected acceleration in the
pace of electricity sector restructuring and competition programs which undermined the
administration’s efforts to use regulated monopoly utility “integrated resource planning”
programs to subsidize energy efficiency and renewable energy.

         While the Clinton administration pursued federal land-use policies that further
restricted oil and gas drilling activity on some federal lands in the West, it also quietly
supported or acceded to Republican policy initiatives that encouraged oil and gas drilling
in deep water in the Gulf of Mexico, tax and royalty relief for small oil and gas wells,
opened up additional federal lands in Alaska to drilling, proceeded with the privatization
of federal uranium enrichment facilities and the Elk Hills Naval Petroleum Reserves,
supported federal funding for development of new technologies to increase oil extraction
productivity, continued the slow process of licensing a federal nuclear waste storage
facility, supported the re-licensing of operating nuclear power plants and continued
research on advanced reactor technology, and initiated a cooperative program with the
U.S. automobile industry to develop more fuel-efficient vehicle technology. Foreign
policy initiatives endeavored to strengthen relationships with the governments of oil
producing states, to diversify the nation’s oil imports, and to foster the independence of
                                            3


oil producing states that were created after the break-up of the Soviet Union from both
Iran and Russia.

        An important component of energy policy during the 1990s involved the
completion of the restructuring and deregulation of natural gas production and
transportation begun during the 1980s, and major new initiatives to restructure the
electric power sector so that it would rely on competitive wholesale and retail markets for
power supplies. The wholesale competition initiatives were undertaken initially by the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). The retail competition programs were
driven primarily by state rather than federal policy initiatives. Harmonizing diffuse state
retail competition programs with federal wholesale market and transmission access and
pricing reforms became a major policy challenge. The Clinton administration supported
these initiatives by appointing sympathetic individuals to serve as Commissioners at
FERC and, belatedly, by proposing comprehensive federal electricity reform legislation
in competition with numerous Republican electricity reform bills; none of which made it
through Congress.

         While the 1990s was a decade of limited major new federal energy policy
initiatives, it was also decade in which the country finally reaped the benefits of the end
of many ill considered energy policies of the 1970s and the early 1980s: oil and gas price
controls, fuel-use restrictions, protectionist policies for oil refiners, publicly funded
mega-projects to promote specific supply sources came to an end. Traditional market
forces were given the opportunity to operate with less government intervention in oil,
gas, and coal markets, the restructuring of the natural gas pipeline industry was largely
completed, and major electricity restructuring and competition initiatives began. Even
the controversial privatization of the United States Enrichment Corporation (USEC)
reflected broad acceptance of relying primarily on market forces to govern the energy
industries. Moreover, the transition to competition in electricity, the spread of
performance-based regulation, etc., provided powerful incentives to improve the
performance of nuclear and coal-fired generating facilities.

         Because much of the regulatory apparatus of the 1970s and early 1980s had been
dismantled by 1990, some of the tools for doing mischief in response to energy supply
and price shocks were not readily available. As a result, there was little that could be
easily done of a regulatory nature in the short run to respond to oil price shocks in 1990-
91 and oil and gas price shocks in 2000 and 2001. This was a good thing and made it
easier for these sectors to adapt to changes in supply and demand conditions. The 1990s
benefited from the legacy of failed regulatory policies of the 1970s and 1980s in another
important, though indirect way. The decade began with substantial excess capacity and a
variety of inefficiencies on the supply side. They provided significant opportunities for
cost reduction and innovation in energy production and distribution. This too contributed
to abundant supplies, stable or falling prices, and allowed energy policy issues to fade
into the background on the national policy agenda. The legacy of regulatory and energy
policies of the 1970s and 1980s also were a major stimulus for electricity restructuring
initiatives in California and the Northeast which had inherited high-cost assets and
                                                    4


contracts from the 1970s and 1980s whose costs for regulatory purposes were often far
above their 1990s competitive market values.

        The Clinton administration embraced and supported increased reliance on market
forces to allocate energy resources and continued efforts begun by the previous
administration to remove barriers to good market performance.                The Clinton
administration viewed the proper role of energy policy to be to respond to market
imperfections, especially as they related to the environmental impacts of energy
production and consumption. However, the favorable performance of the energy sectors
during most of the 1990s also led to some complacency on the energy policy front,
especially regarding investments in energy supply infrastructure. While the decade began
with substantial excess capacity in electricity generation and transmission, natural gas
production and transportation, and oil refining capacity, the capacity of these
infrastructure facilities were being stressed by the end of the decade. Tight supplies and
growing demand led to rising prices for oil, natural gas, and wholesale electricity by the
end of the decade, to significant energy price volatility. Regulatory and environmental
constraints, as well as continued uncertainty about the future of electricity sector
restructuring, contributed to tight supplies, price volatility and some spot shortages of
electricity and natural gas during 2000 and 2001.

        The essay proceeds in the following way. First, I will discuss a number of
reasons why the United States might need a set of sustained national policies specific to
the energy sector. Next, I will provide a background discussion of energy supply,
consumption and energy policy prior to the 1990s. I then turn to an overview of the
evolution of energy markets and energy policy during the 1990s. This discussion is
followed by a more detailed discussion of supply, demand and public policies affecting
the primary sources of energy during the 1990s: petroleum, natural gas, electricity, coal,
nuclear energy, renewable energy and energy efficiency. The essay concludes with some
reflections about current energy policy challenges.

II.    WHY DO WE NEED NATIONAL ENERGY POLICIES?
       It is useful to begin with a brief discussion of the reasons why we might need
national policies targeted specifically at energy supply, demand, and pricing that go
beyond broader public policies (tax, antitrust, environmental, R&D, etc.) affecting
American industry generally. Energy policies are derivative policies reflecting a number
of higher level policy objectives and considerations.4

        a. Important infrastructure sectors essential for economic growth and
           development: Economical and reliable supplies of energy play an important
           role in fostering economic growth and development.             Energy, like
           transportation and telecommunications services, is a key intermediate input
           into most sectors of a developed economy.            Distortions in prices,

4
 The list is not meant to be exhaustive. Clearly, income distribution concerns have played a role in energy
policy formation and implementation. So too have market imperfections which may make it difficult for
consumers to make rational investments in energy-using structures, equipment and appliances.
                                                      5


               consumption, supply, or reliability of energy infrastructure services can lead
               to large economic and social costs. Moreover, because the short run demand
               for energy tends to be quite inelastic and dependent on long-lived capital
               investments, it takes time for consumers to respond fully to long term shifts in
               price levels by changing consumption patterns. Key segments of the energy
               system (electricity and natural gas networks) have (or had) natural monopoly
               characteristics and have been subject to economic regulation for most of this
               century. The performance of these regulatory institutions has profound
               implications for broader indices of economic performance.

           b. National Security Concerns: A growing fraction of U.S. energy consumption
              is supplied by imports of energy, primarily petroleum, from other countries.
              World petroleum reserves in countries exporting oil are concentrated in the
              North Africa, the Persian Gulf, Russia, and countries that were formerly part
              of the Soviet Union.5 These regions are politically unstable and have
              governments that are not always friendly to the United States. Because
              energy, and in particular petroleum, is an important input supporting
              economic growth and development, energy market instability is potentially
              very costly to the U.S. economy and those of our oil-importing allies.
              Accordingly, enemies of the United States or its allies may use energy supply
              strategically in an effort to influence other U.S. policies.6

           c. Environmental Impacts: The combustion of fossil fuels is the primary source
              of air pollution targeted by environmental policies aimed at cleaning the air
              (NOx, SO2, CO, etc.) and accounts for most of the production of CO2, a
              greenhouse gas generally thought to be a major contributor to global climate
              change. Energy production and delivery also have significant potential
              impacts on water quality, water temperature, and land use. Since air and
              water pollution are generally acknowledged to be “externalities” which
              require policy intervention, environmental policies will have significant
              effects on energy supply, demand and prices and vice versa. Environmental
              policies necessarily affect energy markets and energy policies necessarily
              have environmental effects. Sensible environmental policy should be matched
              with compatible energy policies. Moreover, because the U.S. has been
              reluctant to use the best available instruments to internalize environmental
              externalities (e.g. environmental taxes and/or property rights-based cap and
              trade systems), second (third, fourth or more) best policies may involve
              interventions that work directly on the supply of and demand for the resources
              that have adverse environmental impacts.

           d. Competition Policy: General U.S. economic policy is oriented toward
              promoting the development of competitive markets and relying on price and

5
    Countries in the Middle East and North Africa account for over 70% of world crude oil reserves.
6
 This is not my area of expertise, but it seems to me that the oil import situation for both the U.S. and other
G8 countries in the aggregate is an important consideration in evaluating energy security issues.
                                                    6


             entry regulation only when unregulated markets have “natural monopoly”
             characteristics and are expected to perform poorly absent regulation.
             Important segments of the U.S. energy sector, in particular electric power and
             natural gas, have been subject to price and entry regulation for almost a
             century. As already noted, these regulatory institutions have important
             implications for the performance of these important infrastructure sectors and,
             therefore, for the performance of the economy. U.S. competition policies
             continually reexamine the rationale for and performance of price and entry
             regulation. Poor sector performance, as well as technological and economic
             changes that undermine the case for price and entry regulation, can make it
             desirable to design and implement competition policies that restructure
             regulated industries to expand opportunities for competition and shrink the
             expanse of price and entry regulation. Competition (antitrust) policies have
             not only served as constant pressures on regulated energy industries, but have
             also played an important role in affecting the structure and behavior of
             generally “unregulated” energy segments, especially the petroleum sector.
             However, U.S. antitrust policy alone cannot fully override existing state and
             federal statutes that create regulated monopoly sectors. Specific changes in
             state and federal legislation are necessary to do so.

        e. Use of Publicly-owned Resources: A significant fraction of domestic energy
           resources lie on or under land that is controlled by the federal government
           (and to a lesser extent state governments) and this fraction has been
           increasing.7 Hydroelectric resources lie on rivers and in locations subject to
           state or federal jurisdiction. The federal government has no choice but to
           develop and implement policies which define how these lands can be used for
           energy exploration and production. Whether and how these public lands are
           made available for exploration, development and production of energy can
           have important implications for energy supply and prices. These policies also
           have impacts on the environment that further complicate the interactions
           between energy and environmental policies. Sound federal land use policies
           cannot be developed independent of complementary energy and
           environmental policies.

        f. Federalism Issues: Responsibility for energy policy involves both the states
           and the federal government. However, state energy policy decisions can have
           impacts on other states and on suppliers of energy and energy-using
           equipment that affect consumers in many states. Conflicts between state
           policies have emerged in electricity and natural gas industry reform initiatives.
           Moreover, individual uncoordinated state programs defining appliance
           efficiency standards, air and water emissions standards, the composition of
           gasoline, certification of energy facilities, etc., can increase the overall
           national costs of achieving energy policy and environmental goals. Federal

7
  Due largely to increased production from Federal offshore tracts, the share of domestic oil production
from Federal lands increased from 16.3% in 1989 to 26.9% in 1997; similarly, the federal share of natural
gas production increased from 30.2% in 1980 to 39.3% in 1997.
                                                        7


                policies may be necessary to harmonize state programs to reduce their costs
                and to alleviate barriers to interstate commerce created by individual state
                policies.



III. BACKGROUND: ENERGY SUPPLY AND DEMAND AND ENERGY
     POLICY BEFORE 1990
        Historically, energy has been abundant and relatively inexpensive in the U.S.
Americans consume roughly 70% more energy per capita or per dollar of GDP than do
people in most other developed countries. [FIGURE 1] We drive bigger cars, drive them
further, live in bigger houses, and heat, cool and light them more, and work in buildings
that use substantially more energy per square meter than Europeans. The availability of
reliable supplies of cheap energy, especially gasoline, is viewed as a birthright by many
Americans. Taxes on energy are much lower in the U.S. than in most other developed
countries and most politicians have learned that proposing large increases in energy taxes
is unlikely to be a career-enhancing decision. Accordingly, consumer prices for all forms
of energy in the U.S. are relatively low compared to Western Europe and Japan.
Nevertheless, last year Americans spent (directly or indirectly) about $600 billion on
energy of all kinds. About 38% of U.S. energy consumption comes from petroleum, 24%
from natural gas, 23% from coal, 8% from nuclear power, and 7% from renewable
energy, primarily conventional hydroelectric resources.8 This mix is little changed from
1990. [FIGURE 2 and FIGURE 3]. Residential energy consumption in 2000 accounted
for 20%, commercial 17%, industrial 36%, and transportation 27% of energy consumed
in 2000. The 2000 sector mix is almost identical to that in 1990 as well. [FIGURE 4 and
FIGURE 5]

        The U.S. has been blessed with large endowments of domestic energy resources --
- petroleum, natural gas, coal, and hydroelectric resources. These endowments are not
equally divided among the states, however. Most of the states along the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans have relatively limited fossil fuel resources and are very significant net
importers of energy. There are substantial coal resources distributed throughout the
Appalachian mountain region in Western Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Kentucky and
stretching west into Tennessee, Indiana and Illinois. There are also very substantial coal
resources in the far West, especially in Wyoming, Montana, New Mexico, Utah and
Arizona. Oil and natural gas production resources are concentrated in Texas, Louisiana,
Alaska, Oklahoma, and several western states, including California. Hydroelectric
resources are concentrated in the West.

       Historically, the U.S. relied relatively little on imports of energy from other
countries, though imports of petroleum began to increase rapidly in the early 1970s and,
have increase steadily since 1985 to the point where we now import about 60% of our



8
    This includes primary fuels used to produce electricity.
                                                     8


petroleum is imported from countries around the world.9 [FIGURE 6 and FIGURE 7]
Many analysts expect U.S. petroleum imports to continue to grow as a fraction of total
U.S. petroleum consumption; up to 75% by 2020.10

        Prior to the first oil shock in 1973-74, federal energy policy consisted primarily of
uncoordinated industry specific support policies: various tax subsidies for oil and natural
gas production, the leasing of federal lands for oil and natural gas exploration and
production, quotas on imported oil to protect domestic suppliers from cheap imports,
substantial research and development expenditures devoted to promoting the production
of electricity using nuclear power --- a legacy of the development of nuclear weapons
during WW II ---, the regulation of the prices charged for transportation by interstate
natural gas pipelines and, beginning in the early 1960s, a complex system of price
controls on natural gas sold in interstate commerce. The states were primarily
responsible for regulating prices for electricity and the local distribution of natural gas
since these services were provided by state-franchised monopolies. State agencies in
Texas, Louisiana and a few other states also played an important role in regulating
supplies of oil and natural gas.

        In the last 30 years, there have been several bursts of political activity
(characterized as responding to an “energy crisis”) focused on developing national
policies to increase domestic production of energy and to increase the efficiency with
which energy is used in the U.S. in order to reduce the rate of growth in energy
consumption in general and the growth in oil imports in particular. These initiatives have
generally been stimulated by some kind of energy supply and price “shock,” and
associated concerns about energy security and U.S. dependence on imported oil, and the
associated impacts on the U.S. economy. After the first oil price shock in 1973-74,
President Nixon launched Project Independence, with the goal of achieving U.S. energy-
self-sufficiency by 1980. These initiatives included reorganizations of federal agencies
involved in energy research and development, new energy price regulations, data
collection and policy initiatives. In 1975, President Ford signed the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act, extending price controls on oil, establishing automobile fuel efficiency
standards, and authorizing the creation of a Strategic Petroleum Reserve.

      Almost immediately after becoming President, Jimmy Carter signed the
Emergency Natural Gas Act of 1977 in response to growing natural gas shortages

9
 OPEC countries accounted for 43% of world oil production and 51% of world oil production outside of
North America in 2000. The comparable figures for 1990 are 38% and 47%. In 1973, however, OPEC
accounted for 56% of world oil production and 69% of production outside of North America.
10
 For example, see Annual Energy Outlook 2001, Energy Information Administration, December 2000,
page 88. The U.S. consumes roughly 19 million barrels of oil per day (including natural gas liquids), of
which about 11 million barrels per day is imported. Domestic consumption grew steadily during the 1990s
while domestic production fell steadily (more on this below). To put this in perspective, if ANWR is
developed it is projected to produce about 600,000 barrels of oil per day. If growing petroleum imports is
perceived to be a policy problem it is extremely unlikely that increases in domestic petroleum supplies will
have a significant impact on petroleum import trends.
                                                   9


resulting from the existing price controls on natural gas supplies sold in interstate
commerce. Soon after, President Carter announced a National Energy Plan and called for
the creation of a new Department of Energy (DOE, created later that year) to consolidate
dispersed federal agencies involved in energy policy, research, and development
programs.11 After a contentious political debate lasting more than a year, in late 1978
Congress passed and President Carter signed the National Energy Act, which included
the National Energy Policy and Conservation Act (NEPCA), the Power Plant and
Industrial Fuel Use Act (FUA), the Public Utilities Regulatory Policy Act (PURPA), the
Energy Tax Act (ETA), and the Natural Gas Policy Act (NGPA). NEPCA provided that
the DOE was to issue appliance efficiency standards for household appliances and
charged the FTC with issuing appliance energy efficiency labeling rules. PURPA
required states to determine whether they should and would introduce new pricing
mechanisms to encourage energy conservation and obligated electric utilities to purchase
power from cogeneration plants and small power production facilities using renewable
and waste fuels. The NGPA, began the deregulation of “new gas” supplies while
continuing price regulation of “old gas” supplies. The ETA provided tax breaks for
domestic energy supplies and energy efficiency improvements. The Fuel Use Act
prohibited the use of natural gas and oil, whose prices were kept below market clearing
levels by federal price controls, in new power plants and phased out natural gas use in
existing power plants by 1990. These regulations reflected an effort to alleviate natural
gas shortages and reduce the demand for oil burned “inefficiently” to generate electricity.
These regulations pushed utilities to increase their use of coal to generate electricity.

        Only two months after President Carter signed the laws making up the National
Energy Act, Iran ceased exporting oil following the Shah’s overthrow, leading to
worldwide shortages of oil and an explosion in world oil prices. In March 1979, a serious
accident occurred at the Three Mile Island (TMI) nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania,
reinforcing already significant opposition to nuclear power, leading to a moratorium on
the completion of new nuclear plants, and a temporary closure of some operating nuclear
plants, pending a review of safety issues raised by the TMI accident. In April 1979,
President Carter, responding to growing oil and gas shortages, announced the gradual
decontrol of oil prices and proposed a windfall profits tax on producers. In July, he
proclaimed a national energy supply shortage, established temperature restrictions in non-
residential buildings, and went on television to address the nation to argue that energy
shortages had become a major test for the nation requiring sacrifices of various kinds. He
also announced an $88 billion program to produce synthetic fuels from domestic coal and
shale oil reserves and a few months later announced proposals to increase domestic
energy supplies and reduce consumption. In June, 1980 President Carter signed the
Energy Security Act, consisting of six pieces of legislation: U.S. Synthetic Fuels
Corporation Act, Biomass Energy and Alcohol Fuels Act, Renewable Energy Resources
Act, Solar Energy and Energy Conservation Act, Geothermal Energy Act, and Ocean
Thermal Energy Conversion Act. These laws all provided an array of tax subsidies and
direct subsidies for alternative energy supplies and to encourage energy efficiency. The

11
  The DOE also has extensive responsibilities for the U.S. nuclear weapons program and for the cleanup of
weapons research and production sites. I will not discuss these aspects of the DOE’s activities in this
essay.
                                                    10


synthetic fuel and shale oil programs were later abandoned as oil and natural gas prices
fell during the 1980s.

        Oil prices peaked in 1981, fell gradually until 1985 and then fell dramatically in
1986. [FIGURE 8] Real oil prices have stayed far below their 1981-85 peak since then.
Natural gas prices peaked in 1982-84 and then fell dramatically after 1984. [FIGURE
18] During the 1990s real natural gas prices fluctuated between $1.50 and $2.50/MCF
until May 2000 when they began to increase rapidly, reaching a new post-1973 peak by
the end of 2000, before falling back to about $3/MCF in late July 2001. Real coal prices
began to fall in the late 1970s and real electricity prices fell during the post-1985 period.
As energy prices fell and the supply shortages disappeared, interest in energy policy
seems to have quickly declined as well. There were few significant new federal energy
policy initiatives during the Reagan administration or the first years of the George H. W.
Bush administration. Presidents Reagan and Bush largely completed the process of
deregulating oil and natural gas commodity prices. The Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol
Act of 1989 completely removed the wildly inefficient price controls on wellhead prices
of natural gas effective January 1993.

        Historically, local gas distribution utilities (LDCs), electric utilities and large
industrial consumers of natural gas purchased their gas needs from interstate pipeline
companies under long-term contracts. (Smaller consumers in turn purchased gas from
LDCs at prices regulated by state regulatory agencies) These supply contracts “bundled”
the supply of natural gas itself with the transportation of that gas. The associated prices
charged by interstate pipeline companies were subject to regulation by the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) using cost-of-service principles.12 The pipelines
in turn entered into long term gas supply contracts with gas producers.13 In 1985, FERC
began an initiative to open up access to interstate natural gas pipelines to allow gas
distribution companies, electric utilities, and large industrial consumers to purchase gas
separately from transportation service, allowing them to contract directly with gas
producers or marketing intermediaries, purchasing transportation service from interstate
pipelines separately from the gas itself. This initiative was a response to the changing
market and regulatory framework governing the production of natural gas. As field
prices of natural gas declined and supplies increased during the 1980s, pipelines and gas
distribution companies found themselves locked into long-term contracts at very high
prices. This created enormous incentives for industrial customers to seek ways to bypass
high regulated pipeline and gas distribution tariff prices to get at low-priced gas in the
field by buying directly from producers and using competing pipelines (including
constructing spur lines to get to them) to transport market-priced natural gas. Legislation
that went into effect in 1979 created limited opportunities for pipelines to make special
arrangements with industrial customers to increase sales of natural gas by offering them

12
  S. Breyer and P. MacAvoy, Energy Regulation by the Federal Power Commission, Brookings Institution,
1974, Washington, D.C.
13
  FERC (under its previous name, the Federal Power Commission) began regulating field prices of natural
gas, in addition to pipeline charges, in the early 1960s. Field price controls were not fully removed until
1993, though they were largely eliminated during the 1980s.
                                            11


transportation service at regulated prices, but allowing them to purchase gas at lower
unregulated prices. As field prices fell, the demand for these special arrangements grew,
resulting in enormous differences in purchase prices depending on the ability particular
buyers had to make special supply arrangements with pipelines. The growing bypass
efforts threatened to create serious “stranded cost” problems for pipelines and LDCs
locked into long-term contracts.

         In 1985, FERC issued Order 436 which established a voluntary program to
encourage pipelines to provide “open access” transportation service in order to allow
natural gas producers to negotiate directly with local gas distribution utilities, electric
utilities and large industrial consumers of natural gas supplies. This was an effort to
rationalize a regulatory framework that was rapidly collapsing and to do so in a way that
was fair to customers, pipelines and LDCs. Gas transportation rates would continue to be
regulated by FERC, but the price of commodity natural gas would be determined through
arms-length negotiations. This order began the separation of interstate pipelines’
transportation functions from their “merchant” functions as marketers of natural gas.
Although Order 436’s open access rules were voluntary, the order provided financial
incentives for pipelines to adopt the open access rules and associated separations of
transportation and merchant functions in order to obtain recovery of above-market “take-
or-pay” contract costs. Along with the deregulation of wellhead prices for natural gas,
these regulations spurred the development of competitive markets for natural gas at a
growing number of trading hubs, markets for gas storage, secondary markets for pipeline
capacity, the development of a vibrant gas marketing industry, and the creation of
financial derivatives markets giving wholesale gas consumers a wide range of contracting
and risk management options. These developments later served as the model FERC
relied upon to foster competitive wholesale electricity markets and access to the
transmission capacity necessary to support them.

         Federal policy toward nuclear power during the 1980s was primarily a policy of
benign neglect. Legislation was passed in 1982 and 1987 to identify and develop a site
for storing waste fuel from civilian nuclear reactors, though the future of nuclear power
continued to dim as costs escalated, electricity demand growth slowed and many
announced nuclear plants were cancelled. Federal funding for the development of the
Clinch River Breeder Reactor was terminated in 1983 and the project cancelled. Federal
budget cuts reduced DOE spending on research and development dramatically during the
1980s. The Reagan administration opposed setting appliance efficiency standards
required by legislation passed during the Carter administration and eventually
promulgated “no-standard standards.” The DOE was then sued for failing to enforce the
National Energy and Conservation Act of 1978 and a Court of Appeals ruled against the
Reagan administration. However, little progress was made in enacting federal appliance
efficiency standards until the late 1980s, when new federal legislation was passed in
response to a growing number of states enacting their own appliance efficiency standards
and manufacturer concerns about the prospect of manufacturing appliances meeting
numerous state-specific energy efficiency standards.
                                                 12


         During the 1980s, the states became much more involved in energy policy, largely
stimulated by Title II of the Public Utility Regulatory Policy Act (PURPA) and the
Reagan administration’s perceived indifference to energy policy and environmental
issues. Title II of PURPA required electric utilities to purchase electricity supplied by
“Qualifying Facilities” (QF) producing electricity using cogeneration technology,
renewable and waste fuels.14 The objective of PURPA was to stimulate electricity
production from more thermally efficient cogeneration plants and to encourage the use of
renewable and waste fuels in the production of electricity, combining energy security
goals with environmental protection goals. The details of implementation, however, were
left to the states. The states were required to develop regulations to ensure that electric
utilities would stand ready to purchase power from QFs at prices reflecting their “full
avoided costs.” Several states, including California, New York, all of the New England
states, New Jersey and Pennsylvania embraced PURPA with great enthusiasm. In
addition to requiring utilities to pay high prices for QF power under 20 to 30 year
contracts, the implementation of PURPA was also accompanied by the creation of public
“integrated resource planning” (IRP) or “least cost planning” (LCP) processes to
determine “appropriate” electric utility investment and contracting strategies which were
eventually implemented with competitive bidding programs. These programs were
heavily influenced by environmental groups active in these states (NRDC, EDF, CLF).
The programs required treating “customer energy efficiency investments and other
demand-side programs” as utility “resources” and led to the creation in some states of
large utility programs to subsidize customer energy efficiency investments. The rationale
for and economic consequences of these programs were controversial.15 The costs of
these subsidies, in turn, were funded through higher regulated electricity prices. These
states (California, New York, Massachusetts, Maine, Washington and a few others) led
the development of an increasingly close linkage between energy policy and
environmental policy. As I will discuss presently, many of these states were also the
pioneers in electricity sector restructuring and competition in the mid-1990s, stimulated
in part by the high costs and high electricity prices resulting from the PURPA initiatives
of the 1980s.

       States also began to enact their own appliance efficiency standards. California
imposed appliance efficiency standards during 1977-79 and upgraded these standards
during the 1980s. Other states followed California’s lead during the 1980s, including
New York, Florida, Massachusetts, and Connecticut. The proliferation of different
individual state standards then led appliance manufacturers to seek uniform national
appliance efficiency standards.     Manufacturers and energy efficiency advocates
(environmental groups) negotiated what became the National Appliance Energy
Conservation Act in 1987. This Act contains specific efficiency standards for 12 types of

14
   A more detailed discussion can be found in P. Joskow, "Regulatory Failure, Regulatory Reform and
Structural Change In The Electric Power Industry", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
Microeconomics, 1989 and the references cited there.
15
  See for example P. Joskow and D. Marron, "What Does a Negawatt Really Cost? Evidence From Electric
Utility Conservation Programs", The Energy Journal, 1992 and J. Eto, et. al , “Where Did the Money Go?
The Cost and Performance of the Largest Commercial Sector DSM Programs,” The Energy Journal, Vol.
21, No. 1, 2000.
                                                  13


home appliances that are supposed to be updated from time to time by the DOE. The first
standards became effective in 1988 and 1990 and the DOE has revised the statutory
standards since then. President Clinton approved new standards for air conditioners and
other appliances close to the end of his term.

          Most of the federal energy policy initiatives during the 1970s and 1980s were
portrayed largely as responses to “energy and economic security” concerns associated
with excessive dependence on foreign oil, and followed sudden large increases in
petroleum prices and temporary oil and gas shortages. As time went on, however, energy
policy and environmental policy initiatives became more closely linked as well since
fossil fuel combustion accounts for a large fraction of the emissions of most air pollutants
(NOx, SO2, CO, lead) and carbon dioxide. Energy efficiency and renewable energy
slowly rose to more prominent places on the policy agenda. As I will discuss, this
linkage became much closer at the federal level with the enactment of the Energy Policy
Act of 1992 (EPAct92) at the end of the George H. W. Bush administration and this
linkage was strengthened during the Clinton administration. State governments have also
played an increasing role in influencing energy policy, largely reflecting the influence of
environmental groups in California and the Northeast.

IV.     ENERGY POLICY OVERVIEW: 1990 THROUGH 2000
        A. Energy Policy 1990-1992
        The decade began with the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, the curtailment of oil
exports from the area, and a rapid and significant run-up in oil prices in mid- 1990. This
in turn led to the now familiar, though episodic, process of hand ringing by politicians
and the media about rising oil prices, dependence on Middle East oil, and the absence of
any sustained coherent U.S. energy policy. The Department of Energy developed a
“national energy strategy” which presented policy options to President George H.W.
Bush.16 In February 1991, the Bush administration proposed federal energy policy
legislation to Congress. It focused on increasing oil, natural gas, and nuclear power
production, including oil and gas exploration in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
(ANWR). The proposals were very controversial and aggressively opposed by
Democrats and environmentalists. Congress spent the rest of the year debating the
administration’s proposed energy policy measures. The core features of the Bush
administration’s bill were finally rejected by the Congress in June 1991.

        The debate about energy policy continued in 1992, though the public concern
about high oil prices, potential shortages and dependence on imported oil faded quickly
away with the end (so to speak) of the Gulf War. Indeed, in retrospect, the oil shock of
1990-91 was much more modest, narrower and short-lived than the previous two oil
shocks and it is surprising that it generated so much media attention and legislative
activity. Apparently, energy “supply-siders” saw this as an opportunity to promote their

16
   There was a big increase in media coverage of energy policy issues during this period. A Herb Block
cartoon (August 12, 1990) depicted the White House staff searching for an energy policy, which was last
heard of during the Jimmy Carter administration. Numerous editorials in major newspapers during the rest
of 1990 called for a national energy policy.
                                                   14


favorite policy initiatives. They may have regretted doing so. The debate subsequently
shifted away from the Bush administration’s supply-side initiatives to a very different
energy policy program advocated by House Democrats. The Energy Policy Act of 1992
(EPAct92) was passed in October 1992. It was the only piece of major energy policy
legislation passed during the 1990s. It grew out of legislation proposed by Congressman
Phil Sharp entitled “The National Energy Efficiency Act of 1991.” It was a very different
piece of energy legislation than the Bush administration had proposed in 1991. Rather
than being a supply-side program oriented toward conventional fuels it focused on
creating tax and direct subsidies for energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies
and on encouraging all states to develop and implement “integrated resource planning”
programs for their utilities which were to include utility-sponsored energy efficiency
programs in their resources planning processes.          The associated costs were to be
included to regulated retail electricity and gas prices.

        EPAct92 also made changes in the Federal Power Act (FPA) and the Public
Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA) that helped to make electricity industry
restructuring and competition initiatives feasible. Ironically, these restructuring and
competition programs in turn eventually undermined the state integrated resource
planning and energy efficiency programs which EPAct92 promoted since their structure
and financing relied heavily on the institution of regulated monopoly to support what
were effectively a set of “taxation by regulation” policies.17

          In 1992, FERC also issued Order 636, the culmination of nearly a decade of
policy initiatives to open up access to natural gas pipelines by unbundling the sale of
transportation service, the sale of gas storage services, and the sale of natural gas itself,
allowing buyers and sellers of “commodity” natural gas to negotiate supply contracts
directly and then to buy pipeline transportation service to deliver the gas from field to
destination. Order 636 supported continued development of competitive natural gas
markets, natural gas marketing, natural gas financial derivatives markets, natural gas
storage, and secondary markets for natural gas pipeline capacity. It represented the
culmination of eight years of efforts by FERC to respond to the consequences if the
natural gas regulatory policies of the 1970s and early 1980s and the subsequent collapse
of the existing regulatory and contractual framework governing the natural gas industry.
As FERC continued to restructure the pipeline industry, states began to extend the
“unbundling” concept to Local Gas Distribution Companies (LDCs), allowing industrial
and larger commercial consumers to purchase unbundled transportation service from their
LDC as well. These state policies further expanded the base of retail customers
purchasing in competitive gas commodity markets and working with gas marketers and
brokers. These developments have important implications for related changes in the
electric power industry that came later in the decade.


17
    See Paul L. Joskow “Emerging Conflicts Between Competition, Conservation, and Environmental
Policies in the Electric Power Industry,” prepared for the California Foundation on the Environment and the
Economy conference on the regulatory compact, April 2-3, 1992. Expenditures on electric utility energy
efficiency and demand side management programs peaked in 1994 and have declined significantly since then.
See Annual Energy Review 1999, Energy Information Administration, July 2000, page 228.
                                           15


       EPAct92 was the only major piece of energy policy legislation enacted during the
1990s. Moreover, it was largely a Democratic energy policy framework inherited by the
Clinton administration soon after it was signed by President George W. Bush and was the
foundation for much of the Administration’s subsequent energy policy efforts.
Accordingly, it is useful to summarize its primary provisions.

   a. Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy: Directs the Secretary of Energy to
      establish energy efficiency standards for federal buildings, to develop voluntary
      energy efficiency standards for residential and commercial buildings and to
      incorporate them in state building codes; Directs the Secretary of HUD to
      establish an energy efficient mortgage financing program in five states, to develop
      an affordable housing plan using energy efficient mortgage financing incentives;
      Specifies parameters and provides funding for R&D on cost effective
      technologies to improve energy efficiency and increase renewable energy use in
      buildings; Amends PURPA to require gas and electric utilities to employ
      integrated resource planning and to adjust prices to encourage energy efficient
      decisions by consumers and to provide grants to states for DSM programs;
      Amends EPCA to include energy efficiency labeling for commercial and
      industrial equipment, to define energy efficiency standards for a specified set of
      such equipment, to define guidelines for energy efficiency audits and insulation in
      industrial facilities, to provide grants for efficiency improvements in low-income
      housing; Establishes various programs to encourage/require improvements in
      energy efficiency in federal buildings; Requires the Energy Information
      Administration (EIA) to collect data on renewable energy production and
      demand-side management programs; Creates tax subsidies to encourage energy
      efficiency and alternative fuels, including electric vehicles, solar and geothermal
      energy production, alcohol fuels (thank you Senator Dole!), and (snuck it in)
      independent oil and gas producers; Establishes a program and authorizes funding
      for further commercialization of renewable energy technologies, requires various
      studies and reports on renewable energy and data collection regarding renewable
      energy and its impacts on reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

   b. Alternative fueled Vehicles: Provides for acquisition of alternative fueled
      vehicles for the federal fleet, subsidies for an alternative fuels commercial truck
      program and mass transit, funding for an electric motor vehicle demonstration
      program and electric motor vehicle refueling infrastructure, various low-interest
      financing and subsidy programs for alternative fuel vehicles.

   c. Electricity Generation and Use: In addition to above, establishes an R&D
      program for various specified technologies for the generation of electricity from
      renewables on-grid and off-grid, fuel cells, heat engines, superconductors and
      other technologies.

   d. Coal: Authorizes R&D expenditure for specified coal-based technologies, to
      solicit additional proposals for clean-coal technology, and for technology transfer.
                                          16


   e. Strategic Petroleum Reserve: Provides for an increase in the size of the SPR to 1
      billion barrels and expands the set of circumstances in which a severe supply
      disruption is deemed to exist.

   f. Global Climate Change: Requires various reports, studies and assessments
      regarding global climate change and options for reducing greenhouse gas
      emissions.

   g. Nuclear Energy: Directs the DOE to perform various studies, to develop
      emissions criteria, and oversight of the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste fuel
      depository site; Creates the United States Enrichment Corporation (USEC) as a
      government corporation to take over ownership and responsibility for the federal
      government’s uranium enrichments plants and requires the USEC to transmit to
      the President and Congress a strategic plan for privatizing the Corporation;
      Requires the USEC to purchase uranium from domestic suppliers, to “overfeed” it
      into the uranium enrichment process (i.e. to artificially increase the demand for
      domestic uranium), and to create a strategic uranium reserve. Provides funds for
      R&D on advanced nuclear technologies.

   h. Electric Utility Restructuring and Competition: Amends the Federal Power Act to
      give FERC authority to order utilities to provide interstate transmission service
      (“wheeling”) to any jurisdictional supplier requesting such service, requires that
      the costs of providing such service be recovered from those requesting service,
      and expands transmission service obligations to the Bonneville Power Authority
      and to those portions of Texas (ERCOT) which had previously been exempt from
      the FPA by virtue of their decision not to interconnect with either the Eastern or
      Western Interconnections (keeping Texas electrons out of interstate commerce);
      Amends the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA) to exempt
      independent power producers meeting certain criteria (Exempt Wholesale
      Generators --- EWG) from most of the provisions of PUHCA; Amends PUHCA
      to exempt foreign utility holding companies from certain provisions of the Act
      and to allow U.S. utility holding companies to own interests in foreign utilities.


        B. Energy Policy 1993-2000
        The focus of EPAct92 on energy efficiency, renewable energy, and environmental
impact mitigation was well matched to the positions that the Clinton-Gore team had
advanced during their election campaign. Vice President Gore was a champion of
environmental improvement and had expressed deep concerns about CO2 emissions and
their impacts on global climate change. Their appointments to the Department of Energy
were consistent with these views. Secretary Hazel O’Leary drew together an energy
policy team that was very “green” and had been closely involved with the development of
integrated resource planning, renewable energy, and demand-side management programs
                                                    17


in their respective states.18 This team saw the opportunity to bring the lessons they had
learned in New England, New York, and California about the wonders of using electric
and gas utilities as instruments for promoting energy efficiency, renewable energy, and
related programs to the rest of the country. Promoting improvements in energy
efficiency, renewable energy, alternative-fuel vehicles and new technologies for
extracting and using conventional energy sources were their highest priorities.

        Soon after his inauguration, President Clinton proposed the implementation of a
large broad based tax on energy (the “btu tax”). The proposal’s motivation was to raise
revenue to reduce the federal budget deficit, to promote energy conservation, and
indirectly to reduce pollution associated with the combustion of fossil fuels. The
proposal was widely criticized in Congress, was unpopular with industry and individual
consumers, and eventually went down in flames. The only remnant of the initial proposal
that eventually was passed by Congress was a small increase in the federal gasoline tax to
bolster the Highway Trust Fund. No new major energy policy legislation was passed by
Congress during the rest of the decade. In April 1999, the Clinton Administration
proposed comprehensive electricity industry restructuring and competition legislation,
but neither it nor Republican alternatives got very far in Congress.

        Energy policy during the rest of the decade relied heavily on the framework and
policies embodied in the Energy Policy Act of 1992, associated state initiatives to
restructure the electricity industry to promote wholesale and retail competition, the
continued implementation of FERC regulations supporting the evolution of the
restructured natural gas industry, new state initiatives to expand “customer choice” of
natural gas supplier to residential and commercial customers served by local distribution
companies (LDC), and the effects of the Clean Air Act of 1990 on coal use in the electric
power industry. The major energy policy venues for gas and electricity policies were the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (natural gas, electricity) and state regulatory
commissions.

        The Department of Energy’s policies were heavily influenced by the
Administration’s environmental policy agenda, including concerns about global climate
change. The DOE gradually reallocated R&D funding and policy initiatives away from
coal and nuclear R&D programs toward programs focused on promoting energy
efficiency and renewable energy supplies, and the development of more efficient vehicles
that use fuels other than petroleum. Federal expenditures supporting energy efficiency,
renewables, and alternative fuel vehicles increased significantly while funding for coal
and nuclear technology declined.19 The Administrations efforts in these areas were first
hampered by federal budgetary constraints that placed pressure on the DOE’s budget.
After 1994, these initiatives were impeded by a Republican Congress that was hostile to

18
  A large fraction of the DOE budget is devoted to nuclear weapons-related programs and the clean-up of
radioactive waste on sites associated with these programs. I will not discuss these important aspects of
DOE activities in this paper.
19
  There was a significant increase in appropriations for fossil energy and nuclear science and technology
programs in FY2001.
                                             18


the DOE in general and the Clinton administration’s favorite energy programs in
particular. Congress prohibited federal agencies from even studying tightening the
existing vehicle fuel efficiency standards, placed roadblocks in the way of evaluating and
tightening appliance efficiency standards as required by EPAct92, and rejected or cut
back Administration proposals for tax subsidies for renewable energy and alternative fuel
vehicles. Congress also slowed down efforts by the Administration to shift funds toward
renewable energy and energy efficiency programs. In response to budget constraints and
a hostile Congress, the Clinton administration began to work with industrial groups on
voluntary programs to develop policies to respond to global warming concerns (Climate
Change Action Plan) and new motor vehicle technologies that would improved fuel
economy and reduce air emissions (Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles).

         Early in the Administration, the DOE was an active cheerleader for spreading the
gospel of state “integrated resources planning” (IRP) programs for regulated gas and
electricity utilities. However, most of the states that had been leaders in applying IRP
were veering quickly toward initiatives to restructure their gas and electric utilities in
order to promote wholesale and retail competition or “customers choice.” The Clinton
DOE team had to play “catch-up” on the electricity competition front as the states (e.g.
California, New York, Maine, Massachusetts) that had been the primary test-beds for
integrated resource planning and utility Demand Side Management (DSM) programs
began to focus primarily on the problem of high electric rates and the potential for
industry restructuring and competition to bring them down. The electricity restructuring
bandwagon also undermined the Climate Change Action Plan initiative as many of the
utilities that had been active on climate change issues became occupied with industry
restructuring, stranded cost recovery and competition issues. The Administration did not
propose its own federal electricity restructuring legislation until early 1999 and it too had
a number of provisions designed to preserve utility energy efficiency and renewable
energy programs and to tilt deregulated markets toward renewable energy through
“portfolio” standards. Neither the Administration’s bill nor several Republican
alternatives ever gathered enough political support to come close to being passed. While
the Administration’s bill was a piece of “something for everyone” legislation, opposition
from state officials, some vertically integrated utilities, some consumer groups, and tepid
support from interests that supported some, but not all, of the details of the proposed
legislation undermined the ability of the Administration to move it to a successful
conclusion in Congress.

         The Administration also quietly supported or acceded to Republican policy
initiatives that encouraged oil and gas drilling in deep water, tax and royalty relief for
small relatively inefficient oil and gas wells, opened up additional federal lands in Alaska
to drilling, proceeded with the privatization of federal uranium enrichment facilities and
the Elk Hills Naval Petroleum Reserve, supported federal funding for development of
new technologies to increase oil extraction productivity, continued the slow process of
licensing a federal nuclear waste storage facility, supported the re-licensing of operating
nuclear power plants and continued research on advanced reactor technology, and
initiated a cooperative program with the U.S. automobile industry to develop more fuel-
efficient vehicle technology. Foreign policy initiatives endeavored to diversify the
                                             19


nation’s oil supplies and to foster the independence of oil producing states that were
created after the break-up of the Soviet Union. The Administration also supported
increases in the oil stored in the Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPR) and the development
of policies to use the SPR to respond to oil supply crises.

        It is important to recognize that the Clinton administration demonstrated a
continued commitment to relying primarily on market forces to allocate energy resources.
It did not try to return to the failed price control, rationing and energy allocation policies
of the 1970s and early 1980s. The Clinton administration viewed the proper role of
energy policy to be to respond to market imperfections, especially as they related to the
environmental impacts of energy production and consumption. It believed in using
limited financial incentives to encourage consumers and suppliers to change their
behavior. It had faith that new technologies could reduce the costs of energy efficiency,
renewable energy, alternative-fuel vehicles, and production of conventional fuels. It also
viewed increased supply diversity from renewable and alternative fuels as playing an
important role in promoting national security interests as well. Thus, the Clinton
administration’s policies reinforced what has become a bipartisan rejection of the
aggressive energy market intervention policies of the 1970s and early 1980s and support
for policies focused on allowing energy markets to work, breaking down regulatory
barriers restricting markets from working efficiently, and reflecting environmental and
national externalities in energy policies through financial incentives and market-based
mechanisms.

        C. Energy Supply, Demand and Prices During the 1990s
        Total U.S. energy consumption grew steadily after 1991, increasing by about 17%
between 1990 and 2000. Consumption grew in all sectors (residential, commercial,
industrial, transportation) during the decade and the distribution of energy consumption
between residential, commercial, industrial and transportation sectors changed little
between 1990 and 2000. The economy continued to become more electricity intensive as
electricity consumption grew by over 25% during the decade. Energy consumption per
real dollar of GDP continued its long historical decline, though the rate of decline was
slower than during the 1980-1990 period when energy prices were higher. [FIGURE 9]
Energy consumption per capita increased steadily after 1991. [FIGURE 10]

        The overall energy fuel supply mix in 2000 was little different from that in 1990,
with a small increase in the share of natural gas and a small decrease in petroleum’s
share. Aggregate domestic energy production was roughly constant during the decade
while oil production continued to decline. Domestic natural gas production increased
slightly, as off-shore production and production from non-conventional sources increased
more than conventional on-shore production declined. Imports of natural gas from
Canada increased significantly as the demand for natural gas increased much more
quickly than did domestic supplies. Coal production continued to increase slowly but
steadily along with the continuing shift of production from the Eastern producing areas to
those in the West. Nuclear energy production increased significantly, despite few new
plants being completed and nearly a dozen plants closing. Definitive resolution of a site
for permanent storage of nuclear waste continued to elude policymakers, though some
                                                    20


military waste began to move to a site in New Mexico. Renewable energy supplies
increased modestly, but accounted for about the same fraction of domestic energy
production in 2000 as in 1990.20

        Net imports of energy increased by more than 50% during the decade, with all of
the increase coming after 1992. The increase in net imports is associated with large
increases in imports of petroleum from around the world and a large increase in imports
of natural gas from Canada.

         Real fossil fuel prices declined 20% (average for decade) from their 1990 peak
through 1999, though there is considerable volatility in oil and natural gas prices. By
1998/99 the real price of fossil fuels reached a level about equal to prices prevailing just
before the 1973/74 oil embargo. A further dramatic drop in world oil prices in 1998
quickly reversed itself in 1999 as OPEC implemented a supply reduction program,
facilitated by Mexico, and oil prices continued to increase during 2000. Wellhead prices
of natural gas, which had remained in the $2 to $3/MMbtu range through most of the
1990s, increased dramatically beginning in the summer of 2000, with delivered prices
rising to as high as $10/Mcf in most regions by the end of 2000 and (briefly) to as high as
$60/Mcf in Southern California in mid-December 2000, before falling back to $3/Mcf by
July 1, 2001. Real electricity prices fell during the decade, with the first nominal price
increases in many years starting to be observed in late 2000 in response to increases in
natural gas and wholesale electricity market prices. There was excess electric generating
and transmission capacity in all regions of the country at the beginning of the decade.
Little new generating or transmission capacity was added after 1992. With growing
demand and little new supply, the excess capacity margin gradually disappeared. Rising
natural gas prices, tight supplies, and delays in the completion of new generating plants
led to dramatic increases in wholesale market prices in 1999 and especially in 2000. Spot
shortages of electricity occurred in California in late 2000, January and March 2001.

        In summary, most of the decade following Operation Desert Storm was
characterized by abundant supplies of energy, a gas pipeline and electric power
infrastructure with excess capacity, and stable or modestly falling real prices. Predictions
were for more of the same for the first decade of the 21st century. Interest in energy
policy largely disappeared, with the exception of electricity restructuring initiatives,
which in turn were largely stimulated by cheap natural gas, excess generating capacity,
and very low wholesale market prices. The complacency about energy policy and
satisfaction with the performance of energy markets changed quickly as oil, gasoline and
natural gas prices increased significantly during 1999 and 2000, California’s electricity
market collapsed, and electricity supply shortages loomed throughout the West. When
George W. Bush was inaugurated, he argued that the nation again faced an “energy
crisis” driven by higher oil and natural gas prices, higher wholesale electricity prices, and

20
  Almost all of the increase in renewable energy is associated with the use of wood, waste, and alcohol
fuels. The data for these uses is not very reliable. Solar and wind energy supplies increased by about 50%
during the decade, but represented only about 0.1% of total domestic energy production in 2000. More on
renewable energy below.
                                           21


electricity shortages in some areas of the country. In short, the 1990’s was a new “golden
age” for energy which happened to start and end with energy supply shocks, but largely
proceeded without energy policy being high on the national policy agenda.
                                                      22



V.      PETROLEUM
        The 1990s was a decade in which U.S. policies relied primarily on unregulated
market forces to operate to allocate resources to and within the petroleum sector. While
there were no major domestic petroleum policy developments during the decade, the
Administration supported Republican sponsored legislation to stimulate off-shore drilling
in deep water by reducing federal royalty payments,21 urged Congress to reauthorize the
Strategic Petroleum Reserves, proposed the establishment of regional heating oil
reservcs, sold the Elk Hills Naval Petroleum Reserve,22 initiated a set of modest
technology transfer and support programs to increase productivity from small high cost
oil wells, and opened up federal lands for oil and natural gas drilling, including the
National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska and additional areas adjacent to existing
production areas on the North Slope pf Alaska. The Administration also pursued foreign
policies to strengthen relationships with governments of oil producing countries and to
encourage Caspian Sea countries and U.S. oil companies developing resources in these
countries to build a pipeline under the Caspian Sea to Turkey in order to avoid routes
through Iran and Russia, reducing dependence on these two countries.

        Environmental regulations also affected petroleum supply and demand during the
decade. In particular, the implementation of environmental regulations affecting the
composition of gasoline burned in automobiles in several cities resulting from the Clean
Air Act Amendments of 1990 and growing constraints on domestic refining capacity
began to have a visible affect on gasoline supply and prices in some regions by the end of
the decade. Environmental regulations also affected petroleum supply and demand
during the decade. In particular, the implementation of environmental regulations
affecting the composition of gasoline burned in automobiles in several cities resulting
from the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 and growing constraints on domestic
refining capacity began to have a visible affect on gasoline supply and prices in some
regions by the end of the decade. Gasoline price spikes in 1999 and 2000 in California
and the Midwest led to calls for price controls, which the Administration resisted. In
September 2000 President Clinton decided to release oil from the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve (SPR) in response to rising world oil prices and concerns that unusually low
heating oil inventories would lead to shortages during the following winter.

      Petroleum accounted for about 38% of domestic energy consumption in 2000,
down from 40% in 1990. Petroleum consumption grew by 15% between 1990 and


21
     Deep Water Royalty Relief Act, P.L. 104-58, November 28, 1995.
22
  The federal government began studying the sale of Naval Petroleum Reserve #1 (Elk Hills in California)
and #3 (Teapot Dome in Wyoming) in 1986. The DOE initiated the process of evaluating and selling Elk
Hills in 1995. The sale was completed in 1998 for $3.65 billion. Since the Teapot Dome reserve contained
relatively little remaining oil it was decided to produce it out rather than to sell it. The Administration also
initiated policies to lease or transfer to the private sector the federal Shale Oil Reserves. The primary
motivations for these efforts were to raise funds for the federal government and to increase productivity
from these properties.
                                                    23


2000,23 and in 1998 surpassed the previous peak consumption level reached 20 years
earlier. The transportation sector, primarily passenger cars and trucks, accounted for
about 68% of U.S. oil consumption in 2000, up from about 64% in 1990. Most of the rest
is accounted for by the industrial sector, with little oil being used in the residential and
commercial sectors or to generate electricity. Petroleum policies and policies affecting
automobile and truck fuel efficiency and utilization are clearly highly interdependent.
(Automobile fuel efficiency policies are discussed below.)

        Domestic oil production continued to decline steadily during the 1990s as imports
increased. By the end of 2000, the U.S, was importing 56% of its petroleum and
petroleum imports increased by 40% during the decade. Overall, imported energy
increased from 17% of total energy consumption in 1990 to 25% in 2000. In the mid-
1990s aggregate energy imports surpassed the previous peak level reached in 1977 and
by 2000 had exceeded that import level by 36%. By the end of the decade, the U.S. was
far more dependent on imported energy in general and imported petroleum in particular
than it had been since the mid-1970s, just before the second oil shock.24 However, it is
also important to recognize that the energy intensity of the U.S. economy declined
significantly during this period; energy consumption by dollar of real GDP in 2000 was
about 60% of what it was in 1977.

        Crude oil prices declined from their 1990 peaks during the most of the decade,
though there is significant year-to-year price volatility. Crude oil prices plummeted
during 1998, apparently as a result of declining imports from Asian countries
experiencing an economic contraction and subsequent economic problems in Russia.
Gasoline prices followed a similar pattern [FIGURE 11]. Domestic oil and gas drilling
activity followed these price trends fairly closely [FIGURE 12 and FIGURE 13].
Falling crude prices had a significant adverse impact on oil exporting countries. In 1999,
the Mexican Minister of Energy worked closely with Venezuela and other OPEC
countries to curtail supplies in an effort to drive up prices. While these efforts initially
met with little success, they eventually led to coordinated supply curtailments. World
petroleum demand increased as the economies of countries in Europe and Asia recovered
and oil prices began to rise rapidly. Oil prices rose significantly in 1999 and increased
further in 2000 as world demand continued to increase as supplies tightened. Oil prices
peaked at an average price of about $31/barrel of crude oil during the fall of 2000 and
then fell back to the $25-$27 range during the first four months of 2001. The increase in
crude oil (and natural gas) prices has stimulated a very significant increase in domestic
drilling activity, with the number of oil and gas wells drilled each month doubling from
mid-1999 levels by the end of 2000. Despite the significant price increases that occurred
after mid-1999, real oil and product prices remained at levels far below their peaks in
1980-81, though higher than the local price peaks reached in 1990.

23
     This is about the same growth rate experience by the OECD countries as a whole and for OECD Europe.
24
  Petroleum supplied by OPEC countries increased to 43% of world production in 2000 from 38% in 1990.
OPEC accounted for a much smaller proportion of world production in 2000 (43%) than it did in 1973
(56%).
                                                    24



        As U.S. petroleum consumption has increased, the availability of domestic
capacity to refine crude oil into petroleum products has become a growing problem. The
U.S. experienced a steep decline in refining capacity since its peak in 1981, though most
of this decline occurred before 1987. [FIGURE 14] About 3 MMBD of refining
capacity was closed during the 1980s, after price controls and allocations ended. These
regulations had propped up small inefficient refineries and they exited the market as these
regulations were repealed. Though the number of refineries has continued to decline, and
no new refineries have been built in many years, total refining capacity was roughly
constant during the decade, with a significant expansion in capacity after 1994 resulting
from expansion of existing refineries.25 Growing demand for refined products and
roughly constant refining capacity led to increasing refinery capacity utilization rates
around during the 1990s, with capacity utilization reportedly increased to 98.5% by the
end of 2000. Future expansions in refining capacity are expected at some existing
refineries and outside the U.S., including in Mexico and South America. It is unlikely
that major new refinery sites will be developed in the U.S. unless regulatory restrictions
on siting new refineries change significantly.

        The extremely high levels of refinery capacity utilization mean that refined
product supplies and prices are very sensitive to unplanned refinery outages resulting to
equipment breakdowns, fires, etc., since there is essentially no reserve capacity in the
system. Accordingly, product demand and supply availability fluctuations must be fully
absorbed by product inventories, which had also declined in the last few years. This
sensitivity of product prices to refinery (and oil pipeline) outages has increased as a
consequence of the growing regional differentiation in the composition of gasoline
required to meet environmental regulations on a seasonal basis. There are now as many
as 40 “micro-brews” of gasoline (including octane differences) sold in the U.S.

       In the last ten years, the refinery industry has had to respond to five sets of new
environmental regulations affecting motor gasoline product composition:26

                 Phase I Summer Volatility Regulation (RVP):                    1989
                 Phase II Summer Volatility Regulation (RVP):                   1992
                 Oxygenated Gasoline Rules                                      1992
                 Reformulated Gasoline Phase I (RFG)                            1994
                 Reformulated Gasoline Phase II (RFG)                           2000

These regulations have required significant changes in refinery operations and
investments in plant and equipment. In total, the regulations have been estimated to have

25
  See Winter Fuels Outlook, Energy Information Administration, October 2000. Contrary to some
conventional wisdom, refining capacity did not decline during the 1990s. It increased slightly overall, with
more that 100% of the increase between 1990 and 2000 coming after 1994.
26
  See Tancred C.M. Lidderdale “Environmental Regulations and Changes in Petroleum Refining
Operations,” Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia.giv/emeu/steo/pub/special/enviro.html,
March 22, 2001.
                                                     25


increased gasoline prices by amounts in the range of 7 to 10 cents/gallon.27 Perhaps more
importantly, because different states have different requirements for gasoline
composition, some states and regions have become more dependent on a small number of
refineries that can produce gasoline meeting local requirements.28 This means that
regional demand or supply side shocks can have larger impacts on prices in particular
areas of the country than would be the case if there was more refinery capacity producing
approved fuels available to meet supply and demand shocks. The benefits of giving
states flexibility in choosing whether and how to restrict gasoline compositions to meet
ambient air quality standards may not be worth the growing costs of this flexibility.

         The introduction of the EPA’s Phase II regulations for summer-blend
reformulated gasoline in high ozone urban areas likely contributed to the localized
gasoline price spikes experienced in the Midwest during the first half of 2000. As
discussed above, crude, gasoline and product prices increased dramatically during the
second half of 1999 and during 2000 throughout the U.S. However, the increase in
gasoline prices was much more extreme in a few Midwestern cities than it was in most of
the rest of the country during this period of time. These regulations went into effect on
May 1, 2000 at the wholesale level in both Chicago and Milwaukee. An FTC study
found that the new, more-stringent regulations may have contributed to abnormally low
inventories for several reasons. They required that winter-blend gasoline be drained from
storage tanks before the summer-blend supply could be added, which led to lower
inventories than usual. Apparently, summer-blend Phase II RFG also proved to be more
difficult to refine than anticipated, causing refinery yields to be less than expected.
Moreover, the FTC study suggests that the ethanol-based RFG used in Chicago and
Milwaukee was even more difficult to produce. Further, St. Louis entered the RFG
program in 2000, and this further increased demand for RFG in the Midwest. The FTC
study noted that additional, non-RFG factors, also contributed to the increase in gasoline
prices in the Midwest during summer 2000.29 30 Finally, the FTC concluded that supplier
behavior that caused the Midwestern gasoline price spikes during summer 2000 did not
violate the antitrust laws.31
27
     Ibid. and references cited there.
28
   Some states have voluntary adopted restrictions on gasoline composition during different seasons and
states retain some flexibility regarding the precise “micro-brew” they rely on to meet environmental
regulations.
29
   Final Report of the Federal Trade Commission, Midwest Gasoline Price Investigation, March 29, 2000.
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2001/03/mwgasrpt.htm. See also the FTC’s Interim Report,
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2000/07/gasprice.htm.
30
   Another possible contributor to the Midwest price increases was the break in the Explorer pipeline in
March. Explorer moves refined petroleum products from the Gulf of Mexico through St. Louis to Chicago
and other parts of the Midwest. The pipeline break caused a disruption in the supply of gasoline to the
already tight Midwest markets. That could have exacerbated an already tight supply situation and
contributed to rising prices throughout the region. Ibid.
31
   In May 2001 the FTC closed an investigation of gasoline price spikes in the Western U.S. which it began
in 1998, concluding that the prices at issue were not the result of behavior that violated the antitrust laws.
http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2001/05/westerngas.htm.
                                             26



        As noted earlier, the SPR was created in late 1975 pursuant to the Energy Policy
and Conservation Act. (EPCA). EPCA provided for the establishment of a petroleum
reserve of up to 1 billion barrels. Salt caverns were subsequently acquired along the Gulf
coast to store the oil, and crude oil began to be stored there in 1977. Oil stored in the
SPR peaked in 1994 at 592 million barrels and, after some test sales, settled at 570
million barrels by the late 1990s. Under EPCA, the President must determine if a draw
down is required by “a severe energy supply disruption or by obligations of the United
States” under the International Energy Treaty. EPCA goes on to discuss the
characteristics of such a severe supply disruption and these include that the supply
disruption be of significant scope and duration, and cause major adverse impact on
national safety or the national economy. Prior to September 2000, the SPR had been
drawn down for a couple of test sales and during Operation Desert Storm in early 1991.

        On September 22, 2000, President Clinton authorized the release of 30 million
barrels of oil from the SPR over a 30-day period. The objective was to increase domestic
supplies during the prevailing tight supply situation and, in particular, to increase supplies
of heating oil which were projected to be in short supply during the coming winter.
Heating oil inventories were at unusually low levels during 2000 and oil prices continued
to increase as the year progressed. [FIGURE 15 and 16] Very low heating oil stocks
going into the fall were of particular concern given the lags between crude oil deliveries,
refining, and delivery to local oil terminals.

        The proposed release from the SPR was very controversial both inside and outside
the administration. The release was opposed by Treasury and State. Those opposed were
concerned that the federal government was marching down the path of speculating on
future oil price movements and that these interventions would be ineffective because
private oil inventory and production decisions would simply work in the opposite
direction. In the end, the White House decided to release oil to demonstrate that it was
doing something to respond to rising prices and potential heating oil shortages. The
release was structured as a “swap” rather than a sale of oil, apparently partly to avoid
dealing with EPCA’s criteria for selling SPR oil. Under a swap arrangement oil was
released from the SPR and would be replaced later by a larger amount of oil, with the
terms of the swap determined by competitive bidding. It is hard to know what, if any,
effects this modest release had on heating oil stocks or prices. There is no obvious
change in the trajectory of heating oil stocks after the release, though crude oil and
product prices did fall significantly after November. [FIGURE 16]

        The “let the market work” approach to petroleum markets did have some
potentially adverse consequences. Imports of petroleum increased significantly. During
this period, petroleum demand continued to grow, improvements in vehicle efficiency
stagnated (more on this presently), domestic production declined, petroleum imports
increased to their highest levels in history. U.S. imports of petroleum now exceed 10
million barrels per day. The Energy Information Administration projects a continuing
decline in domestic production and increasing imports of petroleum over the next two
decades. By 2020, imports are projected to account for roughly 75% of U.S. petroleum
                                                   27


consumption. There is little chance that much can be done to significantly change this
trend through domestic “supply side” initiatives, despite the fact that real oil prices are
projected to increase significantly over the next 20 years in all EIA cases. As I will
discuss presently, the Clinton administration did little to curtail oil demand growth by, for
example, tightening vehicle fuel efficiency standards, largely because Congress made it
virtually impossible for the Administration even to study changes in fuel economy
standards. For those concerned about U.S. dependence on imported oil, the 1990s did not
end well. While the U.S. and other oil importing countries are much less dependant on
Middle Eastern oil producers than was the case in the 1970s, the share of world
production accounted for by Middle Eastern and North African countries has begun to
grow once again. Moreover, these countries account for 70% of world petroleum
reserves and dependence on them is likely to continue to grow.

        The Administration’s primary direct response to the national security implications
of rising oil imports was to strengthen relationships with governments of oil producing
countries, to encourage Caspian Sea countries and producers to choose an export pipeline
route that did not cross Iran or Russia, and to maintain a significant military presence in
the Middle East.

VI.      NATURAL GAS
         During the 1990’s natural gas was widely viewed as “the fossil fuel of choice.” It
is relatively clean (its combustion produces less CO2, SO2, and NOx than do coal and oil
yielding equivalent useful energy), it was relatively cheap and it could fuel new efficient
combined-cycle gas turbine (CCGT) electric generating facilities. The CCGT facilities in
turn were ideally suited for supporting the evolving competitive electricity markets since
they could be built quickly, at relatively small minimum efficient scale, were less capital
intensive, and could be more easily sited than conventional generating plants. The
primary policy initiatives related directly to natural gas focused on completing the
program begun in the 1980s to open up access to interstate natural gas pipelines to
competing marketers and brokers who could then buy gas in the field at unregulated
markets. The Administration’s support for the Republican Sponsored Deep Water
Royalty Relief Act of 1995 encouraged exploration, development of continued
production of natural gas from marginal reserves in the Gulf of Mexico. The
Administration also supported legislation to provide limited tax incentives for oil and gas
production.32 Several states introduced open access or retail “customer choice” programs
to enable residential and small commercial customers to buy unbundled distribution
service from their local gas distribution utility (LDC) and buy commodity natural gas
separately from an unregulated intermediary. In addition, federal and state policies
supporting restructuring and competition in the electricity sector were viewed as an
indirect way to encourage increased use of natural gas to generate electricity.

       Natural gas accounted for 24% of U.S. energy use in 2000, up from 23% in 1990.
U.S. natural gas consumption increased by 22% between 1990 and 2000. [FIGURE 17]

32
  The proposals would have allowed oil producers to expense certain geological, geophysical and lease
costs.
                                                       28


Electricity produced with natural gas increased by 57% between 1990 and 2000 and
almost all new electric generating plants under construction at the end of the decade were
fueled by natural gas.33 Natural gas consumption is projected to continue to grow rapidly
in the next two decades, increasing by roughly 50% by 2020.34 Natural gas’s share of
total energy consumption is projected to grow to 33.1% in 2020. This increase in
projected natural gas consumption is dominated by rapidly growing utilization of natural
gas to produce electricity, using CCGT generating technology.

        Domestic natural gas production increased by only about 8% between 1990 and
2000; domestic production was roughly constant from 1994 to 1999 before increasing
again in 2000 in response to significantly higher prices. Production from off-shore wells,
unconventional sources, and gas associated with the production of oil all increased during
the decade.35 From 1994 to 1997 natural gas reserve additions exceeded actual
production, however in 1998 and 1999 reserve additions fell short of actual production,
and this is likely to have been true as well during 2000.36 After declining significantly
during the 1980s, gas-finding costs appear to have stabilized.37 The decline is gas finding
costs may be attributed in part to the opening up of more federal lands for drilling and, in
particular, the expansion of drilling in the deep waters of the Gulf of Mexico. With
rapidly growing consumption and stagnant domestic production, imports of gas were
required to balance supply and demand. Imports from Canada increased by about 50%
during the 1990s, new reserves were developed offshore of Eastern Canada, and new
pipelines built, providing gas for New England and the Northeast. The deteriorating
reserve additions situation, the leveling out of gas finding costs, stagnant domestic
production, the “separation” of gas from oil prices due to what was characterized as a
“gas bubble,” and the growing demand for gas in the electricity sector probably should
have been a warning that natural gas prices would soon rise. However, this was not
widely predicted by experts at the time.38

       Real natural gas prices were roughly constant through most of the decade, though
there was considerable year-to-year price variation. [FIGURE 18] Wellhead prices of
natural gas were generally below the BTU equivalent price of oil during the 1990s.


33
   Based on first quarter 2001 data on generating plants (nearly 50,000 Mw) actually under construction
provided to me by Argus. Natural gas used to generate electricity likely increased at a slower rate during
the decade as more efficient CCGT capacity was completed. However, the EIA data presently available do
not make it possible to derive accurate estimates of natural gas utilization to generate electricity after 1998.
34
     Annual Energy Outlook 2001, Energy Information Administration, December 2000, pages 82-86.
35
 Barbara Mariner-Volpe, “The Evolution of Gas Markets in the United States, May 2000, a presentation
made available by the Energy Information Service.
36
     Ibid. Year 2000 data on reserve additions were not yet available in May 2001.
37
     [A discussion of the Deep Water Royalty Relief Act of 1995 will be included here.]
38
     Most pre-2000 forecasts were for natural gas prices in the $2 to $3 range in 2010.
                                                     29


Natural gas also had superior air pollution emissions attributes.39 As a result, natural gas
drove oil out of most boiler fuel uses (e.g. industrial boilers and conventional steam
electricity production). However, beginning in mid-2000, natural gas prices began to rise
rapidly to levels far above prevailing predictions or historical experience. [FIGURE 19]
By late summer 2000 natural gas prices had risen to about $5/mmbtu at Henry Hub and
climbed to near $10 by the end of the year, before declining back to about $5/mmbtu by
late March 2001 and about $4 by June 1, 2001 and $3 by July 1, 2001. Prices in
California reached much higher levels as pipeline constraints caused prices in California
to rise to levels far above those prevailing in the rest of the country.40 [TABLE 1] The
forward price curves in early July 2001 suggest that for the next few years natural gas
prices will be in the $3.00 to $3.75/Mcf range, significantly higher than most predictions
had indicated as recently as March 2000. If this increase in the projected level and
trajectory of natural gas prices is sustained,41 it is likely to have significant implications
for electricity prices (higher), existing coal plants (run them more and keep them running
longer, and for investments in new generating capacity (several new coal generating
plants were announced after gas prices exploded in late 2000).

         The reasons for the unexpected increases in natural gas prices during 2000 are not
yet well understood. Several factors are likely to be at work. First, natural gas demand
increased by about 5% during 2000, after several years of stability, and continuing
increases in demand are anticipated going forward as many new CCGT plants will be
completed in 2001 and 2002. Second, natural gas in short-term underground storage was
at unusually low levels in early 2000 and average storage levels for the year were at their
lowest levels since 1978. [FIGURE 20 and FIGURE 21] Third, oil and gas well
drilling activity had declined significantly in 1998 and the first half of 1999 in response
to falling prices and net reserves declined in 1998 and 1999 as production exceeded new
reserves. Drilling activity began to increase in mid-1999 in response to rising oil prices
and increased further in mid-2000 as natural gas prices rose. Finally, with growing
demand anticipated and tighter supplies ending a decade long “gas bubble” and “gas to
gas” competition period, some analysts have argued that gas prices will rise to levels
closer to price per BTU equivalence with oil products once again.42 According to this

39
  During the early 1980s, a rule of thumb was that wellhead prices of gas would tend to equilibrate at about
90% of the BTU equivalent price of crude oil, with gas and residual fuel oil competing at the burner tip for
the boiler fuel market. During the 1990-99 period wellhead prices were generally well below this level,
except during periods when oil prices suddenly dropped or during unusually cold winters. It is the low gas
prices experienced for almost 15 years, rather than regulatory obstacles, that made the investments in gas
pipeline capacity to bring gas from Northern Alaska and Northern Canada to the lower 48 states
unattractive.
40
   Whether the high prices in California were caused by real pipeline and local storage constraints or
reflected (at least in part) the market power of those controlling pipeline capacity into Southern California
is an issue in dispute and litigation.
41
  Most experts I have consulted are looking for long-term gas prices at much lower levels than prevailed
between June 2000 and May 2001; in the $3 to $3.50/Mcf range.
42
  J. Jensen, “North American Natural Gas Markets: The Revenge of the Old Economy,” presentation at
the MIT CEEPR Workshop, May 4, 2001.
                                                      30


view, rising oil prices help to explain the unanticipated increase in natural gas prices and
oil and gas prices will be more closely linked in the future.43

       Putting aside the excitement in gas markets during 2000, natural gas policy during
the post-1992 period focused on the continued implementation of the open access and
unbundling provisions of Order 636. The natural gas industry reforms begun during the
1980s were largely completed during the 1990s. They have proven to be an important,
though sometimes misapplied, model for restructuring the electric power sector.

        Since the prices for natural gas pipeline capacity continued to be regulated under
Order 636, during the 1990s considerable effort was devoted to reforming interstate
pipeline transportation pricing policies --- peak and off peak pipeline transportation
prices, firm and interruptible contracts, gas storage services to support competitive
markets for gas itself, and associated financial derivative markets upon which buyers and
sellers increasingly came to rely upon to hedge gas price volatility. One of the more
contentious sets of issues was associated with the resale of transportation capacity
“released” by pipelines and other market participants who had purchased firm pipeline
capacity. Order 636 required pipelines to establish capacity release programs to make
unused capacity available to third parties. FERC also allowed shippers to resell or
“release” firm capacity rights that they have acquired. However, the resale arrangements
continued to be regulated in various ways, including through prices caps on short-term
capacity release transactions based on the original regulated sale price of the firm
capacity, without properly reflecting peak and off-peak utilization and cost differences.
In February 2000, FERC issued Order 637 to resolve some of these issues. The order
waives the price cap on short-term capacity release transactions, implements peak and
off-peak rates for firm pipeline capacity, and makes a number of other changes.

       The federal interstate pipeline access and unbundling programs have largely been
successful in achieving their primary goals.44 LDCs and large gas customers can now
easily purchase natural gas in a competitive gas market (directly or through
intermediaries) and are taking advantage of these opportunities. Competitive liquid
markets for futures and options contracts have emerged to facilitate risk management by
buyers, sellers and intermediaries. Gas transportation prices have fallen and, prior to
mid-2000, natural gas prices were reasonably stable and very competitive with other fuels
during the decade.45 In 1995, a few states began to extend the unbundling concept to
residential gas customers and by March 2000, four states had implemented a customer


43
  There appears to be another factor at work in 2000 as well. In “the old days,” a gas price spike like the
one experience in 2000 would have led many utility and some industrial boilers to shift from gas to oil very
quickly. While some switching did take place in 2000, the magnitude was small. I believe that this reflects
environmental restrictions that have been placed on electric generating plants that limit the amount of oil
that they can burn and the conditions under which they can burn it.
44
     The following discussion relies on Barbara Mariner-Volpe, op. cit.
45
     Barbara Mariner-Volpe, op. cit.
                                                  31


choice program for all residential customers, 7 more states were in the process of doing
so, and 12 states had implemented pilot programs to test out the concept.46

        The increasing utilization of natural gas to generate electricity has and will require
significant increases in interstate gas pipeline capacity and gas storage facilities. There
were very significant increases in gas pipeline and gas storage capacity during the
1990s.47 Even larger investments are being made in new pipeline capacity that is under
construction or planned for completion in the first part of this decade.48 The realization
of the large expected increases in future natural gas consumption depends critically both
on expanding gas reserves and expanding the gas pipeline transportation and storage
infrastructure. Future, pipeline projects must confront three sets of challenges.

        First, investors must expect to get an appropriate risk-adjusted return on their
investments in pipeline capacity. There are two important factors that must be taken into
consideration to satisfy this constraint. FERC still regulates pipeline charges based on
cost-of-service principles. Historically, pipeline projects would go forward after the
pipeline had lined up long term firm contracts for a significant amount of the pipeline’s
capacity and the proponents could demonstrated that the pipeline was “needed” to serve
this demand. In a world where pipelines are selling transportation service to serve a
growing number of customers who are themselves operating in competitive markets
(power generating companies, marketers, LDCs with uncertain future obligations to
supply gas along with distribution service), it may be very difficult for pipeline
developers to rely on very long term contracts to support financing of their projects.
More importantly, FERC’s methods for calculating pipeline charges were developed in
an era where transportation customers entered into very long term contracts and took on
the market risks associated with these obligations. With the new market institutions,
some of this market risk will inevitably (optimally) be shifted back to the pipelines. If
FERC regulation does not reflect the associated increases in capital costs, it will delay or
deter necessary pipeline investments.

         The second set of potential problems involves local opposition to new pipeline
facilities. While the Natural Gas Act gives FERC substantial siting authority (unlike the
situation with electric transmission facilities), state and local authorities are still a force to
deal with. While the “Nimby” syndrome has not yet been as significant a problem for
gas pipelines as it has been for electric generation and transmission projects, the
continued local efforts to block pipeline projects is a continuing concern. During the
1990s, the U.S. was able to more fully exploit a gas and electric infrastructure that had
excess supply capability at the beginning of the decade. The excess capacity has been
used up (or more than used up). People may have become comfortable with increasing
consumption without seeing major new supply projects. That era has come to an end and

46
  Status of Natural Gas Residential Choice Programs By State, Energy Information Administration,
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oil_gas/restructure/restructure.html, March 11, 2001.
47
     Barbara Mariner-Volpe, op. cit..
48
     ibid.
                                                   32


we are entering a period when conflicts over siting of energy supply facilities is likely to
intensify once again.

        Third, the future evolution of the natural gas industry is closely tied with
developments in the electric power industry. The incomplete nature of electricity sector
restructuring, competition and regulatory reforms and the turmoil caused by recent events
in California increases uncertainty and investment hurdle rates for the development of
new gas fields and pipeline facilities.

       Despite these potential problems, the natural gas pipeline industry was generally
successful in expanding natural gas pipeline capacity (and gas storage capacity) to meet
the growing demand for natural gas during the 1990s.

        Where is all of the natural gas projected to fuel future electric power generation,
commercial and industrial demand over the next decade going to come from? Until May
2000, the general view was that natural gas was abundant and would continue to be very
cheap. However, the dramatic increase in gas prices since May 2000, and the upward
shift of the forward curve going out two years suggests that these assumptions may need
to be revised. Rising natural gas prices have potentially important implications for future
gas demand, electricity prices, and demand for coal used to generate electricity. The
ultimate price trajectory will depend heavily on the cost of developing new supplies in
the U.S., Canada (the sole exporter of non-liquified natural gas to the U.S.) and perhaps
other countries which may be able to supply liquefied natural gas to the U.S., on the cost
of transporting natural gas from Northern Alaska and Northwestern Canada through
Alberta, on federal policies governing drilling on federal lands, and on into the U.S., and
the ability to expand domestic pipeline capacity to accommodate rapidly growing
demand. Domestic natural gas production has been projected to increase by roughly 50%
over the next twenty years, after increasing only 8% during the 1990s, and these
projections assume that gas prices will not rise above the average level prevailing in 2000
(after falling in the next few years) by 2020. Imports, primarily from Canada, are
projected to increase by about 80%, and would account for nearly 20% of U.S. natural
gas consumption by 2002.49 These projections reflect the assumption that modestly
higher gas prices will lead to significant increases in reserves and production from on-
shore, off-shore and non-conventional non-associated sources (not found with oil).
Production from the first two of these sources has been roughly constant in the last few
years, so the projections reflect the assumption of a significant change in recent historical
production trends. The price increases required to realize these production increases are
very uncertain and without major improvements in drilling technology, much larger price
increases may be necessary to bring forth this level of additional natural gas supplies.
The recent renewed interest in expanding imports of liquefied natural gas (LNG) suggests
that some investors expect natural gas prices to remain relatively high and that more
costly LNG imports will be required to balance supply and demand.



49
     Annual Energy Outlook 2001, Energy Information Administration, December 2000, pages 82-86.
                                                       33


VII.     ELECTRICITY
         A. Background
         Electricity accounts for about 36% of U.S. energy consumption, after taking
account of the thermal losses associated with the transformation of fossil fuel into
electricity.50 In 2000, coal accounted for 52%, nuclear for 20% and natural gas for 16%
of the electricity supplied. Conventional hydro (7%), oil (3%) and renewable energy
(2%) accounted for the rest of the electricity supplied in 2000. [FIGURE 22 AND
FIGURE 23]. The proportions of fuels used to generate electricity changed relatively
little between 1990 and 2000, with natural gas accounting for a larger fraction (16% vs.
12%) and conventional hydro (10% vs. 7%) a smaller fraction. [FIGURE 24] Electricity
consumption grew by about 28% [FIGURE 25] and peak demand grew by about 25%
between 1989 and 1999. The U.S. began the decade with substantially more generating
and transmission capacity than “needed” to meet current demand according to standard
reserve margin criteria. Relatively little investment in new electric generating facilities
was made during the decade, however. Generating capacity available to meet peak
demand grew by only about 7% during the 1989 to 1999 period while (non-coincident)
peak demand increased by nearly 30% during this time period. [FIGURE 26]
Investments in new high voltage transmission lines also increased by only about 7%
during this period as well. Accordingly, electricity consumption grew much more rapidly
than did generating and transmission capacity during the decade. By the end of the
decade the excess capacity had largely disappeared and spot shortages of power began to
appear in some regions of the country, especially in the West. The real price of retail
electricity continued to fall during the 1990s, reaching real price levels prevailing in 1974
by the end of the decade. [FIGURE 27] However, retail electricity prices began to rise
again in a number of areas in 2000, following the increases in natural gas and wholesale
power prices.

        The electric power sector experienced the most profound structural and regulatory
changes of any of the energy sectors during the 1990s. These changes were facilitated by
a combination of wholesale market reforms initiated by FERC as it implemented portions
of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 and individual state initiatives to restructure their
electric utilities to take advantage of competitive wholesale markets and to create
competitive retail markets which would allow consumers to choose their power supplier
who would use the local utility distribution system to deliver power to them. The
Clinton Administration’s role in these developments was modest. The rapid evolution of
federal and state restructuring activity surprised the DOE and the administration played
catch-up during the last half of the decade.

       For most of the 20th century, the U.S. electric power industry was organized
primarily around investor-owned electric utilities that had de facto exclusive franchises to
serve all consumers in designated geographic areas.51 The prices that the utilities could

50
   The actual number is somewhat higher when electricity produced by industrial generators and
cogenerators is fully taken into account. The measurement of the fuel used by these facilities is buried in
commercial and industrial fossil fuel consumption data.
51
   A more detailed discussion of the structure and regulation of the electric utility industry prior to the late
1990s can be found in Joskow, op. cit. 1989 and P. Joskow, “Deregulation and Regulatory Reform in the
                                                      34


charge to retail consumers were regulated by state public utility commissions, based on
their “cost of service,” including a “fair rate of return” on investment. In return for their
exclusive franchises, utilities had an obligation to serve all consumers requesting service
at the prices approved by their state regulatory commissions. Utilities met their
obligation to serve by investing in distribution, generation and transmission facilities.
That is, utilities were vertically integrated into the three primary electricity supply
segments and provided “bundled” retail service to their franchise customers. Unlike
most other countries, the U.S. had a large number of vertically integrated utilities serving
relatively small geographic areas rather than a single dominant enterprise serving most of
the country. Over time, however, transmission and generating technology evolved in
ways that made the economic supply areas regional rather than local. Rather than
encouraging horizontal mergers to create much larger utilities to span economical supply
areas, U.S. policies since the 1930s encouraged utilities to interconnect their transmission
systems with one another, to build facilities jointly, to coordinate and share operating
reserves and to trade power among themselves in wholesale markets when a utility with
surplus energy could produce more cheaply than could a proximate utility from its own
generating facilities. The prices of third-party transmission service (‘wheeling”) and
wholesale trades of power between utilities have been regulated by the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC), formerly the Federal Power Commission, since 1935.
However, prior to EPAct92 FERC had no authority to order utilities to provide
transmission service or to require utilities to build power plants or transmission facilities
to provide wholesale power or transmission service. As a result, regulatory authority for
utility investments, operating costs and prices lay primarily with individual state
regulatory agencies.52 In addition, the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA) of
1935 gave the SEC regulatory jurisdiction over the structure of public utility holding
companies, their geographic expanse, internal transfer prices, and the kinds of businesses
that they could engage in.53

         The Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA) played an important
role in stimulating interest in expanding opportunities for non-utility suppliers to compete
to build an operate power plants to supply of electric generation service to utilities for
resale and created a powerful interest group to promote it. Title II of PURPA required
utilities to purchase power produced by certain “Qualified Facilities” (QFs) using
cogeneration and renewable energy technology at a price reflecting the utility’s “avoided
costs” of supplying the power from its own facilities. These provisions of PURPA were


U.S. Electric Power Sector,” in Deregulation of Network Industries: The Next Steps (S. Peltzman and
Clifford Winston, eds.), Brookings Press, 2000.
52
  IOUs historically accounted for about 80% of industry supplies. The rest is accounted for by municipal,
cooperative, and federal power supply and distribution entities. I will not discuss these entities here.
53
  A public utility holding company is a company that owns more than one utility operating company.
PUHCA placed draconian restrictions on public utility holding companies with utility subsidiaries in more
than one state. These restrictions severely limited the geographic areas in which a public utility holding
company could operate, the lines of business that it could engage in (only those closely related to its utility
operations), foreign investments in utilities in other countries, and investments by foreign utilities in U.S.
utility businesses.
                                             35


motivated by a desire to encourage more efficient electricity production technologies
(cogeneration) and non-fossil technologies (renewables) reflect the 1970’s goals of
reducing dependence on foreign oil (though little oil is used to generate electricity) and
reducing emissions of air pollution from fossil fueled power plants. Some states
embraced PURPA with gusto, pressed utilities to rely as much as possible of PURPA
facilities, and required them to enter into high-priced long term contracts to encourage
third-party investment in PURPA generating facilities. These states were primarily those
with politically powerful environmental groups and high retail electricity prices such as
California, New York, the New England states, and a few others along the east and west
coasts. Other states were indifferent and placed little pressure on their utilities to turn to
third party suppliers for power. While PURPA was originally conceived primarily as an
energy efficiency and environmental program, it soon became a demonstration project for
the virtues of relying on competitive supplies from non-utility producers and was the
primary vehicle undermining the traditional vertically integrated structure of electricity
supply. By 1991, nearly 10% of electricity supplies was coming from non-utility
generating facilities, primarily PURPA facilities heavily concentrated in California, the
Northeast, Texas, and a few other states. Few utility-owned power plants were built in
these states after the mid-1980s. Power supplied from “non-utility” generating plants
increased by 400% during the 1990s. [FIGURE 28]. Until 1996, the increase in non-
utility generation displayed in Figure 25 reflected primarily the completion of PURPA
facilities and a few non-PURPA independent power projects. After 1996, the increase
reflects primarily the divestiture of generating plants by regulated utilities subject to
electricity restructuring programs in California, the Northeast, Illinois, and Montana to
independent power suppliers and the entry of new capacity developed by independent
power producers in these and other states. We turn to these latter developments now.

        The enthusiastic implementation of PURPA by California, New York, the New
England states and a few others was heavily influenced by environmental interests and
concerns. By the late 1980s it would not be unreasonable to conclude that the regulatory
process, especially as it related to electric utility resource planning and acquisition
programs, had been captured by environmental interests in these states. In conjunction
with the implementation of PURPA, these states adopted complex public planning
processes to review utility investments, power purchase arrangements with PURPA
suppliers, and to encourage utilities to “invest in customer energy efficiency” as an
alternative to acquiring additional power supplies through ownership or contract. They
also required utilities to give preference to cogeneration and renewable energy sources by
placing “environmental adders” on the direct costs of power supplies. These planning
processes were referred to as “integrated resource planning” or “least cost planning.”
They were a way to use the institution of regulated monopoly to pay for environmentally
friendly supply sources and energy efficiency programs which traditional utility planning
protocols would not have viewed as being “least cost.” Most of these states also
experienced significant increases in the regulated retail prices of electricity during the
1970s and 1980s. By the mid-1990s retail prices in many of these states were far above
the national average [TABLE 2 and TABLE 3]. The high prices reflected the high
capital costs and poor operating performance of nuclear power plants commissioned
during the 1970s and 1980s, the high prices reflected in PURPA/QF contracts, and the
                                            36


costs of excess capacity which got rolled into regulated prices. The Massachusetts
commission took the view, however, that it was “not the price of electricity that mattered
but rather its global societal cost.”

       By 1990, least cost planning was the all the rage among state regulatory
commissions and was spreading quickly from its origins in California, the Northeast and
the Northwest. And it is these policies that are heavily reflected in the Energy Policy Act
of 1992 (see above). As outlined earlier, EPAct92 has a large number of provisions to
encourage energy efficiency, renewable energy, and integrated resource planning. It also
had two important provisions that would come to have profound effects on the structure
of the electric power industry. First, it gave FERC the authority to order utilities to
provide wholesale transmission service to those requesting it, including the obligation to
build new facilities to accommodate such requests. Second, it amended PUHCA to
exempt firms building independent power production facilities from its regulatory
requirements and also relaxed restrictions on U.S. utility investments in foreign utilities.
These provisions allowed any investor to build “Exempt Wholesale Generating” plants to
supply utilities with power without running into conflict with PUHCA’s rules and
without having to meet PURPA’s cogeneration and renewable energy rules. It also
opened up opportunities for U.S. utilities to invest in other countries and vice versa.

         Thus, the electricity provisions of the 1992 Act reflected environmental,
independent power and energy marketer, and utility interests. Environmental interests
got the energy efficiency, renewable energy and integrated resource planning provisions
of the Act. Independent power producers and marketers, including utilities that were
interested in expanding into these lines of business, got the transmission and PUHCA
exemption provisions. Other utilities thought that they got protection from losing their
exclusive franchises to provide bundled service to retail consumers because the Act
restricted FERC’s ability to order transmission service to support direct sales of power to
retail consumers.

        B. FERC Takes the Lead
        Probably the most important contribution to the development of competitive
wholesale and retail electricity markets made by the Administration was the appointment
of a new set of FERC Commissioners who were committed to creating well-functioning
competitive wholesale electricity markets and providing open non-discriminatory access
to interstate transmission facilities to support the development of these markets. It turned
out as well that these Commissioners were willing and able to work closely with
California and a few other states as they went further than Congress required or the
Administration expected to restructure their utilities and to create competitive retail
markets as well.

       Soon after the new FERC Commissioners were appointed, they proceeded
aggressively to implement the wholesale transmission access provisions included in
EPAct92. The focus was on providing transmission access to utilities seeking to buy
power from independent producers to serve their regulated retail customers franchises
and independent producers seeking to sell power to them. The basic model was one of
                                                    37


voluntary “wholesale competition” in which the local distribution company continued to
act as the generation “portfolio” manager for retail consumers which the distribution
company continued to serve exclusively in defined geographic areas at regulated cost-
based rates. Purchasing power under contract from independent producers was now an
alternative that utilities had to owning and operating their own power plants. A growing
number of state regulators required utilities to seek competitive bids for new generating
capacity needs and either to buy power under the best contracts offered, rather than
building themselves, or to use competitive market prices as a benchmark for determining
the compensation they would receive if they did build new plants, rather than relying on
traditional rate-base/cost of service regulatory mechanisms. The expectation was that
competitive bidding and competitive benchmark prices would provide more power
incentives to control costs and increase operating performance than traditional cost of
service regulation. The transmission access and pricing rules promulgated by FERC
were initially focused on facilitating these developments. However, these early
initiatives basically only required utilities to respond to transmission service requests on a
case-by-case basis. Utilities were not required to file generic transmission tariffs that
specified generally available transmission service offerings and associated maximum
prices. Moreover, the nature of the transmission services that transmission owners were
obligated to supply, and the associated prices, remained fairly vague, and utilities defined
the kinds of transmission services and the pricing principles applicable to them in a
variety of different ways. Transmission service requests sometimes became lengthy and
contentious negotiations.

        Both FERC and transmission service customers became frustrated by the slow pace
at which transmission service was being made available to support wholesale market
transactions, and FERC continued to receive complaints about discriminatory terms and
conditions (real or imagined) being offered by transmission owners. Moreover,
California’s electricity restructuring initiatives that began in April 1994 (more below)
began to make it clear to FERC that its transmission access and pricing rules might have to
support far more radical changes in the structure of the utility industry -- the functional
separation of the generation of electricity from distribution service and the opening of retail
electric service to competition -- and deal with a variety of new issues regarding state vs.
federal jurisdiction over transmission, distribution, wholesale power sales and the treatment
of “above market” costs of generating capacity and QF contracts (what came to be called
the “stranded cost” problem).

        In 1995 these considerations led FERC to initiate rulemakings on transmission
service that ultimately served as the basis for two major sets of new rules issued by FERC
in 1996. These rules are Order 888 -- “Promoting Wholesale Competition Through Open
Access Non-Discriminatory Transmission Service by Public Utilities; Recovery of
Stranded Costs By Public Utilities and Transmitting Utilities,”54 and Order 889 -- “Open
Access Same-Time Information Systems.”55 These rules now serve as the primary

54
     Final Rule issued April 24, 1999, 75 FERC ¶ 61,080.
55
     Final Rule issued April 24, 1999, 75 FERC ¶ 61,078.
                                                        38


federal foundation for providing transmission service, ancillary network support services,
and information about the availability of these services to support both wholesale and
retail competition in the supply of generating services.56

        Order 888 requires all transmission owners to file with FERC pro-forma open
access transmission tariffs that transmission service customers can rely upon to define the
terms and conditions of transmission services that will be made available to them. Order
888 specifies the types of transmission services that must be made available, the
maximum cost-based prices that can be charged for these services, the definition of
available transmission capacity and how it should be allocated when there is excess
demand for it, the specification of ancillary services that transmission owners must
provide and the associated prices, requirements for reforms to power pooling
arrangements to comply with Order 888, and provisions for stranded cost recovery. All
transmission owners and power pools have now filed open access transmission tariffs
with FERC.

        Order 888 recognizes the sanctity of pre-existing commercial, contractual, and
regulatory arrangements associated with the historical use of transmission systems and is
generally sensitive to providing a smooth transition from the old regime to the new
regime. Importantly, Order 888 establishes federal principles governing the recovery of
stranded costs, -- which I will discuss in more detail presently. For utility-owned
generating plants, stranded or “strandable” costs are defined conceptually as the
difference between the net book value of a generating plant used for setting cost-based
regulated prices and the market value of that plant if it were required to sell it’s output in
a competitive market. For a QF contract, stranded costs are generally defined as the
difference between the present value of the contractual payment obligations and the
present value of the competitive market value of the electricity delivered under the
contracts. FERC established the public policy case for allowing for stranded cost
recovery in light of the long established regulatory rules in effect when the investments
and contractual commitments were made and the public policy interest in facilitating
restructuring and the creation of competitive wholesale power markets.57

         While FERC’s position on stranded cost recovery was based primarily on its
assessment of its legal obligations and equity considerations, it almost certainly reflected
a set of more practical considerations as well. Specifically, a major impediment to
incumbent utilities’ going along with more fundamental changes in the competitive
environment and cooperating in creating new transmission and wholesale market
institutions necessary to support full wholesale and retail competition was their concern
about stranded cost exposure. FERC, and ultimately most state commissions that have
considered the stranded cost issue, effectively sent utilities with stranded cost problems
the following message: “Play ball by opening up your transmission and distribution

56
  FERC Order 2000 regarding Regional Transmission Organizations issued in December 1999 is likely to
become equally important. Regional Transmission Organizations, 89 FERC ¶ 61,285 (1999).
57
     Verifiable stranded costs net of all reasonable mitigation options.
                                                    39


systems and by taking actions necessary to create competitive wholesale and retail
markets quickly, and regulatory policy will treat requests for reasonable provisions for
stranded cost recovery favorably. Moreover, this deal may not be on the table forever.”

        Order 888 did not attempt to resolve the problems created for transmission service
customers by the large number of transmission owners, all operating under separate pro
forma Order 888 tariffs, which existed in many regions of the country. So, for example
to make a trade between Indiana and Pennsylvania, a trader might still have to deal with
several transmission owners to get a complete “contract path” from the generator
supplying the power to the customer. However, FERC subsequently issued a set of
regulations which strongly encourage the creation of large Regional Transmission
Organizations (RTO) to resolve problems created by the balkanized control of
transmission networks and alleged discriminatory practices of generators and energy
traders seeking to use the transmission networks of vertically integrated firms under
Order 888 rules.58 The implementation details and effects of Order 2000 are yet to be
determined.

         Order 889, issued at the same time as Order 888, requires each public utility or its
agent (e.g. a power pool) that owns, controls, or operates facilities used for the
transmission of electric energy in interstate commerce to create or participate in an Open
Access Same-time Information System (OASIS). This system must provide information,
by electronic means, regarding available transmission capacity, prices, and other
information that will enable transmission service customers to obtain open access non-
discriminatory transmission service in a time frame necessary to make effective use of
the transmission system to support power transactions. Order 889 also required public
utilities to implement standards of conduct to functionally separate transmission and
unregulated wholesale power merchant functions to ensure that a vertically integrated
transmission owner’s wholesale market transactions are not advantaged by virtue of
preferential access to information about the transmission network. Utilities must also
make the same terms (e.g. service price discounts) available to third parties as they do to
their wholesale power marketing affiliates.

        C. California Takes Over the Lead
        FERC’s initial efforts to implement the transmission provisions of EPAct92 were
based on the wholesale competition/utility-as-portfolio-manager model discussed above.
Then something rather unexpected happened. In the midst of the recession of the early
1990s, which hit California and the Northeast especially hard as defense contractors and
aerospace firms suffered from federal budget cuts, large industrial consumers revolted
against the high electricity prices in these states. The cost of generation service reflected
in their regulated prices was 6 to 7 cents/Kwh (exclusive of T&D costs) while the
wholesale price was about 2.5 cents/kWh. Industrial customers in these states began to

58
  Regional Transmission Organizations, 89 FERC ¶ 61,285 (1999). Order 2000 technically makes
participation in an RTO voluntary, but there are carrots and sticks available to FERC that will create
significant pressure for utilities to join RTOs. Order 2000 does not mandate a particular organizational
form for an RTO, however.
                                                    40


agitate for the right to buy power directly in the wholesale market and to pay the utilities
only for the costs of T&D service. They were supported by independent power producers
and energy marketers who emerged and matured with the earlier PURPA QF projects and
the transformation of the natural gas industry. The utilities generally opposed “retail
competition” because it would “strand” the costs of investments and contracts entered
into years ago under the assumption that oil would be $100/barrel rather than $20/barrel.

        In early 1993, the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) launched a
comprehensive review of the structure and performance of California’s electricity
industry. It was motivated primarily by pressure from industrial consumers to reduce
electricity prices that were among the highest in the U.S. High prices in turn were
blamed on failures of the existing system of regulated vertically integrated monopolies:
the high costs of nuclear power plant investments, expensive long-term contracts with
independent power suppliers, excess generating capacity, costly and ineffective
regulatory institutions. There was broad agreement that the existing industry structure
and regulatory system were seriously broken and needed to be fundamentally reformed.

        In April 1994, the CPUC articulated a reform program for the electricity sector. It
was built around a new industry structure in which the production of electricity from
existing generating plants and the entry of new plants would be deregulated and their
power sold in a new competitive wholesale market. Retail consumers would have the
choice of using the transmission and distribution wires of their local utility to obtain
“direct access” to these new competitive wholesale markets or continuing to receive
power from their local utility at prices reflecting the costs the utilities incurred to buy or
produce it. This vision for reform was heavily influenced by reforms implemented in
Britain in 1990, where several CPUC commissioners and staff visited in early 1994.

         California’s well-funded interest groups then spent the next four years arguing
about exactly how this reform vision would be implemented. The new industry structure
that eventually emerged from this contentious regulatory, legislative, and market design
process was the most complicated electricity market ever created with many features that
had never been tried before. In an effort to appease various interest groups, the market
design incorporated bits and pieces of alternative market models.59 The operation of the
utilities’ transmission networks was turned over to a newly created non-profit
Independent System Operator (ISO) which was responsible for managing the operation of
the transmission network efficiently and reliably by relying on hourly spot markets for
ancillary services and energy to balance supply and demand in real time. It also relied on
a number of annual supply contracts with generators with locational market power to
ensure supply availability in transmission-constrained areas like San Francisco and San
Diego. A non-profit public Power Exchange (PX) was also created to operate a day-
ahead hourly energy market and (ultimately) markets for a number of longer term
forward contracts. Utilities were required to divest most of their fossil fueled generating
plants and to buy and sell energy in the PX and ISO hourly spot markets. Other load
serving entities and power suppliers were free to enter into bilateral contracts and simply

59
  See Joskow (2000), op. cit. for a more detailed discussion of California’s wholesale and retail market
institutions.
                                             41


submit schedules to the ISO. The most complicated set of auction markets for energy and
operating reserves ever created was developed to govern spot market trading managed by
the PX and the ISO.

        It is inaccurate to characterize California’s electricity reforms as “deregulation.”
The reforms are more properly viewed as “regulated competition.” Wholesale market
prices were deregulated, but retail prices were fixed for up to four years. The utilities
were forced to sell their generating plants, in order to facilitate the creation of a truly
competitive wholesale market and to value any prudent costs “stranded” by competition.
But they also retained the obligation to buy power in the new wholesale market to
provide service to retail consumers who did not choose a competitive retail supplier and
to resell it to them at a fixed price regardless of its cost. The CPUC rejected utility
requests to meet their default retail supply obligations, accounting for 85% of demand, by
negotiating fixed-price long-term contracts with power suppliers to hedge wholesale
market price risks. As a result, a large fraction of California’s electricity demand was
being served through the utilities’ purchases in a volatile wholesale market; the utilities in
turn were selling at a regulated fixed retail price and buying at an unregulated wholesale
market price. Several knowledgeable people argued that there were numerous design
flaws that would lead to problems once the wholesale markets began to operate.

        Importantly, the excess capacity situation that contributed to the pressures for
reform in 1993 gradually disappeared as electricity demand grew and no new generating
capacity was completed during the four-year period of uncertainty over the new rules of
the game. Once these rules were defined, developers quickly applied for permits to build
many new power plants, only to confront a time consuming environmental review
process and community opposition to power plants located near where they lived or
worked. This slowed the pace of investment in and completion of new power plants.
The first of these new plants did not be on-line until Summer 2001.

        Subsequently, nearly two-dozen states decided to implement wholesale and retail
competition reforms, though only about a dozen states have proceeded very far with the
restructuring of their electricity industries. These states include five of the six New
England states, New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Illinois.             Most of these
“pioneer states” shared many attributes with California: high retail rates, excess
generating capacity, expensive nuclear plants and QF contracts, and angry industrial
customers. [TABLE 4] Nearly 100,000 Mw of utility generating capacity was divested
to independent power suppliers, primarily affiliates of electric and gas utilities with
franchises in other parts of the country, by utilities in these and other states from 1997
though 2000. Note that, so far, the state reform initiatives have proceeded with no new
federal mandates or obligations beyond those included in EPAct92 and FERC wholesale
power market and transmission regulations made under its existing legislative authority.

         D. The Administration Plays Catch-Up
         The DOE largely played catch-up with these developments during much of the
decade. Early in the administration the DOE’s policies focused on exploiting the
institution of regulated monopoly to promote utility funding of renewable energy and
                                            42


energy conservation options, whose costs were paid for in regulated retail prices. The
states that had pioneered these “integrated resource planning” programs also happened to
be the pioneers on the restructuring and retail competition front. As the debates about
restructuring and retail competition spread across the country, interest in IRP and related
programs evaporated. The DOE tried to get back into the action by sponsoring a set of
electricity policy forums, but DOE simply was never a major player on the electricity
reform front. It was not until April 15, 1999 that the Administration proposed
comprehensive electricity restructuring and deregulation legislation.

         By trying to accommodate states rights interests, pressures from environmental
groups to incorporate energy efficiency and renewable energy programs into federal
“deregulation” legislation, pressures from utilities and independent power producers to
repeal the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA) and PURPA, the
Administration was slow in proposing comprehensive electricity reform legislation. The
legislation that it did propose in April 1999 had something for almost every interest group
in it. However, the legislation was opposed by several states, some vertically integrated
utilities, and some consumer groups and broad support for the entire package was
lacking. It did not get very far in Congress.

       The primary features of the Administration’s proposed legislation were:

   1. Provided that all retail electricity consumers would be permitted to choose their
      power supplier (retail wheeling) and that local distribution companies would
      provide unbundled distribution and transmission service to allow them to do so by
      January 1, 2003 except if a state decided to opt out of this retail competition
      system.
   2. Clarifies FERC’s authority to order utilities to provide wholesale and retail
      transmission service, enshrines the provisions of Order 888 in federal law, and
      gives FERC authority to require the creation of independent regional system
      operators.
   3. Established a Public Benefits Fund that would disburse federal matching funds to
      participating states to provide subsidies to low-income consumers, energy
      efficiency programs, education and other programs. The Fund would be financed
      by generators with a fee of up to 0.1 cents/kWh.
   4. Established a Federal Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) which requires
      electricity retailers to include specified minimum percentages of designated
      renewable energy sources in their supply portfolios.
   5. Repeals the “must buy from QF” provisions of PURPA, while preserving existing
      QF contracts.
   6. Repeals the Public Utility Holding Company Act while expanding access to
      books and records of holding companies and affiliates for FERC and state
      regulatory authorities.
   7. Expands FERC’s authority to remedy market power problems in wholesale power
      markets.
                                                    43


     8. Expands FERC’s authority to approve and oversee a national Electric Reliability
         Organization and Affiliated Regional Entities to prescribe and enforce mandatory
         reliability standards.
     9. Clarified the authority of EPA to require an interstate trading system for NOx
         reductions.
     10. Provisions for stranded cost recovery.

Numerous other pieces of proposed restructuring legislation were filed in the House and
the Senate during 1999 and 2000.60 Several of them included many of the key provisions
of the Administration’s bill while others focused on a narrower set of issues: e.g.
repealing PURPA, repealing PUHCA, transmission access, regional system operators and
reliability issues. However, neither the Administration’s proposed legislation, nor
competing legislation proposed by Republican Senators and Congressmen garnered
sufficient support to come close to being passed by the Congress.

        E. California Runs into Major Problems61
        The new competitive wholesale and retail electricity markets began operating in
April 1998. Within a few months significant problems already began to emerge as a
result of wholesale market design flaws and suppliers’ ability to exploit them. Flaws
were identified in the congestion management system, with the local reliability contracts,
the protocols for planning and investment in transmission, with the real time balancing
markets, in the ancillary services markets, and in other areas. Within the first two years
of operation, the ISO had filed 30 major revisions to its protocols with the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC). The PX had filed for numerous changes in its
operating protocols as well. Responding to a never-ending series of problems and
proposed fixes for them, FERC ordered the ISO to seek to identify and implement
fundamental reforms rather than just piecemeal fixes to individual problems as they
arose. The complex “Noah’s Ark” governance arrangements, with all major interest
groups represented on the Board of the PX and ISO, made agreement on any sensible
reforms very difficult. Moreover, because of California’s very difficult and time
consuming regulatory process for getting siting and environmental approvals for new
power plants, the anticipated flood of new generating capacity was being delayed, while
demand continued to grow along with the economy.

       Despite these problems, competitive wholesale market prices for power were
reasonably close to pre-reform projections, averaging 3 cents/kWh ($30/Mwh) between



60
  Federal Restructuring Legislation 106th Congress, U.S. Department of Energy,
http:www.eia.doe.gov/cnea…/page/restruct_bills/bill_sums_106.html, June 29, 2001.
61
  For a detailed discussion of California’s electricity market problems see Paul L. Joskow, “California’s
Electricity Crisis,” July 2001, http://web.mit.edu/pjoskow/www/. For an overview of the evolution of
electricity restructuring and competition programs in the U.S. see Paul L. Joskow, “Deregulation and
Regulatory Reform in the U.S. Electric Power Sector,” in Deregulation of Network Industries: The Next
Steps (S. Peltzman and Clifford Winston, eds.), Brookings Press, 2000.
                                                   44


April 1998 and April 2000. [FIGURE 29]62 All things considered, prices were perhaps
10% higher than they would be in a system without these design flaws. In March 2000,
the California Energy Commission published projections for wholesale market prices for
2000 and beyond which were in the $30 to $35/Mwh range.63 Nevertheless, California’s
new market arrangements were an accident waiting to happen. And in mid-2000 the
flawed wholesale market institutions and the partial deregulation program suddenly
confronted a run of very bad luck.

        Wholesale prices began to rise above historical levels in May 2000 and stayed at
extraordinary high levels for the rest of the Clinton Administration’s tenure. As
wholesale prices rose above the fixed retail prices that the utilities could charge their
retail customers, they began to lose a lot of money. The CPUC refused to raise retail
prices to cover rising wholesale power costs until early January 2001, and the 1 cent/kWh
surcharge approved was far too little to allow the utilities to cover either their ongoing
wholesale power costs let along their past-due bills. By December some suppliers had
run up against their credit limits and stopped selling electricity to California electricity.
In mid-January the utilities had run out of cash and stopped paying their bills for
wholesale power. At the Administration left office, the California electricity reform was
in shambles as buyers had no credit and suppliers threatened to stop supplying.

         During the Administration’s final month in office the Secretary of Energy issued
emergency orders to keep the lights from going out in California as credit problems led
suppliers to withdraw supplies from the market. The Secretary of the Treasury tried to
facilitate a negotiated settlement with the Governor of California, California utilities, and
the major independent generators and marketers. His efforts were not successful. The
mess would be left for the new Bush Administration to deal with.

        The serious problems that emerged with the new market and regulatory
arrangements in California during Summer 2000 cast a dark shadow over the electric
utility restructuring and competition programs implemented during the Clinton years.
These problems were at least partially a consequence of the failure of the federal
government to articulate and promote a clear model for electricity sector restructuring
and competition initiatives. Instead, it accommodated a wide range of state approaches to
restructuring and interest group concerns. This “let a thousand flowers bloom” approach
may have been politically convenient, but it led to an uncoordinated and sometimes
incompatible and poorly design patchwork of state efforts to respond to interest group
views on the appropriate directions for electricity restructuring and competition. It is
possible that the passage of the comprehensive federal restructuring legislation proposed
by the Administration would have (eventually) improved the situation, largely by
expanding and clarifying FERC’s authority in a number of important areas. However, I
62
  The prices reported in Figure 26 are average hourly day-ahead prices in the PX. The PX went out of
business at the end of January 2001. The prices listed for February, March and April 2001 are the average
prices paid by the ISO for real-time energy during those months.
63
 “Market Clearing Prices Under Alternative Resource Scenarios: 200-2010,” California Energy
Commission, March 2000.
                                                  45


don’t think that the passage of the legislation in 1999 would have forestalled the
problems in California. The legislation does not specify a particular restructuring
framework and does not deal with many important “details” that have led to problems in
California and other states. It would have taken FERC some time to develop a more
comprehensive framework and to use its new authority to implement it. Moreover, the
state opt-out provision would have inevitably given the states a lot of discretion to
proceed along their individual paths.

VIII. COAL
        There were no major federal energy policies initiatives focused directly on the
coal industry during the 1990s. However, environmental policies, especially the Clean
Air Act Amendments of 1990, enhanced enforcement of New Source review policies,
carbon emissions policies, rail transportation policies, policies affecting the price of
natural gas, and electric utility restructuring policies all have had and will continue to
have important implications for the coal industry. This is the case because (a) the
combustion of coal produces more air pollutants and CO2 emissions than other fossil
fuels per unit of useful energy and (b) coal accounts for over 50% of the electricity
produced in the U.S.

        In 2000, coal accounted for 23% of the energy consumed in the U.S., slightly less
than natural gas, about the same percentage as in 1990. Over 90% of the coal produced
in the United States is used to generate electricity. Accordingly, developments in the coal
sector are closely related to developments in the electricity sector. During the 1990s,
U.S. coal consumption increased slowly but steadily, growing 17% between 1990 and
2000.64 [FIGURE 30]. The U.S. exported 5% to 10% of the coal produced each year
during the 1990s. (Coal production declined slightly in 1999 and 2000 as exports fell.)
Coal production continued to shift to the West of the Mississippi from the East of the
Mississippi due to the low-sulfur content of Western coal, declining transportation costs
(a benefit of railroad deregulation initiated in the 1980s), and falling real Western coal
prices. [FIGURE 31] In 1990, about 38% of U.S. coal was produced West of the
Mississippi, while in 1999 nearly 50% was produced in the West. Western coal has
penetrated farther and farther to power plants in the East and Southeast as coal prices at
the mine and coal transportation costs have declined. The 1990 Clean Air Act provided
additional stimulus to this continuing shift to Western Coal, but a lot of it can be
accounted for by pure economics.65 Indeed, the flexibility provided for by the SO2
allowance trading system created by the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 probably
helped to sustain Eastern coal suppliers, especial those producing mid- and low-sulfur
coals, more than would have been the case if alternative regulatory mechanisms had been
adopted based on plant-specific emissions limits or emissions control technology
requirements.


64
  For a more detailed discussion see Richard Bronkowski, “The U.S. Coal Industry in the 1990s: Low
Prices and Record Production,” Energy Information Administration (undated).
65
  Ellerman, Joskow, Schmalensee, Montero and Bailey, Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain
Program, Cambridge University Press, 2000.
                                                    46


         Most of the increase in coal consumption during the decade reflected increased
utilization of the existing fleet of coal-fired power plants, many of which are now quite
old. Few new coal-fired generating plants were built or commissioned for construction
during the 1990s and relatively little additional coal–fired generating capacity is planned
for the next decade. However, during the 1990s, coal plant owners learned how to
operate older plants more efficiently and reliably and adopted maintenance, monitoring
and control technologies that have significantly increased the economic life of these
plants. They adapted to the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments smoothly and efficiently.
Barring major and costly new environmental restrictions on coal-fired power plants, most
of the existing plants have going-forward costs that are less than the total costs of a new
gas-fired CCGT. These plants are likely to be economical to operate for many years into
the future even if pre-2000 natural gas-price projections are realized. Moreover, the
recent increase in natural gas prices and the associated increases in wholesale electricity
prices have led to announcements of several new coal plants, though natural-gas fired
plants continue to dominate the fleet of planned new generating plants.66

         It is difficult to measure coal prices in a meaningful way due to heterogeneity in
heat, sulfur and other mineral content, the prevalence of long term contracts negotiated at
different points in time, and the continuing shift of coal production from the East to the
West. Ellerman, Stoker and Berndt show that real coal prices fell significantly in all
producing regions during the 1990s, continuing a trend going back to the late 1970s.67
Falling real coal prices reflected continuing increases in labor productivity, increases in
total factor productivity, and economies of scale associated with a significant increase
average mine size.68 Productivity improvements were greater in underground mines in
the East, Midwest and West than in surface mines generally.69 The Energy Information
Administration projects a continuing slow increase in coal consumption, a continuing
shift of production to the West, and falling real coal prices for the next twenty years.70

       It became clear during the 1990s that the earlier assumption that older coal plants
would be retired after 30 to 40 years of operation was no longer valid. These plants have
remained competitive even while significantly reducing emissions of criteria pollutants.

66
   As of June 2001, there were only about 10-20 GW of new coal plants “planned” out of over 200 GW of
total “planned” electric generating capacity. There are several data bases that report on “planned”
generating plants and generating plants under construction. There is significant variation in the numbers
reported.
67
   D.A. Ellerman, T. Stoker, and E. Berndt, “Sources of Productivity Growth in the American Coal
Industry,” MIT Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research, March 1998. Spot coal prices rose
significantly beginning in the second half of 2000 and continuing into 2001, apparently in response to
rising gas prices and a shift toward coal in electric generating plant dispatch. See Richard F. Bonskowski,
“U.S. Coal, Domestic and International Issues, Energy Information Administration, March 27, 2001.
68
     Ellerman, Stoker and Berndt, op. cit.
69
     Ellerman, Stoker and Berndt, op. cit.
70
     Annual Energy Outlook 2001, Energy Information Administration, December 2000, pages 92-95.
                                                    47


This realization appears to have motivated the New Source Review lawsuits brought by
the EPA toward the end of the Administration’s second term --- an effort to impose costly
cleanup requirements on older coal plants and to make these plants uneconomical to
continue to operate. Even if the tighter restrictions on criteria pollutants did not make
these plants uneconomical, some in the EPA hoped that these restrictions would make it
more likely that future CO2 emissions regulations would than have a bigger impact on
coal-unit retirement decisions. These suits and the general policies affecting older coal-
fired generating units bring to the fore the need to better harmonize energy, economic,
national security and environmental policies.

IX.    NUCLEAR ENERGY
       Nuclear power accounted for 20% of the electricity generated in the U.S. in 2000,
down slightly from 21% in 1990. Electricity supplied by nuclear plants increased by
31%, despite the fact that the number of operating nuclear plants fell from 112 in 1990 to
104 in 2000 and overall nuclear plant capacity declined by about 2% during the decade
[FIGURE 32 and FIGURE 33]. The increase in nuclear electricity generation is
accounted for entirely by a very significant increase in the availability of nuclear plants
and their associated capacity utilization factors.71 Average plant capacity factors from
66% in 1990 to 88% in 2000. [FIGURE 34]

        U.S. policy toward the nuclear power industry during the 1990s was a policy of
benign neglect, neither promoting new plant development nor seeking aggressively to
close existing plants. Indeed, although the Clinton administration was not a big booster
of nuclear power, the industry flourished during the 1990. A number of “pro-nuclear”
actions were taken, including developing and applying re-licensing procedures for
nuclear plants reaching the end of their initial license period,72 pre-certification of three
new prototype plant designs, and support for continuation of a modest research program
on advanced reactors. After declining for several years, the FY2001 budget included a
big increase for nuclear science.73 The Administration also continued to move the review
process along for the future construction of a site for civilian nuclear waste at Yucca
Mountain in Nevada, though the President vetoed a bill that would have formally
designated this site for development.

        At the beginning of the decade, the projections for the future of the U.S. nuclear
power industry were gloomy. The last four nuclear plants that entered the construction
pipeline in the 1980s were completed during the 1990s (2 in 1990, 1 in 1993, and 1 in
1996). No new nuclear plants have been announced since 1979. Eleven nuclear plants
were closed during the decade (all before 1998) because of poor operating performance
and going-forward costs that exceeded current and projected wholesale market prices.

71
  When nuclear plants are available to run they are almost always dispatched to supply electricity because
their short run operating costs are very low and ramping them up and down is costly.
72
  The re-licensing of the Calvert-Cliffs plant in Maryland provided an important signal that there would
not be insurmountable opposition to re-licensing from opponents of nuclear power.
73
  The proposed Bush administration budget for nuclear science and technology is, surprisingly, about 20%
lower than the last Clinton administration budget for this line of business.
                                                   48


Early closure of additional nuclear units was predicted. By the end of the decade the
picture for the existing fleet of nuclear plants was much rosier. There have been no plant
closures since 1997 and several plants have applied for extensions of their original
operating licenses. The rosier picture reflects the improved operating performance of the
existing nuclear plants and the increase in wholesale market prices for electricity around
the country. The improved operating performance is at least partially the result of the
restructuring of the electric power industry, facilitated by the Energy Policy Act of 1992,
and the expansion of competitive wholesale power markets.

        The restructuring of the electric power industry and the gradual deregulation of
power production is having significant positive effects on the nuclear power sector.
Ownership of nuclear plants is being consolidated through mergers of utilities with
several operating nuclear plants (e.g. Philadelphia Electric (Exelon) + Commonwealth
Electric (Unicom) in 2000) and through acquisitions of nuclear power plants being
divested by their original owners by a small number of utilities with a commitment to
assemble large fleets of nuclear plants spread around the country (e.g. Entergy and
Dominion Resources). Nuclear plants are increasingly subject to market-based pricing
rather than cost plus pricing. The consolidation of ownership of plants within companies
with substantial nuclear operating experience and staff-expertise, combined with market-
based incentives have and should continue to lead to improvements in technical and
economic performance of nuclear plants. Of course, the NRC must continue to be
vigilant about nuclear plant safety, but the trends on key safety-related indicators have
also been excellent.

        The big question today is “will anyone ever build a new nuclear power plant
again?” While the existing fleet of nuclear plants is economical to operate based on
market revenues and going-forward costs, it is far from clear that it is economical to incur
the capital costs associated with building new nuclear plants which would sell output in
competitive power markets, taking into account both market risks and regulatory/siting
risks. For new nuclear plants to be built to supply electricity in competitive wholesale
markets, investors are likely to have to turn to new technologies which are less costly to
build and are “inherently safe” to operate, as well as to overcome public resistance to the
siting of nuclear plants near where they work and live. The economics of investing in
new nuclear plants will turn heavily of the future prices of fossil fuels, especially natural
gas, and whether the U.S. adopts a policy that places a significant price on carbon
emissions as part of a serious policy to control emissions of greenhouse gasses

       Proposals for new nuclear plants will also have to confront opposition resulting
from the unresolved problem of disposal of high-level nuclear waste.74 Controversy on
where interim and permanent high-level nuclear waste disposal sites would be located
continued during the 1990s. A waste disposal site for high-level nuclear waste has yet to
be completed and it does not look like this will happen until after 2010. The Nuclear
Waste Policy Act of 1982 (plus 1987 amendments) required the DOE to take possession

74
  For a good summary of the evolution of civilian nuclear fuel waste storage policies and programs See
“National Nuclear Fuel Management Program,” and “National Program Implementation Timetable,”
Nuclear Energy Institute, http://www.nei.org, November 26, 2000.
                                                    49


of and store spent nuclear fuel by January 1998. Since 1982, electricity consumers have
been making payments into a fund to a fund to pay for waste storage at the rate of 0.1
cents per nuclear kWh produced. Customer commitments plus interest now come to
about $16 billion. However, the federal government has defaulted on its waste disposal
obligations and is potentially subject to financial penalties.

        The DOE was supposed to build a permanent deep, mined geological depository
for high-level waste, an interim storage facility, and develop a transportation system to
move spent fuel from power plants to interim and permanent storage sites. An
underground site at Yucca Mountain, about 100 miles from Las Vegas, was identified for
study (pursuant to 1987 amendments to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act). While feasibility
studies for the site have been completed, there has been continuous opposition to
constructing it and moving spent fuel to it for storage. In early 2000, Congress passed
legislation that would have formally designated Yucca Mountain as the DOE’s official
waste storage site with a target completion date of 2007. However, President Clinton
vetoed the bill. No interim storage site has been designated either. In 2001, DOE is
scheduled to make it’s final site recommendation on Yucca Mountain. If it recommends
moving forward, the President would then decide whether or not to go forward. If the
State of Nevada objects to his decision, Congress would have to approve the site if it is to
move forward. The earliest date that the site would be completed and ready to accept
spent fuel is now about 2010. In the mean time, spent fuel is being stored on-site a
nuclear plants (including plants that have been closed) around the country.

         In 1995 and 1996, a controversy emerged over the privatization of the United
States Enrichment Corporation (USEC), an initiative provided for (but not required) by
the Energy Policy Act of 1992.75 Nuclear power plants use fuel with “lightly enriched
uranium” (LEU). Naturally occurring uranium has too little U235 to sustain a nuclear
reaction. In order to use uranium as a nuclear fuel, naturally occurring uranium must be
“enriched” to a point where it contains 3.5% to 5%. LEU cannot be used directly to
make nuclear weapons. Uranium-based nuclear weapons require highly enriched
uranium (HEU), containing 90% U235.76 Historically, the federal government provided
uranium enrichment services for civilian nuclear fuel (as well as for nuclear weapons) at
plants owned by the Department of Energy. Enrichment services are also provided by
state-controlled enterprises in France, Russia and a European consortium, though U.S.
utilities still rely on U.S. facilities for 75% of their enrichment services. Utilities would


75
  This discussion draws on Peter R. Orszag, “ Privatization of the U.S. Enrichment Corporation: An
Economic Analysis,” (undated, but written prior to the privatization of USEC); “Commercial Nuclear Fuel
From U.S. and Russian Surplus Defense Inventories: Materials, Policies, and Market Effects,” Energy
Information Administration, http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/nuclear/com_fuel/, March 11, 2001; “Nuclear
Proliferation: Implications of the U.S. Purchase of Russian Highly Enriched Uranium,” U.S. General
Accounting Office, December 2000; Richard Falkenrath, “Uranium Blues: Economic Interest vs. National
Security,” The Milken Institute Review, 4th Quarter 2000.
76
  Plutonium produced in nuclear reactors can also be used to create nuclear weapons. The disposition of
stocks of plutonium reprocessed from civilian nuclear plants around the world also raises security issues.
                                                        50


deliver un-enriched uranium that they purchased from uranium suppliers77 to the DOE’s
enrichment facilities and the DOE would then enrich the fuel and charge the utility for
the enrichment services. Roughly 2/3 of the cost of enriched uranium is for enrichment
services and the other third for uranium ore concentrate and conversion to a form that can
be enriched by the DOE’s gaseous diffusion process.

         The Energy Policy Act of 1992 created the USEC as a wholly-owned government
corporation to provide and market enrichment services from the DOE’s enrichment
facilities in Ohio and Kentucky. The DOE’s enrichment facilities were leased to USEC
for a nominal feel and its stockpile of uranium was transferred to USEC as well. The
USEC Privatization Act of 1996 authorized the privatization of USEC. The corporation
was privatized in July 1998 through an IPO. The IPO yielded $1.4 billion in proceeds,
or about $14.50 per share of USEC, Inc. common stock.78 USEC competes with three
foreign uranium enrichment entities, including a Russian and a French enrichment
enterprise. The primary motivations for privatization was to improve the efficiency of
the operation of the enrichment program, to pursue the development of a new enrichment
technology using lasers (AVLIS) on a commercial basis, and to raise money for the
federal government.

        The controversy over the privatization focused primarily on conflicts between the
USEC’s commercial objectives and its responsibility to manage, without government
subsidies, the 1993 “Megatons for Megawatts” agreement between the U.S. and Russian
governments. Under this agreement, the U.S. agreed to purchase 500 metric tons of
Russian HEU that would be extracted from nuclear weapons and convert it to LEU
civilian nuclear fuel. Mechanically, the Russians extract the HEU as they dismantled
their nuclear weapons and then “blend it down” with un-enriched uranium to create LEU
suitable for civilian nuclear fuel. The Russians were to be paid separately for the
enrichment service (by USEC) and uranium components (by the ultimate purchasers) of
the LEU, and the initial prices agreed to would have yielded about $12 billion to Russia.
The USEC was the U.S. government’s exclusive agent for managing this agreement and
continued in this role after it was privatized.

        A potential conflict of interest arises because the Russian uranium was effectively
a substitute source of enrichment services supplied from USEC’s plants. There is a world
market for enrichment services and the Russian LEU effectively reduced the world
demand for enrichment services, further driving down prices in an industry that already
had excess capacity. Moreover, if USEC had to pay the Russians a price greater than the
marginal cost of supplying enrichment services from their own facilities, it would
necessarily have sacrificed profits. Accordingly, USEC benefited commercially by
paying lower prices for the enrichment component and was better off taking no Russian

77
     For simplicity and I skip the interim conversion to UF6 and the subsequent fuel fabrication steps.
78
  “Privatization of the United States Enrichment Corporation,” Energy Information Administration,
http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/nuclear/, March 11, 2001. USEC, Inc. also issued $500 million of bonds and
the proceeds of the bond sale were turned over to the federal government as well.
                                                    51


LEU at any price greater than its marginal production cost.79 On the other hand, the
objective of U.S. national security policy was to induce Russia to convert as much bomb
grade HEU to LEU as possible, as quickly as possible, regardless of small changes in
prices for enrichment services. Since the commercial terms of the arrangement with the
Russians had to be renegotiated from time to time, there was great concern that USEC
would find it in its commercial interest either to reduce its purchases of Russian LEU or
to undermine Russia’s enthusiasm for continuing with deliveries at the agreed upon pace,
a result contrary to U.S. security goals.

       As a commercial venture USEC has remained profitable, but has not been as
successful as many had hoped. Its revenues have declined and its stock has fallen from
the IPO price of $14.50/share to a low of about $4.50/share, though it had recovered to
$10/share by May 25, 2001. It is closing its enrichment facilities in Ohio (raising
concerns about domestic enrichment capabilities) and has abandoned development of the
AVLIS technology. USEC’s performance as the manager of the Russian HEU/LEU
agreement has been the subject of considerable criticism80, though the HEU/LEU
delivery schedule is not very far off target .81

        It is clearly a mistake to privatize a firm that must operate in a competitive market
and expect it successfully to pursue both commercial objectives as a publicly traded
company and non-compensatory public interest goals.82 As Richard Posner observed
many years ago, “taxation by regulation” only works if the firm providing the subsidies
and cross subsidies is a regulated monopoly. USEC is not a monopoly, its prices are not
regulated, and it must compete with other suppliers to make sales of enrichment services.
However, while critics have focused on privatization as being the policy error, it seems to
me that the real policy error relates at least as much to the terms and conditions under
which USEC managed the Russian program and the broader view that USEC would
somehow pursue public policy goals that were not in its commercial interests. The
federal government could have structured the financial relationship so that USEC had
more powerful incentives to meet or beat the HEU/LEU delivery schedule. I suspect that
the decision to keep the net costs of the deal with the Russian’s “off budget” led to a
situation where USEC’s commercial interests and U.S. security interests were more likely
to be in conflict.83

79
  The Russians were not paid for the uranium component of the LEU until a buyer was found and then they
received the market price for uranium. Uranium prices were also falling during this period as a result of the
Russian uranium sales as well as U.S. government sales of surplus defense HEU which was also to be
converted to LEU.
80
     Orszag, op.cit. and Falkenrath op. cit.
81
     U.S. General Accounting Office, op. cit.
82
  The “market” that USEC was being privatized into was hardly a typical market for goods and services.
There were only three other suppliers and they were all state-owned or controlled.
83
  There were other potential conflicts of interest that arose with the privatization of USEC, including
conflicts arising with the government’s longer term goal of pursuing alternative enrichment technologies
and continuing pressure to use USEC to support the U.S. uranium mining and conversion industry. If the
                                                     52


IX.     ENERGY EFFICIENCY, RENEWABLE ENERGY, AND ALTERNATIVE
        ENERGY POLICIES
        The term “energy efficiency” generally refers to a measure of the quantity of
energy required to produce a unit of intermediate energy services --- heat, light, cooling,
transportation, power to drive machinery, etc. --- and/or the quantity of energy services
required to produce a unit of non-energy goods and services. Energy efficiency and
economic efficiency are not the same thing. Energy efficiency measures focus on one set
of productive inputs and rely on technical energy input/output indicia which do not take
input costs and the value of output into account directly. Economic efficiency takes all
inputs into account along with their associated costs and the economic value of the goods
and services they produce. Increases in energy efficiency need not lead to increases in
economic efficiency and vice-versa. Advocates of policies to promote energy efficiency,
however, typically argue that the programs they favor also improve economic efficiency.
Either they lead to lower overall life-cycle costs for energy services taking all relevant
private costs into account, or they reduce overall social costs once the costs of
environmental externalities are factored into the equation. However, the primary
motivation of energy efficiency advocates has typically been improvements in
environmental quality and/or reduced dependence on imported petroleum, not consumer
protection.

        The term “renewable energy” generally refers to energy supplied by
hydroelectric, wind, solar, wood, waste, geothermal energy resources, fuel cells, etc.
These are energy resources which nature (or humans in the case of waste) can naturally
reproduce as they are utilized to produce energy so that the resource base is not depleted
(or is depleted very slowly)84 if it is managed properly. The term “alternative fuels” is
used in a variety of different ways. It incorporates renewable energy, but also refers to
policies which lead consumers to switch to fuels that reduce environmental impacts or
reduce dependence on imported petroleum. Advocates of policies to promote renewable
and alternative energy resources, typically argue that the programs they favor also
improve economic efficiency. Again, either they lead to lower overall life-cycle costs for
energy services taking all relevant private costs into account, or they reduce overall social
costs once the costs of environmental externalities are factored into the equation.
However, the primary motivation of renewable energy advocates is improvements in
environmental quality and/or reduced dependence on imported petroleum.

        The case for government programs to promote energy efficiency, renewable
energy and alternative fuels is often based on the argument that energy markets are
plagued by a variety of market imperfections: poor consumer information, imperfect
capital and rental markets, regulated energy prices that are too low, the failure to
internalize fully or properly environmental and national security externalities, and other


proponents of privatization believed that they could get the efficiency benefits from privatization while
continuing to rely on USEC to pursue public policies that were not in its interest with no continuing federal
budget impacts, they were wrong.
84
  Or in the case of solid waste, transforming it into useful energy saves on other costs that would be
incurred to dispose of it.
                                                   53


market barriers. That is, there is a proper role for government policies to promote energy
efficiency, renewable energy and alternative fuels because market imperfections lead to
under-investment in them. Needless to say, the existence and importance of such market
imperfections is controversial.

       A variety of policy instruments have been used to promote energy efficiency,
renewable energy and alternative fuels. These include vehicle, appliance and equipment
energy efficiency standards, tax subsidies, government R&D expenditures, fuel-use
mandates, and subsidies funneled through regulated gas and electric utilities and paid for
in the prices they charge to consumers. Federal policies supporting improvements in
energy efficiency and expanded supplies of renewable energy are reflected in federal
energy legislation beginning in the late 1970s. As noted earlier, the Energy Policy Act of
1992 has numerous provisions aimed at providing tax subsidies, R&D funding, and other
forms of encouragement for energy efficiency and renewable energy. Several states in
the Northeast and West began to use their regulated monopoly electric utilities to
stimulate investments in cogeneration, renewable energy, and energy efficiency during
the 1980s.

        The Clinton administration’s appointments to the DOE in 1993 reflected the
Clinton/Gore team’s strong interest in promoting renewable energy, energy efficiency,
integrated resource planning, and recognizing the close linkages between energy
production and use and environmental impacts in energy policy, including the impacts of
CO2 emissions on global climate change. Hazel O’Leary and her team of Assistant and
Deputy Assistant Secretaries were a “green team” if there ever was one. The instruments
that the Clinton-era DOE had at its disposal from existing laws were limited, however. It
could seek authorizations to fund R&D, demonstration, and grant programs for energy
efficiency, renewable energy, alternative energy projects. It had opportunities to review
and update appliance efficiency standards. It could use moral suasion and federal grants
to convince more states to adopt integrated resource planning programs to promote the
use of regulated monopoly utilities to support energy efficiency and renewable energy
programs.85 And within the restrictions imposed by existing laws, the Clinton DOE team
tried to use these instruments to their fullest potential. New appliance efficiency
standards were eventually promulgated and expenditures on renewable energy and energy
conservation programs increased. However, no major new laws to promote energy
efficiency, renewable energy or alternative were passed after 1992.

        The Clinton team’s efforts to move forward aggressively to promote energy
efficiency, renewable energy, and alternative fuel vehicles was heavily constrained,
however. During the first several years, a significant constraint was the federal budget
deficit and Congressional spending limits. The DOE’s budget had been reduced during
the previous decade and was under pressure at the beginning of the Clinton
Administration. Republican Senators continued to propose the DOE’s abolitions. After

85
   However, they had to play catch-up as the policy focus at the states quickly shifted from using the
institution of regulated monopoly to subsidize energy efficiency and renewable energy projects to breaking
them up and promoting competition.
                                                     54


1994, the Administration’s efforts to pursue its agenda were further hampered by the
Republican Congress. Beginning in 1995 (FY96), Congress included language in the
Department of Transportation’s annual appropriations bills, forbidding it to even spend
any money studying tightening the Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (CAFE).
Congress also placed roadblocks in the way of the Administration’s efforts to review and
tighten appliance efficiency standards as provided for under existing laws.86 Although
President Clinton vetoed a 1995 DOE appropriations bill that would have prohibited
further DOE efforts to change appliance efficiency standards, the DOE proceeded
cautiously afterwards, delaying the promulgation of new standards for several appliances
until the very end of the second term. State programs to promote energy conservation and
renewable energy which are funded through electric and gas utility rates increased
significantly from 1990 to 1996 and then declined as state regulators turned their
attention toward industry restructuring and competition.87 Finally, the Republican
Congress rejected most Clinton administration proposals to create or increase tax
subsidies for renewable energy technologies and alternative fuel vehicles.

        Despite these problems, the DOE gradually shifted funds toward renewable
energy, energy efficiency, and alternative vehicle programs and, as budget surpluses
appeared total funding expanded. During FY 2001, the DOE received appropriations of
about $2.2 billion for expenditures on “energy resources,” of which about $1.2 billion
was allocated to energy efficiency, renewable energy and alternative fuel vehicles
programs.88 Of this amount about 1/3 went to renewable energy and 2/3 to energy
efficiency programs. The FY 2001 budget included $540 million for fossil energy
research and development.89 This sum includes $70 million of funding for fuel cells and
carbon sequestration and about $200 million for research focused on improving thermal
efficiency and reducing emissions from fossil fueled power plants. Finally, about $240
million was budgeted in FY 2001 for nuclear energy science and technology.90 Between
FY 1996 and FY 2000, energy efficiency and renewable energy resource expenditures
increased by about 50%, while expenditures on fossil and nuclear resource development
declined by about 20%. There was a significant increase in fossil energy expenditures in
86
  “House Conservatives Step Up Assault on Regulations,” Washington Post, July 19, 1995, Section A,
page 4.
87
     Annual Energy Review 1999, page 228.
88
     The Bush administration’s budget proposes to cut expenditures in these areas by about 15% in FY 2002.
89
  I have excluded funds reported in the same line of business for the SPR and the federal power marketing
agencies.
90
   An additional $34 million was appropriated for advanced particle accelerators in FY 2001. Unpacking
the DOE’s R&D budget is not easy. In FY2001, the DOE budget included about $7.7 billion of R&D
expenditures. However, this figure includes weapons-related research at the National labs, basic and
applied science research funded through the DOE budget (e.g. nuclear physics, human genome research,
computer science), and other items. The nuclear science and technology research figure includes some
funds that are pure research (e.g. university research reactors, medical research, etc.) Other departments
also provide some support for related energy resource and conservation programs, but I have not tried to
identify them.
                                                   55


FY 2001 and most of the proposed line item for “clean coal” technology in the proposed
FY 2002 budget is a transfer from the FY 2001 fossil research budget.

        The Administration also embarked on cooperate programs with industry to
develop new technologies. The most important program involved cooperation between
the federal government and the automobile industry to develop commercial technologies
to increase automobile fuel efficiency, with a goal of commercializing vehicles that could
get 80 miles to the gallon of gasoline.

        Energy Efficiency
         The energy efficiency of the U.S. economy, as measured by energy consumption
per dollar of real GDP continued to improve during the decade. Energy consumption per
dollar of real GDP declined by nearly 15% between 1990 and 2000. However, it
declined by 22% from 1980 to 1990, a period with significantly higher average energy
prices. Federal legislation to promote more energy efficient vehicles and appliances
began to be passed in the 1970s and were enhanced during the 1980s and in EPAct92.

        There is little systematic objective evidence regarding the costs, benefits, and
overall effectiveness of federal and state initiatives designed to improve energy
efficiency. No new energy efficiency legislation was passed during the 1990s. DOE
continues to review and promulgate appliance efficiency standards pursuant to the
National Appliance Energy Conservation Act of 1987 and the National Appliance Energy
Conservation Amendments of 1988. DOE claims that its appliance efficiency standards
have reduced consumer energy expenditures by $2 billion per year.91 Appliances are
clearly more energy efficient today than they were prior to 1987. For example, a full size
refrigerator uses about half the energy today than it did 20 years ago.92 The new
efficiency standards proposed at the end of the Clinton administration would require
washing machines to be 22% more energy efficient by 2004 and 35% more energy
efficient by 2007. Hot water heater efficiency is to increase by 8% for gas units and 4%
for electric units by 2004. The proposed rules would have required central air
conditioners to be 30% more energy efficient by 2006.93 However, the cost-effectiveness
and energy savings estimates attributed to federal appliance efficiency standards and state
sponsored utility energy efficiency programs have been the subject of considerable
controversy. The costs and benefits associated with these initiatives programs have relied
heavily on engineering estimates of costs and energy savings rather than actual field
experience, fail to take into account all relevant costs, and ignore behavioral responses by
consumers (e.g. purchasing larger refrigerators and air conditioners).94

91
     http://www.eren.doe.gov/building/consumer_information/. March 11, 2001.
92
   However, appliance choices also changed. The fraction of households with central air conditioning
increased by 21% and with personal computers 120% between 1990 and 1997.
93
  The Bush administration subsequently approved the first two new standards and reduced the central air
conditioner standard to a 20% improvement in energy efficiency by 2006.
94
  Greening, L.A. and D.L. Greene, Energy Use, Technical Efficiency and the Rebound Effects: A Review of
the Literature,” Report to the Office of Policy Analysis and International Affairs, U.S. Department of
                                                   56



          One contributor to the deterioration in the rate of decline in the energy intensity
of the economy since the late 1980s is likely to be the relative trends in vehicle fuel
economy. Between 1980 and 1990, aggregate (passenger cars, light trucks, and trucks)
average vehicle mileage for the then existing stock of vehicles increased by about 20%.
Between 1990 and 1999 it increased by less than 4%.95 [FIGURE 35] The average fuel
economy of new passenger cars and new light trucks (as measured by the EPA) has been
essentially flat for the last 15 years. Due to the shift toward SUVs, which are classified
as light trucks and have lower average fuel economy than passenger cars, the average fuel
economy of new light vehicles (passenger cars + light trucks) deteriorated by about 7%
between 1988 and 2000.96 Sales of light trucks (including SUVs) now make up almost
half of new vehicle sales, more than double their share 20 years ago.

        The Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 established Corporate Average
Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for each automaker, with domestically produced and
imported vehicles counted as separate fleets. For passenger cars, the CAFE standards
started at 18 miles per gallon with the 1978 model year and gradually increased to 27.5
miles per gallon for the 1985 model year. For light trucks, including SUVs, the CAFE
standard began at 17.2 miles per gallon in 1979 and rose to 20.5 miles per gallon by
1987. These standards are based on laboratory tests and have not changed since 1985 and
1987 respectively. Actual vehicle mileage has continued to improve, at a declining rate,
since then as new cars replaced older vehicles from model years with lower CAFE
standards.

       The effects of the CAFE standards on vehicle efficiency and utilization, and the
merits compared to alternative instruments (e.g. gasoline taxes), have been the subject of


Energy, Washington, D.C., December 1997; Greene, D.L. et. al., “Fuel Economy Rebound Effects for U.S.
Household Vehicles,” The Energy Journal, Vol. 20, No. 3, 1999; J. Eto. et.al. “Where Did All the Money
Go? The Cost and Performance of the Largest Commercial Sector DSM Programs,” The Energy Journal,
Vol. 21, No. 2, 2000; F. Wirl, “Lessons from Utility Conservation Programs,” The Energy Journal, Vol.
21, No. 1, 2000.
95
   There are a variety of different data on vehicle fuel economy that are available. The Energy Information
Agency produces estimates of actual average mileage achieved by vehicles in operation each year. These
are the numbers used for the calculation in this sentence. The Department of Transportation (DOT) and
EPA publish estimates of the mileage for new “model year” vehicles in various categories. These data are
based on laboratory tests, not actual driving experience. The DOT and EPA numbers also differ slightly
from one another because the DOT incorporates other factors (e.g. ethanol credits) into the mileage
calculations that are related to the agency’s enforcement responsibilities. These mileage numbers are
higher than the actual mileage achieved by new vehicles in each model year, the mileage reported on the
stickers on the windows of new vehicles, and the actual mileage of the current stock of vehicles which
includes vehicles from a large number of model years. For example, DOT reported that the average fuel
economy for 1999 Model Year passenger cars was 28.3 miles per gallon. EIA reports actual vehicle
mileage of 21.4 miles per gallon in 1999 for the entire fleet of operating passenger cars.
96
  The data in the last two sentences are based on the EPA’s “new model” mileage data discussed in the
previous footnote. See “Automotive Fuel Economy Program, National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/cars/problems/studies/fuelecon/index.html and Light-Duty
Automotive Technology and Fuel Economy Trends 1975 through 2000, U.S. EPA, December 2000.
                                                    57


much study and remains a subject of considerable controversy.97 Efforts to tighten the
CAFE standards have been opposed by domestic automobile manufacturers for the last
two decades. Since the standards were phased in during a time of rising gasoline prices,
some studies suggest that vehicle mileage would have improved significantly without the
standards. Other studies suggest that the shift to light trucks (SUVs) is partially
explained by the more lenient mileage standards applicable to these vehicles, though
changes in consumer preferences and incomes are a more likely explanation. Still other
studies find that the improvements in fuel efficiency has led to an increase in miles driven
(the so-called “rebound effect”), reducing the impact of the standards on gasoline
consumption. Finally, studies have suggested that when manufacturers reduced vehicle
weights to increase mileage, this led to an increase in the severity of accidents and
increased accident mortality.98

        There are several things that are fairly clear about the CAFE standards. First, they
have almost certainly been binding constraints on domestic automobile manufacturers
since the mid-1980s as gasoline prices fell. Second, the efficiency of the CAFE standards
could be substantially improved if manufacturers could trade mileage “credits” among
one another and the “two-fleet” average rules were eliminated. Third, special credits for
alternative fuel capabilities (i.e. ethanol) are ineffective in promoting use of alternative
fuels. Fourth, EPA automobile emissions regulations are constraining the diffusion of
diesel-fueled vehicles with higher mileage. Finally, cost effective improvements in
automobile mileage appear to be available with new technology, but stimulating
consumer interest in fuel economy continues to be a major challenge. The National
Academy of Sciences is now conducting a study of the CAFE standards and their effects.
That report is expected to be released during the summer of 2001.

       Renewable Energy and Alternative Fuel Vehicles
       In 2000, renewable energy, including conventional hydroelectric energy,
accounted for 7% of U.S. energy consumption, about the same fraction as in 1990.
Excluding conventional hydro, renewable energy accounted for 3.7% of total U.S. energy
consumption in 2000, only slightly higher than in 1990. Most of the non-hydro
renewable energy is accounted for by wood, waste, and alcohol fuels. Wind and solar
energy accounted for only 0.1% of total U.S. energy consumption in 2000, though wind
energy supplies did grow quickly during the decade from (and to) a very low base.
[FIGURE 36]

97
   P.K. Goldberg, “The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Standard in the U.S.,” The
Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. XLVI, No. 1, March 1998; R.W. Crandall and J. Graham, “The
Effects of Fuel Economy Standards on Automobile Safety,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 32, No.
1, 1989; J. Mayo and J. Mathis,” “The Effectiveness of Mandatory Fuel Efficiency Standards in Reducing
the Demand for Gasoline,” Applied Economics, Vol. 20, No. 2, 1988; R.W. Crandall, “The Changing
Rationale for Motor Vehicle Fuel-Economy Regulation,” Regulation, Vol. 13, No. 3, Fall 1990; T.
Bresnahan and D. Yao, “The Non-pecuniary Costs of Automobile Emissions Standards,” Rand Journal of
Economics, Vol 16, 1985; D. L. Greene, et. al., “Fuel Economy Rebound Effect for U.S. Household
Vehicles,” The Energy Journal, Vol. 20, No. 3, 1999.
98
 Vehicle performance (e.g. acceleration) probably suffered as well during the first decade of experience
with the CAFE standards, as manufacturers responded by reducing engine horsepower.
                                                  58



       There were about 400,000 alternative fuel vehicles, mostly light trucks and buses,
in operation in 1999. [FIGURE 37] Most of these vehicles use liquid petroleum gas or
compressed natural gas. There were only about 6,500 electric vehicles in operation in
1999. While alternative fuel vehicles represent a tiny fraction of the vehicles on the road,
the number of alternative fuel vehicles nearly doubled during the decade.

        Despite all of the rhetoric about energy efficiency and renewable energy, and the
efforts of the DOE to shift funds to develop and promote more energy efficiency and
renewable energy, these initiatives had little if any effect on trends in energy supply and
demand during the 1990s. This should not be surprising. The primary change in policy
from the previous decade was to shift fairly modest amounts of DOE money toward
development of new energy-using and renewable energy technologies. To the extent that
these efforts have any significant effects, they will only be realized over a significant
future period of time. The Clinton administration continued to tighten appliance
efficiency standards pursuant to existing laws, but the impact of new standards are not
applicable to new appliances for several years after they are finalized and once they are in
effect the impacts on aggregate energy use are realized only gradually over time as the
appliance stock turns over.

X.      CONCLUSIONS99
        Overall, the decade of the 1990s was a period in which energy markets performed
reasonably well, federal energy policymakers focused primarily on implementing and
completing policy initiatives that began before or at the very beginning of the decade, and
the energy supply sectors evolved slowly and relatively smoothly. The overall fuel
supply mix that satisfied growing energy demand changed very little between 1990 and
2000. Aside from the “energy crises,” which were not nearly of the magnitude of those
of the 1970s, at the very beginning and very end of the period examined here, energy
supply was able to expand easily to meet growing demand and to support a rapidly
growing economy without triggering significant sustained price increases or supply
disruptions. Real energy prices were stable or falling for most of the period and there
were significant productivity improvements in several energy sectors. The performance
of the nuclear energy and coal sectors was especially impressive in terms of continuous
performance improvement. It was simply not a decade where there was much public
interest in energy policy issues.

        The restructuring of the natural gas industry was largely completed and the
restructuring of the electricity sector proceeded at a much faster pace than could have
been predicted at the beginning the decade. Until 2000, electricity restructuring initiatives
begun in California and the Northeast appeared to be going sufficiently well that similar
reforms were diffusing fairly quickly among the states without any federal legislation to
push states to consider and adopt major reforms. Responsible federal agencies worked
cooperatively with states pursuing diverse electricity policy strategies in an effort to
ensure that complementary federal policies on transmission access and wholesale power

99
  A version of this paper containing energy policy recommendations can be found at
http://web.mit.edu/pjoskow/www/ .
                                            59


markets supported the state restructuring and retail competition initiatives. However, the
meltdown of California’s electricity markets during 2000 and 2001 has had a chilling
effect on the diffusion of electricity sector restructuring and competition beyond the
dozen states which have implemented such programs.

        The energy intensity of the economy continued to decrease and there was a
gradual increase in the penetration of relatively clean natural gas in the production of
electricity during the decade, with a large fleet of CCGTs in the construction and
planning pipeline. The federal government slowly continued to tighten appliance
efficiency standards and to increase federal funds devoted to the development and
deployment of more energy efficient appliances, vehicles, and technologies, as well as
renewable energy and alternative fueled vehicles. However, the visible impacts of these
programs to date are very small. The energy industries were able to adapt reasonably
well to the requirements of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 and the Clinton
administration clearly recognized and took account of the close relationships between
energy and environmental policies. There was little interest among voters in energy
problems until the very end of the decade and this is reflected as well in the very modest
amount of legislative activity on the national energy policy front.

    I am often asked whether I think that there is an “energy crisis.” I do not think that
the “crisis” mentality for identifying and dealing with energy policy issues has served the
country well. We have a number of energy policy challenges that are likely to take many
years to deal with effectively. These challenges may only be visible to the public when
there are “crises,” but they do not disappear when the short-term crisis inevitably abates.
Sound long-term policies that can and are sustained during and between energy market
shocks are what we should be looking for. The experience of the last 25 years
demonstrates that the best energy policies are those that focus on making markets work
better, mitigating serious market imperfections, pursuing competition policies that
mitigate market power, and on using flexible market-based mechanisms to internalize
environmental and national security externalities. This is the framework that should
guide long-term energy policies in the future.
                                    TABLE 1

               NATURAL GAS SPOT PRICE BASIS DIFFERENCES
                              $/MMBTU1



DATE                Henry Hub            San Juan            So. Cal Border

June 16,2000        $ 4.38               $ 3.90              $ 4.63

July 17               4.18                3.61                 4.70

August 15             4.43                3.40                 4.63

October 20            5.04                4.48                 5.36

November 17           5.88                5.47                 10.00

December 15           7.52                 6.85                14.00

December 20           9.12                 8.55                17.00

January 18, 2001      7.86                7.36                 11.50

May 23                4.04                3.47                 13.40

June 1                3.77                3.03                 10.00




1
  Data from Megawatt Daily (Financial Times) and Energy Market Report (Economic
Insight, Inc.), various issues
                                           TABLE 2
                                  AVERAGE REVENUE PER KWH
                                   RESIDENTIAL CONSUMERS2
                                          (cents/kWh)

STATE                               1997                      1998
Connecticut                         12.13                     11.95
Maine                               12.75                     13.02
Massachusetts                       11.59                     10.60
Rhode Island                        12.12                     10.91
New Jersey                          12.08                     11.39
New York                            14.12                     13.66
Pennsylvania                         9.90                      9.93
Delaware                             9.22                      9.13

Illinois                            10.43                       9.85
Indiana                              6.94                       7.01
Ohio                                 8.63                       8.70
Wisconsin                            6.88                       7.17
Iowa                                 8.21                       8.38
Kansas                               7.71                       7.65
Missouri                             7.09                       7.08
North Dakota                         6.27                       6.49

Florida                               8.08                      7.89
Georgia                               7.74                      7.67
South Carolina                        7.51                      7.51
West Virginia                         6.26                      6.29
Kentucky                              5.58                      5.61
Alabama                               6.74                      6.94
Arkansas                              7.80                      7.51
Texas                                 7.82                      7.65

Arizona                              8.82                      8.68
California                          11.50                     10.60
Montana                              6.40                      6.50
New Mexico                           8.92                      8.85
Wyoming                              6.22                      6.28
Oregon                               5.56                      5.82
Washington                           4.95                      5.03

U.S. Average                          8.43                      8.26




2
    Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration. Electric Sales and Revenue, 1997 and 1998 editions.
                                       TABLE 3
                               AVERAGE REVENUE PER KWH
                                INDUSTRIAL CONSUMERS3
                                      (cents/kWh)

STATE                             1997                      1998
Connecticut                        7.76                      7.70
Maine                              6.36                      6.61
Massachusetts                      8.78                      8.18
Rhode Island                       8.52                      7.61
New Jersey                         8.11                      7.94
New York                           5.20                      4.95
Pennsylvania                       5.89                      5.63
Delaware                           4.82                      4.65

Illinois                           5.29                      5.11
Indiana                            3.91                      3.95
Ohio                               4.16                      4.30
Wisconsin                          3.72                      3.86
Iowa                               3.95                      3.99
Kansas                             4.51                      4.46
Missouri                           4.46                      4.43
North Dakota                       4.38                      4.30

Florida                            5.04                      4.81
Georgia                            4.13                      4.23
South Carolina                     4.00                      3.69
West Virginia                      3.47                      3.78
Kentucky                           2.80                      2.91
Alabama                            3.71                      3.89
Arkansas                           4.45                      4.16
Texas                              4.05                      3.94

Arizona                            5.05                      5.12
California                         6.95                      6.59
Montana                            3.66                      3.19
New Mexico                         4.42                      4.47
Wyoming                            3.46                      3.38
Oregon                             3.23                      3.50
Washington                         2.59                      2.64

U.S. Average                       4.53                      4.48

3
 Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration. Electric Sales and Revenue, 1997 and 1998 editions.
See footnote to Table 1A.
                                                 TABLE 4

                    COMPREHENSIVE STATE RETAIL COMPETITION PROGRAMS
                             (Start Date /All consumers eligible date)


1996                       1997                            1998                            1999

California (1998/1998)     Massachusetts (3-98/3-98)   Arizona(10-99/1-2001)         New Jersey (11-99/11-99)
NH (1998/1998-Delayed)     Illinois (10-1999/5-2002)   Connecticut (1-2000/7-2000)   Arkansas (1-2002/6-2003)
NY (1998/2001)             Maine (3-2000/3-2000)                                     Delaware (10-99/10-2000)
Pennsylvania (1/99-1-00)   Montana (7-98/7-2000)                                     Maryland (7-2000/7-2002)
Rhode Island (1-98/1-98)                                                             New Mexico (1-01/1-2002)
                                                                                     Ohio (1-2001/12-2005)
                                                                                     Oregon (10/01 Except
                                                                                            residential)
                                                                                     Texas (1-02/1-02)
                                                                                     Virginia (1-02/1-04)

Average IOU Electricity Prices (1997):

10.4 cents/kWh             8.3 cents/kWh                   9.5 cents/kWh                   6.8 cents/kWh


Other States: 5.6 cents/Kwh
                                                 FIGURE 1


                                    ENERGY CONSUMPTION PER $ GDP 1998 (USA = 1)

                  1.2




                   1




                  0.8
RELATIVE TO USA




                  0.6




                  0.4




                  0.2




                   0
                        USA   Finland            France           Germany         Sweden   Japan
         FIGURE 2


       ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY FUEL 2000




            Renewable
               7%
  Nuclear                          Coal
    8%                             23%




 Oil                                      Natural Gas
38%                                          24%
              FIGURE 3
       ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY FUEL 1990




            Renewable
               7%
  Nuclear                          Coal
    7%                             23%




 Oil                                      Natural Gas
40%                                          23%
                  FIGURE 4

         U.S. ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY SECTOR 2000




                                       RESIDENTIAL
                                           20%
TRANSPORTATION
     27%




                                                  COMMERCIAL
                                                     17%




                 INDUSTRIAL
                    36%
                     FIGURE 5

         U.S. ENERGY CONSUM PTION BY SECTOR 1990




                                        RESIDENTIAL
                                            20%
TRANSPORTATION
     27%




                                                   COMMERCIAL
                                                      16%




                 INDUSTRIAL
                    37%
                                                                                 FIGURE 6

                                       ENERGY PRODUCTION, CONSUMPTION AND IMPORTS 1949-99

                              Total Energy Imports TEIMBUS BBtu           Total Energy Consumption TETCBUS BBtu                 Total Energy Production

120000000




100000000




80000000




60000000




40000000




20000000




        0
        49

              51

                    53

                          55

                                 57

                                       59

                                             61

                                                   63

                                                         65

                                                               67

                                                                     69

                                                                           71

                                                                                 73

                                                                                       75

                                                                                             77

                                                                                                   79

                                                                                                         81

                                                                                                               83

                                                                                                                     85

                                                                                                                           87

                                                                                                                                  89

                                                                                                                                        91

                                                                                                                                              93

                                                                                                                                                    95

                                                                                                                                                          97

                                                                                                                                                                99
      19

             19

                   19

                         19

                               19

                                      19

                                            19

                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                          19

                                                                                19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                FIGURE 7
                                                                 U.S. PETROLEUM CONSUMPTION, PRODUCTION AND IMPORTS

                                                            TOTAL PETROLEUM CONSUMPTION                     DOMESTIC PETROLEUM PRODUCTION                    IMPORTS

                           25000




                           20000
THOUSANDS OF BARRELS/DAY




                           15000




                           10000




                           5000




                               0
                               49

                                     51

                                           53

                                                 55

                                                       57

                                                             59

                                                                   61

                                                                         63

                                                                               65

                                                                                     67

                                                                                           69

                                                                                                 71

                                                                                                       73

                                                                                                             75

                                                                                                                   77

                                                                                                                         79

                                                                                                                               81

                                                                                                                                     83

                                                                                                                                           85

                                                                                                                                                 87

                                                                                                                                                       89

                                                                                                                                                             91

                                                                                                                                                                   93

                                                                                                                                                                         95

                                                                                                                                                                               97

                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                             19

                                    19

                                          19

                                                19

                                                      19

                                                            19

                                                                  19

                                                                        19

                                                                              19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                          19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                                                    19
                                                                        FIGURE 8

                                                           REAL FOSSIL FUEL PRODUCTION PRICES

                                                    REAL CRUDE OIL PRICE ($1996)              REAL FOSSIL FUEL COMPOSITE ($1996)

          10


           9


           8


           7


           6
$/MMBTU




           5


           4


           3


           2


           1


           0
           49

                 51

                       53

                             55

                                   57

                                         59

                                               61

                                                      63

                                                            65

                                                                  67

                                                                        69

                                                                              71

                                                                                    73

                                                                                          75

                                                                                                 77

                                                                                                       79

                                                                                                             81

                                                                                                                   83

                                                                                                                         85

                                                                                                                               87

                                                                                                                                     89

                                                                                                                                           91

                                                                                                                                                 93

                                                                                                                                                       95

                                                                                                                                                             97

                                                                                                                                                                   99
          19

                19

                      19

                            19

                                  19

                                        19

                                              19

                                                    19

                                                           19

                                                                 19

                                                                       19

                                                                             19

                                                                                   19

                                                                                         19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                                  19
          0
              500
                    1000
                           1500
                                  2000
                                         2500
19
     49
19
     51
19
     53
19
     55
19
     57
19
     59
19
     61
19
     63
19
     65
19
     67
19
     69
19
     71
19
     73
19
     75
19
     77
                                                                                                          FIGURE 9




19
     79
19
     81
19
     83
19
     85
19
     87
19
     89
19
                                                Total Energy Consumed per Dollar Real GDP (10Btu/$1996)




     91
19
     93
19
     95
19
     97
19
     99
          200
                220
                      240
                            260
                                  280
                                        300
                                              320
                                                    340
                                                          360
                                                                380
19
     49
19
     51
19
     53
19
     55
19
     57
19
     59
19
     61
19
     63
19
     65
19
     67
19
     69
19
     71
19
     73
19
     75
19
     77
19
                                                                                                                    FIGURE 10




     79
19
     81
19
     83
                                                                      Total Energy Consumption per Capita (MMBTU)




19
     85
19
     87
19
     89
19
     91
19
     93
19
     95
19
     97
19
     99
                                                                   FIGURE 11

                                                    REAL PRICE OF REGULAR UNLEADED GASOLINE                    ($1996)

           2.5




            2




           1.5
$/Gallon




            1




           0.5




            0
                 1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999 2000-
                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                        FIGURE 12

                                                         Oil and Gas Wells Drilled in U.S.

100000


 90000


 80000


 70000


 60000


 50000


 40000


 30000


 20000


 10000


     0
         1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
                       FIGURE 13


              MONTHLY OIL AND GAS WELLS DRILLED 1999-2001

3000




2500




2000




1500




1000




 500




   0
       1999                     2000                        2001
                                                                               FIGURE 14
                                                                         U.S. Crude Oil Refining Capacity


              20000000


              18000000


              16000000


              14000000


              12000000
Barrels/Day




              10000000


              8000000


              6000000


              4000000


              2000000


                     0
                     49

                           51

                                 53

                                       55

                                             57

                                                   59

                                                         61

                                                               63

                                                                     65

                                                                            67

                                                                                  69

                                                                                        71

                                                                                              73

                                                                                                    75

                                                                                                          77

                                                                                                                79

                                                                                                                      81

                                                                                                                            83

                                                                                                                                  85

                                                                                                                                        87

                                                                                                                                              89

                                                                                                                                                    91

                                                                                                                                                          93

                                                                                                                                                                95

                                                                                                                                                                      97

                                                                                                                                                                            99
                   19

                          19

                                19

                                      19

                                            19

                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                          19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                                                           19
                                      FIGURE 15

                                   Monthly Stocks of Distillate Fuel


                      180



                      160



                      140

                                                                       September 2000
                      120
Millions of Barrels




                      100



                       80



                       60



                       40



                       20



                        0
                        98




                              99




                                                                  00




                                                                                         01
                       19




                             19




                                                                20




                                                                                        20
                                   FIGURE 16
                              Monthly Refiner Price for No. 2 Oil


               120



                                                                           September 2000
               100




                80
cents/gallon




                60




                40




                20




                 0
                     1998




                            1999




                                                                    2000




                                                                                            2001
                                                                             FIGURE 17
                                                             Natural Gas Consumption,Production and Net Imports

                                                                             Consumption           Dry Gas Production              Net Imports

       25000000




       20000000




       15000000
MMCF




       10000000




        5000000




              0
              49

                     51

                            53

                                   55

                                          57

                                                 59

                                                        61

                                                               63

                                                                      65

                                                                             67

                                                                                    69

                                                                                           71

                                                                                                  73

                                                                                                         75

                                                                                                                77

                                                                                                                       79

                                                                                                                              81

                                                                                                                                     83

                                                                                                                                            85

                                                                                                                                                   87

                                                                                                                                                          89

                                                                                                                                                                 91

                                                                                                                                                                        93

                                                                                                                                                                               95

                                                                                                                                                                                      97

                                                                                                                                                                                             99
            19

                   19

                          19

                                 19

                                        19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                             19

                                                                    19

                                                                           19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                         19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                                                           19
       -5000000
                              $/MCF




          0
              0.5
                    1
                        1.5
                               2
                                      2.5
                                            3
                                                3.5
                                                      4
19
     71
19
     72
19
     73
19
     74
19
     75
19
     76
19
     77
19
     78
19
     79
19
     80
19
     81
19
     82
19
     83
19
     84
19
     85
19
     86
19
     87
19
     88
                                                                                                     FIGURE 18




19
     89
19
     90
19
                                                          REAL WELLHEAD NATURAL GAS PRICES ($1996)




     91
19
     92
19
     93
19
     94
19
     95
19
     96
19
     97
19
     98
19
     99
20
     00
                             FIGURE 19
                   Monthly Natural Gas Wellhead Prices 1999-2001


          9



          8



          7



          6



          5
$/MMBTU




          4



          3



          2



          1



          0
              99




                                    00




                                                                    01
          19




                                   20




                                                                   20
                                      BCF




          4000
                 4500
                        5000
                               5500
                                            6000
                                                   6500
                                                          7000
                                                                 7500
19
     73
19
     74
19
     75
19
     76
19
     77
19
     78
19
     79
19
     80
19
     81
19
     82
19
     83
19
     84
19
     85
19
     86
19
     87
19
     88
19
     89
                                                                                                          FIGURE 20




19
     90
19
                                                                        NATURAL GAS UNDERGROUND STORAGE




     91
19
     92
19
     93
19
     94
19
     95
19
     96
19
     97
19
     98
19
     99
20
     00
                            FIGURE 21
                  MONTHLY NATURAL GAS STORAGE (1999-2001)


      8000



      7500



      7000



      6500
BCF




      6000



      5500



      5000



      4500



      4000
             99




                                  00




                                                             01
        19




                                 20




                                                            20
                FIGURE 22

      FUELS USED TO GENERATE ELECTRICITY 2000


            Other Renewable
                   2%

          Conv Hydro
             7%




Nuclear
 20%



                                                Coal
                                                52%




          Gas
          16%

                       Oil
                       3%
                                                      FIGURE 23
                                                 Electricity From Renewal Energy (Except Hydro)


                  45000



                  40000



                  35000



                  30000
Millions of KWH




                                                                                                                       Geothermal
                  25000
                                                                                                                       Solar
                                                                                                                       Wood

                  20000                                                                                                Waste
                                                                                                                       Wind


                  15000



                  10000



                   5000



                      0
                          1989   1990   1991   1992   1993     1994    1995    1996     1997      1998   1999   2000
                    FIGURE 24

          FUELS USED TO GENERATE ELECTRICITY 1990




                         Other Renewable
            Conv Hydro          2%
              10%




Nuclear
 21%                                                Coal
                                                    51%




              Gas
              12%
                              Oil
                              4%
                                                                     FIGURE 25
                                                     Annual          U.S. ELECTRICITY GENERATION


          4.00E+09



          3.50E+09



          3.00E+09



          2.50E+09
MWHours




          2.00E+09



          1.50E+09



          1.00E+09



          5.00E+08



          0.00E+00
                 49

                       51

                             53

                                   55

                                         57

                                               59

                                                     61

                                                           63

                                                                 65

                                                                       67

                                                                             69

                                                                                   71

                                                                                         73

                                                                                               75

                                                                                                     77

                                                                                                           79

                                                                                                                 81

                                                                                                                       83

                                                                                                                             85

                                                                                                                                   87

                                                                                                                                         89

                                                                                                                                               91

                                                                                                                                                     93

                                                                                                                                                           95

                                                                                                                                                                 97

                                                                                                                                                                       99
               19

                      19

                            19

                                  19

                                        19

                                              19

                                                    19

                                                          19

                                                                19

                                                                      19

                                                                            19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                              19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                                                      19
                              FIGURE 26
                              PEAK DEMAND AND CAPACITY               (GW)

                            P EAK GENERATING CAP ABILITY              P eak Demand

900

800

700

600

500

400

300
      1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
                    Cents/kWh
19




        0
            2
                4
                     6
                          8
                                10
                                     12
                                          14
   60
19
   62
19
   64
19
   66
19
   68
19
   70
19
   72
19
   74
19
   76
19
   78
19
                                               Residential Price




   80
19
   82
                                                                                                        FIGURE 27




19
   84
19
                                                                   Average Electricity Prices ($1996)




   86
19
                                               Industrial Price




   88
19
   90
19
   92
19
   94
19
   96
19
   98
                                                          FIGURE 28
                                         NET ELECTRICITY GENERATION FROM NON-UTILITY GENERATORS


                  900000



                  800000



                  700000



                  600000
MILLIONS OF KWH




                  500000



                  400000



                  300000



                  200000



                  100000



                       0
                           1989   1990     1991    1992    1993   1994    1995    1996    1997    1998   1999   2000
                     FIGURE 29
            CALIFORNIA PX DAY-AHEAD PRICES
              ($/Mwh:Weighted Averages 7 x 24)
             1998       1999        2000 2001
 January       -        21.6         31.8 260.2
 February      -        19.6         18.8 363.0 (ISO)
 March         -        24.0         29.3 313.5 (ISO)
 April       23.3       24.7         27.4 370.0 (ISO)
 May         12.5       24.7         50.4
June         13.3       25.8        132.4
July         35.6       31.5        115.3
August       43.4       34.7        175.2
September    37.0       35.2        119.6
October      27.3       49.0        103.2
November     26.5       38.3        179.4
December     30.0       30.2        385.6

AVERAGE      30.0        30.0        115.0
                                                                    FIGURE 30

                                                             COAL CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION

                                                                         COAL CONSUMPTION               COAL PRODUCTION

        25000000




        20000000




        15000000
MMBTU




        10000000




         5000000




               0
               49

                     51

                           53

                                 55

                                       57

                                             59

                                                   61

                                                         63

                                                               65

                                                                     67

                                                                           69

                                                                                 71

                                                                                       73

                                                                                             75

                                                                                                   77

                                                                                                         79

                                                                                                               81

                                                                                                                     83

                                                                                                                           85

                                                                                                                                 87

                                                                                                                                       89

                                                                                                                                             91

                                                                                                                                                   93

                                                                                                                                                         95

                                                                                                                                                               97

                                                                                                                                                                     99
             19

                    19

                          19

                                19

                                      19

                                            19

                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                          19

                                                                                19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                                    19
                                                                                          FIGURE 31
                                                                                          U.S. Coal Production

                                                                  Total Coal Production         Production East of the Mississippi         West of the Mississippi

                         1200000




                         1000000




                          800000
Millions of Short Tons




                          600000




                          400000




                          200000




                               0
                               49

                                     51

                                           53

                                                 55

                                                       57

                                                             59

                                                                   61

                                                                         63

                                                                               65

                                                                                     67

                                                                                           69

                                                                                                 71

                                                                                                       73

                                                                                                             75

                                                                                                                   77

                                                                                                                         79

                                                                                                                               81

                                                                                                                                     83

                                                                                                                                           85

                                                                                                                                                 87

                                                                                                                                                       89

                                                                                                                                                             91

                                                                                                                                                                   93

                                                                                                                                                                         95

                                                                                                                                                                               97

                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                             19

                                    19

                                          19

                                                19

                                                      19

                                                            19

                                                                  19

                                                                        19

                                                                              19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                          19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                                                    19
                                         MMKWH




          0
              100000
                       200000
                                300000
                                          400000
                                                   500000
                                                            600000
                                                                     700000
                                                                              800000
19
     73
19
     74
19
     75
19
     76
19
     77
19
     78
19
     79
19
     80
19
     81
19
     82
19
     83
19
     84
19
     85
19
     86
19
     87
19
     88
                                                                                                            FIGURE 32
                                                                                       NUCLEAR GENERATION




19
     89
19
     90
19
     91
19
     92
19
     93
19
     94
19
     95
19
     96
19
     97
19
     98
19
     99
20
     00
                              MW




          0
              20000
                      40000
                              60000
                                      80000
                                              100000
                                                       120000
19
     73
19
     74
19
     75
19
     76
19
     77
19
     78
19
     79
19
     80
19
     81
19
     82
19
     83
19
     84
19
     85
19
     86
19
     87
19
     88
                                                                                              FIGURE 33




19
     89
19
                                                                NUCLEAR GENERATING CAPACITY




     90
19
     91
19
     92
19
     93
19
     94
19
     95
19
     96
19
     97
19
     98
19
     99
20
     00
                         %




          40
               50
                    60
                         70
                              80
                                   90
                                        100
19
     73
19
     74
19
     75
19
     76
19
     77
19
     78
19
     79
19
     80
19
     81
19
     82
19
     83
19
     84
19
     85
19
     86
19
     87
19
                                                                               FIGURE 34




     88
19
     89
19
     90
                                              Nuclear Plant Capacity Factors




19
     91
19
     92
19
     93
19
     94
19
     95
19
     96
19
     97
19
     98
19
     99
20
     00
                                                    FIGURE 35
                                                MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL EFFICIENCY

                                                       ALL VEHICLES      Passenger Cars

                   25




                   20




                   15
Miles Per Gallon




                   10




                    5




                    0
                        1950   1955   1960   1965     1970        1975         1980       1985   1990   1995   1999
                                                 FIGURE 36
                                   RENEWABLE ENERGY CONSUMPTION (BILLION BTU)

                                                                                        RENEWABLE CONSUMPTION (TOTAL)
                                                                                        HYDRO
                                                                                        WASTE+WOOD
                                                                                        GEOTHERMAL
                                                                                        SOLAR
                                                                                        WIND

8.00E+06


7.00E+06


6.00E+06


5.00E+06


4.00E+06


3.00E+06


2.00E+06


1.00E+06


0.00E+00
           1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
                                                        FIGURE 37
                                                   ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLES

                                            TOTAL VEHICLES   ELECTRIC   LPG     Compressed Natural Gas"

                     450000



                     400000



                     350000



                     300000
NUMBER OF VEHICLES




                     250000



                     200000



                     150000



                     100000



                      50000



                          0
                              1992   1993        1994        1995        1996           1997              1998   1999
