                                   ! "#  




                                                          
                                


                                              
                                              


                                             $%&'
                                   ())*++,,,-. -+ /+,$%&'


                          ! 0          
                                 '121 //3(4/ ))/5 4
                                   6. 7 18'9$
                                       ) 6. 




                        
          ! "   #$% "" "&   
' &( )  *   "  )    "  +,-       .
" /        &   # $  
% 


0)&1 ,  , &  2 % 1 "  / /
    &) /     "     0    " 

( 6  :  4) /   ) 3)/)( )( /
  
!  -$%&'
 ) 6. 811'
; -0'1



                                                   


         :< 3(3//=34))/ ))()3)/>6))))4 /),) /
, ::/. >/3= 6(3)( 3)/- >)()=)  >  3 /
/>3):.4/):3 :) ,)(54:?/: 5 :>(463):7)( 6  3) 
.)( >3) ,6 )/6 :-  >  3 /5 )  :/3 :) ,)()( )  @/4 >
)( / 3),(3(54:/ 6: *54:/=) / 3)/) ). )( 6/)=
) 7,(: 54:// 3)/,)( 5 : 36)5 /5)  )( 6/)) 3)/)-
(754:?/ :)5  363/))4/76 /4 ) 6/> )(  :)5 36 ,)( 3(
34)/ :>= @ // /3:/))4/7(/5 /)/)5 //3),)(=) )))4 /-
0::7= 363 ) 6)/7)( >6>5:4 /7 )) /7))3(6 )/7:6))
:  @:)( 5) >  3 /5 ) -(  /> (.())3(6 )
):/6+))/6 //3) ,)() 3)/))  3 /7,(: 3/6:)/6/3 :) 
,)(=) )))4 /- 4>6 , / /.: A.> @:>>  3 /3//54:/
>:A.> @:>>  3 /3//34) /-




                                                   
 )6 )>363/                                          "  3(:>#5 6 )
55 /)                                               55 /)
6. 7 18'9$                                              6. 7 18'9$
6B>/-(5- 4                                            !
                                                                  &'C%D2=D%2%
                                                                 EB(5- 4
          WHY ARE SOME PEOPLE (AND COUNTRIES) MORE PROTECTIONIST THAN OTHERS?

                                   Anna Maria Mayda and Dani Rodrik


I. Introduction

        Economists disagree intensely on many public policy issues. What is the best way to deal

with poverty? What is the appropriate role of the government in providing health insurance?

Should Microsoft be broken up? Does counter-cyclical macroeconomic policy make sense?

Should social security be privatized? Should we tax international capital flows? Is the minimum

wage desirable? In these and many other areas, economists are engaged in lively controversies

that reflect broader public debates on social problems.

        International trade poses an interesting contrast. Here the debates remain largely

technical, even among policy-oriented economists: which theory is more appropriate in

explaining the patterns of trade? How much, if at all, has trade contributed to the rise in the skill

premium in the U.S.? Why are "border effects" so large? On the important policy questions that

excite the public, there is virtually no difference of views. The consensus among mainstream

economists on the desirability of free trade remains almost universal.

        It is striking how little this consensus resonates with public opinion. When asked about

their views on trade, typically sixty percent or more of respondents in opinion polls express anti-

trade views. While there are some interesting differences across countries, which we shall

document and analyze later, a majority of respondents tend to be in favor of restricting trade

regardless of national context.

        Our purpose in this paper is to shed light on this phenomenon, by undertaking a

systematic analysis of individual preferences on trade and their underlying determinants. We

make use of an interesting cross-country data set put together by the International Social Survey
                                                    2


Programme (ISSP), which allows us to perform a comparative analysis covering more than

20,000 individuals in 23 countries. As our title indicates, we are interested in uncovering the

determinants of individual preferences on trade. We use as our dependent variable a question in

the ISSP data set that asks whether the respondent favors restricting trade. The data set also

contains a wealth of information on demographics, socio-economic status, and values, which we

use to test a number of hypotheses about the formation of preferences.

        The standard workhorse models of international trade have well-defined implications for

the distributive consequences of trade and hence for individual preferences (see Rodrik 1995 for

a review of the literature). Under the factor-endowments model, which assumes costless inter-

sectoral mobility of productive factors, trade benefits individuals who own the factors with

which the economy is relatively well endowed, and hurts the others. This is the well-known

Stolper-Samuelson theorem. Under the specific-factors model, trade benefits individuals who

are employed in the export-oriented sectors and hurts those who are employed in the import-

competing sectors. To the extent that individuals are motivated by material self-interest, these

models provide important hints about an individual's likely attitude to trade depending on his/her

factor type or sector of employment.

        Our first set of results relates directly to these economic models. Most strikingly, and

somewhat contrary to our own priors, we find strong support for the factor-endowments view of

the world. Individuals with higher levels of human capital (proxied by educational attainment)

oppose trade restrictions, but only in countries that are well endowed with human capital.

Higher levels of education are associated with pro-trade views in advanced countries such as

Germany and the United States, but with anti-trade views in the Philippines (the poorest country

in our sample). Most of the other countries are intermediate between these two extremes. That
                                                      3


individual trade preferences interact with country characteristics in exactly the manner predicted

by the factor-endowments model may be considered surprising, but it is a robust result and

perhaps our strongest single finding.

        We find some support for the sector-specific factors model as well. In particular,

individuals employed in import-competing industries are more likely to be in favor of trade

restrictions (compared to individuals in non-traded sectors). However, individuals in export-

oriented sectors are not significantly less predisposed to trade restrictions (compared again to

individuals in non-traded sectors). This finding can be rationalized within the sector specific

model by appealing to the presence of intra-industry (two-way) trade: individuals in export-

oriented sectors still feel the pressure of imports and thus their attitudes to trade are intermediate:

they do not favor trade as much as individuals in non-traded sectors, but neither are they as

protectionist as individuals in import-competing sectors.

        The fact that the factor-endowments and sector-specific models both find support in the

data suggests that individuals may differ in their perceptions of inter-sectoral mobility. Some

view themselves as mobile over the relevant time horizon (and express preferences in line with

the factor-endowments model), while others view themselves as immobile (and express

preferences in line with the sector-specific factors model). We find evidence that is loosely

consistent with this reading when we use the (imperfect) measure of mobility that is contained in

our dataset.

        While the implications of conventional economic models are borne out by the data, these

models go only part of the way in explaining the formation of preferences. We find that social

status, relative incomes, values, and attachments play, if anything, a more important role. In

particular, one of our key findings is that attitudes toward trade are closely linked to an
                                                      4


individual's relative standing on the domestic income scale. Individuals with incomes greater

than the national average tend to favor trade while those with below-average incomes favor

protection. Interestingly, it is income relative to the national average, rather than the absolute

level of income, that is correlated with trade preferences. Subjective evaluations of social status

bear a similar relationship to trade preferences: individuals who consider themselves part of the

upper classes tend to be more favorable to trade than those who consider themselves to be from

the lower classes. These findings are suggestive of a link between income distribution and trade

preferences that is independent of factor ownership and sector of employment.

        Our final set of results relates to self-expressed values, identities, and attachments.

Protectionist attitudes go together with a well-defined set of normative attributes. Individuals

who favor trade restrictions tend to have high attachments to their neighborhood and community,

have a high degree of national pride, and believe that national interest should be paramount in

making trade-offs. At the same time, individuals who have confidence in their country's

democracy and economic achievements are less likely to favor trade protection. Therefore, the

picture that emerges is this: communitarian-patriotic values tend to foster protectionist attitudes,

but this tendency is moderated when the broader institutions of society are perceived to be

working well.

        The bottom line is that both economic and non-economic considerations are important in

determining attitudes towards trade. Once we take the myriad factors discussed above into

account, we are reasonably successful in explaining the variation in trade preferences in our

sample. Our preferred "combined" model accounts for about a fifth of the sample variance.

Moreover, we are also reasonably successful in explaining the differences in mean preferences
                                                          5


across countries. Our preferred model does a good job of explaining why respondents in Poland,

for example, are more protectionist on average than those in Germany.

         The empirical literature on the political economy of trade policy is not small, but it has

focused largely on testing the implications of the factor-endowments and sector-specific factors

models. Thus, studies that have found support for the factor-endowments model include

Rogowski (1987, 1989), Midford (1993), Beaulieu (1996) Balistreri (1997), and Scheve and

Slaughter (1998, 2001). Studies that have found support for the sector-specific model include

Magee (1978) and Irwin (1994, 1996). Some have found support for both views of the world

(Baldwin and Magee 1998 and Beaulieu and Magee 2001). With the exception of Balistreri

(1997) and Scheve and Slaughter (1998), none of these studies analyze individual preferences

directly. Instead they infer preferences from aggregated information on voting, campaign-

contributions, or policy outcomes.1 Also, no study to date has analyzed these issues in a cross-

national framework.

         Since we began our work with the ISSP data set we have become aware of two other

related, but independent papers: O'Rourke and Sinnott (2001) and Beaulieu, Benarroch, and

Gaisford (2001). Both of these papers use the ISSP survey to explore the determinants of trade

preferences. The O'Rourke and Sinnott paper is closest to ours, and many of its conclusions

parallel our own findings. We find this reassuring since some of the methodological choices we

have made quite naturally differ.2 Beaulieu et al. (2001) focus more narrowly on testing the

Stolper-Samuelson theorem. Their conclusions on Stolper-Samuelson are at variance with ours:


1
  For example, Irwin (1994, 1996) looks at the outcomes of the 1906 and 1923 British general elections and
interprets them as proxies for voters’ preferences on new trade barriers.
2
  Some of the key differences are as follows: O'Rourke and Sinnott (2001) measure human capital differently, use
ordered probit (we use ordered logit), do not test the sector-specific model, and do not focus on relative-income or
status.
                                                         6


we (along with O'Rourke and Sinnott 2001) find strong support, while they do not, for reasons

we shall discuss briefly later on.

         The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we briefly describe the data and

the methods we have used. Next, we present a series of empirical models highlighting different

types of determinants of trade preferences. In the penultimate section, we put all our results

together and comment on the overall fit of our explanatory framework. A final section

concludes.



II. Description of the data and empirical approach

         The International Social Survey Programme (ISSP) collects cross-national data by

combining national surveys on topics that are important for social science research

(http://www.issp.org/). In this paper we use data from the 1995 ISSP National Identity module

(ISSP-NI). The data set covers information at the individual level on some 28,456 respondents

from 23 countries, including the United States, Canada, Japan, many Western and Eastern

European countries, and one developing country (the Philippines).3 For each individual, the data

set contains responses on a variety of topics, ranging from opinions on trade and immigration

policy to feelings of patriotism and regional attachment. In addition, the ISSP-NI data set

contains information on several economic and demographic variables. Thus the survey allows us

to identify both stated trade policy preferences and individual characteristics that explain

attitudes towards trade in standard economic models. Since not all questions are covered in

individual country surveys, our regressions will typically not include all 23 countries.


3
 The full list of countries covered in the data set comprises West Germany, East Germany, Great Britain, United
States, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Ireland, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Czech Republic, Slovenia, Poland, Bulgaria,
Russia, New Zealand, Canada, Philippines, Japan, Spain, Latvia, and Slovak Republic.
                                                     7


        In order to measure individual trade policy preferences, we focus on survey answers to

the following question:

        Now we would like to ask a few questions about relations between (respondent's country)
        and other countries. How much do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
        (Respondent's country) should limit the import of foreign products in order to protect its
        national economy.

           1. Agree strongly
           2. Agree
           3. Neither agree nor disagree
           4. Disagree
           5. Disagree strongly

           8. Can't choose, don't know
           9. NA, refused

After deleting the “Can’t choose, don’t know” and “NA, refused” responses, we transformed

survey questions into the dependent variable TRADE_OP (with answers ranging from 1=agree

strongly to 5=disagree strongly). Higher values of TRADE_OP therefore correspond to

preferences that are more pro-trade and less protectionist. TRADE_OP is our preferred

dependent variable, and we use it in most of our empirical exercises.

        We also created two binary variables, which we label TRADEPRO and TRADECON.

TRADEPRO is set equal to unity for individuals opposing trade protection (i.e. for those

replying “disagree” or “disagree strongly” to the question), and to zero for the rest.

TRADECON is set equal to unity for individuals favoring trade protection (i.e. for those replying

“agree” or “agree strongly” to the question), and to zero for others. We ran probit regressions

with TRADEPRO and TRADECON. Since the results were virtually indistinguishable from

those with the ordered logits using TRADE_OP, we shall not report them here.

        Table 1 presents summary statistics for TRADE_OP, TRADEPRO and TRADECON, by

country. Several results stand out. First, as in previous analyses, protectionist sentiment runs
                                                     8


high on average. Taking the 23 countries as a whole, more than half of the respondents agree

with the proposition that trade should be restricted (average TRADECON = 0.58), while fewer

than a quarter disagree (average TRADEPRO = 0.23). Second, there is quite a large variation in

trade preferences across countries. Netherlands emerges as the country that is the most pro-trade

(TRADEPRO = 0.40) while Bulgaria is the most protectionist (TRADEPRO = 0.09), regardless

of the indicator used. Third, as the last comment indicates, the rankings of the countries are not

very sensitive to the measure of trade preferences. Generally, the continental European countries

tend to be the most free trade oriented, while the former socialist economies of Europe are the

most protectionist. The United States is intermediate between these two groups.

        Are these findings truly reflective of underlying attitudes towards trade? It is well known

that survey responses tend to be highly sensitive to framing--the phrasing of the question and the

context and order in which it is asked. In this particular case, there is especially cause to worry

because the question in ISSP-NI refers to possible benefits of restricting imports ("protecting

national economy") without mentioning any drawbacks. One would suspect that this imparts a

strong protectionist bias to the responses. There are two countervailing considerations. First,

there is ample evidence from the U.S., which suggests that the precise phrasing of the question

on imports does not greatly affect the average responses provided (see the review in Scheve and

Slaughter 2001). Second, in our empirical work, we will be interested in identifying the

determinants of the differences in attitudes across individuals. Even though the responses on

trade may be biased in one direction, our results will not be affected unless the magnitude of the

bias is also correlated with our explanatory variables.

        We might also wonder whether protectionist sentiment, as captured by surveys of this

kind, has any relationship to actual trade policies. There are of course good reasons to believe
                                                           9


that in any political system there would be considerable slippage between individual preferences

on any specific issue and policy outcomes. The "supply" side of policy can be as important as

the "demand" side. Moreover, the institutional structures of government and of political

representation mediate between individual voters and policy makers. This is shown

schematically in Figure 1 (taken from Rodrik 1995). Nonetheless, it is interesting to know

whether trade preferences broadly correlate with trade policies in our sample.

         Figure 2 shows that the answer is broadly yes. The correlation between average values of

TRADE_OP and average level of trade duties across countries is negative and statistically

significant (robust t-statistic = -2.13, significant at 5% level).4 The point estimate suggests that a

one-point increase in TRADE_OP on our 5-point scale is accompanied with a 3.6 percentage

point reduction in average duties. At the same time, it is clear from the figure that the

relationship is quite a loose one: TRADE_OP accounts for no more than 8 percent of the cross-

country variation in average tariffs.

         In the following, we shall use TRADE_OP as our dependent variable and estimate a

series of ordered logit models. Ordered logit is our preferred specification because it preserves

the maximum amount of the information in the dependent variable without imposing linearity on

the underlying relationship between the explanatory variables and the 5-point scale on which

TRADE_OP is calibrated.5 Appendix I provides more information on the technical aspects of

the ordered logit. We have checked the robustness of our results to alternative specifications,


4
 Trade duties refer to combined import and export duties (tm and tx, respectively) over the 1992-98 period,
calculated as [(1+ tm)*(1+tx)] -1. The source for duties is the World Development Indicators CD-Rom of the World
Bank. Two countries, Slovenia and Slovak Republic, are not included in Figure 1 because the World Bank does not
provide data on duties for them.
5
 An alternative would have been to estimate ordered probit models, as is done in O'Rourke and Sinnott (2001). The
ordered logit assumes that the error term in the underlying latent relationship is distributed logistically, while the
ordered probit assumes it is distributed normally.
                                                      10


running probit regressions with TRADEPRO and TRADECON as well as OLS regressions with

TRADE_OP. We find very few substantive differences so we shall not present the results from

these different specifications. In most of our specifications, we will include a full set of country

dummies to minimize the likelihood of picking up spurious correlations between regressors and

TRADE_OP. With few exceptions, the inclusion of country fixed effects did not affect the

results either.

         One shortcoming of the ordered logit is that the coefficient estimates are hard to interpret.

As explained in the appendix, even the sign of an estimated coefficient has to be interpreted

cautiously: it provides an unambiguous signal with respect to the marginal probabilities of only

the top and bottom categories (or groups of categories) on the 5-point scale of our dependent

variable. Rather than cluttering the tables with estimated coefficients, therefore, we will report

two measures for each regressor that indicate the estimated increase in the probability of each of

the highest two categories ("disagree" and "disagree strongly" with trade restrictions) given a

marginal increase in the value of the relevant regressor, holding all other regressors at their mean

value. We will often refer to the sum of the two marginal effects presented in the tables, since

this sum represents the estimated impact that a regressor has on the probability that an "average"

individual will be pro-trade (i.e., "disagree" or "disagree strongly" with trade restrictions).



III. A first pass: the naive demographic model

         As a first pass through the data, we ignore economic theory and present some estimates

that relate trade attitudes to a laundry list of standard demographic characteristics. We use

information from other ISSP-NI questions regarding age, gender, citizenship, years of education,
                                                         11


area of residence (rural vs. urban), subjective social class, political party affiliation, trade union

membership and real income.6 The results are shown in Table 2.

         We find strong gender and age effects on trade preferences, which survive virtually all

specifications we have tried. Column (1) in Table 2 shows that being a male increases the

probability of replying "disagree" and "disagree strongly" with trade restrictions by respectively

4.8 and 2.6 percentage points (both significant at the 1% level). In other words males are on

average 7.4 percentage points more likely to be pro-trade, which is quite a striking difference

given that only 23 percent of the sample overall is pro-trade. This gender-based difference in

trade attitudes provides us with an early glimpse into the important role played by values in

shaping preferences.7 Older individuals are significantly more protectionist. Citizenship in the

country and rural residence are both negatively associated with pro-trade sentiments.

         Table 2 also shows that education and income are positively associated with pro-trade

attitudes. However, we shall significantly qualify both conclusions in the analysis that follows.

Individuals who identify themselves as being from the upper classes are more likely to be pro-

trade, while political party affiliation has no significant relationship with trade preferences.

Trade union membership is associated with protectionist attitudes. Regressions without fixed

effects for countries (not shown) yield very similar results, except in the case of trade union

membership. When country dummies are excluded, trade union membership does not have a

statistically significant negative relationship with TRADE_OP. We interpret this to be the result


6
 The log of real income is calculated using data in local currency on individual income from the ISSP-NI data set
and purchasing power parity conversion factors from the WDI (World Bank). Education refers to years of
education, with a maximum top-coding (introduced by us) of 20.
7
  An alternative hypothesis would be that gender differences arise from the significantly lower levels of labor-
market participation of women. Leaving aside the question of why this should produce the bias in question, this
alternative hypothesis is not borne out by the data. The strong gender difference persists even after we control for
whether an individual is in the labor market or not.
                                                      12


of a spurious positive correlation between high levels of union membership and relatively high

incidence of pro-trade preferences that arises from the presence of a number of continental

European countries, which on average exhibit both characteristics. This confounding effect is

eliminated in the presence of fixed effects.

        When we modify the naïve demographics specification below, we shall drop some of

these variables (area of residence, subjective social class, political party affiliation and trade

union membership) because we would be losing too many observations to missing values

otherwise. We shall keep age, gender, citizenship and education as controls in all specifications.



IV. Economic determinants of individual preferences: The factor endowments model

        Moving towards free trade, a country that is well endowed with skilled labor will

experience an increase in the relative price of skill-intensive goods and correspondingly

specialize in the production of those goods. According to the Stolper-Samuelson theorem,

skilled workers in all sectors of the economy will gain and unskilled workers will lose. A key

assumption of the factor endowments model--of which the Stolper-Samuelson theorem is an

implication--is that factors of production can move costlessly across economic sectors. This is

an extreme assumption. However, as long as individuals perceive themselves to be inter-

sectorally mobile over the relevant time horizon, their preferences over trade policy will still be

informed by the underlying logic of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem. In this section, we test this

idea.

        We use as our theoretical backdrop a world in which skilled and unskilled labor are the

only relevant factors of production. We do not have information on capital ownership, so we

shunt it aside by assuming that it plays an insignificant role in shaping comparative advantage,
                                                        13


perhaps because it is internationally mobile. Our measure of skill is years of education

(educyrs), which we have already used above.

        According to the factor endowments model, an individual's trade policy preferences will

depend both on his skill level and on his country’s relative factor endowment. A skilled

individual will be pro-trade in an economy that is well endowed with skilled labor, but anti-trade

in an economy that is well endowed with low-skill labor. So we need information also on an

economy's relative abundance in skilled labor. We shall use three different measures as proxies

for relative factor endowments. The first of these is per-capita GDP. It is reasonable to suppose

that countries with higher GDP per capita are also better endowed with skilled labor. The second

and third measures are based on the actual average years of education in our sample for each

country.8


        Before we present regression results, it is instructive to examine whether the estimated

effect of educyrs varies systematically across countries in the manner predicted by the Stolper-

Samuelson theorem. So we first ran a series of probit regressions on individual countries, with

TRADEPRO as the dependent variable. In each case, we regressed TRADEPRO on educyrs

(along with age and male). In Figure 3, we plot the estimated marginal effects we obtained on

educyrs alongside each country's per-capita GDP. The result is striking: there is a very strong

and tight relationship between a country's per-capita GDP and the magnitude of the

corresponding estimated marginal effect of educyrs (the coefficient of per capita GDP is 1.53e-

06, robust t-statistic= 4.97, significant at 1% level). The richer a country, the more positive is the


8
  We could have also used the Barro-Lee (1996 and 2000) data sets, but these suffer from some clear defects where
the countries in our sample are concerned. For example, when we construct a measure of relative human capital
endowment (high-skilled vs low-skilled labor) by considering no schooling and primary schooling attainment in the
low-skilled labor measure and secondary schooling and higher schooling attainment in the high-skilled labor
measure, we obtain that West Germany and Spain rank lower than the Philippines in 1990.
                                                           14


impact of a marginal increase of education on the probability of pro-trade attitudes. The

Philippines lies at the low end of the spectrum, and is without question the country with the

lowest skill endowment in our sample. The marginal effect of educyrs we obtained for the

Philippines is not only the smallest among all countries, it is actually negative (and statistically

significant at the 1% level). Greater education is associated with more protectionist views in the

Philippines--the only such case in our sample. These findings are quite in line with the Stolper-

Samuelson theorem.


           In Table 3 we show pooled regressions with country dummy variables where we take into

account the cross-country heterogeneity with respect to educyrs. In the first set of regressions,

we interact educyrs with log per-capita GDP, educyrs*gdp, and enter the two variables

separately. The previous exercise on individual countries suggests that the impact of educyrs

should depend on the level of per-capita GDP; that is, we should get a negative coefficient on

educyrs but a positive coefficient on the interaction term educyrs*gdp. This is exactly what we

get.9 Both terms are highly significant. Column (2) confirms that the result is robust to

controlling for an individual's real income. Columns (3) and (4) confirm that the pattern

continues to hold when we drop the Philippines and the other lower-income countries from the

sample.10 This is important evidence, suggesting that the non-linearity in educyrs is present for

the entire range of countries; it is not an artifact driven by either the Philippines or a small

number of low-income countries. Column (5) introduces an additional interaction term between




9
 O'Rourke and Sinnott (2001) have independently replicated this result, even though their measure of skill is
different from ours. These authors use an occupational measure, in contrast to our educational measure.
10
     The countries dropped are Poland, Bulgaria, Russia, Latvia and the Philippines.
                                                     15


individual income and per-capita GDP, income*gdp, to confirm that what we are capturing is a

non-linearity in the impact of education, and not with respect to income/earnings.

        We next use an alternative measure of national factor endowments by taking the sample

average years of education in each country to construct an interaction variable, educyrs*educ,

which is the product of the latter measure with educyrs. When we enter both variables in

regression (6), we find results that are similar to those above. The estimated impact of education

on pro-trade attitudes is nonlinear--negative in skill-scarce countries and positive in skill-

abundant countries. The estimates are statistically significant as before.

        Finally, we construct a third measure of country-level factor-endowments. We again

compute the average years of education of all individuals in each country (ek), then we calculate

a population-weighted average of national skilled-labor endowments of the countries in the

sample (e ) and, finally, we compare each country's value to this global average. We label sk the

measure of each country’s relative abundance of skilled labor and unsk the measure of each

country’s relative scarcity of skilled labor. The two variables are defined as follows:

                                                sk = max ( e k − e, 0)

                                               unsk = min (e k − e , 0)

Next, we construct two interaction variables, educyrs*sk and educyrs*unsk, by multiplying both

sk and unsk with educyrs. According to the factor endowments model, both coefficients on the

interaction variables should be positive. Our results, shown in column (7), are only partially

consistent with this prediction, with the coefficient on educyrs*sk being negative and the

coefficient on educyrs*unsk being positive. This result is most likely due to the way in which

the cut-off point e has been constructed, i.e. averaging national skilled-labor endowments only

over the countries in the ISSP-NI sample.
                                                         16


         Overall, these findings are strikingly supportive of the implications of the factor

endowments model and of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem. Education is very strongly correlated

with support for free trade in countries that are well endowed with human capital. It is either

weakly or negatively correlated with support for free trade in countries that are poorly endowed

with human capital.11



V. Economic determinants of individual preferences: The sector-specific factors model

         If individuals are, or perceive themselves to be, immobile across industries, their attitudes

towards trade should be determined by their sector of employment, rather than their factor type.

Individuals in sectors where the home economy has a comparative advantage should be pro-

trade; individuals in comparative disadvantage sectors should be protectionist; and individuals in

non-traded sectors on balance indifferent or pro-trade. This is the central insight of the sector-

specific factors model.

         In taking this insight to our data, we face an immediate problem. The ISSP-NI survey

contains no direct question about sector of employment. But it does provide fairly detailed

information on occupation (based on the International Standard Classification of Occupations

[ISCO] or national classifications). We do our best to infer sector of employment from this data

on occupation. Since our goal is to establish a correspondence between these sectors and


11
   As we mentioned in the introduction, Beaulieu et al. (2001) interpret these data differently, as rejecting the
Stolper-Samuelson theorem. They note that skilled workers tend to be more pro-trade in virtually all the countries in
the ISSP sample. However, this overlooks the fact that the countries covered by the ISSP are at the high end of the
world income/skill distribution. Beaulieu et al. (2001) do note that the relationship between education and trade
preferences is reversed (Philippines) or weak (Bulgaria, Russia, Latvia, and Slovakia) in some of the individual
countries. But they do not find this to be evidence in favor of Stolper-Samuelson, largely because they rely on
tertiary enrollment per capita (a very problematic statistic, in our view) to rank countries according to their human
capital endowment. By this measure, the relative human capital endowment of the Philippines is the same as
Sweden's, Austria's or Japan's, while that of West Germany lies below Spain's, Bulgaria's, and the Philippines'
(Table 3 in Beaulieu et al.).
                                                      17


international trade data, we recode the occupation variables according to the industry

classification used in the World Trade Analyzer (WTA) data set. In particular, we end up re-

organizing the data on the basis of a breakdown into 34 manufacturing industries as defined by

the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Since the occupation codes used in the ISSP-NI

data set are not always detailed enough to be matched with any single BEA code, we create in

addition new codes as combinations of the original 35 codes. This results in a total of 54 (partly

overlapping) sectors. We treat non-manufacturing industries as non-tradables. The details of our

procedures and the sectoral breakdown we use are discussed in Appendix II. In some cases, the

mapping is straightforward, as many occupational codes (e.g., "dairy and livestock producers,"

"chemical-processing-plant operators," or "aircraft engine mechanics and fitters") are directly

indicative of sectors. In other cases, it is impossible to assign an individual to a specific sector,

and this results in either a less precise recoding or in missing values.

        We determine a sector's revealed comparative advantage/disadvantage by looking at the

sign of adjusted net exports in that sector (averaged over the years 1990-95). The adjustment is

meant to "correct" for the existence of overall trade imbalances. Hence, we define an adjustment

factor, λ, as follows:

                                                    ∑ (M − X ) i       i

                                                 λ=    i

                                                       ∑M          i
                                                           i



The indicator λ is positive for countries that have a trade deficit and negative for countries with

a trade surplus. In particular, λ tells us by what fraction imports in each sector would have to be

reduced in order to balance the trade account. Our measure of adjusted net exports in each sector

is the difference between Xi and (1− λ) M i . We then define the two sector-specific variables,
                                                         18


CAik (comparative advantage sector) and CDik (comparative disadvantage sector) for each sector

i in country k as follows:

                      1, if M ik − Xik − λM ik < 0, for sec torik = 1 ,..., 54
               CAik = 
                      0, if M ik − X ik − λM ik > 0 for sec torik = 1,..., 54 or if nontradabl e sector

                      1, if M ik − X ik − λM ik > 0, for sec torik = 1 ,..., 54
               CDik = 
                      0, if M ik − Xik − λM ik < 0, f or sec torik = 1 ,..., 54 or if nontradabl e sector

A sector is defined as a comparative advantage sector if its adjusted net imports are less than

zero and as a comparative disadvantage sector if its adjusted net imports are greater than zero.

Each individual is therefore assigned to one of three types of sectors: (a) a comparative

advantage sector; (b) a comparative disadvantage sector; or (c) a non-tradable sector.12

         The first regression in Table 4 shows the results. An individual in a comparative

disadvantage sector is significantly less likely to be pro-trade compared to an individual in a non-

traded sector (with a difference of 4.3 percent). This is highly supportive of the sector-specific

factors model. Perhaps surprisingly, an individual in a comparative advantage sector is also less

likely to be pro-trade than an individual in a non-traded sector, although the differences are not

statistically significant in this case.

         The latter result can be rationalized by considering the original survey question, which is

meant to elicit preferences related to restrictions on imports only. In the presence of two-way

(intra-industry) trade, it can be rational for individuals to prefer import restrictions in their

sectors even when those sectors are large exporters on balance. Additionally, our sectoral

classification and aggregation procedures may have resulted in the lumping together of CA and



12
  This is true unless (1) the individual has not reported his occupation; or (2) his occupation cannot be matched to
any industry code nor to the non-tradable sector; or (3) there are no data on imports and exports for his sector of
employment. In all these cases the individual is assigned a missing value.
                                                        19


CD sectors. Whatever the reason, the bottom line that emerges from this regression is that the

main cleavage in preference formation over trade lies not between the two tradable sectors but

between import-competing and non-tradables sectors.13

        An alternative specification, which takes into account the presence of two-way trade, is

shown in column (2). Now we enter separately the actual volumes of exports and imports

(normalized by GDP) of the sector in which an individual is employed. The logic of the sector-

specific model (augmented by the possibility of two-way trade) is that the estimated coefficient

on imports should be negative. The estimated coefficient on exports should be positive to the

extent that individuals fear retaliation from abroad or see through the Lerner symmetry theorem.

We do indeed find a negative (and borderline insignificant) effect on the imports term. The

estimated coefficient on exports, however, remains negative and insignificant.

        In columns (3) and (4), we carry out a joint test of the factor endowments and sector

specific models. There are essentially no important differences from the individual tests, and

both models survive. How do we explain this? A plausible interpretation is that a certain

fraction of individuals in our sample view themselves as inter-sectorally mobile over the time

horizon that is relevant to them, and a certain fraction think of themselves as stuck in their

present line of employment. The first group's trade preferences would be in accordance with the

factor endowments model, while the second group's preferences would be in accordance with the

sector specific model.

        The ISSP data set contains some questions on mobility. In particular, individuals are

asked: "If you could improve your work or living conditions, how willing or unwilling would

you be to move to another town or city?" Answers to the questions range from “very

13
   When we drop individuals employed in non-tradable sectors from the regression, we find no statistically
significant difference between the attitudes of individuals in the CD and CA sectors.
                                                      20


unwilling”(1) to “very willing” (5). The question relates to geographical mobility rather than

inter-sectoral mobility, but may still be indicative of the latter. This gives us an opportunity to

check whether willingness to move relates to trade attitudes in the manner consistent with our

interpretation.

        We interact willingness to move with the CA and CD indicators used previously, and

enter the interaction terms along with willingness to move. The results are shown in column (5).

First, individuals with greater willingness to move are more likely to be pro-trade, as expected.

Second, the sign on the comparative advantage term (CA sector) now becomes positive, in line

with the original expectations from the sector-specific factors model (but the marginal effect is

insignificant). Third, individuals in CA sectors are less pro-trade if their willingness to move is

high (and this interactive effect borders on statistically significance). Fourth, individuals in CD

sectors express more pro-trade sentiments when their stated willingness to move is high,

although the interaction term is not close to significance. Hence the signs on the estimated

coefficients are all consistent with our interpretation, but the insignificance of most of the

estimates prevents us from reading too much support into this.



VI. Economic determinants of individual preferences: Relative-income/status model

        In some of the specifications we discussed previously, we saw that an individual's real

income is associated positively with pro-trade attitudes, even after controlling for education and

other socio-demographic attributes. In this section, we refine this finding and demonstrate that it

is relative income within a country rather than its absolute level that matters.

        Our measure of relative income is earnrel, which is the ratio of an individual's income to

the sample average income in the relevant country. Table 5 shows the results. In column (1), we
                                                             21


see that an individual whose income is double the country's average (earnrel = 2) is 7.0

percentage points more likely to be pro-trade than an individual with the average national income

(earnrel = 1). In column (2), we run a "horse race" between absolute income and relative

income, and show that it is the latter that wins. In fact, the estimated marginal effects of absolute

income change sign (and become negative) once earnrel is included. Column (3) shows that

self-evaluations of social status (social class) have a similar effect on trade preferences.14

Individuals who identify themselves as belonging to one of the upper classes are more likely to

be pro-trade. Finally, in column (4) we enter earnrel and social class together and find that they

are both individually significant.

           The striking regularity that these findings highlight is that trade is generally perceived to

be a good thing for individuals at the high end of a country's income distribution, and a bad thing

for those at the bottom. These results survive various robustness checks, including embedding

the regressions in Table 5 in the economic frameworks we have discussed previously (see also

section VIII). We are not aware of any simple economic theory that would explain these

findings, and we leave the development of such a theory to further research. We note, however,

that our finding is consistent with another empirical regularity of the last couple of decades,

namely that expanded trade has generally been associated with a regressive impact on the

earnings distribution in both rich and poor countries.

           Whatever the underlying story, one interesting implication of the relationship between

relative income and pro-trade preferences is worth noting. Consider a political-economy model

in which trade policies are determined by the preferences of the median voter (as in Mayer

1984). In countries with greater income inequality the median voter will normally have a lower


14
     The correlation between earnrel and self-identified social class is 0.24.
                                                     22


relative income than in countries with greater equality. Consequently, greater inequality will be

associated with higher levels of trade protection across countries.



VII. The role of values, identity, and attachments

        We have drawn attention to the importance of non-economic determinants of trade

preferences in the introduction. Indeed, some of our most interesting results pertain to the role of

values, identity, and attachments in shaping individual preferences on trade policy. These

attributes are particularly significant in explaining differences in average trade preferences across

countries. We consider three different specifications in Table 6.

        First, we look at the impact of community and regional attachments (column (1)). We

focus on answers to the following questions: “How close do you feel to

        o   (respondent’s neighborhood)?” (NEIGHBOR)
        o   (respondent’s town/city)?” (TOWN)
        o   (respondent’s county/region)?” (COUNTY)
        o   (respondent’s country)?” (NATPRID1)
        o   (respondent’s continent)?” (CONTINENT)

The four possible answers to these questions range from “not close at all” (with a value of 1) to

“very close” (a value of 4). The results show a clear pattern. Individuals with strong

attachments to their neighborhood, county/region, or nation tend to be less pro-trade. Such

attachments tend to be particularly strong in countries like Japan and Spain, and weak in Britain

and the U.S (see Table AIII.2 in Appendix III). On the other hand, individuals with strong

attachments either to their town/city or their continent--individuals that we may label

"cosmopolitans"--are more likely to be pro-trade.
                                                      23


        The second set of issues we look at relates directly to patriotism, nationalism, and

chauvinism. In addition to NATPRID1, we focus on the following questions: “How much do

you agree or disagree with the following statements?

        o I would rather be a citizen of (respondent’s country) than of any other country in the
          world.” (NATPRID2)
        o Generally (respondent's country) is a better country than most other countries.”
          (NATPRID3)
        o (respondent's country) should follow its own interests, even if this leads to conflicts
          with other nations.” (NATPRID4)

The five possible answers to these questions range from "disagree strongly" (with a value of 1) to

"agree strongly" (a value of 5).

        A careful analysis of the impact of patriotism/nationalism on individual preferences

needs to distinguish between various degrees of national attachment. On the one hand, national

pride entails feelings of patriotism, i.e. genuine attachment to one’s own country. On the other,

national pride can be associated with feelings of nationalism--or, in its extreme form,

chauvinism--i.e. sentiments of superiority of one’s own country. Smith and Jarkko (1998)

explain the difference between these two concepts:

        National pride is the positive affect that the public feels towards their country as a
        result of their national identity ... National pride is related to feelings of patriotism
        and nationalism. Patriotism is love of one’s country or dedicated allegiance to
        same, while nationalism is a strong national devotion that places one’s own
        country above all others. National pride co-exists with patriotism and is a
        prerequisite of nationalism, but nationalism extends beyond national pride and
        feeling national pride is not equivalent to being nationalistic. Likewise, national
        pride is not incompatible with cosmopolitanism (literally being a “world citizen”),
        but nationalism (or at least a strong degree of it) is antithetical to a transnational
        perspective. [references omitted]

NATPRID1, which inquires about a general sentiment of attachment to the nation, reflects the

degree of national pride/patriotism of an individual. NATPRID2 tests the extent of national

devotion in a stronger form. We interpret answers to these two questions as reflecting feelings
                                                          24


both of patriotism and nationalism.15 NATPRID3 matches perfectly Smith and Jarkko’s (1998)

definition of nationalism as a feeling of superiority of one’s own country. NATPRID4 applies

this nationalistic stand to a practical situation.

         In a world where there are gains from trade at the national level, we would expect

patriotism to be positively correlated with pro-trade preferences. Regardless of distributional

implications, individuals who care about the country as a whole should be in favor of free trade.

On the other hand, patriotic individuals might lean towards protection if trade is viewed as a

zero-sum game between nations or its social consequences are judged as adverse. The results in

column (2) of Table 6 are more in line with the latter interpretation. There is a particularly

strong negative relationship between NATPRID2 and pro-trade views. This is significant in

explaining the cross-country variation in trade preferences, as NATPRID2 varies greatly among

countries. The percentage of respondents that would "rather be citizen of own country than of

any other country" varies from 91 percent in the U.S. to only 50 percent in the Netherlands

(Table AIII.2).

         At the more explicitly nationalistic end of things, the results are as one would have

expected. Feelings of superiority of one’s own country presumably encourage thoughts of

national isolationism, and abstention from political alliances and other international economic

relations. Individuals who agree with the statement that their country "should follow its own

interests, even if this leads to conflicts with other nations" (NATPRID4) are significantly less

likely to be pro-trade. These individuals clearly perceive trade as a zero-sum game. The

percentage of respondents who agree with the proposition that their own country's interests




15
  At least as defined in Smith and Jarkko’s paper (1998), national pride and patriotism are prerequisites of
nationalism.
                                                              25


should be followed even at the cost of conflict with others ranges from 73 percent in Bulgaria to

19 percent in Japan (Table AIII.2).

           Finally, we turn to pride in specific national achievements. We focus on the following

questions: “How proud are you of (respondent's country) in each of the following?

           o    The way democracy works (DEMOCR)
           o    Political influence in world (POL_INFL)
           o    Economic achievements (ECONPRID)
           o    Social security system (SSS_PRID)

As might be expected, levels of pride are generally quite low in the former socialist economies:

only 9 percent of respondents are proud of the economic achievements of their country in

Hungary, compared to 83 percent in West Germany and 82 percent in the U.S (Table AIII.3). As

shown in column (3) of Table 6, pride in a country's democracy and economic achievements are

positively correlated with pro-trade attitudes.16 We take this to indicate that trade is less

threatening to individuals who have confidence in their country's political and economic

institutions. On the other hand, pride in a country's political influence in the world (where the

U.S. tops the list) is negatively associated with pro-trade attributes.

           The last column of Table 6 shows a "kitchen sink" regression where we include all the

questions we have considered in this section. The results on individual questions are largely

unaffected, indicating that the relationships we have analyzed are additive.17 The bottom line is

that strong neighborhood/community attachments and patriotic/nationalist feelings are powerful

predictors of protectionist sentiment. On the other hand, confidence in a county's economic and

political institutions (including its social security system) moderates protectionist tendencies.


16
     Pride in the social security system is also positively correlated with pro-trade attitudes but not significantly.
17
   The significance of the marginal effects for category 4 (dPr(y=4)) are almost unchanged. While a few marginal
effects for the top category are not significant anymore, the signs are the same as before.
                                                     26




VIII. How well are we doing?

        In Table 7 we present our preferred specification, based on the models we have

considered so far. The main constraint in formulating a "summary" model is that missing values

for specific questions result in a reduction in the sample size as more explanatory variables are

added. The specification in Table 7 represents our compromise. It is meant to capture the

essential insights of all the approaches we have used in explaining the formation of trade

preferences, with one exception: we have had to exclude regressors that relate to the sector-

specific factors model, because the sample size would become unacceptably low otherwise.

        The basic specification is shown with and without country dummies. Note that there are

virtually no significant changes in coefficient estimates between the two versions. Note also that

the inclusion of country dummies does not greatly improve the overall fit of the regression. (The

models in Table 7 are OLS specifications, so that we can interpret R2 's in the usual fashion.)

Even without the country dummies, our preferred specification explains almost a fifth (18

percent) of the variation in trade preferences in our sample. Inclusion of the country dummies

raises the adjusted R2 only to 22 percent. In view of the complex nature of the issue at hand and

the imperfections of our data, we consider this to be a fair level of success at explaining attitudes

towards trade.

        At the beginning of the paper, we highlighted the important differences that exist across

countries in average pro-trade orientation. How well does our preferred specification do in

explaining these cross-country differences? One way of getting at this question is to ask how

successful our model is at knocking out the statistical significance of country dummies. The

relevant results are shown in Table 8. In the first column, we present the estimated coefficients
                                                        27


on the country dummies when no other regressors are included in the regression.18 We exclude

the dummy for West Germany, so that the coefficient on the constant term represents the average

value of TRADE_OP for West Germany while the coefficients on specific country dummies

represent the differences in average values between the relevant country and West Germany. 19

With the exception of Japan, all the country dummies are statistically significant, indicating that

there is a statistically significant difference between average trade attitudes in each of these

countries and West Germany.

        The second column of Table 8 in turn shows the coefficients on these country dummies

when the regression includes the regressors in our preferred specification. The key finding is

that 9 of the 15 statistically significant dummies in the previous regression are no longer

significant at any conventional level. And the magnitudes of the estimated coefficients are closer

to zero in all cases (except for Japan). What this indicates is that our specification is fairly

successful in explaining average differences in trade preferences across countries.

        To see how this works, consider two specific cases, Poland and Sweden. In Poland's

case, the average value of TRADE_OP is 0.90 points lower (on a 5-point scale) than in

Germany. What accounts for the difference? We can apply the coefficient estimates in column

(2) of Table 7 to country-level averages of the regressors to arrive at an approximate

decomposition. Our results indicate that some 65 percent of the difference is explained by

differences in comparative advantage--i.e., more individuals associate themselves with skill-

based gains from trade in Germany than in Poland--more than 20 percent by greater


18
  Note that a number of countries had to be dropped because of the unavailability of data on some of the regressors
used in the preferred specification.
19
  The country averages implied by these coefficients differ somewhat from the averages reported in Table 1 because
the sample in Table 8 is restricted to observations without missing values for the regressors in our preferred
specification.
                                                     28


nationalism/patriotism in Poland, and about 6 percent by the greater incidence of perceptions of

low social status in Poland. In Sweden's case, the average value of TRADE_OP is 0.33 points

smaller than in Germany. Since the patterns of comparative advantage and the skill distribution

do not differ greatly in these two countries, the bulk (roughly 60 percent) of the difference

between Germany and Sweden is accounted for by greater cosmopolitanism in Germany and

greater nationalism/patriotism in Sweden.



IX. Concluding remarks

        Attitudes to trade are shaped by a complex set of determinants. As we have documented,

preferences over trade are influenced by both economic and non-economic considerations.

Values and narrow self-interest both matter. We close by summarizing our main findings.

    •   Attitudes toward trade are significantly and robustly correlated with an individual's level

        of human capital, in the manner predicted by the factor endowments model. Highly

        educated individuals tend to be pro-trade in countries that are well endowed with human

        capital (the U.S.), but against trade in countries that are poorly endowed with human

        capital (the Philippines).

    •   Preferences over trade are also correlated with the trade exposure of the sector in which

        an individual is employed. Individuals in non-traded sectors tend to be the most pro-

        trade, while individuals in sectors with a revealed comparative disadvantage are the most

        protectionist. Broadly speaking, therefore, the evidence is also consistent with the

        implications of the sector-specific model, especially when an individual's stated

        willingness to move is taken into account.

    •   An individual's relative economic status, measured in terms of either relative income

        within each country or self-expressed social status, has a very strong positive association
                                                     29


        with pro-trade attitudes. Individuals who rank high in the domestic income distribution

        or consider themselves to belong to the "upper classes" are significantly more likely to be

        pro-trade. It is relative income, and not absolute income, that seems to matter.

    •   Non-economic determinants, in the form of values, identities, and attachments, play a

        very important role in explaining the variation in preferences over trade. High degrees of

        neighborhood attachment and nationalism/patriotism are associated with protectionist

        tendencies, while cosmopolitanism is correlated with pro-trade attitudes. Everything else

        being the same, individuals who have greater confidence in the functioning of domestic

        political and economic institutions are less likely to be protectionist.

Our overall empirical framework relies on a combination of the explanatory factors summarized

above. We have shown that this framework does a reasonable job of explaining differences

across individuals and a fairly good job of explaining differences across countries. We believe

we have made progress in answering the question in our title.
                                                          30


Appendix I: Model Specification: the Ordered Logit Model

         The ordered logit model is built around a latent regression. Given

                                                   y ∗∗ = Xβ + ε ,

where y ∗ is unobserved, we define the probabilities of the five ordered categories as:

                               Pr ob( y = 1 / X) = Pr ob( y∗ ≤ µ1 ) = F(µ1 − Xβ) ,

                  Pr ob( y = 2 / X) = Pr ob( µ1 ≤ y ∗∗ ≤ µ 2 ) = F( µ 2 − Xβ) − F(µ 1 − Xβ)

                  Pr ob( y = 3 / X) = Pr ob( µ 2 ≤ y ∗∗ ≤ µ 3 ) = F(µ 3 − Xβ) − F(µ 2 − Xβ)

                  Pr ob( y = 4 / X) = Pr ob( µ 3 ≤ y ∗∗ ≤ µ 4 ) = F(µ 4 − Xβ) − F( µ 3 − Xβ)

                          Pr ob( y = 5 / X) = Pr ob ( y ∗∗ ≥ µ 4 ) = 1 − F(µ 4 − Xβ) .20

       µ 1 , µ 2 , µ 3 and µ 4 ( µ1 < µ 2 < µ3 < µ 4 ) represent the cutoff values of the ordered logit
model while F( ) is the cumulative distribution function of the logistic distribution:

                                                       ez         1
                                            F( z) =          =           .
                                                      1+ e z
                                                               1 + e −−z

        As in the logit model, the ordered logit model coefficients are not equal to the effect on
the probabilities of changes of the independent variables. The marginal effects of changes in the
regressors are given by:

                                      ∂ Pr ob ( y = 1 / X)
                                                           = − f ( µ1 − Xβ) ⋅ β
                                              ∂X

                             ∂ Pr ob ( y = 2 / X)
                                                  = −[ f ( µ 2 − Xβ) − f (µ1 − Xβ)] ⋅ β
                                     ∂X

                             ∂ Pr ob ( y = 3 / X)
                                                  = −[ f ( µ3 − Xβ) − f (µ 2 − Xβ)] ⋅ β
                                     ∂X



20
  We present the same specification of the model as used by Stata, i.e. a specification without constant in Xβ .
Greene’s formulation (Greene 2000, p.876) of the ordered logit model includes a constant. Using Stata’s estimates,
                                                                        µ
we can calculate the constant in Greene’s model as follows: constant=- 1 .
                                                          31


                             ∂ Pr ob ( y = 4 / X)
                                                  = −[ f ( µ 4 − Xβ) − f (µ 3 − Xβ)] ⋅ β
                                     ∂X

                                       ∂ Pr ob ( y = 5 / X)
                                                            = f (µ 4 − Xβ) ⋅ β
                                               ∂X

         Greene observes that, an increase in the regressors keeping β and µ constant, has
definitely an unambiguous effect on the probabilities of the first and last categories. However,
the impact on the probabilities of the middle categories is ambiguous. Therefore, even a
qualitative interpretation of the coefficient estimates, i.e. of the sign of the changes in the
probabilities, may be misleading.21

         In interpreting the ordered logit coefficients, one can use the following fact. A positive
coefficient estimate of βj means that, given an increase in the regressor X j , the probability of
category 1 (lowest) decreases and the probability of category 5 (highest) increases, as already
pointed out above. Furthermore, a positive coefficient estimate of βj also means that the
probability of the lowest two categories (1 and 2) decreases while the probability of the highest
two categories (4 and 5) increases.22

         In quantitative terms,


                         ∂ Pr ob( y = 4 / X) ∂ Pr ob ( y = 5 / X)
                                            +                     = f ( µ3 − Xβ) ⋅ β .
                                ∂X                   ∂X


        Stata numerically calculates the marginal effects of the regressors X on the probabilities
of the five categories (in correspondence of the means of X). For each regression, the effect of a
change in X on each of the five probabilities can be calculated.

         Concerning the pseudo-R2, we use the formula:

pseudo-R2 = 1 - L1/L0,

where LO and L1 are the constant-only and full model log-likelihoods respectively.

       For discrete distributions, the log-likelihood is the log of a probability, so it is always
negative (or zero). Thus, 0 >= L1 >= L0, and so 0 <= L1/L0 <=1, and so 0 <= pseudo-R2 <=1

21
  “ The upshot is that we must be very careful in interpreting the coefficients in this model…. This point seems
uniformly to be overlooked in the received literature.” (Greene 1993, p. 674)
22
  By probability of the lowest two categories, we mean the probability that the dependent variable is equal to 1 or 2.
Equivalently, by probability of the highest two categories, we mean the probability that the dependent variable is
equal to 4 or 5.
                                             32


for DISCRETE distributions. For continuous distributions, the log-likelihood is the log of a
density. Since density functions can be greater than 1 (cf. the normal density at 0), the log-
likelihood can be positive or negative.
                                                   33


Appendix II: Sectoral classification

         Since in the ISSP-NI survey there is no direct question about industry, we infer sector of
employment from data on occupation. We use individual answers to two questions in the data
set, one asking for occupation according to an international code (the International Standard
Classification of Occupations [ISCO] from 1968 and from 1988) and another one asking for
occupation in terms of national codes. Individuals in each country give information about own
occupation according to only one of the classifications (either ISCO 1968 or ISCO 1988 or
according to a national classification). In particular, individuals’ occupations from the following
countries are coded according to ISCO 1968: Germany West, Germany East, USA, Austria,
Norway, Bulgaria, New Zealand, Spain, Slovak Republic. The occupation codes of this group of
countries are recoded all together. Respondents’ occupations from the following countries are
instead coded according to ISCO 1988: Hungary, Ireland, Czech Republic, Poland, Slovenia,
Canada, Russia, Latvia. Again, we recode the occupation codes of this group of countries all
together. Finally, respondents’ occupations for Great Britain, Sweden, the Philippines, Italy,
Netherlands and Japan follow national occupation codes. Data from Great Britain, Sweden and
the Philippines are recoded individually. The national occupation codes for Italy, Netherlands
and Japan cannot be reclassified since they are not detailed enough.

        We reclassify the occupation variables from the ISSP-NI data set in order to match the
coding in the World Trade Analyzer (WTA) data set, containing world trade flows from 1980 to
1997. WTA uses a slightly modified version of the Standard International Trade Classification
(SITC), Revision 2. However, in the WTA CD-ROM, information is also available in a different
format. Data are organized according to the 34 manufacturing industry basis used by the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). (This coding is quite similar to the U.S. Standard
Industrial Classification.) The WTA CD-ROM includes the annual bilateral trade values
between all countries in the world in 1980-1997 according to this 34-industry classification. We
use the BEA classification to recode the occupation variables in the ISSP-NI data set and
construct a new variable indicating the individual sector of employment. The 34 industries (plus
one – Non-manufacturing – recoded as 35) are listed below. In order to obtain a more precise
match between the ISSP-NI occupation data and the BEA industry codes, we base the recoding
on a very detailed description of the correspondence between BEA codes and SITC Revision 2
(four-digit level) codes.

          In addition to the 35 BEA industry codes, we create new codes as combinations of the
original 35 codes. This is necessary since the occupation codes used in the ISP-NI data set are
not always detailed enough to be matched to any single BEA code. The combined codes are
listed below. All individuals who cannot be assigned to a single or combined BEA code are
matched with either the non-tradable sector or with a missing value. Many occupations naturally
fall in the non-tradable sector (for example "jurists," "teachers," "workers in religion").
Individuals with generic occupations such as "company managers," "clerks," "secretaries," and
"bookkeepers," are assigned a missing value.

        For each of the 35 original BEA industries, we consider sector-specific exports and
imports. For each new code, exports (imports) are obtained as sum of exports (imports) of the
sectors used in the combination (so, for example, exports of sector 36 are set equal to the sum of
                                                34


exports of sectors 17 and 18). We then average both exports and imports over the years 1990-
1995.
                                                      35


Table AII.1: BEA (Bureau of Economic Analysis) 34 manufacturing industry codes

           1.   Grain, Mill and Bakery Products
           2.   Beverages
           3.   Tobacco Products
           4.   Other Food and Kindred Products
           5.   Apparel and Other Textile Products
           6.   Leather and Leather Products
           7.   Pulp, Paper and Board Mills
           8.   Other Paper and Allied Products
           9.   Printing and Publishing
           10. Drugs
           11. Soaps, Cleaners, and Toilet Goods
           12. Agricultural Chemicals
           13. Industrial Chemicals and Synthetics
           14. Other Chemicals
           15. Rubber Products
           16. Miscellaneous Plastic Products
           17. Primary Metal Industries, Ferrous
           18. Primary Metal Industries, Nonferrous
           19. Fabricated Metal Products
           20. Farm and Garden Machinery
           21. Construction, Mining, etc.
           22. Computer and Office Equipment
           23. Other Nonelectric Machinery
           24. Household Appliances
           25. Household Audio and Video, etc.
           26. Electronic Components
           27. Other Electrical Machinery
           28. Motor Vehicles and Equipment
           29. Other Transportation Equipment
           30. Lumber, Wood, Furniture, etc.
           31. Glass Products
           32. Stone, Clay, Concrete, Gypsum, etc.
           33. Instruments and Apparatus
           34. Other Manufacturing
           35. Non Manufacturing ( . )
                                                      36


Table AII.2: New codes as combination of original 34 manufacturing industry codes


           36. Primary Metal Industries, Ferrous and Nonferrous (17 and 18)
           37. Beverages and Other Food and Kindred Products(2 and 4)
           38. Electronic Components and Other Electrical Machinery (26 and 27)
           39. Drugs and Soaps, Cleaners and Toilet Goods (10 and 11)
           40. Industrial Chemicals and Synthetics and Other Chemicals (13 and 14)
           41. Rubber Products, Miscellaneous Plastic Products, Primary Metal Industries (Ferrous and
               Nonferrous) (15,16,17 and 18)
           42. Farm and Garden Machinery and Other Non-electric Machinery (20 and 23)
           43. Lumber, Wood, Furniture, etc., Apparel and Other Textile Products and Leather and Leather
               Products (30,5 and 6)
           44. Glass Products and Stone, Clay, Concrete, Gypsum, etc. (31 and 32)
           45. Stone, Clay, Concrete, Gypsum, etc. and Non-Manufacturing/Natural Resources (32 and 35)
           46. Apparel and Other Textile Products and Leather and Leather Products (5 and 6)
           47. Pulp, Paper and Board Mills and Lumber, Wood, Furniture, etc. (7 and 30)
           48. Pulp, Paper and Board Mills, Other Paper and Allied Products and Printing and Publishing (7,8
               and 9)
           49. Primary Metal Industries, Ferrous and Nonferrous and Fabricated Metal Products (17, 18 and 19)
           50. Household Audio and Video, etc., Electronic Components and Other Electrical Machinery (25,26
               and 27)
           51. Pulp, Paper and Board Mills and Other Paper and Allied Products (7 and 8)
           52. Grain, Mill and Bakery Products, Beverages and Tobacco Products (1,2 and 3)
           53. Primary Metal Industries, Ferrous and Nonferrous, Instruments and Apparatus and Other
               Manufacturing (17, 18, 33 and 34)
           54. Other Food and Kindred Products, Computer and Office Equipment, Household Audio and Video,
               etc. and Glass Products (4,22,25,31)
                                                  37



References

Baldwin, Robert E., and Christopher S. Magee, "Is Trade Policy for Sale? Congressional Voting
on Recent Trade Bills," NBER Working Paper No. W6376, January 1998.

Balistreri, Edward J., “The Performance of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Model in Predicting
Endogenous Policy Forces at the Individual Level,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 30
No. 1, February 1997, pp. 1-17.

Beaulieu, Eugene “Who supported the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement: Factor or Industry
Cleavages in Trade Policy?” University of Calgary, unpublished paper, November 1996.

Beaulieu, Eugene, and Christopher S. Magee, "Campaign Contributions and Trade Policy: New
Tests of Stolper-Samuelson," University of Calgary, unpublished paper, May 2001.

Beaulieu, Eugene, Michael Benarroch, and James Gaisford, "Intra-Industry Trade Liberalization:
Why Skilled Workers Everywhere Resist Protectionism," University of Calgary, unpublished
paper, June 2001.

Feenstra, Robert C., “World Trade Flows, 1980-1997” plus data CD, March 2000.

Greene, William H., Econometric Analysis, London: Prentice-Hall, 2000.

International Social Survey Programme, National Identity, 1995.

Irwin Douglas A., “The Political Economy of Free Trade: Voting in the British General Elections
of 1906,” Journal of Law and Economics, 37, 1994, pp. 75-108.

Irwin, Douglas A., “Industry or Class Cleavages over Trade Policy? Evidence from the British
General Election of 1923,” in Robert C. Feenstra, Gene M. Grossman, and Douglas A. Irwin
(eds), The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati,
Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1996, pp. 53-75.

Magee, “Three Simple Tests of the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem,” in Peter Oppenheimer (ed),
Issues in International Economics, Stockfield: Oriel Press, 1978.

Mayer, Wolfgang, "Endogeneous Tariff Formation," American Economic Review, 74, 1984, 970-
985.

Midford, Paul, “International Trade and Domestic Politics: Improving on Rogowski’s Model of
Political Alignments”, International Organization, 47, 4, Autumn 1993, pp. 535-564.

O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Sinnott, Richard, “The Determinants of Individual Trade Policy
Preferences: International Survey Evidence," unpublished paper, April 2001.
                                                38


Rodrik, Dani, “Political Economy of Trade Policy,” in Gene Grossman and Ken Rogoff (eds),
Handbook of International Economics, Volume 3, Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers,
1995, pp. 1457-1494.

Rogowski, Ronald “Political Cleavages and Changing Exposure to Trade,” American Political
Science Review, Vol. 81 No. 4, December 1987, pp. 1121-1137.

Rogowski, Ronald, Commerce and Coalitions, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989.

Scheve, Kenneth F. and Slaughter, Matthew J., “What Determines Individual Trade Policy
Preferences?” NBER Working Paper #6531, April 1998.

Scheve, Kenneth F. and Slaughter, Matthew J., Globalization and the Perceptions of American
Workers, Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, 2001.

Smith, Tom W. and Jarkko, Lars, “National Pride: A Cross-national Analysis”, National Opinion
Research Center/University of Chicago, GSS Cross-national Report No. 19, 1998.
                                                                 Table 1: Summary Data on Individual Preferences on Trade Policy


                                                                                  trade opinion (TRADE_OP)




                                                                                                                             disagree strongly (5)
                                                                                       neithera agree nor
                                            agree strongly (1)




                                                                                                                                                      missing values
                                                                                                                                                                        average




                                                                                          disagree (3)



                                                                                                             disagree (4)
                                                                      agree (2)
            Country                                                                                                                                                                TRADEPRO     TRADECON
                                                                                                                                                                       TRADE_OP




 Germany West                            15.13                      23.71              18.49                26.83           9.52                     6.32              2.91   3    0.39   2       0.41         20
 Germany East                            25.98                      30.39              16.99                17.32           4.74                     4.58              2.42   11   0.23   13      0.59         13
 Great Britain                           23.16                      40.17              18.53                12.38           1.42                     4.35              2.25   16   0.14   18      0.66         10
 USA                                     21.29                      43.09              16.02                10.39           2.93                     6.29              2.26   16   0.14   19      0.69          7
 Austria                                 37.84                      31.98              10.92                12.61           3.87                     2.78              2.10   20   0.17   15      0.72          5
 Hungary                                 45.40                      25.80              15.80                6.90            2.60                     3.5               1.92   21   0.10   22      0.74          4
 Italy                                   25.78                      34.73              14.53                16.09           6.58                     2.29              2.42   12   0.23   12      0.62         12
 Ireland                                 24.25                      41.35              10.87                19.62           2.72                     1.21              2.34   14   0.23   14      0.66          9
 Netherlands                             5.12                       23.93              28.24                31.93           5.51                     5.27              3.09   1    0.40   1       0.31         23
 Norway                                  9.10                       28.49              27.37                22.79           4.91                     7.33              2.85   4    0.30   4       0.41         21
 Sweden                                  12.42                      28.09              29.24                17.52           6.40                     6.33              2.76   5    0.26   10      0.43         19
 Czech Republic                          25.56                      26.55              17.73                17.19           9.54                     3.42              2.57   8    0.28   6       0.54         17
 Slovenia                                24.03                      26.83              17.95                20.46           3.96                     6.76              2.50   9    0.26   7       0.55         15
 Poland                                  30.04                      34.86              12.70                11.76           2.63                     8.01              2.15   18   0.16   17      0.71          6
 Bulgaria                                53.57                      23.80              4.98                 3.26            4.52                     9.86              1.68   23   0.09   23      0.86          1
 Russia                                  35.58                      24.48              11.74                15.02           6.81                     6.37              2.28   15   0.23   11      0.64         11
 New Zealand                             17.64                      34.23              19.37                19.85           4.99                     3.93              2.59   7    0.26   8       0.54         16
 Canada                                  14.13                      31.69              21.58                21.84           6.03                     4.73              2.73   6    0.29   5       0.48         18
 Philippines                             12.75                      53.75              16.33                15.17           0.83                     1.17              2.37   13   0.16   16      0.67          8
 Japan                                   14.09                      16.80              29.54                14.97           19.03                    5.57              3.09   2    0.36   3       0.33         22
 Spain                                   21.21                      50.12              10.97                9.25            0.98                     7.45              2.12   19   0.11   21      0.77          2
 Latvia                                  50.19                      20.79              9.87                 9.00            4.12                     6.03              1.89   22   0.14   20      0.76          3
 Slovak Republic                         26.66                      28.75              15.99                16.14           8.57                     3.89              2.49   10   0.26   10      0.58         15
 Mean                                    23.57                      31.22              17.80                16.66           5.48                     5.26              2.46        0.23           0.58
 Standard Deviation                                                                                                                                                    1.20        0.42           0.49

The second column of each variable gives the ranking of countries according to that variable.

Bold numbers correspond to highest and lowest values.

TRADEPRO: TRADEPRO=1 if TRADE_OP=4 or 5; 0 if TRADE_OP=1,2 or 3.

TRADECON: TRADECON=1 if TRADE_OP=1 or 2; 0 if TRADE_OP=3,4 or 5.
TRADE_OP gives responses to the following question: "How much do you agree or disagree with the following statements: (R's country) should limit the import of foreign products in order to protect its national economy."
                                                               Table 2: Naïve Demographics Model
Equation                                                 1                             2                            3                           4                            5

Method                                        ordered logit                 ordered logit                ordered logit               ordered logit                ordered logit

Dependent variable                                                                                       y=TRADE_OP

                                            dPr(y=4)         dPr(y=5)     dPr(y=4)         dPr(y=5)     dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)    dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)     dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)

age                                         -0.0022          -0.0012      -0.0018          -0.0006      -0.0012         -0.0006     -0.0014         -0.0007      -0.0011         -0.0005
                                            [-20.73]**       [-14.52]**   [-15.93]**       [-11.78]**   [-9.57]**       [-8.58]**   [-9.09]**         [-8.1]**   [-5.21]**       [-4.53]**
male                                         0.0484           0.0264       0.0383           0.0129      0.0466          0.0245      0.0427            0.0199     0.0450            0.0179
                                            [13.97]**        [11.72]**    [10.66]**         [8.96]**    [12.42]**       [10.68]**   [8.96]**          [7.89]**   [6.64]**          [5.38]**
citizen                                     -0.0685          -0.0373      -0.0582          -0.0197      -0.0686         -0.0361     -0.0722         -0.0337      -0.0624         -0.0248
                                            [-5.49]**        [-5.33]**    [-4.69]**        [-4.53]**    [-4.9]**        [-4.76]**   [-4.64]**         [-4.5]**    [-2.4]*          [-2.34]*
rural                                                                     -0.0215          -0.0073
                                                                          [-10.23]**       [-8.76]**
educyrs (years of education)                                                                            0.0157          0.0083      0.0157            0.0073     0.0133            0.0053
                                                                                                        [24.74]**       [15.37]**   [19.08]**       [12.49]**    [9.62]**          [6.06]**
log of real income                                                                                                                  0.0390            0.0182     0.0370            0.0147
                                                                                                                                    [9.86]**          [9.56]**   [6.11]**          [5.06]**
social class                                                                                                                                                     0.0135            0.0054
                                                                                                                                                                  [4.4]**          [5.11]**
trade union member                                                                                                                                               -0.0236         -0.0094
                                                                                                                                                                 [-3.27]**         [-2.9]**
political party                                                                                                                                                  0.0055            0.0022
                                                                                                                                                                  [1.65]           [1.72]
cutoff1                                             -2.92                         -2.58                         -1.52                          0.71                         1.19
cutoff2                                             -1.32                         -0.93                         0.12                           2.32                         2.82
cutoff3                                             -0.38                         0.04                          1.08                           3.33                         3.75
cutoff4                                             1.38                          1.84                           2.9                           5.19                         5.54
number of obs                                      25509                         20375                        22903                       15906                            7356
Pseudo R-squared                                    0.05                          0.05                         0.05                        0.06                            0.05
The table contains the estimated marginal effect on the probability of each of the highest two categories, given an increase in the value of the relevant regressor,
holding all other regressors at their mean value. Robust z statistics of the marginal effect of each relevant regressor are presented in parentheses.
Each regression includes country dummy variables.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
rural is coded as follows: 1=urban, 2=suburbs/city-town, 3=rural.
social class is coded as follows: 1=lower, 2=working, 3=lower middle, 4=middle, 5=upper middle, 6=upper.
political party is coded as follows: 1=far left, 2=centre left, 3=centre, 4=right, 5=far right.
                                                                                       Table 3: Factor Endowments Model
Equation                                 1                            2                              3                           4                           5                            6                           7
Method                          ordered logit                ordered logit                  ordered logit               ordered logit               ordered logit                ordered logit               ordered logit

Dependent variable                                                                                                    y=TRADE_OP

                            dPr(y=4)         dPr(y=5)     dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)      dPr(y=4)         dPr(y=5)    dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)    dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)     dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)    dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)

age                          -0.0011         -0.0005      -0.0014         -0.0005        -0.0012         -0.0005     -0.0010         -0.0004     -0.0014         -0.0006      -0.0012         -0.0007     -0.0012         -0.0006
                             [-9.41]**       [-8.22]**    [-8.88]**       [-7.65]**      [-9.31]**       [-8.21]**   [-6.94]**       [-6.45]**   [-8.85]**       [-5.69]**    [-9.74]**       [-8.65]**   [-9.54]**       [-8.35]**
male                         0.0435           0.0175      0.0385            0.0151       0.0463          0.0215      0.0564          0.0246      0.0394            0.0179     0.0460          0.0281      0.0468          0.0263
                            [11.68]**         [9.8]**     [8.04]**           [7]**      [12.01]**        [9.94]**    [12.82]**       [10.26]**   [8.11]**          [5.35]**   [12.26]**       [10.53]**   [12.41]**       [10.41]**
citizen                      -0.0655         -0.0263      -0.0694         -0.0273        -0.0674         -0.0312     -0.0710         -0.0310     -0.0704         -0.0319      -0.0664         -0.0406     -0.0681         -0.0383
                             [-4.79]**       [-4.61]**    [-4.58]**       [-4.37]**      [-4.87]**       [-4.67]**    [-4]**         [-3.89]**   [-4.55]**         [-3.9]**   [-4.81]**       [-4.69]**   [-4.82]**       [-4.69]**
educyrs
                             -0.0891         -0.0358      -0.0737         -0.0290        -0.0560         -0.0260     -0.1133         -0.0495     -0.0821         -0.0373      -0.0129         -0.0079     0.0216          0.0121
(years of education)
                            [-10.98]**       [-11.17]**   [-4.98]**       [-5.46]**      [-4.61]**       [-5.06]**   [-4.75]**       [-5.18]**   [-4.98]**       [-4.03]**    [-2.94]**       [-2.72]**    [18]**         [14.3]**
educyrs*gdp                  0.0109           0.0044      0.0092            0.0036       0.0076          0.0035      0.0135          0.0059      0.0101            0.0046
                            [12.93]**        [12.67]**    [6.06]**          [6.69]**     [6.05]**        [6.73]**    [5.58]**        [6.12]**    [5.95]**          [4.51]**
log of real income                                        0.0381            0.0150                                                               0.1498            0.0680
                                                          [9.91]**          [9.01]**                                                              [1.77]           [1.46]
income*gdp/cap.                                                                                                                                  -0.0115         -0.0052
                                                                                                                                                  [-1.33]          [-1.15]
educyrs*sk                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.0016         -0.0009
                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-2.05]*        [-2.15]*
educyrs*unsk                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0078          0.0044
                                                                                                                                                                                                           [8.89]*        [8.22]**
educyrs*educ                                                                                                                                                                  0.0024          0.0015
                                                                                                                                                                              [6.56]**      [5.44]**
cutoff1                              -1.19                           0.88                        -1.22                         -1.13                        0.69                      -1.64                          -1.53
cutoff2                              0.45                            2.49                        0.38                          0.55                         2.3                       -0.01                          0.11
cutoff3                              1.42                            3.5                         1.35                          1.56                         3.31                       0.95                          1.07
cutoff4                              3.26                            5.38                        3.16                          3.44                         5.19                       2.78                           2.9
number obs                         22374                        15393                          21236                       17353                       15393                        22903                       22903
Pseudo R-squared                     0.05                         0.06                           0.05                          0.05                         0.06                      0.05                           0.05

The table contains the estimated marginal effect on the probability of each of the highest two categories, given an increase in the value of the relevant regressor,
holding all other regressors at their mean value. Robust z statistics of the marginal effect of each relevant regressor are presented in parentheses.
Each regression includes country dummy variables.
In regression (3) the Philippines are dropped. In regression (4) low income countries are not included.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                                      Table 4: Sector Specific Model
Equation                                             1                           2                  3                                             4                             5
Method                                     ordered logit                   ordered logit                 ordered logit                 ordered logit                 ordered logit
Dependent variable                                                                                      y=TRADE_OP
                                         dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)        dPr(y=4)           dPr(y=5)    dPr(y=4)      dPr(y=5)        dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)      dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)

age                                      -0.0010         -0.0007         -0.0010             -0.0007    -0.0010       -0.0005         -0.0010           -0.0005     -0.0010         -0.0006
                                         [-5.81]**         [-5.5]**      [-5.74]**          [-5.45]**   [-6.02]**     [-5.42]**       [-6.01]**         [-5.41]**   [-5.48]**       [-4.81]**
male                                      0.0454           0.0307         0.0430             0.0293     0.0450            0.0208      0.0442            0.0204      0.0484            0.0293
                                         [8.79]**          [7.74]**      [8.34]**            [7.49]**   [8.72]**          [7.16]**    [8.63]**          [7.11]**    [8.91]**          [7.31]**
citizen                                  -0.0427         -0.0289         -0.0425             -0.0290    -0.0420       -0.0194         -0.0416           -0.0192     -0.0375         -0.0227
                                         [-2.16]*          [-2.14]*      [-2.15]*            [-2.13]*   [-2.08]*          [-2.05]*    [-2.06]*          [-2.03]*     [-1.78]          [-1.77]
educyrs (years of education)              0.0152           0.0102         0.0149             0.0101     -0.1060       -0.0490         -0.1043           -0.0482     0.0145            0.0088
                                         [15.74]**       [11.16]**       [15.59]**          [11.03]**   [-9.27]**         [-9.3]**    [-9.21]**         [-9.32]**   [15.05]**         [9.48]
educyrs*gdp                                                                                             0.0128            0.0059      0.0126            0.0058
                                                                                                        [10.65]**     [10.22]**       [10.6]**        [10.25]**
imports                                                                 -1245.3730          -849.5183                                -1075.5040 -496.8681
                                                                          [-1.9]             [-1.86]                                   [-1.6]           [-1.57]
exports                                                                 -123.0995           -83.9711                                  -98.7649        -45.6281
                                                                          [-0.35]            [-0.35]                                   [-0.28]          [-0.28]
CA sector                                -0.0085         -0.0058                                        -0.0151       -0.0070                                       0.0248            0.0150
                                          [-1.07]          [-1.05]                                       [-1.86]          [-1.82]                                    [1.33]           [1.35]
CD sector                                -0.0256         -0.0173                                        -0.0228       -0.0106                                       -0.0482         -0.0291
                                         [-2.92]**       [-2.82]**                                      [-2.49]**     [-2.41]**                                     [-2.23]*          [-2.13]*
willingness to move                                                                                                                                                 0.0067            0.0040
                                                                                                                                                                    [2.83]**          [3.14]**
CA*willingness to move                                                                                                                                              -0.0103         -0.0062
                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.67]          [-1.68]
CD*willingness to move                                                                                                                                              0.0078            0.0047
                                                                                                                                                                     [1.13]      [1.11]
cutoff1                                        -1.4181                             -1.4555                    -0.9654                       -0.9530                       -1.3424
cutoff2                                        0.2162                              0.1835                     0.6799                        0.6920                         0.2983
cutoff3                                        1.1803                              1.1522                     1.6556                        1.6677                         1.2746
cutoff4                                        2.9109                              2.8770                     3.3926                        3.4047                         3.0097
number of obs                                   11898                               11673                      11673                            11673                         11033
Pseudo R-squared                                    0.04                             0.04                          0.04                          0.04                          0.04
The table contains the estimated marginal effect on the probability of each of the highest two categories, given an increase in the value of the relevant regressor,
holding all other regressors at their mean value. Robust z statistics of the marginal effect of each relevant regressor are presented in parentheses.
Each regression includes country dummy variables.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
"imports" refers to the value of imports in the respondent's sector of employment, normalized by GDP
"exports" refers to the value of exports in the respondent's sector of employment, normalized by GDP
                                                            Table 5: Status Model


Equation                                                1                           2                            3                           4

Method                                       ordered logit               ordered logit                ordered logit               ordered logit

Dependent variable                                                                         y=TRADE_OP

                                            dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)    dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)     dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)    dPr(y=4)        dPr(y=5)

age                                         -0.0014         -0.0007     -0.0014         -0.0007      -0.0011         -0.0004     -0.0013         -0.0005
                                            [-9.05]**       [-8.11]**   [-8.96]**       [-7.97]**    [-8.97]**       [-7.65]**   [-8.45]**       [-7.05]**
male                                        0.0413          0.0212      0.0419          0.0221       0.0430          0.0172      0.0362          0.0129
                                            [8.62]**        [7.86]**     [8.8]**        [7.77]**     [11.33]**       [9.09]**    [7.59]**        [6.45]**
citizen                                     -0.0735         -0.0377     -0.0732         -0.0386      -0.0665         -0.0265     -0.0688         -0.0245
                                            [-4.72]**       [-4.58]**   [-4.72]**       [-4.55]**    [-4.84]**       [-4.61]**   [-4.85]**       [-4.56]**
educyrs
                                            0.0151          0.0077      0.0151          0.0079       0.0106          0.0042      0.0100          0.0036
(years of education)
                                            [18.12]**       [12.64]**   [18.18]**       [12.3]**     [13.76]**        [9.3]**    [9.86]**         [7.2]**

log of real income                                                      -0.0090         -0.0047

                                                                         [-0.89]           [-0.86]
earnrel (relative income)                   0.0461          0.0237      0.0534          0.0281                                   0.0356          0.0127
                                            [9.56]**        [8.82]**    [4.75]**        [4.16]**                                   [8]**         [7.29]**
social class                                                                                         0.0193          0.0077      0.0151          0.0054
                                                                                                     [11.95]** [13.61]**         [7.83]**      [8.59]**
cutoff1                                             -1.41                          -1.89                     -1.26                       -1.22
cutoff2                                             0.21                           -0.28                     0.36                         0.36
cutoff3                                             1.21                           0.72                      1.27                         1.32
cutoff4                                             3.09                            2.6                        3                          3.08
number of obs                                     15906                       15906                        18609                       12798
Pseudo R-squared                                   0.06                        0.06                         0.04                        0.05

The table contains the estimated marginal effect on the probability of each of the highest two categories, given an increase in the value of the relevant regressor,
holding all other regressors at their mean value. Robust z statistics of the marginal effect of each relevant regressor are presented in parentheses.
Each regression includes country dummy variables.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
earnrel is the ratio of individual personal income to the country's (sample) average personal income
social class is coded as follows: 1=lower, 2=working, 3=lower middle, 4=middle, 5=upper middle, 6=upper.
                                                Table 6: Community/National Attachment Model
Equation                                                       1                 2                3                                                  4
Method                                                    ordered logit    ordered logit     ordered logit                                      ordered logit
Dependent variable                                                                  y=TRADE_OP
                                                            dPr(y=4)     dPr(y=5)      dPr(y=4)     dPr(y=5)     dPr(y=4)      dPr(y=5)      dPr(y=4)       dPr(y=5)
age                                                          -0.0007       -0.0004     -0.0004       -0.0001      -0.0010        -0.0007       -0.0003        -0.0001
                                                            [-4.79]**     [-4.52]**    [-2.89]**    [-2.82]**    [-7.67]**      [-6.81]**       [-1.63]         [-0.51]
male                                                         0.0455        0.0270       0.0547       0.0197       0.0458         0.0313        0.0565          0.0178
                                                            [10.57]**       [8.7]**     [13.2]**    [10.67]**    [10.76]**       [8.75]**     [10.99]**        [3.46]**
citizen                                                      -0.0596       -0.0353     -0.0347       -0.0125      -0.0639        -0.0436       -0.0344        -0.0108
                                                            [-3.82]**     [-3.69]**     [-2.17]*     [-2.16]*    [-4.01]**      [-3.86]**       [-1.82]         [-0.57]
educyrs (years of education)                                 0.0143        0.0085       0.0123       0.0044       0.0149         0.0102        0.0109          0.0034
                                                            [18.99]**     [11.78]**    [17.49]*     [12.18]**    [17.27]**      [11.38]**     [12.63]**        [3.97]**
NEIGHBOR                                                     -0.0207       -0.0123                                                             -0.0173        -0.0055
                                                            [-6.16]**     [-5.76]**                                                           [-4.54]**         [-1.43]
TOWN                                                         0.0105        0.0062                                                              0.0116          0.0037
                                                             [2.67]**      [2.63]**                                                            [2.59]**          [0.82]
COUNTY                                                       -0.0199       -0.0118                                                             -0.0164        -0.0052
                                                            [-5.74]**     [-5.36]**                                                           [-4.15]**         [-1.31]
CONTINENT                                                    0.0232        0.0137                                                              0.0140          0.0044
                                                             [7.83]**      [7.09]**                                                            [4.21]**          [1.32]
NATPRID1                                                     -0.0287       -0.0170     -0.0036      -0.0013                                    -0.0088        -0.0028
                                                            [-7.81]**     [-7.24]**     [-1.19]      [-1.19]                                   [-2.14]*         [-0.67]
NATPRID2                                                                               -0.0442      -0.0160                                    -0.0432        -0.0136
                                                                                      [-16.43]**   [-12.22]**                                [-12.53]**       [-3.94]**
NATPRID3                                                                               -0.0217      -0.0078                                    -0.0219        -0.0069
                                                                                       [-9.15]**    [-8.25]**                                 [-7.91]**       [-2.49]**
NATPRID4                                                                               -0.0541      -0.0195                                    -0.0533        -0.0167
                                                                                      [-23.65]**   [-15.05]**                                [-17.12]**       [-5.38]**
DEMOCR (pride in democracy)                                                                                       0.0127          0.0086       0.0195          0.0061
                                                                                                                  [3.98]**        [3.33]**     [4.44]**           [1.4]
POL_INFL (pride in pol influence)                                                                                -0.0252         -0.0172       -0.0119        -0.0038
                                                                                                                 [-7.76]**       [-5.67]**    [-2.75]**         [-0.86]
ECONPRID (economic pride)                                                                                         0.0069          0.0047       0.0159          0.0050
                                                                                                                   [2.05]*         [2.2]*      [4.11]**          [1.29]
SSS_PRID (pride in social security system)                                                                        0.0012          0.0009       0.0077          0.0024
                                                                                                                    [0.42]         [0.43]       [2.18]*          [0.69]
cutoff1                                                             -2.49                      -3.95                       -1.54                        -3.89
cutoff2                                                             -0.78                      -2.18                        0.12                        -2.04
cutoff3                                                              0.21                      -1.17                        1.06                        -1.02
cutoff4                                                              2.09                       0.78                        2.91                         0.97
number of obs                                                       18219                      20008                       19336                        14837
Pseudo R-squared                                                     0.05                       0.08                        0.05                         0.08
The table contains the estimated marginal effect on the probability of each of the highest two categories, given an increase in the value of the relevant regressor,
holding all other regressors at their mean value. Robust z statistics of the marginal effect of each relevant regressor are presented in parentheses.
Each regression includes country dummy variables.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                        Table 7: Preferred Specification

Equation                                           1                        2
Method                                            OLS                      OLS
                                             without country           with country
                                                dummies                 dummies

Dependent variable                                        TRADE_OP
age                                                    -0.0021                  -0.0024
                                                           2.76**                  3.07**
male                                                    0.2421                   0.2131
                                                         10.14**                   9.08**
educyrs (years of education)                           -0.3029                  -0.3848
                                                         14.48**                   5.28**
educyrs*gdp                                             0.0339                   0.0428
                                                         16.22**                   5.70**
earnrel                                                 0.1201                    0.128
                                                           5.90**                  6.39**
social class                                            0.1212                   0.0735
                                                         10.87**                   6.31**
NEIGHBOR                                               -0.0648                  -0.0728
                                                           3.71**                  4.13**
TOWN                                                    0.0635                   0.0634
                                                           3.03**                  3.04**
COUNTY                                                 -0.0708                  -0.0747
                                                           3.85**                  4.10**
CONTINENT                                               0.0108                   0.0467
                                                            0.83                   3.33**
NATPRID2                                                 -0.152                 -0.1394
                                                         11.28**                  10.35**
NATPRID3                                               -0.0624                  -0.0866
                                                           5.21**                  7.01**
NATPRID4                                               -0.1899                  -0.1596
                                                         17.98**                  14.76**
constant                                                  3.285                  3.4901
                                                         32.36**                  30.49**
number of obs                                             9478                     9478
Adj. R-squared                                             0.18                     0.22

T values in parentheses are robust, i.e. they are calculated using White (1980)-corrected standard errors.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


social class is coded as follows: 1=lower, 2=working, 3=lower middle, 4=middle, 5=upper middle, 6=upper.
earnrel is the ratio of individual personal income to the country's (sample) average personal income
Table 8: Power of Main Regressors in Explaining Cross-Country Differences
Equation                                1                2
Method                                                  OLS                     OLS
                                                regression with only regression with main
                                                        DV            regressors and DV

Dependent variable                                              TRADE_OP
USA                                                          -0.8396              -0.6861
                                                                12.12**                9.45**
Austria                                                      -0.9016              -0.4896
                                                                10.70**                6.26**
Hungary                                                      -1.2227              -0.4705
                                                                17.07**                4.84**
Ireland                                                      -0.8155                  -0.259
                                                                11.43**                3.65**
Norway                                                       -0.2596              -0.1248       •
                                                                 3.75**                 1.91
Sweden                                                       -0.3272              -0.0541       •
                                                                 4.63**                 0.85
Czech Republic                                                   -0.55            -0.1544       •
                                                                 6.52**                 1.65
Slovenia                                                     -0.6026              -0.1587       •
                                                                 7.44**                 1.85
Poland                                                       -0.8958              -0.1154       •
                                                                10.70**                 0.86
Russia                                                       -0.7284                  0.1933    •
                                                                 8.10**                 1.46
New Zealand                                                  -0.2694                  0.0486    •
                                                                 3.03**                 0.57
Canada                                                       -0.4671              -0.3257
                                                                 6.64**                4.71**
Japan                                                         0.0644                  0.2512
                                                                   0.82                3.39**
Spain                                                        -1.0052              -0.4724
                                                                14.20**                6.35**
Latvia                                                       -1.2702                  -0.239    •
                                                                14.95**                 1.54
Slovak Republic                                              -0.7137              -0.1821       •
                                                                 9.19**                 1.66
Constant                                                      3.1563                  3.4901
                                                                53.97**               30.49**
number of obs                                                    9478                  9478
Adj. R-squared                                                    0.09                  0.22
Robust t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
The dummy variable which has been dropped is West Germany's one.
 individual preferences                    interest groups
                                                                        “demand side”
 (A)                                       (B)
                                                                        of trade policy




                                          Trade policy outcomes




 policymaker preferences                   institutional structure of   “supply side”
 (C)                                       government                   of trade policy
                                           (D)



Figure 1: Determination of trade policy
                       average trade duties 1992-98                          Fitted values
                                                    Russia
  15.9732

                                                             Philippi




                                        Poland
                          Hungary




            Bulgaria

                                                                            New Z eal                         Japan

                                                   USA                     Czech Re
                         Lat v ia                                                       Canada
                                    Austria                                              SwedenNorway
                                      Spain                      Italy ,
                                                 Great BrIreland
                                                              Germany                            Germany ,   Netherla
        0
            1.68                                                                                             3.09
                                                       TRADE_OP

Figure 2: Relationship between TRADE_OP and average trade duties
                                   educ_ME                                                Fitted values
                                                                                          Great Br
          .061




                                                            Slov enia

                                                                                              Germany , Japan
                                                                                            Netherla
                                                                                New Z eal Sweden              Norway
educ_ME




                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                Italy Austria
                                                                                                          Canada
                                                                                Ireland
                                                          Czech Re

                                   Poland

                                    Russia      Hungary                 Spain
                                            Slov ak R
                        Lat v ia




                 Philippi
          -.01
                 3519                                                                                                  27395
                                                                        GDPcap

Figure 3: Relationship between per-capita GDP and the estimated marginal effect of education
                                                                                    Appendix III: Table AIII.1 - Demographic Variables

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             political party
                                                                                                                                                                 subjective social class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               affiliation
                                            number of                                   average
                                                                                                                                              trade union




                                                                                                                                                                                                         upper middle
                                                                                                                                                                                lower middle
             Country                      observations                   age            years of               male                rural




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               centre left
                                                                                                                                                                      working




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 far right
                                                                                                                                              membership




                                                                                                                                                                                               middle




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              centre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  far left
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         upper
                                                                                                                                                             lower




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        right
                                          in the sample                                education



 Germany West                                    1282                     46               10.93                0.54                     -       0.36       2.0      0.0 16.2 56.4 16.5 1.3                                      0.3 49.0 5.5 36.0 2.6
 Germany East                                     612                     48               10.93                0.50                     -       0.78       9.0      0.0 33.5 43.1 4.3                                  0.3 15.2 43.5 5.1 25.5 1.3
 Great Britain                                   1058                     47               11.34                0.40                     -       0.21        -       -          -              -         -               -       0.6 42.9 14.6 26.3 0.0
 USA                                             1367                     45               13.43                0.44                   1.59      0.10       5.9 45.8 0.0 44.3 0.0                                       3.3      0.0 34.3 36.1 27.7 0.0
 Austria                                         1007                     46               10.39                0.45                     -       0.46       3.7      0.0 15.5 61.8 12.5 0.8                                      0.0 36.2 4.5 29.9 0.0
 Hungary                                         1000                     48               10.50                0.43                   1.97      0.15       12.7 35.2 25.3 22.2 1.2                                     0.0       -            -             -          -        -
 Italy                                           1094                     43               11.03                0.48                   1.98      0.12       1.4      0.0 11.5 71.3 13.4 2.5                                       -            -             -          -        -
 Ireland                                          994                     46               12.26                0.49                   2.02      0.26       1.6 35.3 14.3 38.7 4.3                                      0.5      0.0          2.4 35.4 0.9                      0.0
 Netherlands                                     2089                     44               12.69                0.46                   1.72      0.21        -       -          -              -         -               -       6.5 18.0 26.0 15.7 2.7
 Norway                                          1527                     43               12.68                0.50                   2.09      0.44       0.0 30.4 6.5 39.5 8.3                                       0.5      0.7 38.1 18.6 19.7 0.0
 Sweden                                          1296                     45               11.43                0.49                   1.23      0.71       2.4 35.2 0.0 45.1 9.2                                       0.7      5.8 33.3 14.0 18.0 0.0
 Czech Republic                                  1111                     43               12.91                0.51                   1.65      0.21       4.1 27.3 21.2 35.0 6.4                                      1.3      5.1 10.8 39.3 22.6 9.0
 Slovenia                                        1036                     43               10.68                0.44                   2.03      0.35       3.3 34.1 0.0 47.5 6.2                                       0.2      0.0          4.5            9.6 17.4 1.9
 Poland                                          1598                     47               10.29                0.45                   1.72      0.13       7.4 41.2 0.0 39.6 4.4                                       2.2      0.0 24.2 9.3                          4.7      0.0
 Bulgaria                                        1105                     49                 -                  0.48                   1.92      0.19       14.6 51.7 0.0 26.2 0.0                                      1.0      6.0 15.0 8.1                          9.0      2.7
 Russia                                          1585                     45               11.19                0.45                   1.50      0.32       12.8 29.7 14.6 25.1 2.9                                     0.7 18.3 3.2                         8.1 35.8 4.4
 New Zealand                                     1043                     46               14.33                0.47                   1.50      0.15       3.4 19.0 10.6 40.9 11.8 1.0                                          0.0          4.2 55.2 4.9                      0.0
 Canada                                          1543                     42               14.78                0.49                   1.16      0.20       2.6 16.4 10.2 31.8 13.1 1.5                                          0.9 20.0 30.1 14.6 0.0
 Philippines                                     1200                     40               9.38                 0.50                   1.75      0.01       25.1 61.3 0.0 10.8 0.0                                      2.8       -            -             -          -        -
 Japan                                           1256                     46               11.87                0.46                     -       0.13       4.5      0.0 19.3 48.7 17.2 3.5                                      1.7          5.2            6.2 24.1 0.0
 Spain                                           1221                     45               10.13                0.48                   1.48      0.08       6.1 41.3 17.6 28.8 3.8                                      0.3 11.5 31.4 0.3 28.6 0.0
 Latvia                                          1044                     47               11.64                0.39                   0.39      0.19       11.9 43.3 21.0 0.0                          9.8             0.6       -            -             -          -        -
 Slovak Republic                                 1388                     41               11.83                0.48                     -       0.32       8.7 31.0 22.0 26.6 6.6                                      1.7      4.9 13.2 35.8 12.7 6.4


 Mean                                    total n=28,456                  44.77             11.69                0.47                   1.69      0.31       7.29 30.8 12.5 40.2 7.9 1.44 6.07 33.2 29.0 29.3 2.52
 Standard Deviation                                                      16.88             3.58                 0.50                   0.90      0.46

Rural is coded as follows: 1 urban, 2 suburbs/city-town, 3 rural.

Male is coded as follows: 1 male, 0 otherwise (i.e., 0 includes m.v.).

Trade Union Membership is coded as follows: 1 member, 0 otherwise (i.e., 0 includes m.v.).

Both Subjective Social Class and Political Party Affiliation give percentages over the whole national sample (I.e., including m.v.).
                           Table AIII.2 - Attachment to Own Neighborhood, Town/City and County/Region and National Pride Variables


                                                                                                         % in each nation declaring

           Country                                  attachment                           attachment    attachment     attachment        "rather be     own country     in favor of
                                                       to own                               to own        to own         to own       citizen of own    better than country's interests
                                                  neighborhood                            town/city   county/region     country          country"         others       at any cost
                                                   (NEIGHBOR)                              (TOWN)       (COUNTY)      (NATPRID1)       (NATPRID2)      (NATPRID3)       (NATPRID4)
 Germany                                      0.74                       12              0.72    7    0.68      7     0.80    4       0.69       3     0.37     8      0.29       5
 Great Britain                                0.64                        3              0.56    1    0.51      2     0.71    2       0.73       8     0.56     13     0.52      16
 USA                                          0.57                        2              0.60    2    0.62      4     0.81    5       0.91      22     0.81     21     0.44      13
 Austria                                      0.83                       16              0.84   16    0.89     20     0.91    13      0.86      15     0.69     17     0.62      20
 Hungary                                      0.80                       14              0.84   15    0.86     18     0.96    22      0.87      17     0.26     3      0.41      10
 Italy                                        0.68                        8              0.82   12    0.80     16     0.87    10      0.62       2     0.37     7      0.30       6
 Ireland                                      0.84                       17              0.83   14    0.81     17     0.93    15      0.86      16     0.71     18     0.63      21
 Netherlands                                  0.71                       10              0.71    5    0.49      1     0.87    9       0.50       1     0.46     11     0.28       4
 Norway                                       0.51                        1              0.70    4    0.79     15     0.94    20      0.78      11     0.67     16     0.38       9
 Sweden                                       0.65                        4              0.66    3    0.66      6     0.83    7       0.70       5     0.48     12     0.44      12
 Czech Republic                               0.81                       15              0.87   19    0.69      9     0.92    14      0.73       7     0.22     1      0.31       7
 Slovenia                                     0.77                       13              0.82   13    0.78     14     0.93    17      0.78      13     0.28     4      0.28       3
 Poland                                       0.73                       11              0.75    9    0.64      5     0.94    19      0.88      19     0.39     9      0.48      15
 Bulgaria                                     0.88                       21              0.89   21    0.86     19     0.93    16      0.88      20     0.57     14     0.73      22
 Russia                                       0.67                        6              0.72    6    0.62      3     0.82    6       0.75       9     0.42     10     0.61      19
 New Zealand                                  0.65                        5              0.76   10    0.71     11     0.94    18      0.81      14     0.78     20     0.52      17
 Canada                                       0.69                        9              0.76   11    0.74     13     0.74    3       0.78      12     0.77     19     0.43      11
 Philippines                                  0.86                       19              0.73    8    0.68      8     0.68    1       0.88      18     0.59     15     0.37       8
 Japan                                        0.91                       22              0.88   20    0.89     21     0.95    21      0.89      21     0.84     22     0.19       1
 Spain                                        0.88                       20              0.92   22    0.90     22     0.89    12      0.73       6     0.36     6      0.61      18
 Latvia                                       0.68                        7              0.85   18    0.69     10     0.86    8       0.76      10     0.32     5      0.44      14
 Slovak Republic                              0.84                       18              0.85   17    0.73     12     0.89    11      0.69       4     0.23     2      0.23       2
 Mean                                         0.74                                       0.78         0.73            0.87            0.78             0.51            0.43
 Standard Deviation                           0.11                                       0.10         0.12            0.08            0.10             0.20            0.15
The second column of each variable gives the ranking of countries according to that variable.

Bold numbers correspond to highest and lowest values.
                                       Table AIII.3 - Pride in Specific Achievements


                                                                              % in each nation declaring
                Country                           proud of             proud of political           proud         proud of
                                                  national                 influence             of economic   social security
                                                 democracy               in the world           achievements      system
 Germany                                         0.57         12          0.61             16   0.83     22    0.62       17
 Great Britain                                   0.68         15          0.55             15   0.44     12    0.48       12
 USA                                             0.83         20          0.80             22   0.82     19    0.50       13
 Austria                                         0.71         16          0.63             17   0.82     21    0.84       22
 Hungary                                         0.20          1          0.18              1   0.09     1     0.07       1
 Italy                                           0.26          6          0.23              3   0.40     9     0.28       8
 Ireland                                         0.75         18          0.79             21   0.82     20    0.65       19
 Netherlands                                     0.84         21          0.49             13   0.78     16    0.83       21
 Norway                                          0.80         19          0.78             19   0.80     18    0.62       16
 Sweden                                          0.64         13          0.41             11   0.17     3     0.65       18
 Czech Republic                                  0.35          8          0.51             14   0.42     11    0.19       6
 Slovenia                                        0.21          3          0.29              4   0.34     8     0.30       9
 Poland                                          0.24          5          0.36              6   0.28     6     0.17       4
 Bulgaria                                        0.31          7          0.36              7   0.26     5     0.18       5
 Russia                                          0.20          1          0.32              5   0.16     2     0.08       2
 New Zealand                                     0.73         17          0.71             18   0.72     15    0.39       10
 Canada                                          0.84         22          0.79             20   0.62     14    0.81       20
 Philippines                                     0.53         10          0.39              9   0.50     13    0.52       14
 Japan                                           0.66         14          0.45             12   0.80     17    0.47       11
 Spain                                           0.54         11          0.40             10   0.41     10    0.53       15
 Latvia                                          0.40          9          0.38              8   0.21     4     0.12       3
 Slovak Republic                                 0.22          4          0.19              2   0.31     7     0.22       7
 Mean                                            0.52                     0.48                  0.50           0.43
 Standard Deviation                              0.24                     0.20                  0.26           0.25
The second column of each variable gives the ranking of countries according to that variable.

Bold numbers correspond to highest and lowest values.
