"" %%"" 

  

     
  
 
!"#!

 $%&'()*
&+,,---.$,&&,-'()*
  " / ""
012134
#.5$6170*'
&#.

            
 
 !"#$%&  $'() *  +    %
   *  % ,         %  *
 % *  

3 5  .3$58
  6 5!"#!
" $%&'()*
&#.7110
7(6 )(





&&9&854$.4&5 #&8!#$:.
# #3$#588.# -3.-3 5 -
53 /%$-638653985
&#3#&8!#-&83#89$6
-83#&8!#33-;#&8!#58!< &&8
-3.836#58535&..8! 8886.
9&8   & #&8!# &==8   39   #3$ #58 - .
5$:.35:.53

  
4!86 $6%"5"
 
4%#&/.
!"#!
4!86 $

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

W J.  H , C H ,
1. I  

G  R 

1

In the 1950’s and 1960’s, the unemployment rate in both Europe and the U.S. was below
five percent. During the 1970’s European and U.S. unemployment rates increased sharply
in response to the steep increase in oil prices. In the last two decades, however, unemployment rates diverged sharply: average European rates have remained high while American
rates have returned once again to prior levels. There are a variety of institutional factors
distinguishing Europe from the U.S., including strong unions, minimum wages, generous
unemployment benefits, and high employment protection, that might explain differences in
levels of unemployment. These institutional distinctions have been present throughout the
postwar era, however, and thus they cannot by themselves explain the differences in how
unemployment rates have changed.

This unexplained divergence between unemployment

rates has been termed the “European unemployment puzzle.”
Recent research has focussed on explaining the puzzle by considering the interaction
between institutions and long-term changes in the economic environment, thought of as
1

den Haan: University of California, San Diego, CEPR and NBER. Haefke: Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Ramey: University of California, San Diego. The authors would like to thank Yann Algan, Jean-Pascal Benassy, Jeff Campbell, Michel Juillard, Per Krusell, Etienne Lehman, Christopher Pissarides, Xavier Taffunel,
Justin Wolfers, Eran Yashiv, and seminar participants at Cepremap, Erasmus University, London Business
School, Tinbergen Institute, UCSD, the 2001 conference of the Society of Computational Economics, and
the 2001 NBER summer institute. The Fortran program used to solve the models in this paper is available
at http://weber.ucsd.edu/~wdenhaan.
1

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

2

“shocks” to the environment. Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998), for example, have argued that
a long-term rise in economic turbulence, manifested in greater skill loss for displaced workers,
raises unemployment by a greater amount when unemployment benefits are higher. Increased
turbulence could thus explain why Europe, with its more generous unemployment benefits,
would experience greater increases in unemployment. Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) present
empirical evidence relating the behavior of the unemployment rate in several European
countries and the U.S. to the slowdown in TFP growth and higher interest rates.

They

show that these factors lead to larger increases in unemployment where institutions are
less “employment-friendly,” as they are in Europe relative to the U.S..

Blanchard and

Wolfers find statistically significant influence of the following institutions: the level of the
replacement rate (the share of income replaced by unemployment benefits), the duration of
unemployment benefits, the amount of employment protection, the tax wedge (the difference
between the real labor cost of a worker to an employer and the real consumption wage of the
worker), the percentage of workers who belong to a union, and the extent to which unions
and employer organizations coordinate wage setting.
Doubt has been expressed in the literature about the importance of some of these institutions. Nickell and Layard (1999, p. 3030), for example, argue that “time spent worrying
about strict labor market regulations, employment protection, and minimum wages is probably time largely wasted”. Similarly, Garibaldi (1998) shows that the level of firing restrictions

leaves steady state unemployment rates unaffected even though it has important (offsetting)
effects on job creation and job destruction. This paper starts, therefore, by considering the
interaction between the slowdown in TFP growth and increase in real interest rates (the
shocks) and the level of unemployment benefits. Furthermore, we analyze the interaction

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

3

between changes in labor taxation (as a shock) and the initial tax rate (as an institution).2
In this paper we assess the interactions between shocks and institutions using a job
matching model of equilibrium unemployment. Following Mortensen and Pissarides (1994),
job creation and destruction are both determined endogenously, with wages set via bilateral
bargaining within employment relationships.
Comparing steady state equilibria, unemployment is shown to increase when either the
growth rate falls, the interest rate increases, or the tax rate on labor income increases.
Moreover, each of these factors leads to a larger rise in unemployment when the replacement
rate is greater or the initial tax rate is higher.
effect found by Blanchard and Wolfers.

Thus, the model exhibits the interaction

Slower growth and higher interest rates lead to

permanent effects on unemployment, since steady state equilibria are affected: as long as

growth remains slow or interest rates remain high, job creation and destruction decisions are
impacted in a manner that raises the equilibrium unemployment rate. This is contrary to
the view of Blanchard and Wolfers and several other economists that productivity growth
and interest rates should have only a transitory impact on unemployment and should not
affect the natural rate of unemployment.

3

Whether the interactions between the institutions and the shocks to the growth, interest,
and tax rates are sufficient to quantitatively explain both the European and American unemployment experiences depends crucially on the cross-sectional distribution of productivity
levels. The key view expressed in this paper is that high replacement rates and high tax
2

Daveri and Tabellini (2000) also consider the effect of tax rates on unemployment but, as discussed in

section 4.5, the focus of their explanation is quite different from ours.
3

Phelps (1968), Gordon (1997), and Blanchard (2000, p. 257) also claim that the natural rate is not

affected by productivity growth.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

4

rates increase the mass of jobs that are vulnerable to the type of shocks considered here.
Indeed, it is easy to construct numerical examples where this is the case. The numerical
examples suggest that the variability of outcomes at the relationship level, which may be
tied to factors such as government protection and geographic distance, may play a role in
accounting for the European unemployment puzzle. More broadly, our model has the feature
that small changes in the cross-sectional distribution can have important quantitative effects
on equilibrium outcomes. This stands in stark contrast to the recent body of work (e.g.,
Krusell and Smith (1998)) that has argued against the quantitative relevance of details of
cross sectional wealth and income distributions in stochastic growth models with partially
uninsurable idiosyncratic risk.
In an extension of our model, we incorporate turbulence.

Following Ljungqvist and

Sargent (1998), turbulence is modelled as a positive probability that a high-skilled worker
looses his skills when he is displaced. In our model, a rise in turbulence typically reduces
the level of equilibrium unemployment, contrary to the result of Ljungqvist and Sargent.
As in Ljungqvist and Sargent, turbulence reduces the value of employment relationships
for displaced high-skilled workers, and thus lowers the rate at which new relationships are
formed.

The destruction rate is also affected in our model, however: greater turbulence

makes high-skilled workers more reluctant to leave their jobs, and job destruction falls.
On balance, the latter effect tends to dominate and unemployment declines. Although an
increase in turbulence cannot explain the increase in European unemployment rates in the
present setting, allowing for some degree of turbulence does serve to greatly improve the
model’s ability to match the unemployment evidence quantitatively.
Section 2 documents the European unemployment puzzle, Section 3 lays out the model
and Section 4 reports results for parameterized versions of the model. Section 5 concludes.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

5

2. E U   P!!
In this section we document the time series behavior of variables related to the European
unemployment puzzle for five European countries (France, Germany, Spain, Italy and the
United Kingdom) and the United States. Standardized unemployment rates are plotted in
Figure 1. As documented by the figure, the unemployment rates in Europe and the U.S.
were low and fairly similar in the beginning of the postwar period. During the 1970’s, unemployment rates rose both in Europe and the U.S.. After this, however, the unemployment
rate in the U.S. declined, while European unemployment remained high.

Accounting for

this difference, and, in particular, for the persistently high unemployment rates in Europe,
constitutes a puzzle.
One possible explanation is that European institutions may have been less favorable for
employment.

More generous European unemployment benefits, for example, might lead

workers to be more selective in accepting new jobs, thus raising European unemployment
relative to that of the U.S.. Figure 2 plots OECD standardized replacement rates, indicating
that U.S. replacement rates are much lower on average than those in Europe. Note however
that European replacement rates were already high relative to U.S. levels at the beginning
of the postwar period, when unemployment rates were similar. Thus, the rise in European
unemployment cannot be explained by changes in European replacement rates.
The numbers in the graph may seem low. The reason is that the OECD standardized
unemployment rate gives equal weight to the replacement rate in year 1 of an unemployment
spell, to the average replacement rate in years 2 and 3, and to the average replacement rate
for years 4 and 5. Using unequal weighting is unfortunate since the replacement rate during
the first year is clearly more important than that during years 4 and 5.

We, therefore,

also report in Table 1 the benefit replacement rate and the corresponding benefit duration

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

6

measure from Nickell and Layard (1999).
Figure 3 plots the effective tax rate on labor income from Daveri and Tabellini (2000).
Just like replacement rates, labor tax rates cannot by themselves account for the dynamic
differences between European and U.S. unemployment because tax rates were already substantially higher in Europe in the 1960’s.4
As Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) and Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) have stressed, the
differences between European and U.S. unemployment experiences might best be explained
by the interaction between institutions and shocks to the economies. Consider, for example,
the behavior of TFP growth and interest rates over the postwar period.

Figure 4 docu-

ments a pronounced decline in TFP growth for all of the countries considered, coinciding
roughly with the increase in unemployment. Real interest rates are considered in Figure 5,
where increases over the postwar period may be observed for every country except Germany.
Unemployment responses to the growth slowdown and rise in interest rates appear to vary
based on institutional differences between countries. Blanchard and Wolfers, in particular,
provide evidence that where institutions are less employment-friendly, e.g., where replacement rates are higher, unemployment rises by a greater amount in the face of slower growth
and higher real interest rates. In the remainder of this paper we assess the extent to which an
equilibrium job market matching model can rationalize these observed interactions between
4

Nickell and Layard (1999) point out that the labor market consequences of taxation depend on the sum

of payroll taxes, income taxes, and consumption taxes. In this paper, differences in the taxation of labor
income and unemployment benefits play a crucial role. This means that differences in payroll taxes and
differences in the progressivity of income taxes across countries are important. Nickell and Layard (1999)
show that average payroll taxes for the period from 1989 to 1994 were lower in the US than in all European
countries considered in this paper except the UK.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

7

institutions and unemployment responses.

3. M 
In this section we present the model. Sections 3.1 through 3.4 describe the version of the
model in which there is no growth and no turbulence. In Section 3.5 we show that adding
disembodied growth is equivalent to an adjustment of the discount factor in the model with
no growth. In Sections 3.6 we introduce turbulence.

3.1. Employment Relationships.

Production takes place within employment relation-

ships consisting of one worker and one firm, who interact through discrete time until the
relationship is severed or the worker retires. A relationship produces output
When a relationship is first formed, the initial value of
For a continuing relationship, the value of

z

z

z

per period.

is drawn from the distribution

ν (z ).

may vary as a consequence of relationship-

specific productivity shocks that occur at the start of a period. We consider two kinds of
productivity shocks.
(1) With probability

γS

there is a switch of the productivity level

drawn again from the distribution
the previous period value of
(2) With probability

ρx

ν (z ).

z.

In this case,

z

is

If no switch occurs, then the relationship maintains

z.
the relationship experiences an exogenous breakup, where sev-

erance occurs automatically. Exogenous breakups reflect events that permanently destroy
the productivity of the relationship; e.g., market conditions may shift adversely. Alternatively, exogenous breakups can capture changes in workers’ personal circumstances that lead
them to change jobs. Assume that exogenous separations cannot occur in the period that a
relationship is newly formed.
After the current-period productivity parameter is determined, the worker and firm de-

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

8

cide whether to continue or sever their relationship, and, if the relationship is continued,
they determine the worker’s wage payment. Wages are set according to Nash bargaining,
where

π

gives the worker’s bargaining weight, and the disagreement point is severance of the

relationship. In addition, workers are subject to shocks that induce retirement, occurring
at the end of a period. Let

ρr

denote the probability of retirement. If the worker and firm

agree to sever their relationship following a switch, or if exogenous separation occurs, then
they each enter a matching market in which new employment relationships are formed. A
retiring worker, in contrast, leaves the labor market and obtains a future value of zero.

3.2. Matching Market.

New employment relationships are formed on a matching mar-

ket. Each period, the number of newly formed relationships is

m(u, v),

where

the masses of unemployed workers and firms posting vacancies, respectively.
that

m(u, v)

u

and

v

give

We assume

is a homogeneous function of degree 1 and that the total masses of workers and

firms are fixed at unity. Because the mass of workers is equal to the mass of firms, the ratio
of the mass of unemployed to the mass of vacancies and, thus, the matching probability are
fixed. Each period, a proportion

ρr

of the workers leaves the market through retirement,

replaced by an identical number of new entrant workers that flow into the unemployment
pool. Further, established workers enter the unemployment pool when their employment
relationships are severed.
While they are unemployed, workers receive unemployment benefits equal to

b.

To sim-

plify the analysis, we assume that benefits are linked to average wages of all workers. Unemployed workers thus obtain a per period benefit of

b = φp while unemployed, where p denotes

the mean wage payment of all workers. New entrant workers do not receive unemployment
benefits.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

3.3. Zero Surplus Level.

9

Newly-matched workers and firms choose to accept their

match and begin an employment relationship if their initial productivity draw

z is sufficiently

high. Correspondingly, a worker and firm in an ongoing relationship choose to continue their
relationship following a switch if the new draw of

z

is sufficiently high. We assume that the

worker and firm bargain efficiently over the terms of their relationship, and thus they make
acceptance and continuation decisions that maximize their joint surplus. Joint surplus is
defined as follows.

Let

z

denote the current value productivity parameter following any

productivity draw, and suppose the worker obtains unemployment benefit

b

each period he

is in the worker matching pool. Then joint surplus is given by

s(z, b) = (1
where

− τ e (z)) z + g(z) − (1 − τ u (b))b − ww (b) − wf ,

(1)

g (z ) denotes the future joint value from continuing the relationship, w w (b) denotes the

worker’s future value from entering the unemployment pool in the current period when he
receives an unemployment benefit of b,
vacancy pool in the current period,
when income is equal to
In equilibrium,
too sharply with
of

z

x

s(z, b)

x),

and

wf

τ e (x)

τ u (x)

indicates the firm’s future value from entering the

is the tax rate on income earned in the relationship

is the tax rate on unemployment benefits equal to

is an increasing function of

z

(as long as

and there exists a zero surplus level

z(b)

τ e (x)

x.

does not increase

indicating the smallest value

at which accepting or continuing the relationship yields nonzero surplus to the worker

and firm. For values of

z

below

z (b),

the worker and firm will either reject a new match,

or they will destroy an existing match. The zero surplus level is defined by the following
condition:

s(z (b), b) = 0.

(2)

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

3.4. Equilibrium.
w(b),

The equilibrium conditions, involving equilibrium values of

10

g (z)

and

equilibrium wage payments, and steady state conditions for the matching market, are

given as follows. The future joint value from continuing a relationship is equal to 5



∞


g (z ) = β (1 − ρx ){(1 − γ S )s(z, b) + γ S
s(y, b)dν (y )} + (1 − τ u (b))b + ww (b) + wf  .
z (b)

(3)
The Nash bargaining solution implies that the wage payment to a worker having current
unemployment benefit

b,

written

p(z, b),

satisfies the following condition:

p(z, b) + g w (z) = πs(z, b) + (1
where

g w (z )

− τ u(b))b + ww (b),

(4)

indicates the worker’s future value from continuing the relationship:



∞


g w (z ) = β (1 − ρx ){(1 − γ S )πs(z, b) + γ S
πs(y, b)dν (y )} + (1 − τ u (b))b + ww (b) .

(5)

z (b)

For a worker having unemployment benefit

b,

the future value from entering the unemploy-

ment pool satisfies



∞


w w (b) = β λw
πs(y, b)dν (y ) + (1 − τ u (b))b + ww (b) ,

(6)

z (b)

where

λw = m(u, v )/u

Let

u(b)

denotes the worker matching probability.

denote the mass of workers in the unemployment pool at the end of a period,

having unemployment benefit
5

b.

This formula holds for values of z

The probability that a firm in the vacancy pool matches

≥ z(φp). A match with a worker that is not entitled to unemployment

benefits would be willing to produce for values of z lower than z (φp) but higher than z(0) to become entitled
to unemployment benefits. For the values of z for which such an “entitlement effect” occurs, the relationship
exists for only one period and g(z) is equal to (1 − τ u (b))b + ww (b) + wf ).

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

11

with such a worker is given by

λf (b) =

m(u, v) u(b)
.
v
u

It follows that the future value obtained by a firm in the vacancy pool is

wf =
Let

e


b

∞

λf (b)β

(1

z (b)

− π)s(y, b)dν (y) + βwf .

(7)

denote the total mass of employed workers in continuing employment relationships

at the start of a period prior to realization of productivity shocks. Steady state conditions
for worker stocks and flows are given as follows. The stocks

u(0)

and

u(φp)

of new entrants

and workers previously employed, respectively, must satisfy

ρr = ρr u(0) + (1

(1

=

− ρr )

− ρr )λw (1 − ν (z(0)))u(0),

ρx + (1

ρr u(φp) + (1

− ρx)γ S ν (z(φp))

(8)

e

− ρr )λw (1 − ν (z(φp))u(φp),

(9)

where gross inflows are given on the left-hand sides of the equations, and gross outflows on
the right-hand sides. Observe in (9) that workers never flow directly from the
the

φp.

u(φp)

pool, since they must spend at least one period in the

The stock

e

e

u(0)

pool to

pool to quality for benefits

is determined by

(1

− ρr )λw [(1 − ν (z(0))u(0) + (1 − ν (z(φp))u(φp)]
=

ρr e + (1

− ρr )

ρx + (1

− ρx)γ S ν (z(φp))

e.

(10)

We assume that the government uses tax revenues to finance unemployment benefits
and the purchases of commodities.

Below we let

ζ

denote the per capita value of these

government purchases. We introduce this term to study tax rates that are not related to

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL
financing requirements of unemployment benefits.

Let

e(b)

workers that would be entitled to unemployment benefits
constraint for the government is equal to

e(0)

∞

τ e (y )ydν (y ) + e(φp)

z (0)

3.5. Growth and Interest Rates.
t

z

denote the mass of employed

after displacement. The budget

τ e (y )ydν (y) =

z(φp)

u(φp)(1

to (1 + ξ )

∞

b

12

per period, where

ξ

− τ u (φp))φp + ζ.

(11)

We assume that output within a relationship is equal

is the growth rate. Output, thus, displays disembodied

deterministic technological growth. We also assume that households are risk neutral and
discount future earnings using the interest rate

r.

with the presence of growth, since the parameter
growth effect when



ξ = 0.

In particular,

The model outlined above is consistent

β

can be reinterpreted to capture the

β = (1 + ξ )/(1 + r).

This discount factor would also be appropriate under more general assumptions about
preferences. Suppose that households pool their labor and profit incomes at the end of each
period and choose aggregate consumption to maximize the discounted utility of a representative household using the composite discount factor
the retirement parameter,

ρr ,

δ = (1

− ρr )/(1 + ρ), which combines

with the conventional discount factor, 1/(1 + ρ). Interest rates

are determined by the following equation:

(1 + r)δMt+1 = 1,
where

Mt+1

(12)

is the marginal rate of substitution between consumption this period and next

period.
For example, when the utility function of the agent is given by

∞

s=t

C 1−γ
δ s−t s
1

− 1,

−γ

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL
where

Cs

is consumption in period

s,

13

then we have

Mt+1 =

−γ

Cs+1
Cs

and

(1 + r )δ
Note that using

z.

δMt+1

Cs+1
Cs

−γ

= 1.

(13)

to discount (1 + ξ )z is equivalent to using (1 + ξ )δMt+1 to discount

The relationship between

ξ

and

Mt+1

depends crucially on assumptions about the utility

function. The asset-pricing literature has shown that standard assumptions about preferences cannot explain average real interest rates.6 A related problem of standard preferences
is that the predicted effect of

ξ

on

r

is inconsistent with the data.7

Note, however, that

irrespective of the particular specification for preferences, optimizing behavior pins down
the “growth-adjusted” discount factor at

(1 + ξ )δMt+1 =

1+ξ
1+r

Instead of trying to solve the difficult question of how

ξ

.
affects

(14)

Mt+1 ,

this equation suggest

that one may simply use observed growth and interest rates to infer the appropriate effective
discount factor. This is the approach followed in this paper.8
6

See, for example, Weil (1992).

7

For example, the CRRA preferences used above imply that a decrease in the growth rate should lower real

interest rates, while in Section 2 we documented that the observed decrease in TFP growth rates coincided
with an increase in real interest rates.
8

Taking the interest rate would be appropriate if one thinks of the matching model as a partial equilibrium

model. For example, the model can be viewed as being relevant for those sectors for which growth can be

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

3.6. Turbulence.

14

In this subsection we distinguish between low-skilled and high-skilled

workers. This allows us to analyze the turbulence effect of Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998).
They argue that the European unemployment puzzle can be explained by the interaction
between high replacement rates, on one hand, and an increase in the probability that an
unemployed skilled worker cannot find a job in which he can use his acquired skills, on the
other. Unemployed workers who had previously earned high wages, and are thus entitled
to high unemployment benefits, thus, become more likely to receive low wage offers. The
corresponding increase in the rejection rate of job offers would then lead to an increase
in the unemployment rate.

As in Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) we capture an increase

in turbulence by an increased probability that a high-skilled worker becomes a low-skilled
worker.
It is interesting to analyze an increase in turbulence in our framework because it differs
in two important aspects from the framework of Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998). First, we
allow for endogenous wage setting between the worker and the employer, meaning that the
worker can bargain for a higher wage instead of simply having a choice between rejecting or
accepting the employer’s wage offer. Second, in contrast to Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998),
the breakup decision in our model is not exogenous, but is allowed to vary in response to
changes in the economic environment. The view that employees are likely to change their
behavior is clearly formulated by Alan Greenspan in the following quote: “

But the sense of

increasing skill obsolescence has also led to an apparent willingness on the part of employees
to forgo wage and benefit increases for increased job security. Thus, despite the incredible
characterized as disembodied. We are sympathetic to this view, since one could very well argue that growth
in some sectors is better described as embodied growth. We discuss embodied growth in more detail in
Section 4.5.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

15

tightness of labor markets, increases in compensation per hour have continued to be relatively
modest.”

9

The current-period skill level of a particular worker is denoted by
low skill levels are given by
benefit of

bk = φpk

where

pk

h

ν k (z).

and the high and

and l, respectively. Unemployed workers obtain a per period

denotes the mean wage payment of all skill

relationship is first formed with a worker having skill level
from the distribution

k,

Assume

ν h (z ) > ν l (z );

k,

k

workers. When a

the initial value of

z

is drawn

i.e., the high-skill distribution first-order

stochastically dominates the low-skill distribution. In addition to the probability of a
and an
an

switch

exogenous breakup, the relationship with a low-skilled worker can now also receive

upgrade at the beginning of the period, wherein he receives a draw from ν h(z).10
High-skilled workers who become unemployed will become low skilled with probability

γD.

The key feature of the model with turbulence is, thus, that there are low-skilled unemployed
workers with a high level of unemployment benefits bh .
Adjusting the equations is reasonably straightforward. The surplus equation for a highskilled worker is now given by:

sh (z, bh ) = (1

− τ e(z))z + gh(z) − (1 − τ u(bh ))bh − (γ D wl (bh) + (1 − γ D )wh(bh ) + wf ),

where the subscripts
9

h

and

l

(15)

denote the skill level of the worker. The zero surplus level is

Alan Greenspan in ”Is there a new economy?: The effect of human psychology on the market.” Vital

Speeches of the Day, Oct 1, 1998, 64(24): 741-745.
10

We assume that workers experiencing an upgrade must work for at least one period at the high skill level

in order to qualify for the benefit bh . To reduce the number of different worker classifications we assume
that in case of an upgrade a worker receives a draw of z in the range of values where an existing relationship
with a high-skilled worker who is entitled to bh would not break up.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

16

defined by the following condition:

sk (zk (b), b) = 0.

(16)

In the model without turbulence (γ D = 0) the value of

zl

is the same for those workers

who receive a switch and for the unemployed who enter a new relationship, because both
are entitled to

bl .11

In the model with turbulence, however, the zero surplus level for the

unemployed with high unemployment benefits,

zl (bh )

will be higher than the zero surplus

level for the unemployed with low unemployment benefits,

zl (bl ).

Note that the latter zero

surplus level still equals that of the low-skilled workers who receive a switch.
The equilibrium conditions are modified as follows.

The continuation values for the

relationship with a low-skilled worker and a high-skilled worker are given by



∞


gl (z ) = (1 − ρx )β (1 − γ U ) (1 − γ S )s(z, bl ) + γ S
s(z, bl )dν l (y)
zl (bl )

∞
(1

−

z (bh )
ρx )βγ U h
1

sh (z, bl )dν h (y)

−

∞

zh (bh )

dν h (y )

f

+ (bl + wl (bl ) + w ),

(17)



∞


gh (z ) = (1 − ρx )β (1 − γ S )sh (z, bh ) + γ S
sh (y, bh )dν h (y)

and

z h (bh )

+β (bh + γ

D w (b ) + (1
l h

− γ D )wh(bh) + wf ).

Equations (4), (5) and (6) are changed in a similar way. For
stock

ul (bh )

γ D > 0,

(18)
there is a nonnegligible

of workers who have low skills but obtain the high unemployment benefit on the

basis of their previous job. To calculate average wages (and, thus, unemployment benefits)
11

Note that this is not true for the (small number of) new labor market entrants who are not yet entitled

to unemployment benefits.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

17

and taxes one needs a precise differentiation of the different groups, since not all workers
with the same skill level earn the same wage and operate at the same range of values for

z.

In particular, in the model with turbulence there are four different types of unemployed and
six different types of employed workers (see the appendix for details).12

4. S

U   R  

The goal of this section is to document that the model outlined in Section 3 can explain
the divergent behavior of European and U.S. unemployment rates when key aspects of the
economic environment deteriorate.

To accomplish this, we will show that a decrease in

the growth rate, an increase in the interest rate, as well as an increase in the tax rate (the
shocks considered) lead to a higher steady state unemployment rate. Further, the magnitude
of the effect can be small at low initial tax rates and replacement rates (the institutions),
but substantial at high initial tax rates and replacement rates. The idea is that the steady
state values corresponding with the favorable economic environment capture the average
values of the unemployment rate during the 1950’s and 1960’s, and the steady state values
corresponding to the unfavorable economic environment reflect the average values of the
unemployment rate during the 1980’s and 1990’s. The 1970’s represent a transition period
that we will not try to model.
In Section 4.1, we give the basic intuition behind our story and illustrate it using several
numerical examples that document the interaction between the reduction in the discount
factor and the level of unemployment benefits.

In Section 4.2, we show that the same

idea applies to changes in tax rates on labor income. In Section 4.3, we demonstrate that an
12

This makes the complete set of transition equations somewhat tedious. Details of the transition equations

are available on request.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

18

increase in turbulence is not a good candidate to explain the European unemployment puzzle
in this framework, when an increase in turbulence is modelled as an increased probability
of skill loss after job separation. In Section 4.4, we emphasize the importance of the crosssectional distribution of productivity shocks and in Section 4.5 we discuss related literature.

4.1.

Implications of Shocks in the Benchmark Model.

In this section we study

the effect of changes in the growth rate and the interest rate on steady state unemployment
rates.

Intuition.

In Section 3.5, it was established that the appropriate discount factor in

a model with disembodied growth is equal to (1 +

ξ )/(1 + r).

Figure 6 plots the scaled

values of (1 + ξ )/(1 + r ) for five-year intervals. The graph clearly shows that combining the
growth effect and the real interest rate effect, one observes for each country a decrease in
the transformed discount factor. We will start by investigating the effect of changes in this
discount factor on the steady state unemployment rate and the interaction with the level of
the replacement rate.
Consider again the equation that determines the zero surplus level.

z + g (z )

− b − w(b) = 0.

(19)

To simplify the notation we have set tax rates to zero. A decrease in the discount factor
will decrease both

g (z )

and

w(b).

The question is which one will decrease more. If

is equal to

w(b),

then it is not hard to show that there will be no effect on

bigger than

w(b),

then a decrease in the discount factor, not surprisingly, will have a bigger

impact on
and

z

g (z )

than on

w(b),

will be smaller than

b,

thus increasing

z.

The value of

g (z )

z.

g (z )

If

g (z )

will be bigger than

when the probability of receiving a switch,

γS ,

is

w(b),

is higher than

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL
the matching probability for an unemployed worker,
is relatively simple.
of

z

The idea is that when

that are somewhat less than

b

γS > λ

λ.

19

The intuition for this last result

relationships stay together at values

because by staying together they have a better chance

of quickly increasing their earnings. We find it implausible that the best way to increase
productivity is to end the relationship, and therefore, the natural case to consider is the one
where

z

γS > λ

and

g (z )

is bigger than

w (b).

Thus, a decrease in the discount factor increases

and, correspondingly, increases the rejection rate of unemployed workers along with the

breakup probability of workers within a relationship.
Graphically, this idea is captured in Figure 7, which show how the surplus changes in
response to a decrease in the discount factor. A shift to a low growth (or high interest rate)
economy lowers the joint surplus, raising both the rejection probability for new matches
and the destruction probability for ongoing ones. Thus, the flow out of the unemployment
pool is reduced, while the flow into the pool is increased, leading to the robust prediction
of a higher steady-state unemployment rate. Further, an increase in the replacement rate,

φ,

also shifts joint surplus downward, raising the rejection and destruction probabilities.

We will show below that the effects of lower
a decline in

β

to have a bigger effect when

β

φ

and higher

is large.

φ

are complementary, causing

It should be stressed that slower

growth and higher interest rates lead to permanent changes in unemployment, based on the
fact that unemployment is determined in steady state equilibrium. This contrasts with the
conjecture of Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), who argue that the shocks affect unemployment
in a transitory way. As long as

β

remains low, however, the zero surplus level continues to

be high, and high levels of unemployment are maintained.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL
Benchmark Parameterization.
examples. The distribution

ν (z )

20

This effect may be illustrated using some numerical

is taken to be uniform with support [ν, ν ], while the match-

ing probability is fixed. Periods are taken to be quarters. Table 2 reports numerical values
of the parameters for our benchmark specification.
Results for the benchmark parameterization are given in part A of Table 3, which reports
for a low- and a high-replacement-rate economy the equilibrium unemployment rates for
various values of the discount factor

β.

Note that the low- and the high-replacement-rate

economy are identical in everything except the replacement rate. As documented by the
table, a decline in growth or a rise in the interest rate, both reflected by a fall in the
discount factor

β,

lead to higher unemployment rates for high levels of the replacement rate

φ.

At low values of

φ,

β.

The model, therefore, exhibits an interaction between shocks and institutions, whereby

however, there is no rise in unemployment associated with a fall in

higher replacement rates exacerbate the unemployment effects of either a growth slowdown
or a rise in interest rates. The key aspect of this parameterization is displayed in Figure
8, which plots the cross-sectional distribution of productivity values

z,

along with the zero

surplus levels. The figure captures our basic believe that at high replacement rates, the mass
of jobs sensitive to deteriorations in the economic environment is bigger.
Note that in the high-replacement-rate economy, only the lowest productivity jobs are
destroyed.

The average productivity of ongoing relationships will, therefore, increase in

the high-replacement-rate economy relative to the low-replacement-rate economy.13
13

This

The increase in average productivity leads to an increase in average wages and, thus, an increase in

unemployment benefits. This increase in unemployment benefits leads to a further increase in the unemployment rate. The effect is quantitatively, however, very small and the overall increase in the unemployment
rate would be similar if the value of b is kept constant.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

21

is consistent with Nickell and Layard (1999), who document that labor productivity has
increased in Europe relative to the U.S..

Duration and Flows Into and Out of Unemployment.

In several European coun-

tries, the fraction of long-term unemployed has increased in the last few decades.14 Moreover,
Machin and Manning (1999) argue that the rise in the incidence of long-term unemployment
is mainly due to a decrease in the flows out of unemployment. To understand the relevance
of these observations for our model, consider the following steady state expression for the
unemployment rate:

λw ρR u = ρD (1

where

ρR

is the rejection rate and

ρD

− u),

(20)

is the destruction rate (here we have abstracted from

retirement and new entrants, which do not play an important role in the numerical exercises).
In our model,

ρR is equal to ρD

(except for new entrants), so it may seem that our framework

is not consistent with the observation made by Machin and Manning (1999). Moreover, it
might be difficult to generate realistic increases in the outflow rate

λ w ρR

with a constant

matching probability.
Because of composition effects, however, our mechanism is consistent with a substantial
increase in the

average

duration of unemployment, a substantial decrease in the

outflow rate of unemployment, and a modest increase in the

average

average

outflow rate of em-

ployment. To clarify this statement, consider the following example of an economy with two
types of workers: type A and type B. For simplicity we assume that workers never switch
type;15 this means that both types operate with complete independence. Suppose that jobs
14

See, for example, Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998).

15

Recall that in the turbulence version of the model we allow workers to switch types, and in Section 4.3

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

22

of type A workers are destroyed with probability equal to 0.1 and that jobs of type B workers are destroyed with probability equal to 0.02. According to our model, these are also the
rejection rates of new job offers. Furthermore, assume that the mass of type A workers is
equal to 0.1, the mass of type B workers is equal to 0.9, the matching probability for a type
A worker is equal to 0.3 and the matching probability for a type B worker is equal to 0.8.
Then it is straightforward to calculate that the steady state unemployment rate is equal to
4.94%, that the outflow rate of unemployment is equal to 50.3% and that the outflow rate
of employment is equal to 2.61%. Now suppose that in response to a deterioration of the
economic environment the destruction rate of type A workers increases from 0.1 to 0.4, while
the destruction rate of type B workers remains unchanged. This increases the unemployment
rate from 4.94% to 9.14%. Note that for type A workers there is a substantial increase in the
outflow rate of employment. The

average

outflow rate of employment, however, increases

only from 2.61% to 3.3% because the number of employed type A workers decreases relative
to the number of employed type B workers. In the unemployment pool, the fraction of type
A workers, i.e. the workers with high unemployment duration, increases. This results in a
substantial decrease in the outflow rate of unemployment and a substantial increase in the
average unemployment duration. Specifically, the average unemployment duration increases
from 2.6 to 4.5 periods.

Alternative Parameterizations.
terization is that the value of

z

An important feature of the benchmark parame-

is not in the support of the distribution

ν (z)

for the high

discount factor case for both the low- and the high-replacement-rate economy. Suppose instead that we increase the support of

z

such that there are endogenous breakups during the

we consider the importance of composition effects in the model with turbulence.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL
favorable, i.e. high

β,

period. If we keep the rate of exogenous breakups,

ρx ,

23

the same then

unemployment rates across the high-replacement-rate and the low-replacement-rate economy
would not be equal during the favorable times. We consider two alternatives to deal with
this. In the first, the rate of exogenous breakups,

ρx ,

economy, and in the second, the standard deviation of

is higher in the low-replacement-rate

z

is higher in the low-replacement-rate

economy.
When one thinks of the low-replacement-rate economy as the U.S., then these specifications do not seem especially implausible. Since distances are bigger in the U.S., relocations
for personal reasons are more likely to lead to job termination in the U.S. than in Europe.
The presence of government subsidies could also trim the low side of the distribution in Europe. There are some empirical observations consistent with these conjectures. Nickell and
Layard (1999), for example, document that regional mobility has been substantially higher
in the U.S. than in most European countries. For the period from 1980 to 1987, for example,
an average of 2.9% of all workers changed region each year in the U.S., while for the five
European countries considered in this paper the highest percentage was observed for France,
16

at only 1.3%.

Also important in this respect are the observations from Nickell and Layard

(1999) about minimum wages. They report that the minimum wage relative to the country’s
average wage over the period from 1991 to 1994 was substantially higher in Sweden than in
the U.S., but in Sweden no workers were at or near the minimum wage while in the U.S.
four percent of the workers were at or near the minimum wage. In Spain, however, more
workers were at the minimum wage even though the minimum wage in Spain was lower.
16

Regions are of comparable geographical size.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL
Results for Alternative Parameterizations.
set the rate of exogenous breakups,

ρx ,

24

In the first alternative considered, we

in the high-replacement-rate economy equal to zero

and choose the support of the distribution such that the unemployment rate in the highreplacement-rate economy is again equal to (approximately) 5% when β = 0.99, i.e., the value
corresponding to the favorable growth and interest rate regime. The results for this case are
reported in the first two columns of part B of Table 3 for the high- and the low-replacementrate economy, respectively. For the low-replacement-rate economy the zero surplus level is
still outside the support of the distribution, and changes in the discount factor have no effect
on the breakup and rejection margin. The key idea of this parameterization is graphically
presented in Figure 9.
In the second alternative, the support of

z

in the economy with a low replacement rate is

set such that the unemployment rate is equal to 5% when
destruction equal zero. Obviously the support for

z

β = 0.99 and the rate of exogenous

will then be wider in the economy with

a low replacement rate. The results for the low-replacement-rate economy are reported in
the third column of part B of Table 3. When we compare the third column with the first
column, then we see that unemployment rates actually increase more in the low-replacementrate economy. This despite the fact that the mass of jobs just to the right of

z

is larger in

the high-replacement-rate economy. There is a stronger response to the level of

z

in the

− b is lower in the low-replacement-rate
economy, leading to a higher level of g (z ) − w. As pointed out before, the higher g (z ) − w ,
high-replacement-rate economy, however, because

the higher the effect of changes in

β

on

z

z.

Note that the matching probabilities are assumed to be equal across economies. But du-

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

25

ration of unemployment has been much lower in the U.S. then in Europe,17 so it makes sense
to use a higher matching probability in the low-replacement-rate economy. In particular, we
increase the matching probability in the low-replacement-rate economy from 0.3 to 0.5 and
repeat the last experiment. The results in the fourth column of part B of Table 3 show that
the increase in the matching probability reduces the sensitivity of the unemployment rate
to a change in the discount factor, by decreasing the value of

g (z )

− w.

In fact, when we

compare the first and the fourth column we see that the unemployment rate is again more
sensitive to changes in the discount factor in the high-replacement rate economy.

4.2.

Shocks to Tax Rates in the Benchmark Model.

In this section we discuss

the effects of differential tax rates for labor income and unemployment benefits on the
unemployment rate.

It is easy to show that when tax rates are proportional and equal

for both forms of income, tax rates have no effect on unemployment in our framework.
Because of the presence of payroll taxes and progressive income taxes, however, this is not
an empirically relevant case. In general the tax rate on labor income will be higher than the
tax rate on unemployment benefits. The effects of tax rates on unemployment are similar
to the effects of the discount rate on unemployment. Just like a reduction in the discount
factor, an increase in the tax rate differential increases the zero surplus level.

This has

important consequences for the unemployment rate only if many jobs are affected by the
increase. When most jobs have surplus values that are considerably above zero the increase
in

z

will be unimportant. A low initial tax level, just like a low replacement rate, can ensure

that most jobs have surplus levels that are high enough to be safe from increases in tax rates.
Since only differences between the tax rate on labor income and the tax rate on un17

See Table 1 in Machin and Manning (1999).

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

26

employment benefits matter in our model, we will normalize tax rates by setting the tax
rate on unemployment benefits,

τ u (b),

equal to zero.

Moreover, we assume that positive

profits are taxed at a constant rate and no tax credits are given for negative profits, that is,

τ z (z ) = τ z > 0

for z

>0

and

τ z (z ) = 0

for z

< 0.

Part A of Table 4 shows the steady state unemployment rates for different values of the
discount factor and different values of
to the mean value of

z.

ζ , the level of per capita government purchases relative

We consider values of

ζ

equal to 0, 0.25, and 0.5. The empirical

literature has mainly focused on tax rates. In our framework, the tax rate is an endogenous
variable influenced by the level of unemployment benefits, the number of unemployed workers
and the level of government expenditures. Since changes in
model only through changes in tax rates, changes in

ζ

ζ

affects the economy in our

are the cleanest way to evaluate

the effect of changes in tax rates. Note that it makes no sense to consider larger values of
government expenditures since we have used the normalization that
of

φ

τ u = 0. We set the value

equal to 0.5. The first column in part A of Table 4, corresponding to the case where per

capita government expenditures are equal to zero, is identical to the second column in part
A of Table 3. In this case taxes are only used to finance unemployment benefits. We see
that an increase in tax rates (caused by an increase in government expenditures) increases
the steady state unemployment rate. The results in Part B correspond to the same exercise
when the initial level of government expenditures is higher. In particular, while for part A
the support of the distribution was chosen in such a way that the unemployment rate equals
5% when

β = 0.99

and

ζ = 0,

for part B the support of the distribution was calibrated

such that the unemployment rate equals 5% when

β = 0.99

and

ζ = 0.10.

We clearly see

that an increase in the tax rate has a bigger impact when the initial tax rate is higher.18
18

One could argue that it would be better to ensure that the percentage change in 1-ζ is the same for part

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL
In particular, starting at

ζ =0

27

a five percentage point increase in per capita expenditures

increases the unemployment rate from 5% to 6.24%, while the same percentage point change
starting at

ζ = 0.10

increases the unemployment rate from 5% to 7.32%. Also note that

the combined change in the discount factor and the tax rate leads to substantial changes in
steady state unemployment rates.

4.3.

Shocks in the Presence of and to Turbulence.

We now consider the extension

of the model that includes two skill levels and turbulence. In a turbulent economy, highskilled workers may face a loss of skills if they lose their jobs, because of skill obsolescence
or difficulty of finding a new job in the sector for which their skills are specialized. Following Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998), we model turbulence by assuming that high-skilled
workers who separate from an employment relationship suffer a
probability

γD.

The previous version of the model, in which

downgrade

γ D = 0,

to low skills with

may be viewed as a

“tranquil” economy in which skills never become obsolete. Greater degrees of turbulence are
reflected by higher values of

γD.

The parameters for the economies with turbulence are given

in Table 5. In the economy with a high replacement rate, exogenous destruction is set equal
to zero and the support of z is chosen in such a way that for

β = 0.99

and

γ D = 0.10

(the

favorable regime values) the unemployment rate is equal to 5%. In the low-replacement-rate
economy, all parameters are identical except the replacement rate and the level of exogenous destruction, which is increased to obtain a 5% unemployment rate for

β = 0.99

and

γ D = 0.10.
A and B of Table 4. The value of 1-ζ drops 5% (from 1 to 0.95) in part A. An equal percentage decrease in
the value of 1-ζ in part B requires a reduction in 1-ζ from 0.9 to 0.855 or an increase in ζ from 0.10 to 0.145,
slightly less than the increase to 0.15 considered. The results for the increase in
very similar.

ζ

to 0.145 are, however,

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

28

The steady state unemployment rates for different values of the discount factor and the
turbulence parameter are reported in parts A and B of Table 6 for the high- and the lowreplacement-rate economy, respectively.

In part B we see that the low-replacement-rate

economy is still far enough away from the zero surplus level of

z

and is not affected by

changes in the discount factor or the turbulence parameter. Two important observations
can be made concerning the results for the high-replacement-rate economy.
that in contrast to Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998), an increase in turbulence

The first is

decreases

the

unemployment rate. The reason is related to the aspect of turbulence that Alan Greenspan
referred to in the quote cited in Section 3.6. In particular, faced with increased turbulence
(that is, an increased probability of skill loss), high-skilled workers are less likely to quit
their job. Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) fix the rate of destruction and do not consider a
response in the destruction rate to a change in the economic environment. In our model an
increase in turbulence does increase the rejection rate of the unemployed, because a rise in
turbulence increases the fraction of unemployed workers entitled to unemployment benefits
that are high relative to wage offers received.

This effect, however, is dominated by the

increased willingness of high-skilled workers to hold on to their jobs.
A second observation is that in the presence of turbulence, the impact of a change in
the discount factor on the unemployment rate is substantially higher, due to a composition
effect. A decrease in the discount factor not only increases the destruction rate for each skill
level, but it also increases the fraction of low-skilled workers. Since low-skilled workers have
higher destruction rates, unemployment rates rise even further. This composition effect is
stronger for lower values of the upgrade probability,
6, which corresponds to part A except that
19

γU

γU .

This can be seen in part C of Table
19

is now equal to 0.10 instead of 0.15.

We see

In addition, the standard deviation is recalibrated to obtain a five percent unemployment rate in the

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

29

that a decrease of the discount factor from 0.99 to 0.97 would increase the unemployment
rate from 5% to 23% and even if we allow for an increase in turbulence (γ D increases from
0.10 to 0.15) the unemployment rate would still increase from 5% to 18.5%.
When

γU

is equal to 0.1, the unemployment rates in the low-replacement-rate economy

are affected by the decrease in the discount factor, although the effect is very small. This
is documented in part D of Table 6.
decrease in

β

β = 0.99

and

γ D = 0.10,

a

to 0.97 would increase the unemployment rate from 5% to 5.6%. Note that

at this point, an increase in
5.7%.

Starting at values of

γD

to 0.15 would increase the unemployment rate slightly, to

The main reason why an increase in turbulence increases the unemployment rate in

the low-replacement-rate economy is not because of the effect proposed by Ljungqvist and
Sargent (that there are more unemployed workers with benefits that are high relative to
the wage offers their skills can generate). The quantitatively more important effect is that
turbulence decreases the outside option for high-skilled workers and, thus, lowers the wages
of high-skilled workers. This implies a reduction in future wages of low-skilled workers and
thus a decrease in relationship benefits for low-skilled workers. This reduction implies an
increases in their zero surplus level.

20

Turbulence and the effect on unemployment rates?.

The question arises whether

in reality the effect of Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) is always dominated by a reduction in
the breakup probability of high-skilled workers. In our numerical examples we typically found
numerically insignificant effects from increases in the rejection rates by the unemployed,

favorable regime.
20

The quantitative importance of this effect is still small. For this effect to be quantitatively important,

one needs a large mass of low-skilled workers, that is, a low value of γ U . But when γ U is low, changes in
wages earned after an upgrade occurs are not very important.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

30

because the mass of unemployed is relatively small. For example, suppose that the matching
probability is equal to 50% and that both the destruction rate and the rejection rate of new
job offers is equal to 2.56%. Then it is easy to calculate that the steady state unemployment
rate would be equal to 5%. To get an increase of the unemployment rate to 10% one would
have to increase the rejection rate to 53.8%, while one only has to increase the destruction
rate to 0.054% to get the same increase in the unemployment rate.21 Also, a problematic
observation for the explanation given by Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) is that most of the
increase in European unemployment rates is due to an increase of the unemployment of
workers with low skill levels.22
There actually is a more robust way to increase turbulence. Mortensen and Pissarides
(1999) model an increase in turbulence as an increase in the cross-sectional variation of

z.

Table 7 reports steady state unemployment rates for different values of

sectional variation of

z

β

and the cross-

in the high-replacement-rate economy and documents that an increase

in turbulence now leads to a substantial increase in the steady state unemployment rate.

4.4.

Empirical Relevance and the Importance of Cross-Sectional Data.

We have

generated numerical examples in which unemployment rates in the low-replacement-rate
economy do not respond to a deterioration of the economy, but unemployment rates in the
high-replacement-rate economy do. In the benchmark parameterization, in which there are
no endogenous breakups in the favorable regime, this was accomplished using two economies
21

There is no retirement in this example.

22

See Table 22 in Nickell and Layard (1999).

This empirical observation is also inconsistent with the

turbulence story told in Marimon and Zilibotti (1999), who model the increase in turbulence as an increase
in the difference between the most and least productive job a worker could get. As in Ljungqvist and Sargent
(1998) this would induce those workers with high unemployment benefits to remain unemployed longer.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

31

that are identical except for the replacement rate. In the alternative parameterizations, the
same effects are possible when there are endogenous breakups, but now the two economies
have to differ in more than just the replacement rate.

The key hypothesis in this paper

is that the mass of jobs that were close to breaking up was substantially higher in Europe
because of high tax rates and high outside benefits. In Section 2 we documented that tax
rates and unemployment benefits are higher in Europe. But if Europe is more productive
than the U.S., then European surplus values are not necessarily lower. To shed some light
on this question, we plot in Figure 10 net profit rates in the manufacturing sector in the
U.S. and Europe. The figure documents that in the early postwar period profit rates were
higher in the U.S. than in Europe, but that in the second half of the sample period profit
rates were slightly higher in Europe. The observed pattern for profit rates is consistent with
the main hypothesis and a key prediction of this paper. The higher U.S. profit rates are
consistent with higher surplus values which ensured that jobs in the U.S. were less sensitive
to decreases in the growth rate and increases in the tax and interest rate.23 Moreover, the
increase of the profits rate in Europe relative to the U.S. is consistent with the property
of our model that a deterioration of the economic environment destroys the less productive
jobs in Europe but not in the U.S..
For a serious investigation about the quantitative importance of the mechanism proposed
in this paper, however, one would need to know much more detailed information about the
cross-sectional distribution of surplus levels than just observed averages. In particular, one
would have to know detailed information about that part of the distribution of

z

close to

the breakup level. Our hypothesis is that because of the higher replacement rate, there were
23

In the model, higher profit rates can be due to higher values of

which lowers workers’ outside option and wages.

z

and to lower unemployment benefits

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

32

more jobs close to breaking up during the sixties in Europe than in the U.S.. The model with
turbulence makes it clear that even perfect knowledge of the cross-sectional distribution of

existing

jobs is not always enough to make model predictions. We saw, for example, that an

increase in turbulence lowers the zero surplus level and one could not predict the additional
mass of jobs created because these jobs never existed before.
Time-series information on several other variables, like job creation and job destruction,
has only limited information to support or contradict the explanations proposed in this paper.
In particular, our theory offers no prediction for steady state destruction rates. Our theory
makes predictions for the destruction rate

conditional on the skill level.

That is, for each skill

level, the destruction rate should go up more in economies with high replacement rates. But
because of composition effects, aggregate destruction rates could either decrease or increase.
For example, it is possible that in the seventies a large number of low-productivity, highdestruction-rate jobs were destroyed in Europe and never again created. This would increase
the productivity of the remaining jobs and lower the average destruction rate. Moreover,
although job protection seems to have offsetting effects on average unemployment rates, it
can have important effects on average job destruction and job creation rates and could also
be important to understand business cycle properties of unemployment rates.

4.5.

Related Literature.

There are several other papers that study the relationship

between growth and steady-state unemployment rates. A key issue is whether technological
progress is modelled as embodied or disembodied technological progress. We follow Pissarides
(1990) and model growth as disembodied technological progress, while Aghion and Howitt
(1994) model growth as embodied technological progress. In Aghion and Howitt (1994) a
relationship can only benefit from new technology by severing the relationship, going to

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

33

the matching market, and getting newly matched. We argue that embodied technological
progress is a sensible approach for capital and investment but less so for labor market models.
Note that in Aghion and Howitt (1994) a worker who was part of a relationship that was
severed because of a low productivity level (relative to the newly available technology), will
actually be capable of using the newest technology, but only after having been unemployed
for some time. We argue that it makes more sense to let existing relationships incorporate
new technologies. Mortensen and Pissarides (1998) generalize Aghion and Howitt (1994) by
allowing existing relationship to upgrade to the newest available technology by paying an
upgrade cost. It seems to us that such an upgrade cost to benefit from the newest technology
should be lower for an existing firm then for a new relationship.24 This implies that firms
would never break up to obtain the new technology but rather would continue the existing
relationship and pay the upgrade cost.
This issue is important because with embodied technological progress (allowing vacancy
costs to rise at the same rate as the productivity of new matches), an increase in growth
actually increases unemployment.25

The reason is that higher growth causes existing re-

lationships to become obsolete faster and, thus, to break up faster. This idea is used by
Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante (2000) to argue that an

increase

in embodied technological

progress that started in the 1970’s increased unemployment in those countries with high unemployment benefits. The story we propose in this paper is more straightforward, but we are
sympathetic to the idea that in some sectors embodied technological progress is important
and has increased unemployment in the last few decades.
The role of taxes is studied in detail by Daveri and Tabellini (2000). Their paper docu24

Our model basically assumes that the upgrade costs are equal to zero.

25

See Aghion and Howitt (1994) and Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante (2000).

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

34

ments the effect of taxes on unemployment rates and growth rates and builds an overlappinggenerations model with endogenous growth to explain the empirical findings.

Note that

whereas we consider changes in tax rates and growth rates as two independent shocks, Daveri and Tabellini (2000) argue that the cause of the lower growth rates actually is high tax
rates. The finding that tax rates affect growth is disputed in the literature,26 but Daveri and
Tabellini argue that one does find significant effects if one exploits both the cross-sectional
and time series variation of the data and distinguishes among countries on the basis of their
labor market institutions.

5. C 
We have reassessed the European unemployment puzzle using a job matching model that
features endogenous job creation and destruction, bilateral wage bargaining, and variable
worker skill levels that may rise on the job. The model considers shocks in the form of slower
growth, higher interest rates, higher tax rates, and increased turbulence, and studies how
these shocks interact with the replacement rate and the initial tax rate level. The variability
of relation-specific productivity is also considered. Slower growth, higher interest rates, and
higher tax rates are shown to induce a larger increase in unemployment when the replacement
rate or the initial tax rate is higher, as was found empirically by Blanchard and Wolfers (2000)
and Daveri and Tabellini (2000). Higher turbulence actually reduces unemployment, due to
exerting a favorable effect on job destruction; this reverses the finding of Ljungqvist and
Sargent (1998).
An important implication of our results is that the European unemployment problem
should not be viewed as self-correcting. The model demonstrates that slower growth and
26

See, for example, Nickell and Layard (1999).

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

35

higher interest rates produce greater unemployment, especially in the presence of generous
unemployment benefits. Unless the shocks are reversed, or other institutional changes are
made, unemployment may be expected to remain high.
This paper documents the importance of the cross-sectional distribution of the surplus,
especially about that part of the distribution where relationships are close to breaking up.
The key hypothesis in this paper is that the mass of jobs that were close to breaking up was
substantially higher in Europe because of high tax rates and high outside benefits. The ideal
data set to test the explanation given in this paper would be a survey held in the sixties that
asked firms and workers in the U.S. and Europe how close they were to breaking up. The
historical profit rates discussed in Section 4.1 support the view that a smaller share of jobs
were close to breaking up in the U.S. than in Europe, but a serious quantitative assessment
of the mechanism described in this paper would require much more detailed information
about the cross-sectional distribution in the sixties.

6. A



In the appendix we discuss details about the data sources and different types of relationships
in the model.

Data Sources.

The tax data reported in Figure 3 are from Daveri and Tabellini (2000).

The net-profit rates in manufacturing are from Armstrong, Glyn and Harrison (1991). All
other data were provided to us by Justin Wolfers and we refer the reader for a more detailed description of these data to the data appendix of Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) that
is available at http://web.mit.edu/blanchar/www/harry_data/. Data for standardized unemployment rates and durations are from the Quarterly Labor Force Statistics. The OECD
replacement rates are from the OECD’s database on Unemployment Benefit Entitlements

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

36

and Replacement Rates. These numbers are based on an average over three family types,
two income levels, and seven unemployment duration levels. The real interest rate is the
nominal interest rate on long-term government securities less the annualized rate of inflation
over the last five years using the GDP deflator. Finally, total factor productivity is the Solow
Residual in the business sector, scaled by the labor share.

Types of Workers.

Given tax rates and values for

b

one only needs to know the frac-

tion of low-skilled workers, the fraction of high-skilled workers, the fraction of (low-skilled)
unemployed not entitled to unemployment benefits, the fraction of low-skilled unemployed
entitled to bl , the fraction of low-skilled unemployed entitled to

bh ,

and the fraction of high-

skilled unemployed. To calculate average wages (which in turn determine unemployment
benefits) and tax rates a more precise disaggregation is needed. In Table 8 we report all the
different types of workers their outside option or unemployment benefits and if applicable
the values of

z

at which they operate.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

37

R    
[1] Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1994), “Growth and Unemployment,”

Studies,

Review of Economic

61, July, 477-494.

[2] Armstrong, A., A. Glyn, and J. Harrison (1991), “Capitalism

since World War II,”

Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
[3] Blanchard, O., (2000), “Macroeconomics,” 2nd edition, Upper Saddle River: Prentice
Hall.

[4] Blanchard, O., and J. Wolfers (2000), “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise
of European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,”

Economic Journal, 110, March,

1-33.

[5] Daveri, F., and G. Tabellini (2000), “Unemployment, Growth and Taxation in Industrial
Countries,”

Economic Policy,

15, April, 47-104.

[6] Den Haan, W.J., G. Ramey, and J. Watson (2000a), “Job Destruction and Propagation
of Shocks,”

American Economic Review, 90,

June, 482-498.

[7] Den Haan, W.J., G. Ramey, and J. Watson (2000b), “Job Destruction and the Experiences of Displaced Workers,”

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,

52, June, 87-128.

[8] Garibaldi, P. (1998), “Job Flow Dynamics and Firing Restrictions,”

Review, 42,

European Economic

February, 245-275.

[9] Gordon, R. (1997), “Is there a Trade-Off between Unemployment and Productivity
Growth?” CEPR Discussion Paper #1159.

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL

38

[10] Hornstein, A., P. Krusell, and G. Violante (2000), “Technology, Policy, and the
Inequality-Unemployment Tradeoff,” manuscript.

[11] Krusell, P., and A.A. Smith, Jr. (1998), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
Macroeconomy,”

Journal of Political Economy,

106, October, 867-896.

[12] Ljungqvist, L., and T.J. Sargent (1998), “The European Unemployment Dilemma,”

Journal of Political Economy,

106, June, 514-550.

[13] Machin, S., and A. Manning (1999), “Longterm Unemployment in Europe,” in: O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.,

Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3C, Amsterdam:

Elsevier, 3085-3139.

[14] Marimon, R., and F. Zilibotti (1999), “Unemployment vs. Mismatch of Talents: Reconsidering Unemployment Benefits,”

Economic Journal,

109, April, 266-291.

[15] Mortensen, D.T., and C.A. Pissarides (1994), “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,”

Review of Economic Studies,

61, July, 397-415.

[16] Mortensen, D.T., and C.A. Pissarides (1998), “Technological Progress, Job Creation,
and Job Destruction,”

Review of Economic Dynamics,

1, October, 733-753.

[17] Mortensen, D.T., and C.A. Pissarides (1999), “Unemployment Responses to ’SkillBiased’ Technology Shocks: the Role of Labour Market Policy,”

Economic Journal,

109, April, 242-265.

[18] Nickell, S., and R. Layard (1999), “Labor Market Institutions and Economic Performance,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.,
3C, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 3029-3084.

Handbook of Labor Economics,

Volume

SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONS IN A JOB MATCHING MODEL
[19] Phelps, E.S. (1968), “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor Market Equilibrium,”

of Political Economy,

39

Journal

76, July-August, 678-711.

[20] Pissarides, C.A. (1990), “Equilibrium

Unemployment Theory,”

Cambridge, MA: MIT

Press.

[21] Weil, P. (1992), “Equilibrium Asset Prices with Undiversifiable Labor Income Risk,”

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,

16, July-October, 769-790.

40
Figure 1: Standardized unemployment rates

0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
1960-64 1965-69 1970-74 1975-79 1980-84 1985-89 1990-94 1995-99
FRANCE

GERMANY

ITALY

UK

USA

Note: Data are described in the appendix.

Figure 2: OECD replacement ratio
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

19
65
19
67
19
69
19
71
19
73
19
75
19
77
19
79
19
81
19
83
19
85
19
87
19
89
19
91
19
93
19
95

0

France
Note: Data are described in the appendix.

Germany

Italy

Spain

UK

US

41
Figure 3: Effective tax rate
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
1965-70
FRANCE

1971-75
GERMANY

1976-80
ITALY

1981-85
SPAIN

1986-91
UK

USA

Note: Data are from Daveri and Tabellini (2000).

Figure 4: Total factor productivity growth
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02

1960-64 1965-69 1970-74 1975-79 1980-84 1985-89 1990-94 1995-99
FRANCE

Note: Data are described in the appendix.

GERMANY

ITALY

SPAIN

UK

USA

42
Figure 5: Real interest rate
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
1965-69

1970-74

FRANCE

1975-79

GERMANY

1980-84
ITALY

1985-89
SPAIN

1990-94
UK

1995-99
USA

Note: Data are described in the appendix.

Figure 6: Transformed discount factor
1.02
1
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.9
1960-64 1965-69 1970-74 1975-79 1980-84 1985-89 1990-94 1995-99
FRA NCE

GERM A NY

ITA LY

SPA IN

UK

USA

Note: This graph plots (1+ξ)/(1+r), where ξ is the TFP growth rate of Figure 4 and r is the interest rate of Figure 5. For each country
the ratio is scaled such that it is equal to one in 1960.

43

Figure 7: Effect of decrease in TFP growth on rejection and destruction margin
Surplus

s(z,b): surplus
with high TFP
growth

z(b)

s’(z,b): surplus with
low TFP growth

z′(b)

z

44

Figure 8: A Decrease in β and the effect of replacement rates on zero-surplus margin
(identical cross-sectional distributions)

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Density for
Europe & US

z (b ) for Europe
z (b ) for US

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Figure 9: A Decrease in β and the effect of replacement rates on zero-surplus margin
(higher rate of exogenous destruction in US)
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Density US
Density
Europe

Europe

z (b ) US

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

45

Figure 10: Manufacturing Net-Profit Rate

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

Europe
Note: Data are described in the appendix.

1975
USA

1980

1985

1990

46

Table 1: Benefit measures (1989-1994)

France
Germany
Italy
Spain
U.K.
U.S.

benefit replacement rate
57
63
20
70
38
50

Source: Nickell and Layard (1999, p. 3045).

Table 2: Benchmark parameter values

γs
ρx
ρr
E(z)

σz
λ
π
ζ

0.8
1.05%
0.5%
1.0
2.32
0.5
0.5
0

benefit duration (years)
3
indefinite
0.5
3.5
indefinite
0.5

47

Table 3: Equilibrium unemployment rates and decreases in the discount factor
Part A: Benchmark specification

discount
factor β

0.97
0.98
0.99

φ = 0.3

φ = 0.5

4.97
4.97
4.97

6.62
5.64
4.97

Note: Here φ is the replacement rate and the values of other parameters are given in Table 2.

Part B: Alternative Specifications

φ = 0.5

φ = 0.3

ρx = 0
σz = 2.43

λ = 0.3
ρx=1.05%
σz = 2.43

ρx = 0
σz = 3.18

λw = 0.5
ρx = 0
σz = 2.04

6.75
5.75
5.01

4.97
4.97
4.97

7.85
6.24
4.99

5.71
5.35
5.01

w

discount
factor β

0.97
0.98
0.99

Note: Here φ is the replacement rate, λw is the matching probability, ρx is the rate of exogenous breakups,
and σz is the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic productivity shock. The values of other parameters are
given in Table 2. In all economies the parameters are chosen such that the unemployment rate is approximately 5%
when β = 0.99. In the first column this is done by adjusting σz. Then in column 2 the value of ρx is increased to again get a 5%
unemployment rate at the lower value of φ. In the third and fourth column the value of σz is used to get a 5% unemployment rate at the
indicated matching probability.

48
Table 4: Equilibrium unemployment rates and increases in the tax rate

Part A: Low initial tax rates

discount
factor β

0.97
0.98
0.99

government expenditure ζ
0.0
0.025
0.05
6.75
7.63
8.78
5.75
6.43
7.34
5.01
5.54
6.24

Note: The value of φ = 0.5. The value of σz = 2.43 which insured that the
unemployment rate was approximately equal to 5% when ζ = 0 and β = 0.99.
The other parameter values are given in Table 2.

Part B: High Initial Tax Rates

discount
factor β

0.97
0.98
0.99

government expenditure ζ
0.10
0.125
0.15
6.75
8.19
10.52
5.76
6.88
8.73
5.03
5.89
7.32

Note: The value of φ = 0.5. The value of σz = 2.32 which insured that the
unemployment rate was approximately equal to 5% when ζ = 0 and β = 0.99.
The other parameter values are given in Table 2.

Table 5: Parameter Values for Model with Turbulence

γS
ρr
E(zl)
E(zh)

λ
π

0.8
0.5%
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5

49
Table 6: Equilibrium Unemployment with all shocks
Part A: Replacement rate φ = 0.5 & upgrade probability γU = 0.15

downgrade
probability

γD

0.0
0.05
0.1
0.15

discount factor β
0.97
0.98
0.99
28.7
26.9
25.1
20.9
17.0
12.6
14.4
8.8
5.0
8.0
4.0
2.7

Note: The value of ρ x = 0 and the value of σ z = 3.81. The values of other parameters are given in Table 5.
The value of σ z is chosen in such a way that the unemployment rate is approximately equal to 5% when
β = 0.99 and γD = 0.1.

B: Replacement Rate φ = 0.3 & upgrade probability γU = 0.15

downgrade
probability

γD

0.0
0.05
0.1
0.15

discount factor β
0.97
0.98
0.99
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0

Note: The value of σ z = 3.81 as in part A and the value of ρ x = 0.0106. The values of other parameters are given in Table 5.
The value of ρ x is chosen in such a way that the unemployment rate is approximately equal to 5% when
β = 0.99 and γD = 0.1.

50

C: Replacement Rate φ = 0.5 & upgrade probability γU = 0.1

downgrade
probability

γD

0.0
0.05
0.1
0.15

0.97
34.5
27.7
23.2
18.5

discount factor β
0.98
0.99
33.0
31.2
23.9
18.5
16.3
5.01
4.23
3.91

Note: The value of ρ x = 0 and the value of σ z = 4.051. The values of other parameters are given in Table 5.
The value of σ z is chosen in such a way that the unemployment rate is approximately equal to 5% when
β = 0.99 and γD = 0.1.

D: Replacement Rate φ = 0.3 & upgrade probability γU = 0.1

downgrade
probability

γD

0.0
0.05
0.1
0.15

discount factor β
0.97
0.98
0.99
9.6
7.8
6.4
5.4
5.1
4.8
5.6
5.3
5.0
5.7
5.4
5.1

Note: The value of σ z = 4.051 as in part A and the value of ρ x = 0.0098. The values of other parameters are given in Table 5.
The value of ρ x is chosen in such a way that the unemployment rate is approximately equal to 5% when
β = 0.99 and γD = 0.1.

51

Table 7: Equilibrium Unemployment with all shocks
(Mortensen & Pissarides type increase in turbulence)

cross-sectional
standard
deviation σz

2.83
2.91
2.99

discount factor β
0.97
0.98
0.99
8.75
5.11
3.32
14.36
8.77
5.01
19.72
14.37
8.39

Note: Here ρ x = 0, φ = 0.5, and γD = 0. The values of other parameters are given in Table 5.

Table 8: Different types of agents in model with turbulence
Part A: Unemployed workers
New labor market entrant
Formerly low-skilled worker
Downgraded high-skilled worker
Formerly high-skilled worker

skill level
low
low
low
high

unemployment benefit
0
bl
bh
bl

Part B: Employed workers
Young low skilled who accept job to become
Eligible for unemployement benefit
Low-skilled worker, formerly entitled to bh,
in 1st period of employment
Low-skilled worker, formerly entitled to bh,
after 1st period of employment
Other low skilled workers
High-skilled worker who just got upgraded
Other high-skilled workers

outside option
wl(0)

range of z values
[zl(0),zl(bl)]

bh + wl(bh)

[zl(bh),∝]

bl + wl(bl)

[zl(bh),∝]

bl + wl(bl)
bl + wl(bl)
bh + wh(bh)

[zl(bl),∝]
[zh(bh),∝]
[zh(bh),∝]

