                                 $ " %                




                                         


                                           !


                                          "  #&'(
                                  )**#+,,!!!-,##,!&'(


                             $  .                       
                                   /0)1** 21
                                     3- 45 67&
                                        #*3-




                                   
!"  # $%   & &        '   ( #  
) *     "+,  $ "  ,        
      -  ( &  $


./-$!  0 * $1   " $    , ,            
/ 2   ,   "   . "    $
* 8 01 *)
 !
$ "  #&'(
#*3-6
9/



                                                   


         ) ##4 01*)0410*4#:30:3*#8 041 *)5
03#  **#8 041 *)#2 128404*0):1-40081 . *5*)
3003 0#:30:*)!;0#* 85#0 88 :<144-*)28* 8 *:
!*)513#83*54 :8* 045310):*)4#:30!41*4810
  :3*)1##8= 4:*)03+.44# 0!!88-)2454#410* 2 *
!*);# 041;#0*4008*  ) 453*#8 03423:*)04 *
-3  ***3# 2* :8* *)!*)0 #2 1# 4.1*)5
8*)1)*)0-2 !4;3#8:100:184 0* #8 05.4#8 03
3)2-4 >02* :8* ** >**:-1*7#0* )2 40:
;#8 0 *#8 0185)!253*)*:1*1#8 03 ) *88 3 *480




 !
#*3*:03 0
 **1667
24 2 *
3- 45 67&
4$
3 !?)2441
    "I'm     baffled.     I    find   it   hard     to   believe....What   I'm

    puzzled about is whether, and if so how, they suddenly

    learned how to regulate the economy.                 Does Alan Greenspan

    have an insight into movements in the economy and the

    shocks that other people don't have?"



    Milton Friedman, May 2000




    No aspect of U.S. policy in the 1990s is more widely hailed

as a success than monetary policy.            Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan

is often viewed as a miracle worker.              Many Americans share the

admiration    that   Senator     John      McCain    expressed   during    his

presidential bid.       When the senator was asked about Greenspan's

conduct of monetary policy, McCain said that if anything were to

happen to the Fed chairman, as president he would take the

strategy followed in the movie Weekend at Bernie's: He would

prop up the chairman's body, give him some sunglasses, and keep

him on the job as long as possible.

    Greenspan's tenure at the Fed has had its share of historic

events, impinging on (as well as being affected by) the stance

of monetary policy.           In October 19, 1987, two months after

Greenspan took office, the stock market fell 22 percent--a one-


                                      1
day plunge larger than anything seen before or since.              The Fed

reacted   by    flooding    the   economy   with   liquidity,     lowering

interest rates and averting a recession.            But soon inflation

became the more pressing concern, and the Fed started raising

interest rates.     The federal funds rate rose from 6.7 percent in

November 1987 to 9.8 percent in May 1989.          This Fed tightening,

together with other factors, pushed the economy into a recession

the following year.         More than any other single event, the

recession set the stage for the economic policies of the 1990s:

It helped Bill Clinton, a little-known governor from Arkansas,

defeat George Bush, an incumbent president who, only a short

time earlier, had enjoyed overwhelming popularity following the

Gulf War.

    The Clinton years brought their own challenges to monetary

policymakers.     International financial crises in Mexico in 1994-

95 and in Asia in 1997-98, as well as the infamous failure of

the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management in 1998, put the

world financial system in jeopardy and the Fed at center stage.

 At the same time, the push for fiscal discipline, which turned

the U.S. government budget from deficit to surplus, made the

Fed's job easier.          So did the acceleration of productivity

growth,   which   most     analysts   attribute    to    the   advances   in

information     technology    associated    with   the    so-called   "new


                                      2
economy."    Another (perhaps related) development was a gradual

decline in the U.S. unemployment rate, without the inflationary

pressures that normally accompany such a change.         Explaining

this happy but surprising shift, and deciding how to respond to

it, remains a topic of debate among students and practitioners

of monetary policy.

    The purpose of this paper is to look back at these events.

My goal is not to tell the story of U.S. monetary policy during

the 1990s: Bob Woodward's widely read book, Maestro, already

does that.    Instead, I offer an analytic review of monetary

policy   during   this   period,   which   should   complement   more

narrative treatments of the topic.

    I proceed as follows.     Section 1 compares the macroeconomic

performance of the 1990s to other recent decades.         Section 2

considers whether some of the good performance of the 1990s can

be attributed to good luck rather than good policy.        Section 3

examines how policy was different from earlier decades.      Section

4 considers the legacy that the monetary policy of the 1990s

leaves for the future.      Section 5 summarizes the conclusions

from this experience.



1. The Macroeconomic Performance of the 1990s

    I begin by comparing the performance of the economy during


                                   3
1990s with other recent decades.    To do this, I concentrate on

three standard time series: inflation, unemployment, and real

growth.    Economists,   policymakers,   and   pundits   watch   these

measures of the economy's performance more than any others.

This is for good reason: If a nation enjoys low and stable

inflation, low and stable unemployment, and high and stable

growth, the fundamentals are in place to permit prosperity for

most of its citizens.



1.1 The Level and Stability of Inflation

    Inflation is the first piece of data to look at, in part

because a central banker's first job is to keep inflation in

check.    There is no doubt that central bankers also influence

unemployment and real growth and that they do (and should) keep

an eye on these variables as well.       But according to standard

theories of monetary policy, central-bank actions have only a

transitory effect on unemployment and real growth.       By contrast,

the effects of monetary policy on inflation continue in the long

run--and indeed are strongest in the long run.      So, if monetary

policymakers take a long view of their actions, inflation is

their first order of concern.

    Table 1 shows the performance of inflation during the 1990s

and the preceding four decades.     The first row shows average


                                4
inflation for each of the decades.           The second row shows the

standard deviation, which is a common measure of volatility.

    As judged by the average inflation rate, the 1990s were not

exceptional.     Inflation was lower in the 1950s and 1960s than it

was in the 1990s.         For those with shorter memories, however,

the 1990s can be viewed as a low-inflation decade.               There was

substantially less inflation in the 1990s than there was in the

1980s and especially the 1970s.

    This decline in inflation is largely the result of the tough

disinflationary policies that Paul Volcker put into place in the

early 1980s: Inflation fell from a peak of 14.8 percent in March

1980 to 3.6 percent three years later.            As is almost always the

case,   this    large    and   persistent   decline    in    inflation    was

associated     with    temporarily    declining   production    and   rising

unemployment.         By most measures, the recession of the early

1980s was the most severe economic downturn since the Great

Depression of the 1930s.

    The 1990s look more exceptional once we look at the standard

deviation of inflation.         The second row of Table 1 shows that

inflation was far more stable during the 1990s than during any

other   recent    decade.       The   differences    are    substantial    in

magnitude.     Inflation was only one-third as volatile during the

1990s as it was during the 1980s.             It was 24 percent less


                                       5
volatile during the 1990s than it was during the 1960s, the

second-best decade as ranked by inflation volatility.    There is

no doubt that by historical standards the 1990s were a decade of

remarkably stable inflation.

    Another way to look at the data is to examine how bad

inflation was at its worst.    The third line of Table 1 shows the

highest annual inflation rate recorded over the 120 months of

each decade.    By this measure, inflation was lowest in the 1960s

and 1990s.     But there is an important difference between these

two periods.    In the 1960s, the highest inflation rate occurred

at the end of the decade, representing the beginning of a

problem that would persist into the 1970s.     By contrast, in the

1990s, inflation peaked at the beginning of the decade and

thereafter became tame.    After January 1992, inflation remained

in a remarkably narrow range from 1.34 percent to 3.32 percent.




                                 6
Table 1:

The Inflation Experience, Decade by Decade


                   1950s     1960s    1970s     1980s     1990s

Average
Inflation           2.07      2.33     7.09      5.66      3.00

Standard
Deviation           2.44      1.48     2.72      3.53      1.12
of Inflation

Maximum             9.36      6.20    13.29     14.76      6.29
Inflation

Date of
Maximum            Feb 50    Dec 69   Dec 79    Mar 80    Oct 90
Inflation


Note: In this and subsequent tables, the decade of the 1950s
refers to the period from the first month (or quarter) of 1950
to last month (or quarter) of 1959, and so on. Inflation is the
rate of change in the consumer price index over the previous 12
months.

Source: Department of Labor and author's calculations.




                               7
1.2 Judging the Inflation Experience

    These comparisons of inflation over the past five decades

bring up a classic question of economic theory: What costs does

inflation impose on a society?              Or, to focus the issue for the

purposes at hand, is it more important for the central bank to

produce low inflation or stable inflation?                     If low average

inflation is the goal, then the monetary policymakers of the

1990s   can   be   given   only   an    average      grade.    But if stable

inflation is the goal, then they go to the top of the class.

    Textbook discussions of the costs of inflation emphasize

both the level and stability of inflation.                    A high level of

inflation is costly for several reasons: (1) Because inflation

raises the costs of holding money, it diverts people's time and

attention toward conserving their money holdings and away from

more productive uses. (2) Inflation induces firms to incur more

"menu costs"--the costs associated with changing prices and

distributing the new prices to salesmen and customers.                      (3)

Because   price     adjustment     is       staggered,    inflation   induces

spurious volatility in the prices of some firms relative to

others, which impedes the price system's ability to allocate

resources efficiently. (4) Because the tax laws are not indexed,

inflation raises the effective tax on capital income and thereby

discourages    capital     accumulation        and    economic    growth.   (5)


                                        8
Inflation makes economic calculation more difficult, because the

currency is less reliable as a yardstick for measuring value.

    All five of these costs indicate that low average inflation

is desirable, but they suggest that the stability of inflation

matters as well.   Standard theory implies that these costs of

inflation are "convex," meaning that the cost of incremental

inflation rises with inflation itself.         In other words, an

increase in inflation from 4 to 6 percent is worse than an

increase from 2 to 4 percent.       If this is so, then these five

benefits to low inflation also argue for stable inflation.     The

cost of steady 4-percent inflation is less than the average cost

of inflation that fluctuates back and forth between 2 and 6.

    In addition to these five costs, there is another cost

associated directly with inflation volatility: (6) Because an

unexpected change in the price level redistributes real wealth

between debtors and creditors, highly volatile inflation creates

unnecessary risk for all parties.     As people avoid try to avoid

these risks, long-term contracts using money as the unit of

account become less tenable.

    Although these six costs of inflation are widely accepted

among economists, there is debate about whether the costs are

large or small in total, and which are larger than others.

Moreover, there is little direct evidence of convexity in the


                                9
costs   of    inflation.         As   a    result,   it    is    hard   to    compare

quantitatively the benefits of low inflation with the benefits

of stable inflation.             The more weight is given to inflation

stability     as    a   policy    objective,       the    more    exceptional      the

monetary policy of the 1990s appears.



1.3 Two Arguments in Favor of Inflation

    Some      economists    argue         that   there    are    some   benefits    to

inflation, at least if the inflation is only moderate.                         These

arguments are worth noting, in part because they are associated

with some prominent policymakers of the 1990s.

    In particular, long before he was U.S. Secretary Treasury,

Lawrence Summers (1991) wrote, "the optimal inflation rate is

surely positive, perhaps as high or 2 or 3 percent."                         Although

Summers has never had direct control over monetary policy, Fed

policymakers are well aware of the views of prominent Treasury

officials.         Moreover, nations that have adopted a policy of

inflation targeting (which were numerous during the 1990s) have

typically chosen a positive number, rather than zero, for their

target.      In this environment, claims that the Fed is aiming for

"price stability" should perhaps not be taken too literally.

The 3-percent inflation experienced during the 1990s may be

close to the target policymakers had in mind.


                                           10
1.3.1 The Possibility of Negative Real Interest Rates

       One argument for a target rate of inflation greater than

zero is that it permits real interest rates (that is, interest

rates corrected for inflation) to become negative.                          Because

individuals    can    always    hold    cash    rather      than   bonds,    it   is

impossible for nominal interest rates to fall below zero.                     Under

zero    inflation,    real   interest        rates   also    can   never     become

negative.    But if inflation is, say, 3 percent, then the central

bank can lower the nominal rate toward zero and send the real

interest toward negative 3 percent.                  The ability to produce

negative     real    interest   rates        gives   the    central   bank     more

latitude to stimulate the economy in a recession.

       Some economists point to Japan in the 1990s as an example of

why some inflation is desirable.               With inflation at about zero

and nominal interest rates at zero, the Bank of Japan appears to

have had little room to stimulate the economy.                 Japan is said to

have been stuck in a "liquidity trap" when monetary policy loses

its effectiveness.       If Japan had inherited a tradition of more

inflation, the argument goes, then when the Bank lowered nominal

rates   to   zero,    real   rates     would    have   become      negative.       A

negative real rate would have stimulated spending and helped

pull the economy out of its lingering recession.


                                        11
    This line of reasoning is controversial.     Some economists

dispute the claim that Japan was stuck in a liquidity trap.

They argue that more aggressive Japanese monetary expansion

would have lowered real rates by raising inflation expectations

or that it would have stimulated exports by causing the yen to

depreciate in foreign exchange markets.

    Nonetheless, this argument for positive inflation may well

have influenced U.S. monetary policy during the 1990s.   Lawrence

Summers endorsed this argument at the beginning the decade.

Moreover, the Japanese experience in the aftermath of its stock

market and real estate bubble was a warning flag of what might

happen in the United States if the booming stock market were

ever to suffer a similar collapse.   The 3-percent inflation rate

gave Fed policymakers the option to stimulate spending with

negative real interest rates, if the need should ever have

arisen.



1.3.2 Greasing The Wheels of Labor Markets

    A second argument for moderate inflation starts with the

observation that cuts in nominal wages are rare.         For some

reason, firms are reluctant to cut their workers' nominal wages,

and workers are reluctant to accept such cuts.   A 2-percent wage

cut in a zero-inflation world is, in real terms, the same as a


                               12
3-percent raise with 5-percent inflation, but workers do not

always see it that way.        The 2-percent wage cut may seem like an

insult, whereas the 3-percent raise is, after all, still a

raise.       Empirical studies confirm that nominal wages rarely

fall.

      This fact suggests that inflation may make labor markets

work better.        Here's the argument.    The supply and demand for

different kinds of labor is always changing.                  Sometimes an

increase in supply or decrease in demand leads to a fall in the

equilibrium real wage for a group of workers.              If nominal wages

can't be cut, then the only way to cut real wages is to allow

inflation to do the job.       Without inflation, the real wage will

be   stuck    above   the   equilibrium   level,    resulting      in   higher

unemployment.

      For    this   reason,   some   economists    argue    that   inflation

"greases the wheels" of labor markets.            Only a little inflation

is needed: An inflation rate of 2 percent lets real wages fall

by 2 percent per year, or 20 percent per decade, without cuts in

nominal wages.        Such automatic reductions in real wages are

impossible with zero inflation.

      There is reason to suspect that this argument for positive

inflation also influenced U.S. monetary policy in the 1990s.

Once again, Lawrence Summers endorsed this view at the beginning


                                     13
of the decade when he proposed a target rate of inflation of 2

to    3    percent.    Subsequently,      the   case   was   advanced   by   a

Brookings research team that included George Akerlof, husband to

Janet Yellen, a Clinton appointee to the Federal Reserve.1              These

facts suggest that some U.S. monetary policymakers during the

1990s may have been skeptical about the desirability of pushing

inflation all the way down to zero.              The 3-percent inflation

realized during this period may have been exactly what they were

aiming for.



1.4       Real Economic Performance: Unemployment and Growth

          The other key aspect of macroeconomic performance beyond

inflation is the real economy, which is most often monitored by

unemployment and growth in real GDP.            Keep in mind that monetary

policy is not the most important determinant of these economic

variables.       Indeed, according to standard theory, the Fed has no

ability at all to influence unemployment and real growth in the

long run.

          What determines the long-run rates of unemployment and real

growth?       Unemployment is determined by labor-market features,

institutions, and policies, such as the demographic structure of

the work force, the bargaining power of unions, minimum-wage

laws,       unemployment-insurance     policies,       and   the   mechanisms


                                     14
available for matching workers and jobs.                  These factors also

influence real economic growth (for lower unemployment means

higher production), but the primary determinant of real economic

growth in the long run is the rate of technological progress.

Notice   that    when     discussing        the    long-run     forces    setting

unemployment and real growth, monetary policy is far in the

background.

    Yet monetary policy influences unemployment and growth in

the short run.     What the "short run" means is a subject of some

dispute, but most economists agree that the central-bank actions

influence these variables over a period of at least two or three

years.   This means that the central bank can potentially help

stabilize the economy. (And if policy is badly run, it can

destabilize     it--the    Great    Depression       of   the   1930s    being   a

prominent example). In the jargon of economics, monetary policy

is neutral in the long run, but not in the short run.                          The

practical     implications     of    this         textbook    theory     are   the

following: The average levels of unemployment and growth over

long periods are beyond the central bank's powers, but the

volatility of these series from year to year is something it can

influence.

    Table 2 presents summary statistics on unemployment and real

growth for each of the last five decades of the twentieth


                                       15
century. It presents both the average level over the decade and

the standard deviation as a measure of volatility.

      As the table shows, the average level of unemployment during

the 1990s was lower than it was during the previous two decades

(although still higher than 1950s and 1960s).                    There is no

consensus among economists on the reasons for this decline in

the normal level of unemployment.               It could, for instance, be

related to the aging of the work force, as the baby boom reaches

middle age.    Older workers tend to have more stable jobs than

younger   workers,     so    it    is    natural      to   expect   declining

unemployment   as    the    work   force      ages.    Alternatively,      as   I

discuss later, the decline in normal unemployment during the

1990s could be related to the acceleration in productivity

growth due to advances in information technology.               But whatever

the   cause   for   the     long-run     decline      in   unemployment,    few

economists would credit monetary policy.

      Data on real economic growth shows that average growth

during the 1990s was similar to that experienced during the

1980s and substantially lower than that experienced during the

1950s and 1960s.      This fact might seem surprising in light of

the great hoopla surrounding the so-called "new economy."                   The

explanation is that the acceleration of economic growth occurred

in the middle of the decade.                 Once the rapid growth in the


                                        16
second half of the decade is averaged with the recession and

slow growth in the first half, overall growth during the 1990s

is no longer impressive.

       What's important for evaluating monetary policy, however,

are not the averages in Table 2 but the standard deviations.

Here    the    numbers   tell    a   striking    story:   Unemployment    and

economic growth were more stable during the 1990s than during

any recent decade.       The change in the volatility of GDP growth

is large.      The economy's production was 27 percent less volatile

during the 1990s than it was during the 1960s, the second most

stable decade.

       These    statistics      suggest     amazing   success   by   monetary

policymakers during the 1990s.              As we saw earlier, the economy

enjoyed low volatility in inflation.              One might wonder whether

this success came at a cost.                That is, did the Fed achieve

stable inflation by giving less weight to the goals of stable

employment and growth?          The answer appears to be no: The economy

became more stable in every dimension.

       Of course, improvement in economic stabilization does not

necessarily mean that policymakers are doing a better job.

Perhaps they were just lucky.




                                       17
Table 2:

Unemployment and Real Economic Growth, Decade by Decade

                        1950s       1960s      1970s        1980s       1990s

Unemployment

Average                  4.51        4.78       6.22         7.27        5.76

Standard
Deviation                1.29        1.07       1.16         1.48        1.05


Real GDP growth

Average                  4.18        4.43       3.28         3.02        3.03

Standard
Deviation                3.89        2.13       2.80         2.68        1.56



Note: Unemployment is the monthly seasonally-adjusted percentage
of the labor force without a job. Real GDP growth is the growth
rate of inflation-adjusted gross domestic product from four
quarters earlier.

Source:    Department    of     Labor,    Department   of   Commerce,    and

author's calculations.




                                     18
2. The Role of Luck

      The Fed's job is to respond to shocks to the economy in

order to stabilize output, employment, and inflation.             Standard

analyses of economic fluctuations divide shocks into two types.

 Demand shocks are those that alter the overall demand for goods

and services.      Supply shocks are those that alter the prices at

which firms are willing and able to supply goods and services.

      Demand shocks are the easier type for the Fed to handle

because, like monetary policy, they push output, employment, and

inflation in the same direction.            A stock market crash, for

instance, reduces aggregate demand, putting downward pressure on

output, employment, and inflation.         The standard response is for

the Fed to lower interest rates by increasing the money supply.

 If well timed, such an action can restore aggregate demand and

offset the effects of the shock on both inflation and the real

economy.

      Supply shocks pose a more difficult problem.        An increase in

the world price of oil, for instance, raises firms' costs and

the prices they charge.         This tends to raise inflation and, for

given aggregate demand, push the economy toward recession.              The

Fed   then   has   a   choice   between   contracting   policy   to   fight

inflation and expanding policy to fight recession.           In the face

of supply shocks, the Fed cannot stabilize inflation and the


                                     19
real economy simultaneously.     Supply shocks force upon the Fed a

tradeoff between inflation stability and employment stability.

    Yet during the 1990s the U.S. economy enjoyed stability of

both kinds.   One possible reason is dumb luck.        Perhaps the

economy just did not experience the supply shocks that caused so

much turmoil in earlier decades.



2.1 Food and Energy Price Shocks

    The most significant supply shocks in recent U.S. history

are the food and energy shocks of the 1970s.      These shocks are

often blamed as one proximate cause of the rise in inflation

that occurred during this decade not only in the United States

but also around the world.     So a natural place to start looking

for supply shocks is in the prices of food and energy.2

    Table 3 shows some summary statistics on these shocks.     They

are measured here as CPI inflation minus core inflation, where

core inflation is based on the consumer price index excluding

food and energy.   This measure is positive when food and energy

prices are rising relative to other prices in the economy.

    The first two rows of the table show the average shock and

the standard deviation of the shocks in each decade.     The 1990s

were lucky time.   The low standard deviation shows that large

supply shocks were not common.    Moreover, the negative value for


                                 20
the average shock indicates that good shocks were more common

than bad shocks.

      The third row of the table shows the worst shock that the

Fed had to deal with during each decade.            Not surprisingly, the

worst shock in the entire period was in the 1970s: Because of

adverse shocks to food and energy, CPI inflation rose 4.64

percentage points more than core inflation during the twelve

months ending February 1974.         By contrast, the worst shock of

the   1990s   was   less   than   one-fourth   as    large.   This   shock

occurred in 1990 as a result of the Gulf War.            For the rest of

the decade, there was no adverse food and energy shock as large

as a full percentage point.

      Given these data, it is hard to escape the conclusion that

the macroeconomic success of the 1990s was in part due to luck.

 Food and energy prices were unusually well behaved, and the

economy reaped the benefit of this stability.




                                    21
Table 3

Food and Energy Price Shocks, Decade by Decade


                        1960s        1970s     1980s     1990s

Average
Shock                   -0.12         0.61     -0.51     -0.22

Standard
Deviation                0.45         1.41      0.97      0.50
of Shocks

Worst Shock              1.34         4.65      2.26      1.02

Date of Worst Shock      Feb 66       Feb 74    Mar 80    Oct 90


Note: The shock here is measured as the CPI inflation rate over
12 months minus the core CPI inflation rate over the same
period. The core CPI is the index excluding food and energy.

Source: Department of Labor and author's calculations.




                                22
2.2 Productivity

       Another potential source of supply shocks is the rate of

technological advance.      This is a natural hypothesis to explain

the good macroeconomic performance of the 1990s.        During these

years there was much discussion of the so-called "new economy"

and the increasing role of information technology.

       Table 4 shows data on the productivity growth in the nonfarm

business sector.       The pickup in productivity growth is evident

in these data.     It is even clearer if the 1990s are split in

half: Productivity growth was higher in the second half of the

decade than in the first.      While the productivity speed-up is a

fortuitous development, its importance should not be overstated.

 Compared to the data from the 1950s and 1960s, the average rate

of productivity growth during the 1990s is not unusual.

       What is more anomalous is the low volatility of productivity

growth, as shown in the second row of the table.       To the extent

that productivity reflects technological progress, the 1990s

were a decade of smooth advances in technology.       It is possible

that    this   might     explain   the   low   volatility   in   other

macroeconomic variables.      Yet it is also possible that the tame

business cycle led to low volatility in productivity, rather

than the other way around.

       The productivity data suggest an intriguing observation: The


                                   23
1990s were in many ways the opposite of the 1970s.                 The 1970s

saw a large increase in the price of a major intermediate good--

oil.    At the same time, productivity growth decelerated, while

unemployment and inflation rose.           The 1990s saw a large decrease

in the price of a major intermediate good--computer chips.                 At

the     same   time,     productivity       growth   accelerated,       while

unemployment and inflation fell.

       Economists   do    not     fully    understand     the   links   among

productivity, unemployment, and inflation, but one hypothesis

may help explain the 1990s.         If workers' wage demands lag behind

news about productivity, accelerating productivity may tend to

lower    the   natural     rate     of     unemployment    until    workers'

aspirations catch up.        If the central bank is unaware of the

falling natural rate of unemployment, it may leave more slack in

the economy than it realizes, putting downward pressure on

inflation.     Thus, even if the average rate of productivity

growth was not exceptional during the 1990s, the surprising

acceleration from the poor productivity growth of the 1970s and

1980s may have acted like a lucky shock to aggregate supply.3




                                      24
Table 4:

Productivity Growth, Decade by Decade


                     1950s   1960s      1970s   1980s       1990s

Average
Productivity          2.80    2.84       2.05   1.48        2.07
Growth

Standard Deviation
of Productivity       4.29    4.20       4.30   2.91        2.62
Growth


Note: Productivity growth is the quarterly change in output per
hour in the nonfarm business sector, expressed at an annual
rate.

Source: Department of Commerce and author's calculations.




                              25
2.3   The Stock Market

      It would be an oversight in any discussion of luck in the

1990s to neglect the stock market.            For investors in the stock

market, this decade was extraordinarily lucky.

      Table 5 shows the average return and the standard deviation

of returns for each of the past five decades.               It also shows the

ratio of the average return to the standard deviation, which is

commonly used as a measure of how much reward an investor gets

for   taking   on   risk.     The   table    shows   that    the    1990s   were

exceptional.    Returns were high, and volatility was low.                  There

was never a better time to be in the market.

      To a large extent, the performance of the stock market is

just a reflection of the macroeconomic events we have already

seen in other statistics.           Low volatility in the stock market

reflects low volatility in the overall economy.               The high return

reflects the surprising acceleration in productivity growth,

which helped fuel growth in corporate profits.                    If the stock

market is merely a mirror being held up to the economy, then it

has   little   independent     role   in    the   conduct    or    analysis   of

monetary policy.

      There are, however, two reasons why the stock market may

have a role to play.        The first is that the stock market may be

an indicator of things to come.             According to the "efficient


                                      26
markets" theory, stock-market investors are rationally looking

ahead to future economic conditions and constantly processing

all relevant information.          Thus, news about the economy might

show up first in the stock market.                The 1990s are a case in

point.      The     bull    market     preceded       the   acceleration      in

productivity growth by several years, suggesting the possibility

that Wall Street knew about the "new economy" long before it

showed up in standard macroeconomic statistics.

    A second reason why the stock market may be relevant to

monetary   policy    is    that   it   can   be   a   driving   force   of   the

business cycle.      John Maynard Keynes suggested that movements in

the market are driven by the "animal spirits" of investors.

Alan Greenspan reprised this idea during the 1990s when he

questioned whether investors were suffering from "irrational

exuberance."      Such exuberance could push stock prices higher

than their fundamental value and make households feel richer

than they truly are.

    Under either theory, monetary policymakers might react to a

rise in the stock market by setting interest rates higher than

they otherwise would.        This is the other side of the coin to the

Fed's policy in October 1987, when it responded to a stock

market crash by increasing liquidity and cutting interest rates.

 Regardless of whether the movements in the stock market are


                                       27
rational,   they   alter   the   aggregate   demand   for    goods   and

services, which make them of interest to monetary policymakers.

 Indeed, the decline in the personal saving rate during the

1990s was mostly due to the booming stock market, for the

"wealth effect" was a potent stimulus to consumer spending.

    Of course, saying that monetary policy might react to the

stock market is different from saying that it did.          As I discuss

below, there is scant evidence that the booming stock market of

the 1990s played a large, independent role in monetary policy

during this period.




                                  28
Table 5:

Stock Market Returns, Decade by Decade




                     1950s   1960s       1970s   1980s     1990s

Average
Return               21.46   9.55        6.05    18.58     18.83


Standard Deviation
of Return          15.88     12.30       16.36   17.09     12.04

Ratio of
Average Return to     1.35   0.78        0.37    1.09      1.56
Standard Deviation


Note: Calculations are based on monthly data on total returns on
the S&P 500 index over the previous 12 months.

Source: Standard and Poors and author's calculations.




                               29
3. The Role of Policy

    Let's now turn to looking directly at policy to see how, if

at all, it was different in the 1990s than in earlier decades.

I look at two standard gauges of monetary policy--the money

supply and interest rates.

    Before doing so, let's clear up a potential confusion.

Although a central bank can control both the money supply and

the level of interest rates, it would be wrong to view these two

variables as distinct policy instruments.         The reason is that

the central bank influences interest rates by adjusting the

money supply.     In essence, interest rates are the price of

money.     The   central   bank   affects   the   price   of    money   by

controlling the quantity of money.

    As a first approximation, the central bank's only policy

lever is the supply of high-powered money (currency plus bank

reserves), which it controls through open-market operations and,

to a lesser extent, lending at its discount window.            It can use

this single lever to target a broad monetary aggregate, such as

M1 or M2, an interest rate, an exchange rate, or the price of

bananas.   But once it chooses one intermediate target, the game

is over: The central bank has used up its power over economic

conditions.




                                   30
3.1. The Demise of Monetary Aggregates

    There once was a time when critics of Fed policy thought the

key to good monetary policy was stable growth in the money

supply.   If the Fed would only keep M1 or M2 growing at a low,

stable rate, the argument went, the economy would avoid high

inflations, painful deflations, and the major booms and busts of

the business cycle.    Milton Friedman was the most prominent

proponent of this so-called "monetarist" view.

    It is easy to see how such a viewpoint arose.     The two most

painful macroeconomic events of the twentieth century were the

Great Depression of the 1930s and the Great Inflation of the

1970s.    Both calamities would likely have been avoided if the

Fed had been following the Friedman prescription of low, stable

money growth.

    In the early 1930s, high-powered money continued to grow at

a moderate rate, but the collapse of the banking system caused

broader measures of the money supply to plunge.     Worries about

bank solvency caused households to hold more money in the form

of currency rather than demand deposits and banks to hold more

deposits in the form of reserves rather than bank loans.     Both

actions reduced the amount of bank lending; the creation of

inside money by the banking system went in reverse.    As measured

by currency plus demand deposits, the quantity of money fell by


                               31
25 percent from 1929 to 1933.      If the Fed has been committed to

stable growth in the broader monetary aggregates, it would have

pursued a more expansionary policy than it did, and the Great

Depression would have been less severe.

    Generals are said to often make the mistake of fighting the

last war, and the same may be true of central bankers.          Perhaps

because of the memory of its insufficient expansion during the

1930s, the Fed was too expansionary during the 1970s.               The

proximate cause of the Great Inflation was not monetary policy:

The fiscal expansion due to the Vietnam War in the late 1960s

and the OPEC oil shocks of 1973-74 and 1979-81 deserve much of

the blame.    But monetary policy accommodated these shocks to a

degree that ensured persistent high inflation.         The money supply

grew rapidly throughout the 1970s, and inflation reached some of

its highest levels on record.      How best to handle supply shocks

is a topic about which economists disagree. But there is no

doubt that if Fed had kept money growth to a slower rate during

the 1970s, it would have better contained the inflationary

pressures.

    With     these   two   formative   episodes   as   the   historical

background, one might have expected subsequent improvements in

monetary policy to be associated with increased concern at the

Fed to maintain low, stable money growth.          Indeed, increased


                                  32
reliance     on   target   ranges   for     the    monetary   aggregates    was

allegedly part of Paul Volcker's 1979 change in the direction of

monetary policy, which helped set the stage for the 1990s.4                  If

the improved macroeconomic performance of the 1990s went hand in

hand with greater stability in the money supply, monetarists

could have claimed intellectual victory.

       Alas, it was not to be.         Table 6 shows the average growth

rate and the standard deviation of the growth rate for M1 and

M2, the two most commonly used measures of the money supply. (I

omit   the   1950s   here    because    the   Fed's     consistent   data    on

monetary aggregates start in 1959.)               One clear fact is that the

1990s saw slower money growth than the 1970s and 1980s.                     The

basic lesson of the quantity theory of money--that slower money

growth and lower inflation go hand in hand--receives ample

support from this decade.

       Yet the data give no support for the monetarist view that

stability in the monetary aggregates is a prerequisite for

economic stability.        The standard deviation of M2 growth was not

unusually low during the 1990s, and the standard deviation of M1

growth was the highest of the past four decades.                     In other

words, while the nation was enjoying macroeconomic tranquility,

the money supply was exhibiting high volatility.

       From the standpoint of economic theory, this is not a


                                       33
puzzle.    The money supply is one determinant of the overall

demand for goods and services in the economy, but there are many

others, such as consumer confidence, investor psychology, and

the health of the banking system.         The view that monetary

stability is the only ingredient needed for economic stability

is based on a narrow view of what causes the ups and downs of

the business cycle.     In the end, it's a view that is hard to

reconcile with the data.

    This lesson was not lost on monetary policymakers during the

1990s. In February 1993, Fed chairman Alan Greenspan announced

that the Fed would pay less attention to the monetary aggregates

than it   had in the past.     The aggregates, he said, "do not

appear    to   be   giving   reliable   indications   of   economic

developments and price pressures."5      It's easy to see why he

might have reached this conclusion when he did.            Over the

previous 12 months, M1 had grown at an extremely high 12-percent

rate, while M2 had grown at an extremely low 0.5-percent rate.

Depending on how much weight was given to each of these two

measures, monetary policy was either very loose, very tight, or

somewhere in between.

    Henceforth, the Fed would conduct policy by setting a target

for the federal funds rate, the short-term interest rate at

which banks make loans to one another.       It would adjust the


                                 34
target   interest        rate     in    response     to    changing   economic

conditions, but it would permit the money supply to do whatever

necessary   to    keep    the     interest    rate    on   target.     If   the

subsequent performance of the economy is any guide, this policy

of   ignoring    data    on     the    monetary   aggregates   has    proven   a

remarkably effective operating procedure.




                                         35
Table 6:

Growth in the Money Supply, Decade by Decade


                        1960s        1970s   1980s    1990s

M1

Average                  3.69         6.35     7.78    3.63

Standard
Deviation                2.15         1.61     4.10    5.42


M2

Average                  7.05         9.49     7.97    4.04

Standard
Deviation                1.63         3.22     2.29    2.39


Note: Calculations are with monthly data.    The growth rate is
calculated from 12 months earlier.

Source: Federal Reserve and author's calculations.




                                36
3.2. Interest Rate Policy: The End of the Inflation Spiral

       Choosing the short-term interest rate as an intermediate

target for Fed policy is only the first step to conducting

monetary policy.           The next, more difficult step is to decide

what the target rate should be and how the target should respond

to changing economic conditions.

       There is a long tradition of concern among economists that a

central bank's reliance on interest-rate targets could prove

inflationary.        The argument runs as follows.              Imagine that some

event--an accidental overheating of the economy, an adverse

supply shock, or a sudden scare about impending inflation--

starts to drive up expectations of inflation.                       If the central

bank    is    targeting      the   nominal       interest    rate,    the   rise    in

expected inflation means an automatic fall in the real interest

rate.        The    fall   in    the   real     interest    rate    stimulates     the

aggregate demand for goods and services, which in turn puts

upward pressure on prices.                 The rise in prices confirms and

reinforces the inflationary expectations that began the process.

Thus, expected inflation begets actual inflation, which in turn

begets       even   higher      expected    inflation.        The    central   bank,

committed to its interest-rate target, ends up increasing the

money supply at an ever more rapid rate.                    Inflation spirals out

of control.


                                           37
      Fortunately, there is a simple way to avoid this problem: A

central bank should raise its interest-rate target in response

to   any   inflationary        pressure    by    enough    to   choke    off      that

pressure.        How much is enough?            Economic theory suggests a

natural    benchmark:     If    the    central    bank    responds      to   a    one-

percentage-point increase in inflation by raising the nominal

interest rate by more than one percentage point, then the real

interest rate will rise, cooling off the economy.                        In other

words, it is not sufficient that the central bank raise nominal

interest rates in response to higher inflation; it is crucial

that the response be greater than one-for-one.

      These theoretical insights go a long way to explaining the

success of monetary policy in the 1990s, as well as its failures

in previous decades.           The first line of Table 7 shows how much

the federal funds rate typically responds to changes in core

inflation.       These numbers are based on a simple statistical

analysis    of    the   data    on    interest    rates,    unemployment,          and

inflation (described in the note to the table).

      The key result in this table is that the responsiveness of

interest rates to inflation has been rising over time.                              In

earlier decades, the response was less than one-for-one.                         In the

1960s, for instance, when inflation rose by 1 percentage point,

the federal funds rate rose by only 0.69 of a percentage point.


                                          38
 The theory of spiraling inflation may be the right explanation

for the Great Inflation of the 1970s.           In other words, this

episode was the result of the inadequate response of interest-

rate policy to the inflationary pressures arising first from the

Vietnam War and later from the OPEC oil shocks.

    The situation was just the opposite during the 1990s.         Each

rise in the inflation rate was met by an even larger rise in the

nominal interest rate.       When inflation rose by 1 percentage

point, the federal funds rate typically rose by 1.39 percentage

points.   This   substantial   response   prevented    any   incipient

inflation from getting out of control.

    Although the 1990s saw high responsiveness of interest rates

to inflation, it was not a decade of volatile interest rates.

The second line in Table 7 shows that the federal funds rate, in

fact, exhibited low volatility by historical standards.          High

responsiveness   and   low   volatility   may   seem   a   paradoxical

combination, but they are easy to reconcile: The more the Fed

responds to inflationary pressures when they arise, the less of

a problem inflation becomes, and the less it has to respond to

later.

    Overall, the U.S. experience with monetary policy during the

1990s teaches a simple lesson.    To maintain stable inflation and

stable interest rates in the long run, a central bank should


                                 39
raise interest rates substantially in the short run in response

to any inflationary threat.6




                               40
Table 7:

The Federal Funds Rate, Decade by Decade

                                 1960s       1970s     1980s         1990s

The typical response
of the federal funds rate         0.69        0.85         0.88       1.39
to a 1-percentage point
increase in core inflation


Standard deviation of             1.78        2.54         3.38       1.39
the federal funds rate


Note: These numbers are computed using 120 months of data for
each decade. The first line is derived from an ordinary least
squares regression of the federal funds rate on a constant, the
unemployment rate, and the core inflation rate over the previous
12 months; the table reports the coefficient on core inflation.

Source:    Federal   Reserve,   Department   of   Labor,   and    author's

calculations.




                                   41
3.3. A Simple Way to Set Interest Rates Like A Pro

       Consider   the    following     simple      formula   for   setting   the

federal funds rate:



Federal funds rate = 8.5 + 1.4 x (Core inflation - Unemployment)



Here   "core   inflation"      is   the     CPI    inflation   rate   over   the

previous 12 months excluding food and energy, and "unemployment"

is the seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate.                  For example, if

core inflation is at 3 percent and unemployment is at 5 percent,

the federal funds rate should be set at 5.7 percent.                         The

parameters in this formula were chosen to offer the best fit for

data from the 1990s.



3.3.1. The Case for the Interest Rate Formula

       The   logic    behind    such      an      interest-rate    formula    is

straightforward.        The Fed raises interest rates in response to

higher inflation to cool the economy.              As we just discussed, the

response is more than one-for-one to avoid spiraling inflation.

 In addition, the Fed responds to high unemployment by cutting

interest rates to stimulate aggregate demand.

       There are two reasons why the Fed might want to respond to

unemployment.        First, employment stability may be a goal in


                                       42
itself.    At times, legislation has been proposed that would give

the Fed single-minded concern about price stability.                        But the

Fed's actual Congressional mandate has always been much broader.

    Second,      unemployment      is    a   leading     indicator     of    future

inflation.      Low unemployment tends to put upward pressure on

wages, which in turn raises production costs and the prices of

goods and services.       Although some observers have suggested that

the combination of low unemployment and low inflation in the

late 1990s casts doubt on the "Phillips curve" tradeoff between

these    variables,     careful    statistical         analyses    suggest        that

unemployment and related variables are among the most useful

data for forecasting inflation.7             Other things equal, a Fed that

wants     to   keep    inflation    in       check    will    respond       to     low

unemployment by raising interest rates.



3.3.2 What the Formula Says About Monetary Policy During the

1990s

    Figure 1 shows the federal funds rate predicted by this

simple    interest-rate       formula    and    the    actual     federal        funds

beginning      from   1958.    Comparing       these    two   series    leads       to

several conclusions about the conduct of monetary policy.

    The first, important observation is that during the 1990s,

the two series in Figure 1 move closely together.                  According to


                                        43
a standard measure of goodness of fit (the R2 statistic), the

formula explains 85 percent of movements in the federal funds

rate during this time.    This tight fit has profound implications

for understanding monetary policy. It means that the interest-

rate policy during the 1990s can be viewed as largely a response

to the contemporaneous levels of inflation and unemployment.8

    A corollary to this conclusion is that the many other issues

that dominated public debate over monetary policy during the

1990s must be of secondary importance.      The media spent much

time discussing the Fed chairman's broad interests, including

the stance of fiscal policy, the "irrational exuberance" of the

stock market, the productivity gains of the "new economy," the

financial crises in Mexico and Asia, and sundry obscure economic

data.   Apparently, these did not exert a great influence over

interest rates.     If they had, the formula would not be able to

track actual interest rates so well.

    A second, important observation is that the two series in

Figure 1 move at about the same time.    There was much discussion

during the 1990s of the need for the Fed to be preemptive, to

respond to economic pressures before they showed up in inflation

and unemployment.    Being preemptive makes sense, if forecasting

is good enough to make the task feasible, because monetary

policy influences the economy with a lag typically estimated to


                                 44
be 6 to 12 months.   But the strong contemporaneous correlation

in Figure 1, and the absence of any tendency for the actual

interest rate to move before the formula indicates, suggests

that policy was not in fact preemptive at all.



3.3.3 What the 1990s Teach Us About Earlier Monetary Policy

    Figure 1 can also be used to make some judgments about

monetary policy of the past.     We can view the interest-rate

formula as a rough approximation to the Greenspan Fed.        By

comparing the two series, we can see how the Greenspan Fed might

have responded to the economic circumstances facing monetary

policymakers of the past.

    One conclusion is that the Greenspan Fed of the 1990s would

likely have averted the Great Inflation of the 1970s.    From the

late 1960s to the early 1970s, the formula interest rate in

Figure 1 is consistently several percentage points above the

actual interest rate.   The same is true, to a less extent, in

the late 1970s.   This is consistent with the result presented in

Table 7: Fed policymakers of the 1990s responded more to rising

inflation than did their predecessors.

    A second conclusion from Figure 1 is that the Greenspan Fed

would have been much more expansionary in the early 1980s.    As

the economy experienced the deepest recession since the Great


                               45
Depression, the Fed would have cut interest rates much more

aggressively.       (Taken literally, the interest-rate formula says

interest rates should have become negative, which is of course

impossible.)        The disinflation would have been less rapid, but

some of the very high unemployment would have been averted.



3.4 The Role of the White House

       So    far,   this   paper    has   said    little   about    the   Clinton

administration.       In some ways, this is to be expected: Monetary

policy is made by the Federal Reserve, which is independent of

the executive branch.              But the administration did influence

monetary policy in several important ways.

       The most obvious is the reappointment of Alan Greenspan.                 In

retrospect, this decision may seem like a no-brainer, but at the

time    it    was   less    obvious.           When   Greenspan    came   up   for

reappointment during Clinton's first term, his reputation was

not as solid as it would become: Some observers (including some

members of the administration of the elder George Bush) blamed

Greenspan for the recession of 1990-91.                 Moreover, Greenspan was

a conservative Republican.                It would have been natural for

Clinton to want to put a more Democratic stamp on the nation's

central bank.        That he chose not to do so is notable.               To the

extent that Greenspan's Fed has been a success, the Clinton


                                          46
administration deserves some of the credit.

    The Clinton administration also influenced monetary policy

with its other appointments to the Board of Governors.                     These

included    Alan    Blinder,       Ned   Gramlich,   Lawrence     Meyer,   Alice

Rivlin, and Janet Yellen.            Compared to the typical appointment

to the Fed by other presidents, the Clinton appointees were more

prominent within the community of academic economists.                     Some

observers may applaud Clinton for drawing top talent into public

service (while others may decry the brain drain from academia).

 Whether this had any effect on policy is hard to say.

    In addition to appointments, the administration also made a

significant policy decision: Throughout its eight years, it

avoided making public comments about Federal Reserve policy.

Given the great influence the Fed has on the economy and the

great influence the economy has on presidential popularity,

presidents and their subordinates usually have a tough time

remaining    silent     about      monetary    policy.      Yet   the   Clinton

administration avoided this temptation.

    A large academic literature indicates that more independent

central banks produce lower and more stable inflation without

greater volatility in output or employment.                One contributor to

this literature was Lawrence Summers, who would later spend

eight   years      as   a   high    Treasury    official    in    the   Clinton


                                         47
administration,      culminating      in     the    position     of    Treasury

Secretary.9      Thus, it is hardly an accident that the Clinton

administration       was     unusually       respectful    of     the       Fed's

independence.      What effect this had on policy is hard to gauge.

 Perhaps the administration's restraint made it easier for the

Fed to raise interest rates when needed without instigating

political opposition.        It may also have made it easier for the

Fed   to   cut    interest   rate    when    needed    without    sacrificing

credibility in the fight against inflation.               In this way, the

administration's       respect      for     Fed    independence       may    have

contributed to the increased responsiveness of interest rates to

inflation.       If so, the White House again deserves some credit

for the Fed's success.



4. Is There a Greenspan Legacy?

      In May 1964 the Journal of Finance published a short paper

by a young economist named Alan Greenspan.                     It was called

"Liquidity as a Determinant of Industrial Prices and Interest

Rates."    Greenspan began his summary of the paper as follows: "I

have endeavored to integrate several theoretical approaches to

the forecasting of prices, with special emphasis on its relation

to interest rates."

      The paper was a sign of things to come in several ways.


                                      48
First, and most obviously, it showed Greenspan's early interest

in liquidity, inflation, and interest rates--topics that are the

essence of monetary policy.      Second, the paper demonstrated his

interest in looking intensely at the data to try to divine

upcoming macroeconomic events.     According to all staff reports,

this has also been a hallmark of his time at the Fed.

    Third, the desire to integrate various points of view shows

a lack of dogma and nimbleness of mind.         Without doubt, these

traits have served Greenspan well in his role as Fed chairman.

They have made it easier to get along with both Republican and

Democratic administrations and to forge a consensus among open-

market    committee   members   with   their   differing   theoretical

perspectives.    They have also made it easier for him to respond

to economic circumstances that are changing, unpredictable, and

sometimes inexplicable even after the fact.

    But there may also be a fourth, less favorable way in which

Greenspan's paper presaged the author's later career: It left no

legacy.    According to the online Social Science Citation Index,

the paper was cited in the subsequent literature exactly zero

times.    This raises the question of whether the monetary policy

of the 1990s faces a similar fate.       Will Greenspan's tenure as

Fed chairman leave a legacy for future monetary policymakers, or

will the successful policy of the Greenspan era leave office


                                  49
with the man himself?

       Imagine that Greenspan's successor decides to continue the

monetary policy of the Greenspan era.             How would he do it?        The

policy has never been fully explained.             Quite the contrary: The

Fed chairman is famous for being opaque.                If a successor tries

to emulate the Greenspan Fed, he won't have any idea how.                    The

only    consistent    policy    seems     to    be:     Study    all   the   data

carefully, and then set interest rates at the right level.

Beyond that, there are no clearly stated guidelines.

       There is a great irony to this.            Conservative economists

like    Milton   Friedman     have   long      argued     that    discretionary

monetary policy leads to trouble.              They claim that it is too

uncertain, too political, and too inflationary.                   They conclude

that monetary policymakers need to be bound by some sort of

monetary policy rule.       This argument is the economic counterpart

to John Adam's famous aphorism that "we are a nation of laws,

not of men."

       These views, together with the great inflation of the 1970s,

have influenced central banks around the world.                    Although no

country has yet replaced its central bankers with computers

programmed to an automatic monetary rule, as the most extreme

critics    suggest,   there    has   been      movement    away    from   giving

central bankers unconstrained discretion.                  During the 1990s,


                                     50
many nations adopted some form of inflation targeting.                           In

essence, inflation targeting is a commitment to keep inflation

at some level or within some narrow range.                It can be viewed as

a   kind    of   soft   rule,     or    perhaps    a   way      of   constraining

discretion.10

       Despite this environment, and the fact that a prominent

conservative headed the U.S. central bank, the Fed during the

1990s      avoided   any   type    of    commitment       to    a    policy   rule.

Conservative economists are skeptical about policies that rely

heavily on the judgments of any one man.                        But that is how

monetary policy was made over this decade, and it was hailed as

a success by liberals and conservatives alike.

       As a practical matter, Fed policy of the 1990s might well be

described as "covert inflation targeting" at a rate of about 3

percent.       That is, if the Fed had adopted an explicit inflation

target at the beginning of the 1990s, the rest of the decade

might not have been any different.            The virtue of eschewing such

a     policy     framework   is        that   it   kept        options   open--as

unconstrained discretion always does.              The downside is that it

is makes it harder for subsequent Fed chairmen to build on the

legacy of the 1990s, because it is hard to know what that legacy

is.




                                         51
5. The Lessons of the 1990s

       This paper has covered a lot of ground.               So I finish by

summarizing four key lessons for students of monetary policy.



1. The macroeconomic performance of the 1990s was exceptional.

Although the average levels of inflation, unemployment, and real

growth were similar to what was experienced in some previous

decades, the stability of these measures is unparalleled in U.S.

economic history.

2. A large share of the impressive performance of the 1990s was

due to good luck.       The economy experienced no severe shocks to

food    or    energy   prices    during     this   period.      Accelerating

productivity growth due to advances in information technology

may also have helped lower unemployment and inflation.



3. Compared to previous eras, monetary policy during the 1990s

adjusted interest rates more aggressively in response to changes

in     core   inflation.        This   prevented    spiraling     inflation.

Increased stability in monetary aggregates played no role in the

improved macroeconomic performance of this era.



4. The low inflation and economic stability of the 1990s shows

that discretionary monetary policy can work well.             Yet it leaves


                                       52
only a limited legacy for future policymakers.   U.S. monetary

policymakers during the 1990s may well have been engaged in

"covert inflation targeting" at a rate of about 3 percent, but

they never made that policy explicit.




                              53
References



Akerlof, George A., Dickens, William T., and Perry, George L.

    "The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation," Brookings Papers on

    Economic Activity, 1996:1, 1-76.



Alesina,   Alberto,   and   Summers,   Lawrence   H.,   "Central     Bank

    Independence      and     Macroeconomic       Performance:       Some

    Comparative    Evidence,"     Journal   of    Money,   Credit,    and

    Banking 25 (May 1993), 151-162.



Ball, Laurence, and Moffitt, Robert, "Productivity Growth and

    the Phillips Curve," Johns Hopkins University, 2001.



Bernanke, Ben S. and Mishkin, Frederic S. "Inflation Targeting:

    A New Framework for Monetary Policy?" Journal of Economic

    Perspective 11, Spring 1997, 97-116.



Blinder, Alan S., Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation, New

    York: Academic Press, 1979.



Campillo, Marta, and Miron, Jeffrey A., "Why Does Inflation

    Differ Across Countries?" in Christina D. Romer and David


                                 54
    H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy

    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997): 335-362.



Friedman, Milton, An Interview, Macroeconomic Dynamics 5, 2001,

    101-131.



Greenspan,   Alan,    "Liquidity   as   a   Determinant   of   Industrial

    Prices and Interest Rates,"         Journal of Finance, vol. 19

    (2), May 1964, 159-169.



Stock, James H., and Watson, Mark W. "Forecasting Inflation,"

    Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44 (2), October 1999,

    293-335.



Summers, Lawrence, "How Should Long-Term Monetary Policy Be

    Determined?" Journal of Money Credit and Banking, vol. 23,

    no, 3, part 2, August 1991, 625-631.



Taylor,   John   B.   "A   Historical   Analysis   of   Monetary   Policy

    Rules," in Monetary Policy Rules, ed., John B. Taylor,

    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.




                                   55
                           ENDNOTES




1. See Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996).

2. Blinder (1979) offers a classic analysis of the stagflation
of the 1970s, emphasizing the role of supply shocks related to
food and energy.

3. Some of these ideas are explored in a recent paper by
Laurence Ball and Robert Moffitt (2001).

4. I say "allegedly" because it is not obvious whether
Volcker's professed interest in the monetary aggregates was
genuine or just a political feint to distract attention from
the very high interest rates he needed to disinflate.

5. "Greenspan Upbeat on U.S. Economy," Financial Times,
February 20, 1993.

6. My discussion of interest rates in this section and the
next one builds on John Taylor's seminal work on monetary
policy rules. See, for instance, Taylor (1999).

7. See Stock and Watson (1999).

8. The Greenspan Fed deviated from this formula during the
late 1980s, when interest rates rose substantially more than
the formula recommended. Arguably, the formula did the better
job, and the actual policy was the mistake leading to the
1990-91 recession.

9. The Greenspan Fed deviated from this formula during the
late 1980s, when interest rates rose substantially more than
the formula recommended. Arguably, the formula did the better
job, and the actual policy was the mistake leading to the
1990-91 recession.

10. See Bernanke and Mishkin (1991) for a discussion of
inflation targeting.




                              56
                                                             Figure 1.
                                        Federal Funds Rate: Actual and Hypothetical Formula


    25




    20




    15
%




    10




     5




    0
    Jan-58   Jan-61   Jan-64   Jan-67   Jan-70   Jan-73   Jan-76     Jan-79   Jan-82    Jan-85   Jan-88   Jan-91   Jan-94   Jan-97   Jan-00



    -5

                                                                   Actual     Formula
