                                  $ % &   




                                                      


                                               
                                             


                                           !" #'(')
                                   #*++,,,-.-"+##+,'(')


                          $     
                               /010 23 43
                                  .5"6  0)/7'
                                     # .




           
          !" # $       %"& '(  
 ()*+   ! +,- %&./012 %!"% 
)'3 - " 4'-  $  '5   '' 6 
!!   '       $   
  %   "!&


76$+" 3  !8   '       
   !$69       ! '      7  '
  
 232 2 5 2 248
    5  
$ !" # - '(')
 # . )00/
9 - 16 :



                                               $%#%


        3" #2 4 .  2#233 #2 3  32  2 86 .3    
53"  2  5.  /;;7 5 /;;(-  ## 4" #. 2  #2
248  # 232 #26 ,  #23 23    2  #5-  43
 <  ,2 # 232 2 # ,5    ,2 8 25 #2  
 #  # # "4  4-         5 6 , 22= 2 # .5  
43.8  33 #2 "3-   25 #  #2 4  2 2 #-
  3 3""  2 # , 53" 5 " # 4 5 , 5 28 25
2.3   2# 2 2     >? ,5 #2 2 53" /;;)
5 /;;(    2 #-   523  5"3 #2" 52 2 2 #
 /;;76 ## .23  2 # 5 #5"5  !# #2 2 .,    -




                                                 
 #   2 2                                        2  $3
1)@):)2                                                         $!8
10   4                                               $!86  ;(A)0@/;00
 .5"6  0)/()@/7(A                                        5 $
B -53                                                , B-.!8-53
1. INTRODUCTION

        Pharmaceutical prices have been a prominent political issue over the past two decades,
surfacing everywhere from the Catastrophic Health Insurance Bill to proposals for Medicare
coverage of drugs. Legislative efforts to curb drug prices have been implemented on a small scale,
and, during health care reform discussions, debated but not implemented on a much larger scale.
Our purpose is to look for effects of legal changes and political climates on pharmaceutical prices
during much of this period. Using two different data sets, we find little, if any, effect of legal
changes or other events on prices. We do find evidence of self-regulation by the pharmaceutical
companies during the early years of the Clinton Administration, suggesting they preemptively
lowered prices or price increases under the threat of regulation. Specifically, by comparing pricing
strategies across firms which differ in their vulnerability to price regulation, we find evidence that
more vulnerable firms slowed their price increases during the period in which regulation seemed
most likely.


        Economic models deal extensively with firms’ responses to the legal environment in which
they operate (i.e. past government actions) as well as their customers’ and competitors’ actions.
This paper addresses the hypothesis that firms’ decisions are also affected by pressure from the
general public and policy makers, in other words, by the threat of future government action.
Economists have proposed several theories to explain government involvement in firms’
decisions. Public interest theories of industrial policy predict that the government will intervene
to correct market failures. If government intervention is costly, however, the role the government
plays in solving different market failures may vary based on the costs of intervention (or
“political transaction costs”). In other words, in circumstances where the costs of government
intervention are high and the costs of private action are low, there is room for private exchange
(see Noll, 1989 and the references he cites).


        Whether government regulation of drug prices would have solved a market failure is a
complicated, controversial question on which this paper remains agnostic. Other theories of
government regulation do not start from the premise that the government is solving market
failures, but rather emphasize the roles that competing interest groups play in convincing policy



                                                   1
makers to allocate rents to their members (Stigler, 1971). Within this paradigm, however,
competing interest groups may still privately decide to enact changes to redistribute rents instead
of leaving decisions to policy makers. They will do so if the private steps are much less
expensive than potential policy changes. For instance, the drug companies may have lowered
vaccine prices slightly in 1993 in order to diffuse the strength with which children’s rights
activists opposed high prices if doing so avoided costly government intervention. Private
responses are likely if they sufficiently diffuse the poignancy of the competing interest group’s
issue. One could even imagine a type of political “contestability,” where the persistent threat of
government intervention constantly distorts firm behavior.


         This paper seeks to provide an empirical example of a case in which firms perceived that
taking costly steps on their own was preferable to likely government intervention. Little
empirical evidence of such actions yet exists. A related paper by Erfle and McMillan (1990)
considers oil prices during the price shocks in the late 1970’s, comparing prices charged by large,
domestic oil producers to prices of small and foreign companies. They hypothesize that the big,
domestic firms are better able to influence government and public perceptions about policy.
They show that the large, domestic producers were more likely to adjust their prices for home
heating oil relative to the prices for oil sold to electric utilities when evening television programs
were providing heavy coverage of the oil price shock. Pricing during less politically sensitive
times was more homogenous. Both Erfle and McMillan (1990) and our paper identify politically
motivated pricing by comparing decisions across firms, although the approaches are
complementary. While they segment firms as being more and less able to influence the
government, this paper compares pricing by firms more and less willing to sacrifice current
profits to avert future regulation.1,2 Olmstead and Rhode (1985) describe a situation where oil
companies appeared to lower prices in the summer of 1920 in the face of potential government

1
 The context studied in this paper is also slightly cleaner than Erfle and McMillan’s because the period when political
sensitivity was high was a function of a number of economy-wide factors that influenced the rise and fall of the health
care reform debate. Erfle and McMillan have to address the fact that television news coverage may not be an exogenous
measure of political awareness of oil prices if coverage is influenced by the level of or changes in oil prices.
2
 Both willingness and ability to influence government action should be important in determining which firms act, but an
implicit assumption of our approach is that variations in the abilities of brandname manufacturers, all fairly large and
visible, to influence government actions are minimal.




                                                            2
involvement, but conclude that the hypothesis is “nearly impossible to test” (p. 1050). In more
recent work, Stango (2000) reports that bigger, more politically visible, credit card issuers were
more likely to lower interest rates following threatened legislation to cap rates. He also shows
that announced rate reductions led to positive stock price responses for both the announcing firm
and its competitors.


           The literature on firms’ environmental activities also has examples of private responses to
threatened regulation.3 For example, Pargal and Wheeler (1996) showed that Indonesian plants
were less likely to pollute in areas where the local townspeople were more likely to impose high
costs on polluters (for instance, they cite examples where local farmers burned a factory that was
polluting irrigation channels). They describe such public reactions as a system of informal
regulation that develops when formal government regulation is non-existent or poorly enforced.
Our paper is similar to Pargal and Wheeler’s though it considers a different sort of firm response
(slower price increases as opposed to pollution abatement) and considers private actions in a
country with an extensive regulatory and legislative apparatus through which competing interest
groups mediate conflict.4


           Our results also speak indirectly to the nature of corporations’ political power by
providing a new piece of evidence on the way in which firms can set the political agenda.
Previous empirical work has considered the impact of corporate lobbying and campaign
contributions on political decisions. Studies have both sought patterns in campaign contributions
(e.g. across industries) and also considered the relationship between campaign contributions and
votes in Congress.5 By considering whether firms make decisions in response to the threat of
policies, our results address the extent to which firms can keep issues from coming to vote in the



3
 Examples include Kennedy, Laplante and Maxwell (1994), Konar and Cohen (1997) and Maxwell, Lyon and Hackett
(2000).
4
 Several studies on the deterrent effects of antitrust enforcement are also closely related to this paper. For instance, Block,
Nold and Sidak (1981) find a negative relationship between various proxies for the threat of antitrust enforcement and
markups in the bread industry.
5
    See, for example, Esty and Caves (1983), Masters and Keim (1985) and Grier, Munger and Roberts (1994).




                                                                3
first place.6 That would imply that by only considering actual votes, previous studies might have
yielded biased assessments of corporations’ impact on political outcomes.


         For the core of our paper—the analysis of self-regulating behavior during the period of
greatest threat of regulation—we construct three measures which reflect cross-sectional
differences in firm political sensitivity or vulnerability: recent past corporate contributions to
political action committees, percentage of sales of drugs purchased disproportionately by the
elderly, and number of on-patent drug-years ahead of each firm. We analyze whether these
measures are associated with slower price growth during the early 1990s. We perform this
analysis twice, using a data set containing average wholesale prices of 106 of the largest revenue
prescription drugs sold in the U.S. during the period, as well as a set containing wholesale
transactions prices of antibiotics. Despite the very different characteristics and origins of the data
sets, our results are broadly consistent. Although the magnitudes of the effects we find are small,
our measures of political sensitivity are correlated with slower price growth in both data sets.


         In addition to our focus on firm behavior during the early 1990’s, when major health care
reform seemed likely, we take a broader view and present descriptive evidence on trends in
pharmaceutical pricing over an eleven year period from 1985 to 1996. We find mostly patterns
of small steady increases or decreases over this period with little evidence of the effects of
political events on pricing. In fact, this event study of prices shows an effect only of health care
reform debates.


         Pharmaceutical prices have attracted considerable research interest, in addition to the
attention they have received in public forums and the press. For instance, the systematic new
product introductions (both generic and new branded) provide interesting test cases for theories
of market dynamics (see e.g., Caves, Whinston and Hurwitz, 1991, and Ellison and Ellison,
1999) and price indices (see e.g., Griliches and Cockburn, 1994). The industry is also heavily
regulated along several dimensions, and a number of existing studies evaluate the effects changes

6
 Since health care reform legislation failed for a number of reasons (see Johnson and Broder, 1996), the particular case
we consider is not a good example of this part of the process. Other regulatory changes are more piecemeal and, therefore,
more prone to the effects we describe.




                                                            4
in specific regulations have had on drug pricing (see e.g., Masson and Steiner, 1985, Grabowski
and Vernon, 1992 and Scott Morton, 1997). Those studies consider enacted legislation and
address neither the genesis of the regulatory changes nor the effects drug companies’ actions may
have had on the legislative outcome.


         This paper proceeds by providing a chronology culled from the contemporary press of
events, perceptions, and debates relevant to pharmaceutical pricing since the mid-1980s. Section 3
describes the pricing data we use. Section 4 presents overall time series patterns in pharmaceutical
pricing, and considers evidence of changes in price trends around the events identified by the
chronology in Section 2. Section 5 considers the period of debate of health care reform in more
detail, and presents cross-sectional evidence, based on firm differences in political sensitivity, of the
effects of those debates. Section 6 concludes.


2. CHRONOLOGY

         The time period we consider begins in October 1985, a year after the Drug Price
Competition and Patent-term Restoration Act of 1984 (commonly referred to as the Waxman-
Hatch Act) was passed. This lifted substantial barriers to generic entry into many therapeutic
categories.7 The mid to late 1980’s brought various congressional proposals to expand Medicare
coverage to include prescription drugs (The Washington Post, 1987b, 1988), as well as public
scrutiny of prescription drug prices (The Washington Post, 1987a). Starting in July of 1988,
however, public scrutiny shifted as a scandal involving several manufacturers of generic drugs
broke (The Washington Post, 1989). The scandal involved allegations of Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) favoritism in granting approval of generic drugs. It resulted in fines and
jail sentences for some FDA officials, as well as the tabling of any congressional proposals
involving mandated generic substitution. In fact it was reported that “as the current crisis
continues to hold the public spotlight, many health officials fear that one of the most effective
ways to hold down medical costs for the consumer may now be in serious jeopardy (The
Washington Post, 1989).”

7
 Note that provisions similar to those in Waxman-Hatch had already been in place for antibiotics for decades (see
Hellerstein (1995)), one reason why generic entry into antibiotics had historically been so substantial.




                                                            5
         Public confidence was gradually restored in generic manufacturers and the FDA as the
scandal faded from public view, bringing branded manufacturers under scrutiny again. Concerns
over prices prompted Merck & Co. to announce voluntary price restraints (amounting to a pledge
not to raise prices faster than inflation) in 1990 and to publicly scold its competitors for large
price increases in 1991. Merck’s CEO Roy Vagelos says “`It is clear that the U.S. public and our
congressmen and senators are focusing on health-care costs…. People are really concerned…
and drug prices are such an obvious target’ (The Wall Street Journal, 1991).” (Several other
leading manufacturers joined Merck's voluntary price restraints a few years later in the midst of
the debate on health care reform.)

         Also in 1990 Congress became concerned over Medicaid drug costs. Medicaid, unlike
Medicare, did (and does) provide prescription pharmaceutical coverage, and a proposal requiring
that Medicaid only provide coverage for the least expensive drug (i.e. generic, when available)
was defeated. Instead, a plan by which each drug company must charge Medicaid the lower of its
“best” wholesale price or approximately 15% off its current inflation-indexed average
manufacturer’s price8 was passed and slated to go into effect in January of 1991 (The Los
Angeles Times, 1990, The Washington Post, 1990).

         There was some speculation in the industry that such a provision would cause firms to
eliminate deep discounts given to some wholesale customers (such as hospitals and HMOs).
Such action would have two effects, decreasing wholesale price dispersion and also raising the
average wholesale price.

         Best-price is working brilliantly for its proponents. By forcing drugmakers to
         extend discounts to Medicaid for no additional business, it makes price cutting far
         more expensive. The manufacturers’ response is simple: On many drugs, no
         buyer gets a discount deeper than Medicaid’s 15.7%. The losers are the most
         powerful buyers like HMOs and hospitals, which frequently received discounts of
         40%, 50%, or more (Fortune, 1993b).

         During much of this period, there was a vague public discussion of the need for health
care reform—Harris Wofford won an interim Senate election in Pennsylvania on a health care

8
  The average manufacturer's price is the average price charged by wholesalers for products distributed to the retail class of
trade (U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (1993)).




                                                              6
reform platform—but the discussion heated up considerably during the 1992 Presidential
campaign.9 In September of 1992, then-candidate Clinton gave a speech at Merck discussing the
need for reform but offering few specifics. The speech was generally well received by the
industry. After Hillary Rodham Clinton was appointed the head of the Health Care Task Force in
January of 1993 and leaks about the Task Force’s attitude toward drug prices surfaced later in the
spring of 1993, prospects for the pharmaceutical industry dimmed significantly.

            As part of a plan to transform the cost and delivery of health care, the Clinton
            Administration has launched a scalding attack on drugmakers, fanning public
            outrage over their high prices. The presidential task force, headed by Hillary
            Rodham Clinton, has threatened to shackle the industry with price controls and
            other onerous regulations (Fortune, 1993a).

The prospects of the industry are reflected in a huge decrease, over 40% by one measure10, in the
market-adjusted value of a portfolio of pharmaceutical stocks over the year during which the
health care reform plan was being formulated. The most precipitous decline occurs in the spring
months, after leaks about price controls.

            In March of 1993 several pharmaceutical companies announced voluntary price restraint,
essentially keeping price increases at the rate of inflation (The San Francisco Chronicle, 1993).
The Task Force disbanded at the end of May, and in September of 1993, the President’s Health
Security Plan was first leaked and then officially unveiled before Congress. The plan did not
include price controls for pharmaceuticals. Instead it proposed to control costs of
pharmaceuticals by giving the purchasers more “buying clout.”

            Under reform, with the addition of prescription drug coverage, Medicare will
            become the world’s largest purchaser of drugs. And the Medicare program will
            use its negotiating power to get discounts from the pharmaceutical companies. In
            addition, with competing health plans trying to become more efficient, more and
            more buyers will use the same successful negotiating techniques (The President's
            Health Security Plan, 1993).



9
 Much of the chronology and discussion of health care reform in the Clinton Administration is based on The System by
Johnson and Broder.
10
     See Ellison and Mullin (2001).




                                                          7
           October of 1993 marked the high point for the political prospects of health care reform
(Johnson and Broder (1996)). The demise of the Clinton Plan was gradual, beginning soon after
its official unveiling, continuing with announcements of various business and consumer interest
groups that they would oppose it,11 and culminating with the official tabling of the legislation in
September of 1994.

           From the fall of 1992 through the fall of 1994, Congress was occupied first with the
election and then with hearings on health care reform. Not surprisingly, there were no substantial
legal changes enacted at the federal level involving pharmaceuticals during this period.12


3. PRICING DATA


           For our analyses we use two main pricing data sets. One is a set of 106 of the largest
revenue prescription drugs sold in the U.S. during this period. These drugs span many different
therapeutic classes and were all produced by “branded” manufacturers, those engaging in efforts
to discover, patent, and sell novel pharmaceutical products. These are also the manufacturers
receiving the most political scrutiny and pressure during health care reform discussions. These
data contain monthly prices from 1989 to 1996, but do not contain information on sales or
revenues. The second is a set of (virtually) all prescription antibiotics sold in the U.S. from 1990
to 1996 and one large subclass of antibiotics from 1985 to 1990. These data have the obvious
drawback of only covering one therapeutic class, but they do contain revenue information as well
as information on sales by “generic” manufacturers and sales of other small revenue drugs. The
other main difference between the two data sets is that the former contains Average Wholesale
Prices (AWP), as reported by the manufacturers, and the latter contains averaged transactions
prices, as collected from both manufacturer and wholesale purchaser by IMS, a market research
firm. More detail on the structure and sources of these data sets is included in the appendix.




11
     For example, The Business Roundtable announced opposition to the plan in February.
12
  Ellison and Mullin (2001) provide a more complete argument that the health care reform debates were by far the most
important event affecting pharmaceutical companies during this period.




                                                            8
            Note that both of these data sets contain measures of wholesale prices, arguably the level
of most interest in this market. Much of the public debate, centering on the actions of the drug
manufacturers, is focused on the wholesale level. Government policies regarding drug
reimbursement also are concerned with wholesale prices.


            Our use of two separate data sets is an important feature of our study. Previous studies
using AWP have been questioned because AWP tends to significantly overstate transactions
prices, a more reliable measure of actual firm behavior.13 The reliability of IMS transactions
prices has also been questioned because they do not reflect rebates given by the manufacturer.
While we cannot construct a perfect data set, we do have the unusual advantage that we can carry
out our analyses twice, once on each data set. In fact, we find that our general results are robust
to our choice of data set, bolstering confidence in our interpretations.


            Our pricing data are summarized in Table 1, which presents average price growth rates,
Price Change = ((pt – pt-1)/pt-1). For the top 106 data set, p is AWP for month t. We have
monthly data on prices for 925 National Drug Codes (NDCs) for 106 top-selling drugs.14 The
price series begin in January 1989, so the first price change is in February 1989. The data
continue through December 1996. For the antibiotics data set, p is aggregated transactions prices
at the drug level for month t. This data set is separated into four categories. First, data on
cephalosporins, a subclass of antibiotics based on its mechanism of action, is presented for
months November 1985 to August 1996.15 Cephalosporins are further separated into those
produced by branded manufacturers and those produced by generic manufacturers.16 Then for


13
  It could be argued that AWP may, in fact, be the measure we are most interested in because it is reported and published
and so tends to receive a lot of public scrutiny. Also, since most of our analysis uses price changes rather than price
levels, changes in AWP may be reflective of changes in transactions prices, even if the levels are systematically too high.
14
     NDCs provide unique identifiers for every strength, dosage form, and package size of every drug.
15
  Cephalosporins, constituting approximately 40% of antibiotic sales during this period, is the only subclass for which we
have data back to 1985. We will, therefore, use cephalosporin data to examine time series evidence over a longer period.
Section 5, which examines cross-sectional evidence of political pressure focusing on health care reform discussions of the
early 1990’s, will exploit a fuller set of antibiotics, all of those products made by branded manufacturers.
16
  We defined a branded manufacturer as one that has engaged in R&D effort and introduced at least one novel, patented
pharmaceutical product, even though they may also produce “generic” versions of some drugs. The summary statistics in




                                                              9
the period October 1990 to August 1996, we present summary statistics for all antibiotics, again
separated by branded and generic manufacturers.


            For the top 106 drugs the average monthly growth rate was .4% per month, though the
standard deviation suggests there was significant variation over time and across NDCs. Both
average growth rates and standard deviations are much smaller for the antibiotics data sets.
These facts are not unexpected given the density in product space of antibiotics relative to other
classes of drugs (thus making price increases more difficult) and the relative homogeneity of
products within a class relative to across classes. Note, also, that the (branded) antibiotics are, on
average, older than the top 106 drugs, with a much larger average time since patent expiration
(and smaller average time before). We also computed the between firm standard deviation of
prices by year to examine how variations in pricing strategies have evolved over time. We found
that 1993 was the year with the lowest standard deviation, consistent with firms entering into
price pledges in response to the threat of potential regulation.


4. OVERALL TRENDS


            We first examine broad time series patterns in pharmaceutical company pricing and
research and development spending decisions to look for effects of the various events mentioned
in the chronology. Figure 1 plots an eleven-year monthly price index of all cephalosporins.17
This aggregate index exhibits a modest average annual growth rate (AAGR) of 1.1%, as well as
consistency through the political vicissitudes of the past eleven years. The only notable deviation
from a broad linear trend occurs over the most recent few years. As public concern over rising
drug prices waxes and wanes, cephalosporin prices, at least, steer a fairly steady course of small
price increases until approximately 1994, when prices level off and then drop.18

Table 1 do not weight by revenue, explaining why the average price increase was higher for generic than for branded
cephalosporins.
17
  As mentioned in the data section, cephalosporins are the only class of drugs for which we have data back to 1985. Over
the period of overlap, we compared the price indexes for cephalosporins with those from other groups of antibiotics, and
general trends were similar.
18
     This recent slowdown of price growth exists in an aggregate index of all antibiotics, but it is less pronounced.




                                                               10
         Consider the events in the chronology in more detail. The Medicaid best price provision,
taking effect in January 1991, has no obvious impact on prices of cephalosporins, despite
speculation in the popular press about how average wholesale prices will go up. (There is a run-
up in price in the four months leading up to January 1991 of about 2%, but this increase is not
out of line with other fluctuations around the general trend.)19


         Examining pricing differences between branded and generic20 manufacturers gives us
another lens through which to analyze events mentioned in the chronology. In particular, we
would expect some of those events to have had differential impacts on branded and generic
manufacturers. Figure 2 shows the branded-generic split. The generic index is rebased at
approximately 50% of the branded index, reflecting that fact that existing generics in October of
1985 were pricing on average at half of the branded price for the corresponding chemical
compound. The branded index exhibits price increases over the entire period, although at a
slower rate starting around 1993. The generic index is falling over our entire period, with an
increasing rate of price decline in recent years roughly paralleling the branded slow down. 21


         The first event of note is the generic drug scandal. If the scandal served to shift down
demand for generic drugs, further differentiate branded and generic versions, temporarily relieve
political pressure on branded manufacturers, or all three, we would expect a further widening of
the branded-generic price difference during this period. We do, in fact, see a small but
perceptible increase in the rate at which generics are decreasing prices around mid-1988. The



19
  Scott Morton (1997) provides a detailed discussion of the 1991 Medicaid reimbursement change and analysis of its
effect on drug prices. Using average wholesale prices of cardiovascular drugs, she finds an increase in price at the time of
Medicaid best price.
20
  For this figure only, we defined a branded manufacturer as the innovator for the particular drug and a generic
manufacturer as anyone else who produced it. Other definitions yielded very small generic sales through much of this
period.
21
  These broad aggregate patterns are a fairly good representation of pricing patterns on the drug level. Although there is
significant variation around these norms, prices of individual branded drugs often increase over time, and prices of
individual generics often decrease over time.




                                                            11
branded index appears unaffected. Note, however, that cephalosporins had relatively little
generic penetration at this time: generic sales were about a third of branded sales in mid-1988.


         Health care reform might also have different impacts on branded and generic
manufacturers. Political pressure was clearly focused on branded manufacturers, and it was the
branded manufacturers who voluntarily restrained prices.22 We do, however, see a slightly more
marked price decrease among generic manufacturers than among branded manufacturers.
Generic antibiotics, however, have a slightly different regulatory history from generic drugs in
other therapeutic classes and may not be representative of the class overall. For one, branded
manufacturers produce a substantial fraction of generic antibiotics, unlike other therapeutic
classes.


         Figure 3 presents the last piece of graphical evidence of pharmaceutical price changes:
plots of annual changes in the CPI and PPI for pharmaceutical products, as well as the average
annual price change across drugs in our top 106 data set. For comparison purposes, we also
include the overall CPI. The slowdown in price growth in the early 1990’s is much more
pronounced than in the antibiotics plots, and it is instructive to consider why. First, it is well
known that the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) over-samples older drugs and higher revenue
drugs when constructing the CPI and PPI (see Griliches and Cockburn (1994) and Berndt,
Griliches, and Rosett (1993), for example). Since these drugs tend to have faster price growth,
this typically leads to an upward bias in the official indexes. In our case, however, a pronounced
slowdown in the official indexes, relative to the antibiotics index, suggests that the drugs
oversampled by BLS, the older, higher revenue drugs, actually had slower price growth during
this period. To the extent that the drugs over-sampled by the BLS tended to be more visible and
high-profile, this observation is consistent with our notion that political sensitivity led to price
moderation.23 Second, we would expect the same pattern for the top 106 data set since it is
composed entirely of high revenue drugs.

22
  Such political pressure could have had an indirect effect on generic manufacturers through changes in the competitive
environment, but one would expect those effects to be smaller than any direct effect.
23
  The different pricing patterns we observe are not due to peculiarities in cephalosporin pricing. The cephalosporin PPI
exhibits the same pronounced slowdown as the pharmaceutical PPI and CPI, in contrast to the more subtle slowdown in



                                                           12
         To further investigate the possible effects of health care reform discussions, we consider
one specific mechanism through which prices could have been moderated: voluntary price
restraints. Table 2 summarizes price increases for all of the manufacturers in our data sets that
had pledged to voluntarily restrain prices.24 For the top 106 data set, we report the average price
increase for each company, unweighted by sales across drugs, for the period 1990-1992 (roughly,
the pre-pledge period) and 1993-1996 (roughly, the post-pledge period). All of the companies
lowered their price increases precipitously during the post-pledge period, although many of the
increases exceeded the inflation rate of 2.8%.25 Notably, of the five companies for which we
found no evidence that they had pledged to lower their prices, two of the companies (Amgen and
Burroughs Wellcome) had higher price increases in the post-pledge period than in the pre-pledge
period. While hardly a conclusive test, this could suggest that the lower price increases were not
related to general trends that affected the whole industry and that the pledges restrained pricing.
For the antibiotic data set, we calculated average annual growth rates (AAGRs) of the price
indexes for each firm. AAGRs for the pre-pledge period range from -14.2% to 7.5%, five
exceeding the inflation rate of 4.0%. During the post-pledge period, only one firm exceeded the
inflation rate and seven of the seventeen lowered antibiotic prices during that period. All but
four of the firms had slower price growth (or sharper decline) in the post-pledge period.


         Generally, the results in Table 2 suggest that firms abided by their pledges and decreased
prices or lowered their rate of price increases in response to the threat of health care reform. To
the extent that one firm’s price reduction could defray the probability of regulation for all firms
in the industry, unilateral price reductions may not have been successful. While the DOJ
declared the industry’s attempt to coordinate pledges illegal, the industry-wide push to have firms



our broader cephalosporin index.
24
  This list was constructed using newspaper accounts of firms who joined the pledge, a March 14, 1996 Federal Trade
Commission document concerning an investigation of the pledge as a means of price fixing and correspondence with the
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA).
25
  Note that we cannot formally test the drug companies’ pledges because we only have data on a subset of each
company’s products.




                                                          13
adhere to their pledges appeared at least somewhat successful in overcoming the collective action
problem.


        The last overall trend we consider is firm-level investment in research and development
(R&D). Figure 4 plots the weighted-average ratio of R&D to sales for the 15 companies in our
sample for which we could get both R&D and sales data for the entire eleven-year period from
1986-1996.26 The graph demonstrates that the deceleration in R&D expenditure growth during
health care reform exceeded the sales slowdown. This could suggest that the companies foresaw
some chance that prices for new drugs would be regulated in the future, so they had less of an
incentive to invest in drug development.


5. CROSS-SECTIONAL EVIDENCE


        Time series evidence from the last section suggested a slowdown in price increases
coincident with health care reform discussions. In particular, firms which entered into a
politically-motivated pledge to keep price increases at the rate of inflation seemed to increase
their prices at a slower rate (or decrease them) after entering into the pledge. Other explanations,
such as the changing structure of the market for pharmaceuticals, for instance, cannot be ruled
out based on the time series evidence alone. This section investigates the extent to which cross-
sectional differences in firms could provide additional evidence that they were reacting to
political pressures during health care reform discussions. Ironically, the price pledge, which
seemed important in detecting time series evidence, will complicate our search for cross-
sectional evidence, because such a collective action masks the differences in firms’ incentives to
act unilaterally.


        Broadly speaking, our empirical strategy is to measure the political sensitivity of firms—

26
  The R&D and sales data are from Compustat. Data for G.D. Searle and Sandoz were unavailable.
 Data for 6 companies were only available for part of the time period, and we exclude those
companies from the figure so that year-to-year changes do not reflect compositional changes. When
we include them, the dip in R&D/Sales growth in 1994 is more dramatic and the change in 1996 is
positive even though none of the composition changes occur during either of those two years.




                                                 14
for instance based on how much they have to lose from enacted health care reform legislation—
and then evaluate whether increased sensitivity is associated with slower price increases. We
first lay out our methods of measuring cross-sectional differences in firms’ political sensitivity.


         Measuring Political Sensitivity


         To develop estimates of a company’s sensitivity to the political climate, we appeal to
Glazer and McMillan (1992) who propose a theoretical model of a monopolist facing future
regulation. They demonstrate that the firm’s incentives to reduce its prices in the face of
potential regulation are a function of both the effect such an action has on the probability of
regulation and the cost of sacrificing short run profits to avert regulation – the firm’s discount
factor.27 Based on this theoretical framework, we develop the following firm-level measures of
the expected costs of future regulation:


         Measure 1: A revenue-weighted average of the length of time remaining on a firm’s
              patents,
         Measure 2: The percent of a firm’s revenues derived from sales to the elderly, and
         Measure 3: The growth in a firm’s contribution to its corporate Political Action
              Committee (PAC) in 1993.


Measure 1 is intended to proxy for the firm’s discount factor, under the assumption that a firm
with less time remaining on important patents would be less willing to take costly steps in the
short run to preempt future regulation. Measure 2 captures the fact that firms with more drugs
used by the elderly faced a higher probability of facing regulation in the near term since Medicare
reimbursements would have provided a ready vehicle through which the government could affect


27
  Baron (1997) develops a common agency model where two firms attempt to influence government decisions (in his case
Kodak and Fujifilm are both trying to influence the Japanese and American governments). Though Baron’s setting is
somewhat different from Glazer and McMillan’s (for instance, he has firms making direct expenditures to influence the
government rather than using prices), the characterization of multiple firms taking actions to influence the government is
appropriate to the pharmaceutical industry. A number of Baron’s comparative static results are similar to those in Glazer and
McMillan. For instance, he shows that a firm will spend more to influence the government if its payoff from doing so is
higher.




                                                             15
drug prices. For instance, the most overt regulation of drug prices called for in the Clinton
reform package was the proposal to prohibit Medicare reimbursement for new drugs deemed to
be priced “too high.” To the extent that the elderly are a more cohesive and powerful political
faction than other drug consumers, Measure 2 could also capture a firm’s incentive to influence
potential regulation.28 Measure 3 describes a firm’s overtly political actions under the
assumption that they proxy for its sensitivity to political pressure.


        The variables we use to capture each of the three political sensitivity measures are
described in Table 3. Co. Patent Duration is the sales-weighted average of the time left on a
company’s patents as of 1993. In 1993, the average company in our sample had almost six years
left on its typical patent, though there is a fair amount of variation across companies. Co. Elder
Drugs measures the sales-weighted fraction of a company’s drugs in therapeutic classes that are
consumed primarily by the elderly. On average, companies sell 36 percent of their drugs in elder
categories. Co. PAC Growth is a measure of the increase in the amount each company’s
corporate PAC disbursed between 1991/2 and 1993. It is based on information reported to the
Federal Election Commission and is not applicable for three companies. Neither Bayer nor
Hoechst-Roussel had a corporate PAC during the time period considered, Zeneca’s PAC was not
organized until the middle of 1993.


        The assumptions and data used to construct Co. Patent Duration, Co. Elder Drugs and
Co. PAC Growth are described in the Appendix. While each of the three measures is based on a
different hypothesis about political sensitivity and captures different attributes of the companies,
patterns and correlations across the measures are nonetheless instructive. Table 3 provides the
value of each political sensitivity variable for all of the companies in our data set, and also
indicates whether the variable is above (H) or below (L) the median value of that variable.
Interestingly, the values of Co. Patent Duration and Co. PAC Growth are quite positively
correlated. The correlation coefficient for the values is 0.80 and the coefficient for the dummy
variables indicating whether or not the value is above the median is 0.39. By contrast, Co. PAC

28
 Maxwell, Lyon and Hacket (2000) develop a model where firms facing consumers with low political organizing costs
would lower prices more to preempt regulation.




                                                        16
Growth is negatively correlated with Co. Elder Drugs (ρ = -0.38). If Co. PAC Growth reflects
the extent to which a company took political action in response to the impending threat of
regulation and Co. Patent Duration and Co. Elder Drugs attempt to proxy for the different
reasons a company would be sensitive, this suggests that Co. Patent Duration is a better
measure.29


         Corporate PAC contributions, reflected in Co. PAC Growth, is only one of many ways in
which companies spend money attempting to influence political outcomes. For instance,
individual company employees can contribute to PACs and directly to political candidates. If the
individuals are executives, contributions may be implicitly tied to preferences on policies that
affect the company. Unfortunately, it is extremely difficult to track such donations. The Center
for Responsive Politics (see Makinson and Goldstein, 1994), provides aggregate statistics on the
percent of contributions each industry makes through corporate PACs as a fraction of total
contributions. According to their calculations, 76 percent of pharmaceutical manufacturers’
contributions were through corporate PACs. We, therefore, feel that our measure captures the
bulk of the political contributions.


         Empirical Specification


         The cross-sectional empirical results we present below can be interpreted with respect to
the following semi-reduced form pricing equation:


                                                       pitj = θ itj mcitj                                                  (1)

where pijt is the price charged by firm j for drug i during month t and mcijt is marginal cost.30 We
want to allow political pressure in addition to market conditions to affect a firm’s pricing


29
  We also collected data on the ratio of R&D to sales by company. This is negatively correlated with Co. Patent
Duration, perhaps indicating that firms with few remaining good patents are spending more (relative to sales) on
developing new drugs.
30
  This estimation strategy is very similar to the one used by Caves et al. (1991) to estimate the effect of generic entry on
drug prices. The strategy does not attempt to identify all determinants of drug prices. Instead it relies on comparisons
across firms facing different potential regulatory costs.




                                                              17
decisions, so we will model θijt as a multiplicative function of the demand elasticity for drug i at
time t and the political pressure faced by firm j at time t.31 Because we do not observe marginal
costs, we decompose mcijt into a month-specific term and a drug-specific term. Taking logs and
rewriting, this pricing equation becomes:
                                ln( p itj ) = β X ijt + γ Y ijt + ln( mc t ) + ln( mc ij )                                (2)

where Xijt is a vector of variables affecting the elasticity of demand for the drug and Yjt is a vector
of variables measuring the political pressure faced by the firm. We make the further simplifying
assumption that changes in the log of industry-wide marginal costs are linear within k different
time periods (note that this also accounts for industry-wide changes in elasticity not captured by
the variables in Xijt) and that there are no systematic, drug-specific changes in costs beyond the
industry trend. Then, differencing equation (2) and allowing for a random error, we get:
                                    ln( pijt / p ij (t −1) ) = α k + β∆X ijt + γ∆Y jt + ε ijt                             (3)

To estimate equation (3) we use data on the time until each drug goes off patent or the time since
it was off patent and therapeutic category dummies as variables which could relate to changes in
the demand elasticity (∆Xijt).32 We construct ∆Yjt by interacting our cross-sectional measures of
firm sensitivity with dummy variables for periods over which the salience of political pressure
varied. Finally, we estimate αk with period-specific dummy variables.


         Our null hypothesis is that the components of γ will be equal to zero for all periods. The
alternative hypothesis—roughly that political pressure will affect drug pricing—merits
elaboration. First of all, during periods when political pressure is particularly salient, we expect
the corresponding rows of γ to be negative, suggesting that firms that are more sensitive will have
slower price increases. Since health care reform falls in the middle of our data set, we also have
periods before and after the period of intense political pressure. If there is some baseline level of
political pressure during the entire time period and if the companies we identify as politically

31
  Note that we are modeling political pressure at the company level and not the drug level and not capturing, for instance,
the fact that drugs sold to a specific class of customers (e.g., the elderly) may be subject to more political pressure.
32
  Caves et al. (1991) show that prices for drugs off patent have slower inflation (especially as they face more competition
from generics) and that drug prices accelerate for the several years before a patent expires. Similarly, different therapeutic
categories will face different changes in market structures over time, suggesting that changes in demand elasticities may
differ by therapeutic category.




                                                              18
sensitive restrain their price increases as a result, the components of γ may always be negative.
We would expect, however, that the coefficients during health care reform would be more
negative. After health care reform, the coefficients could be positive if firms try to make up for
the fact that they restrained pricing when political pressure was high, although there may be some
base level of political pressure that prevents this kind of catch up.


        Results


        We start by examining the data set of the top 106 drugs, and Table 4 begins to address the
central hypothesis evaluated in this paper by comparing price changes across companies. To
calculate the figures reported in each column, we first divided the companies into two categories:
those with political-sensitivity values above the median and those below the median. We then
calculate the average price change by year within each group. (We first averaged across NDCs
for a given drug-month and then took the average for each year over drug-months. The test
statistics are calculated using every drug-month as an observation. This avoids weighting drugs
with many distinct NDCs too heavily, and avoids overstating the number of independent
observations reflected in the data.) The rows of the table reflect the difference between the
average monthly price change for companies with low values and the average for companies with
high values in a given year. If more politically-sensitive companies raise their prices slower, the
difference should be positive.


        When Co. Patent Duration is used to split the data, all of the differences are positive,
though a one-tailed t-test of the equality of the means is only rejected at the 90 percent
confidence level or greater in 1994 and 1995. In the other two columns, only one difference is
statistically significant, 1989 for Co. PAC Growth, though both columns show positive price
differences that are nearly statistically significant in 1994.


        In all three columns, cross-company differences are small in 1993, exactly when the
likelihood of future drug price regulation was highest. (The difference between the two types of
companies’ pricing is either smallest or second smallest in 1993.) This, we believe, reflects the




                                                  19
fact that many of the companies in the database were involved in the pledge to keep their price
increases below the rate of inflation. Though a handful of companies had made pledges before
1993 (Merck did as early as 1990), the industry-wide push may have peaked with PMA’s request
to the Justice Department to grant antitrust exemption. Before 1993, few general patterns hold
across all three columns.


       The pattern in Table 4 is consistent with the idea that staving off industry-wide regulation
is a public good. We are trying to take advantage of the fact that companies’ individual
incentives to take costly steps to defer regulation varied, but ideally, as came close to happening
in 1993, all companies should participate. The fact that the difference between low and high
companies becomes positive again in 1994 suggests that the Justice Department’s refusal to
uphold the companies’ request for antitrust exemption freed companies with less concern about
regulation to raise their prices, while the more sensitive companies still kept them low. (Health
care reform legislation did not die until September 1994.)


       To the extent the positive values in 1994 reflect politically-motivated price reductions,
price changes in 1995 and 1996 can provide some clue as to whether companies tried to make up
for slower price increases when the threat of imminent regulation disappeared. If this were the
case, we would expect large negative values, as we see when the companies are divided based on
their PAC contributions or sales of Elder Drugs. In the first column, however, the price changes
are still lower for politically sensitive companies.


       While the simple differences in Table 4 are instructive, they do not control for other
factors known to affect drug prices. For instance, Caves et al. (1991) show that there are
persistent price and advertising reactions to imminent patent removal and recent patent loss.
Perhaps the ages of different companies’ drugs relative to their patent expiration dates (the very
variation Co. Patent Duration seeks to take advantage of) affects their relative price changes.
Since Co. Patent Duration is based in 1993, such an effect may be greatest then. In order to
control for such possibilities, we estimated versions of equation (3) and report the results in
Table 5.




                                                  20
       Like Table 4, Table 5 reports results based on all three measures of political sensitivity,
again using just the top 106 data set. In each regression, we include period fixed effects and
interact the period dummies with the political sensitivity variable listed at the head of the
column. (In other words, for column 1, the coefficient reported in the Political Sens*Period1
row is based on the variable Co. Patent Duration*Period1 but in column 3 it is based on Co.
Elder Drugs*Period1.) We report two sets of results for each sensitivity measure: one including
therapeutic category specific effects for each period, and one without those fixed effects. We
consider five time periods. The first time period covers 1989 and 1990. The second covers
January 1991 through October 1992, the last month in which there was uncertainty about the next
party in the White House and the composition of Congress. A third spans November 1992 to
September 1993, the month in which the DOJ rejected the companies’ request for antitrust
exemption. A fourth covers October 1993 through September 1994, the end of health care
reform legislation; and a fifth includes October 1994 through December 1996.


       The regression results demonstrate the same general patterns as Table 4. The coefficient
on Political Sens*Period3 is small for both Co. Patent Duration and Co. PAC Growth,
suggesting that there was little cross-company variation in drug pricing during the period when
the companies’ pledges to keep drug price inflation low were salient. The Period3 coefficients
for Co. Elder Drugs are both negative, and the coefficient is statistically significant without
therapeutic category fixed-effects. The coefficients in Period1 and Period2 illustrate no general
patterns and are only significant in two of the specifications. Unlike in Table 4, the interaction
terms with Period3 and Period4 break 1993 into the periods before and after the DOJ requested
the PMA request. (The end of Period3 is September 1993, and Period4 picks up the end of 1993
and ends in September 1994.) The negative coefficient for Political Sens*Period4 is consistently
negative in all six columns and statistically significant in columns 2 and 6. This suggests that
while the threat of regulation still loomed but after the companies’ plan to adhere to voluntary
price reductions had been rejected, the patterns predicted by political economic stories of pricing
emerge. For both Co. Patent Duration and Co. PAC Growth the interaction terms continue to be
negative and statistically significant in Period5.




                                                     21
            It is difficult to use the results in Table 5 to assess how much of the aggregate price dip
depicted in Figure 3 and discussed in Section 4 can be explained by political motivations. While
we identify politically-motivated pricing by comparing pricing strategies of more and less
sensitive companies, it is conceivable that even the least sensitive companies lowered their prices
somewhat in response to the threat of regulation. With that caveat in mind, the results reported
for the interaction terms for Period433 each suggests that a one standard deviation increase in
political sensitivity is associated with roughly a two to five-hundredths of a percentage point
change in monthly inflation. By comparison, the average monthly price increase fell by about
three tenths of a percentage point between 1989-1991 and 1993-94. Taking these magnitudes as
lower bounds on the extent to which political motivations affected pricing decisions, they only
explain ten to fifteen percent of the drop in inflation. Clearly many factors were at work (see,
e.g. Ellison, 1998) of which politics is just one.


            The control variables included in Table 5 are generally significant and their signs are
roughly consistent with past work. For instance, the variable Time since Patent Exp. is negative
suggesting that price increases slow progressively as the time since the patent expiration
increases. To the extent there are more generic entrants over time, this result is consistent with
Caves et al. (1991). Similarly, the negative coefficient on Time to Patent Exp. is consistent with
the positive coefficient that they find on variables measuring the time since the drug was
introduced. Also, the coefficients on the period effects show the largest drops in drug price
inflation in 1993 and 1994.


            Co. PAC Growth is used here as a measure of political sensitivity, but the results in
columns 5 and 6 also address the complementarity between overt political strategies and
politically-motivated pricing decisions. The coefficients on Co. PAC Growth*Period3 and Co.
PAC Growth*Period4 could be insignificantly different from zero, for instance, if PAC
contributions and pricing strategies are substitutes. For instance, if demand elasticites are very
different across different companies’ drugs, the same price reduction (which could have roughly

33
     The numbers reported in Table 5 are the coefficients times 104.




                                                              22
the same political impact) could have very different costs. If price changes are costly for a given
firm, it could substitute into PAC contributions.


        Several additional issues can be addressed by limiting the data set to antibiotic drugs, for
which we have information on volume sales. We use the information on volume sales to weight
price changes for different presentations by their sales. For instance, since most price pledges
were vague about how increases would be weighted, it is possible that the companies increased
prices for high volume presentations and decreased them for low volume. Also, by considering a
specific sub-class of products, we can control for changes in demand elasticity or cost that were
unique to that class.


        The results we obtain for the antibiotics, reported in Table 6, are broadly consistent with
those for the top 106 drugs, albeit somewhat less strong. Co. PAC Growth is the only measure of
political sensitivity that yields significant results, but those results are consistent with our
findings for the top 106 drugs. Higher levels of Co. PAC Growth are associated with statistically
significantly lower levels of price growth in all periods except Period3. In Period3 we cannot
distinguish the effect from zero. In other words, results from the antibiotics data set support the
main finding, that politically sensitive firms exhibit slower price growth around health care
reform discussions, except during Period3, when collective action could be masking firm
differences. In addition, the coefficients on control variables and period dummies in the
antibiotics regressions are less precisely estimated than in the regressions using the top 106
drugs, but the significant ones are roughly consistent across the two data sets.


        Given the very different characteristics of the two data sets, the consistency in results is
striking and encouraging. It is instructive, however, to consider the differences in the two sets of
results more carefully. Upon initial consideration, one might have expected more precisely
estimated coefficients from the antibiotics data set, where the set of drugs was more
homogeneous. For our purposes, however, what may be more important is that the antibiotics
data set contains many small revenue drugs that would not have been very politically visible.
Although our analysis implicitly assumes that political sensitivity varies only by firm and not by




                                                   23
drug within firm, it may be that firms recognize that distorting their prices on their more visible
drugs is a more efficient way to deter regulation. Therefore, it may not be surprising that we
obtained stronger results for the top 106 drugs, given that it is a data set comprised entirely of
high revenue, politically visible drugs.


6. Conclusions


         The results presented here suggest that there was a political component to pharmaceutical
pricing during the health care reform debates, explaining approximately fifteen percent of the total
reduction in price inflation observed in 1993-4. Probably the most profound recent development in
the prescription pharmaceutical market is the increase in the volume of drugs sold through mail
order outlets (and the concomitant fall in the percent of drugs sold through retail outlets, including
pharmacies, mass merchandisers and food stores) and the increase in retail sales paid for by a third
party.34 The most often-cited explanation for slower drug price inflation in the early 1990s is the
pressure that cost-conscious managed care plans are putting on pharmaceutical companies. While
we cannot explicitly rule out other explanations for price reductions, and no doubt many of them
were also affecting prices, they only explain our results if companies’ sensitivity to the additional
factors was correlated with the political sensitivity measures we are using.


         Note that our results do not speak to the welfare implications of any politically motivated
price reductions. It may be tempting to conclude that when firms voluntarily lower prices,
efficiency increases. However, lower prices may reduce R&D below socially optimal levels,
favoring current drug consumers at the cost of the future sick. To the extent politics put
downward pressure on prices in 1993-4, there is little evidence that the most affected companies
have subsequently tried to make up with accelerated price increases. This suggests that the
reallocation of rents to current consumers has not been temporary.



34
  Berndt et al. (1998) report that 57% of pharmaceutical sales took place through retail outlets in 1996 compared to 64%
in 1990 while mail order sales have increased from 5% to 9% of the market (the hospital and HMO shares have remained
relatively constant). Over the same time period, the percent of retail sales paid for by third parties (other than Medicaid)
has risen from 28% to 57%.




                                                             24
       The health care reform debates provide a relatively distinct shock (with exogenous
boundaries) to the political pressure faced by the drug companies, and a number of steps taken by
the companies suggest that they took the threat seriously. For that reason, the situation provides
a weak test of political pricing. The fact that political effects seem to play a relatively minor role
in explaining recent price movements may suggest that they are of limited importance. However,
several factors, most notably the industry-wide push to moderate price inflation, complicate the
assessment of political pricing in this context.




                                                   25
                                        REFERENCES

Alpert, Bill. 1996. "Hooked on Drugs: Why Do Insurers Pay Such Outrageous Prices for
        Pharmaceuticals?" Barron’s June 10: 15-18.

Baron, David P. 1997. "Integrated Strategy and International Trade Disputes: The Kodak-Fujifilm
       Case." Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 6 (Summer): 291-346.

Berndt, Ernst R., Linda T. Bui, David H. Lucking-Reiley, and Glen L. Urban. 1997. "The Roles of
       Marketing, Product Quality, and Price Competition in the Growth and Composition of the
       U.S. Antiulcer Drug Industry." In Timothy Bresnahan and Robert Gordon, eds., The
       Economics of New Goods. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Berndt, Ernst R., Iain M. Cockburn, Douglas L. Cocks, Arnold Epstein and Zvi Griliches. 1998. "Is
       Price Inflation Different for the Elderly? An Empirical Analysis of Prescription Drugs." In
       Alan Garber, editor, Frontiers of Health Policy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Berndt, Ernst R., Zvi Griliches and Joshua G. Rosett. 1993. "Auditing the Producer Price Index:
       Micro Evidence from Prescription Pharmaceutical Preparations." Journal of Business and
       Economic Statistics 11 (July): 251-264.

Block, Michael K., Frederick C. Nold and Joseph G. Sidak. 1981. "The Deterrent Effect of
       Antitrust Enforcement." Journal of Political Economy 89 (June): 429-445.

Caves, Richard E., Michael D. Whinston and Mark A. Hurwitz. 1991. "Patent Expiration, Entry,
       and Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry." Brookings Papers on Economics
       Activity: Microeconomics, 1-48.

Ellison, Sara F. 1998. "What Prices Can Tell Us About the Market for Antibiotics." Mimeo, MIT.

Ellison, Sara F. and Glenn Ellison. 1999. "Strategic Entry Deterrence And The Behavior Of
        Pharmaceutical Incumbents Prior To Patent Expiration.” Mimeo, MIT.

Ellison, Sara F. and Wallace P. Mullin. 2001. "Gradual Incorporation of Information:
        Pharmaceutical Stocks and the Evolution of President Clinton’s Health Care Reform."
        Journal of Law and Economics 44 (April): 89-129.

Esty, Daniel C. and Richard E. Caves. 1983. "Market Structure and Political Influence: New Data
       on Political Expenditures." Economic Inquiry 21 (January): 24-38.

Federal Election Commission. 1994. Campaign Expenditures in the United States, 1978-1992:
       Longitudinal Political Action Committee (PAC) Data. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
       Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR).

Fortune (1993a). “Why Drug Prices Will Go Lower.” May 5, p. 56.



                                                26
Fortune (1993b). “The Plots to Keep Drug Prices High.” December 27, p. 120.

Glazer, Amihai and Henry McMillan. 1992. "Pricing by the Firm Under Regulatory Threat."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (August): 1089-1099.

Grabowski, Henry G. and John M. Vernon. 1992. "Brand Loyalty, Entry and Price Competition in
      Pharmaceuticals after the 1984 Drug Act." Journal of Law and Economics 35 (October):
      331-350.

Grier, Kevin B., Michael C. Munger and Brian E. Roberts. 1994. "The Determinants of Industry
        Political Activity, 1978-1986." American Political Science Review 88 (December): 911-
        926.

Griliches, Zvi and Iain Cockburn. 1994. "Generics and New Goods in Pharmaceutical Price
        Indexes." American Economic Review 84 (December): 1213-1232.

Hellerstein, Judith. 1995. “Economic Impediments to the Development of New Antibiotic Drugs.”
        Contract paper prepared for the Office of Technology Assessment, U.S. Congress.

Johnson, Haynes and David S. Broder. 1996. The System. Little, Brown and Company: Boston.

Kennedy, Peter W., Benoit Laplante, and John Maxwell. 1994. “Pollution Policy: The Role for
      Publicly Provided Information.” Journal of Environmental Economics & Management 26
      (January): 31-43.

The Los Angeles Times (1990). “Medicaid Savings.” November 20, p. 5.

Mackinson, Larry and Joshua Goldstein. 1994. Open Secrets: The Encyclopedia of Congressional
      Money & Politics. 3rd Edition. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly.

Masson, Alison and Robert L. Steiner. 1985. Generic Substitution and Prescription Prices:
      Economic Effects of State Drug Product Selection Laws. Washington, D.C.: Federal Trade
      Commission, Bureau of Economics.

Masters, Marick F. and Gerald D. Keim. 1985. "Determinants of PAC Participation Among Large
       Corporations." Journal of Politics 47 (November): 1158-1173.

Maxwell, John W., Thomas P. Lyon and Steven C. Hackett. 2000. “Self-Regulation and Social
     Welfare: The Political Economy of Corporate Environmentalism." Journal of Law and
     Economics 43 (October): 583-617.

Noll, Roger G. 1989. "The Politics of Regulation." In Richard Schmalensee and Robert Willig, eds.,
       Handbook of Industrial Organization, New York: North Holland.




                                               27
Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul Rhode. 1985. “Rationing without Government: The West Coast Gas
      Famine of 1920.” American Economic Review 75 (December): 1044-55.

Pargal, Sheoli and David Wheeler. 1996. "Informal Regulation of Industrial Pollution in
        Developing Countries." Journal of Political Economy 104 (December): 1314-1327.

Rich, Spencer and Ann Devroy. 1993. "President Blasts Cost of Vaccines." Washington Post
       February 13: a1.

The San Francisco Chronicle (1993). “Drug Firms’ Proposal For Holding Prices Down.” March
       13, p. A5.

Scott Morton, Fiona. 1997. "The Strategic Response by Pharmaceutical Firms to the Medicaid
       Most-Favored-Customer Rules." RAND Journal of Economics 28 (Summer): 269-290.

Stango, Victor. 2000. "Strategic Responses to Regulatory Threat in the Credit Card Market."
       Mimeo, University of Tennessee.

Stigler, George. 1971. "The Theory of Economic Regulation." Bell Journal of Economics 2
         (Spring): 3-21.

Tanouye, Elyse. 1993. "Two Senators Say Drug Firms Failed to Keep Promises." Wall Street
      Journal February 4: b4.

The Wall Street Journal (1991). “Merck’s Chairman Blames Price Rises on Industry Rivals.”
      November 8, p. B2A.

The Washington Post (1987a). “Prices for Prescription Drug Rising Sharply, Study Finds.” April
      22, p. F01.

The Washington Post (1987b). “Pharmaceutical Firms Fight New Medicare Benefit.” June 16, p.
      A13.

The Washington Post (1988). “A Good Health Bill.” May 27, p. A18.

The Washington Post (1989). “How Safe Are the Drugs You Take.” August 22, p. Z12.

The Washington Post (1990). “Drug Price Controls.” November 11, p. A26.




                                               28
                       Table 1: Summary Statistics, Pricing Data
Data Set         Variable                Varies by       Mean    Standard    Number of
                                                                 Deviation     Obs.

Top 106 Drugs
(2/89-12/96)     Price Change             NDC-Month      .37       1.64       58875
                 [percent]
                 Time to Patent Exp.      Drug-Month    5.40       4.99        8643
                 [years]
                 Time Since Patent Exp.   Drug-Month     .57       1.40        8643
                 [years]



Antibiotics—
                 Price Change             NDC-Month     .024       1.21       64624
Branded
                 [percent]
Cephalosporins
(10/85-8/96)



Antibiotics—
                 Price Change             NDC-Month     .033       1.09       83022
Generic
                 [percent]
Cephalosporins
(10/85-8/96)



Antibiotics—
                 Price Change             Drug-Month    .002       .085       13101
Branded
                 [percent]
(10/90-8/96)
                 Time to Patent Exp.      Drug-Month     .53       1.31       13101
                 [years]
                 Time Since Patent Exp.   Drug-Month    2.41       1.93       13101
                 [years]



Antibiotics—
                 Price Change             Drug-Month    .004       .153       16320
Generic
                 [percent]
(10/90-8/96)




                                          29
                      Table 2: Pre- and Post-Pledge Price Growth by Company*

                                        Top 106 Drugs                         Antibiotics
                                 AAGR               AAGR              AAGR                AAGR
    Company                     1990-92           1993-1996          1990-92            1993-1996
                              (pre-pledge       (post pledges)     (pre-pledge        (post pledges)
                                period)                              period)
    Abbott Labs                   9.4                   5.5            3.6                   2.4
    Bristol-Myers Squibb          7.9                   3.1            3.3                  0.1
    Ciba-Geigy                    __                    __             -6.5                 -2.3
    DuPont Merck                  __                    __              7.5                 -27.9
    Eli Lilly                     6.6                   1.5            6.4                   0.7
    G.D. Searle                   9.2                   5.3           -14.2                  1.0
    Genentech                     1.0                   0               __                   __
    Glaxo                         8.3                   3.5             7.5                 -0.5
    Hoechst-Roussel               9.8                   4.4            -0.9                 -2.1
    Hoffmann-La Roche             7.3                   4.5            1.3                  -1.3
    Johnson & Johnson             7.8                   3.3            -0.1                  2.8
    Knoll                         __                    __              6.3                  4.5
    Marion Merrell Dow            5.0                   3.4             __                   __
    Merck                         5.9                   2.8            -0.3                  2.6
    Pfizer                        4.5                   2.6            4.1                  -3.6
    SmithKline Beecham            6.5                   2.9            2.8                  1.3
    Syntex                        6.1                   3.9             __                   __
    Upjohn                        7.3                   3.5             2.3                  1.4
    Warner-Lambert               12.5                   4.7            2.0                  -10.5
    Wyeth-Ayerst                  8.6                   5.2            2.3                  1.1
    Zeneca                        6.1                   3.1             __                   __

*
 Note that dashes indicate that the relevant data set contained very small or no sales of drugs by the
company.




                                                  30
                  Table 3: Company-Specific Political Sensitivity Measures

                        Co. Patent Duration        Co. Elder Drugs     Co. PAC Growth
Company                       (years)                 (percent)        (percent change)
Abbott Labs                  10.0 (H)                  34 (H)              18 (H)
Amgen                        20.0 (H)                  0 (L)                 396 (H)
Bayer                         8.7 (H)                 13 (L)                      NA
Bristol-Myers Squibb          4.4 (L)                 66 (H)                 -7 (L)
Burroughs Wellcome            5.4   (H)                0    (L)              -44       (L)
Eli Lilly                     5.5   (H)               17    (L)              -30       (L)
G.D. Searle                   3.7   (L)               51    (H)              69     (H)
Genentech                     3.8   (L)               54    (H)              -32       (L)
Glaxo                         4.9   (H)               11    (L)              86     (H)
Hoechst-Roussel               2.1 (L)                 32 (H)                      NA
Hoffmann-La Roche             8.7   (H)                0    (L)              46     (H)
Johnson & Johnson            11.2 (H)                  0 (L)                 181 (H)
Marion Merrell Dow            0.4   (L)               65    (H)               8    (L)
Merck                         7.1 (H)                 58 (H)                 48 (H)
Pfizer                        6.4 (H)                 61 (H)                 48 (H)
SmithKline Beecham            8.3   (H)               17    (L)              18     (H)
Sandoz                        4.2   (L)               21    (L)              130       (H)
Schering-Plough               4.3   (L)               15    (L)               8    (L)
Syntex                        1.5   (L)               100       (H)           9    (L)
Upjohn                        0.8   (L)               34    (H)              -50       (L)
Warner-Lambert                1.8   (L)               66    (H)              -4     (L)
Wyeth-Ayerst                  2.1   (L)               30    (L)               -11 (L)
Zeneca                        6.6   (H)               81 (H)                      NA


MEAN                             5.7                       36                     44
STD DEVIATION                    4.3                       29                     101




                                              31
     Table 4: Difference between Average Price Changes for Less Sensitive and More Sensitive
                                          Companies*

                   Co. Patent Duration             Co. Elder Drugs              Co. PAC Growth
    Year                ∆p L − ∆p H                   ∆p L − ∆p H                  ∆ p L − ∆p H
    1989                    8.0                           14.6                         34.7
                           (0.5)                          (0.9)                        (2.0)
    1990                   12.4                            8.4                          -7.4
                           (0.9)                          (0.6)                       (-0.5)
    1991                   10.4                            -3.7                        7.7
                           (0.8)                          (-0.3)                       (.6)
    1992                    2.2                            7.5                        11.5
                           (0.2)                          (0.8)                       (1.1)
    1993                    1.0                           -2.2                         5.4
                           (0.2)                          (-.4)                       (0.8)
    1994                   10.4                            8.8                         9.3
                           (1.5)                          (1.3)                       (1.2)
    1995                   19.8                            -4.5                       -10.4
                           (1.4)                          (-0.3)                       (-.7)
    1996                    7.7                            -0.6                        -2.9
                           (1.2)                          (-0.1)                      (-0.4)

*
    Note that the reported numbers are the estimated coefficients times 102. t-statistics in parentheses.




                                                     32
                                    Table 5: Regression Results*
                                 Dependent Variable: ln(pt) – ln(pt-1)
     Political Sens. Proxy:   Co. Patent Duration        Co. Elder Drugs         Co. PAC Growth
                               (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)       (5)        (6)
    Period2                   -24.5                   -22.6                     -15.5
    (1/91-10/92)              (5.5)                    (5.4)                    (3.6)
    Period3                   -48.2                   -33.8                     -36.4
    (11/92-9/93)              (5.8)                    (5.2)                    (3.5)
    Period4                   -47.6                   -39.7                     -38.4
    (10/93-9/94)              (5.2)                    (4.9)                    (3.4)
    Period5                   -42.7                   -35.8                     -37.0
    (10/94-12/96)             (5.0)                    (5.3)                    (3.5)

    Political Sens*Period1     -2.9         -1.4        -14.6         10.8       -9.2         -4.4
                               (.8)        (1.2)        (8.8)       (14.2)      (3.0)        (6.6)
    Political Sens*Period2     -1.2         -1.3          1.8         20.9       -5.6         -6.8
                               (.5)         (.7)        (6.2)        (9.0)      (1.8)        (3.8)
    Political Sens*Period3      .18          1.3        -12.3        -10.7        .28          -.8
                              (.50)         (.8)        (5.5)        (7.8)      (1.9)        (3.9)
    Political Sens*Period4     -.72         -1.6         -8.2         -2.1       -1.1         -5.4
                              (.39)         (.5)        (4.6)        (5.6)      (1.6)        (2.7)
    Political Sens*Period5    -1.2          -.75        -12.8       -13.7        .23           3.5
                               (.3)        (.31)        (5.5)        (5.2)      (.36)        (5.4)

    Time to Patent Exp.        -.69         -.62        -1.4         -.87        -1.0         -.82
                              (.22)        (.31)        (.2)        (.28)        (.2)        (.30)
    Time since Patent Exp.    -1.7         -1.7         -2.3        -1.7         -2.0         -1.8
                               (.3)         (.8)        (.4)         (.8)        (.3)        (1.1)

    Fixed-Effect Estimated    None      Ther.Cat.*      None     Ther.Cat.*     None      Ther.Cat.*
                                         Period                   Period                   Period
    R2                        .007        .015          .007       .012         .007        .015
    Number Observations       58875       58875         58875       58875      52454        52454


*
 Note that the reported numbers are the estimated coefficients times 104.
Period1 (2/89-12/90) is omitted from each specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                   33
                              Table 6: Regression Results—Antibiotics*
                                 Dependent Variable: ln(pt) – ln(pt-1)
     Political Sens. Proxy:   Co. Patent Duration       Co. Elder Drugs          Co. PAC Growth
                                       (1)                      (2)                     (3)
    Period2                           -70.7                    -29.5                   -36.3
    (1/91-10/92)                     (35.1)                   (20.3)                  (14.1)
    Period3                           -67.2                    -39.9                   -39.2
    (11/92-9/93)                     (36.4)                   (21.0)                  (14.7)
    Period4                           -71.5                    -32.3                   -35.9
    (10/93-9/94)                     (36.1)                   (20.9)                  (14.7)
    Period5                           -89.3                    -27.7                   -40.1
    (10/94-12/96)                    (35.1)                   (20.3)                  (14.5)

    Political Sens*Period1            -5.1                      .1                      -1.4
                                     (5.2)                    (.5)                      (.4)
    Political Sens*Period2              .6                     -.1                       -.3
                                     (1.8)                    (.2)                      (.1)
    Political Sens*Period3             -.7                      .1                       -.1
                                     (2.2)                    (.2)                      (.1)
    Political Sens*Period4              .3                     -.1                       -.2
                                     (2.0)                    (.2)                      (.1)
    Political Sens*Period5            1.8                      -.5                       -.2
                                     (1.4)                    (.1)                      (.1)

    Time to Patent Exp.               -.03                    -.05                        .2
                                     (.15)                    (.1)                      (.2)
    Time since Patent Exp.             -.4                     -.5                       -.4
                                      (.1)                    (.1)                      (.2)

    R2                               .0028                   .0035                     .0045
    Number Observations              13101                   13101                     11064


*
 Note that the reported numbers are the estimated coefficients times 104.
Period1 (1/89-12/90) is omitted from each specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                 34
                                              APPENDIX

Following is a more detailed description of some of the data sets and variables used in this paper.

Prices

        The first pricing data set, with the top 106 largest revenue drugs, was derived from the
ReadyPrice database, a compendium of the information found in the annual publication and monthly
supplements to the Red Book. Both ReadyPrice and the Red Book are published by Micromedix.
ReadyPrice contains average wholesale prices (AWP) for a number of drugs, of which we have
selected 106 to analyze in this paper. Our data set covers only those NDCs that were available in the
beginning of 1997, and the pricing histories for each NDC are not consistent. Only 52 percent of the
NDCs for which we have data in 1997 are covered in 1989. Information on historical pricing is
unavailable because the NDC was introduced mid-way through the time period we study, or because
Ready Price discontinued coverage of the NDC.

        One concern with the ReadyPrice series is that it does not contain information on sales or
revenue figures by NDC. We are unable to identify those NDCs that are used by many customers
and those which are comparatively rare. (It is not entirely clear that we should weight more heavily
drugs or dosage-forms used by more people. Dosage-forms used by more people are seen by more
people, but it is not clear that this is the relevant metric of political exposure.) The difference
between the standard deviation within a drug-month and between drug-months suggests that the bulk
of the variation is between drug-months, though price changes are not uniform across NDCs within a
drug. We report results based both on average price changes across drugs (Table 4) and using each
NDC as a separate observation (Table 5).

        The second pricing data set, covering antibiotics, comes in two pieces, one covering 1985 to
1991 and the second covering 1990 to 1996. The first piece, collected by IMS America, contains
wholesale quantities and revenues of all prescription cephalosporins (a subclass of antibiotics) sold
in the U.S. from October 1985 to December 1991. These data are monthly and come at the NDC
level, but we aggregate up to the drug level by computing a Divisia price index for each drug.
Figures 1 and 2 are Divisia price indexes of many drugs. See Ellison (1998) for a more
comprehensive discussion both of this data set and the calculation of the Divisia indexes.

Co. Patent Duration
        Co. Patent Duration measures the sales-weighted average patent life remaining on each
company’s drug portfolio as of 1993. Table A1 details the drugs, sales figures and patent expiration
dates used to construct the variable. Finding sales information for a number of drugs for comparable
markets (e.g. U.S. and not international, consistent weights on distribution outlets) is not easy. We
use the annual lists of the top 100 drugs by US sales published every spring in Med Ad News.
Because we want to describe a company’s perspective in 1993, we use information on drug sales in
1993, 1994 and 1995, under the assumption that companies could accurately forecast drug sales for
existing and new products through 1995. The three lists together cover 140 drugs. Each list contains
information on the current years’ sales as well as the previous years’, so a number of the gaps in sales
figures could be filled. For instance, when a drug showed up on the 1994 list that had not been on the
1993 list, the 1994 list almost always contained information on 1993 sales. If sales figures for a given
year were still missing, we extrapolated from recent growth rates, or included zero sales for drugs



                                                   35
brought to market after the year for which we had no data. We calculate each drug’s total sales over
the three-year period, though we discount 1994 and 1995 sales by factors of .9 and .8 respectively
because, as of 1993, the sales were both in the future and uncertain.

        The patent expiration years in Table A1 are those reported in Med Ad News or Scripps. The
commercially-relevant expiration date is not always identifiable in the FDA’s Approved Drug
Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations (also referred to as the Orange Book), though
the expiration dates in the Orange Book coincide with the commercial sources (plus or minus two
years) about 90 percent of the time. We calculate the number of years each drug has remaining on
patent and then take the sales-weighted average across each company’s products.

        Since we only consider drugs that made the top 100 lists in 1993-1995, we do not have a
complete view of each company’s patent profile. The distortions this introduces, however, are most
likely minimal. First, drug sales are skewed heavily towards the most popular drugs. (For instance,
1993 US sales for Zantac, the top selling drug according to Med Ad, were 70 times larger than sales
for the one-hundredth largest drug.) Also, for 20 of the 23 companies in our study, the largest drug
not making the Med Ad lists would comprise less than five percent of total sales. Of course, if
companies have a number of small drugs that do not make the list, and if those drugs are very
different from the ones on the list (in terms of remaining patent years), the political sensitivity
measures are less accurate. We do not think this is the case, though, since comparing the drugs we
have on our list to the drugs mentioned by companies in their annual reports and 10K’s suggests we
have covered the bulk of the important ones.1

Co. Elder Drugs

         Co. Elder Drugs measures the percent of each company’s revenue from drugs in therapeutic
classes that are predominantly used by the elderly. The drugs considered for each company and the
sales weights used are identical to those described above and summarized in Table A1 of the
Appendix. Elderly therapeutic classes are identified from Berndt et al. (1998) who report usage
patterns between the elderly and non-elderly based on information from surveys of physicians on
drugs prescribed to patients of different ages. All cardiac drugs, antineoplastic agents, cholesterol
reducers, antidiabetics, arthritis treatments, glaucoma treatments, antiemetics, diuretics, clot
dissolvers, and one drug (Parlodel) used to treat patients with Parkinson’s disease were considered
elderly.

Co. PAC Growth

        Co. PAC Growth measures the increase in the annual disbursements made by each company's
corporate PAC between the 1991/2 election cycle and calendar year 1993. Information on PAC
disbursements for the 1991/2 election cycle is from Makinson and Goldstein (1994). The PACs of
two companies, Amgen and Wyeth-Ayerst, were not covered by Makinson and Goldstein (1994), so
we used information assembled by ICPSR. Data on PAC disbursements for companies covered by
both Makinson and Goldstein and ICPSR were very similar. Information on PAC disbursements for
the calendar year 1993 was obtained directly from company filings with the Federal Election

1
  We also estimated results omitting companies for whom the smallest drug in Med Ad was bigger than five percent of
total sales. They were very similar to those reported.




                                                          36
Committee, downloaded from the Federal Election Commission's web site (www.fec.gov). Online
information only extends back to 1993. Note that Makinson and Goldstein (1994) only covers
donations to Congressional candidates, so even though 1991/2 coincided with the presidential
election cycle, the PAC contributions we consider are roughly comparable across time periods.

Time to/since Patent Exp.

         The patent expiration years listed in Table A1 were also used to construct the last two
variables in Table 1, Time to Patent Expiration and Time since Patent Expiration. The first variable
is equal to zero in years after a drug’s patent has expired and equal to the number of years until the
patent expires for drugs that are still on patent. The second variable is equal to zero for drugs that
still have patent coverage and equal to the number of years since the patent expired for off-patent
drugs. Due to the different regulatory treatment of antibiotics, patent expirations are not available
from the same sources. For the second data set, therefore, we simply use the year in which generics
entered as the year of commercially-relevant patent expiration.




                                                  37
                     Table A1: Drug Sales & Patent Information by Company
                                            Patent        Sales
                                            Expiration (wtd ‘93-’95 Percent Co. Price in Data
Company                  Product            (year)         $millions)     Sales      Set?
Abbott Labs              Abbokinase                                   367        13%      No
                         Biaxin                     2005           1,059         37%
                         Depakote                   2008              578        20%
                         Hytrin                     1997              827        29%
Amgen                    Epogen                      2013          2,007         56%
                         Neupogen                    2013          1,582         44%
Bayer                    Adalat                     1991              292        13%
                         Cipro                      2003           1,884         87%
Bristol-Myers Squibb     BuSpar                     2000              651        10%
                         Capoten                    1996           1,484         23%
                         Cefzil                                       549         9%      No
                         Duricef                    1994              479         7%
                         Isovue                      1998             853        13%
                         Paraplatin                 2004              391         6%
                         Pravachol                  2000              925        14%
                         Taxol                      1997              688        11%
                         VePesid                    1993              416         6%
Boehringer Ingelheim     Atrovent                   1998              610       100%      No
Burroughs Wellcome       Imuran                     1993              211        12%
                         Retrovir                   2005              406        23%
                         Zovirax                    1997           1,150         65%
Ciba                     Estraderm                  2001              278        12%      No
                         Lopressor                  1990              671        30%      No
                         Tegretol                   1986              344        15%      No
                         Transderm-Nitro            2001              235        11%      No
                         Voltaren                   1993              703        32%      No
Dupont-Merck             Coumadin                                     748       100%      No
Eli Lilly                Axid                       2002              964        13%
                         Ceclor                     1992              982        13%
                         Dobutrex                   1993              472         6%
                         Humatrope                                    181         2%      No
                         Humulin                    1995           1,241         17%
                         lorabid                                      339         5%      No
                         Prozac                     2001           3,115         42%
                         Vancocin                   1990              186         2%
Fisons                   Intal                      1993              403       100%      No
G.D. Searle              Ambien                     2006              206        14%      No
                         Calan                      1992              812        56%
                         Daypro                      1997             439        30%      No
Genentech                Activase                   2000              707        54%
                         Protropin                  1992              610        46%
Generic                  Cefaclor                                     619                 No
Generic                  Tamoxifen                                    200                 No
Glaxo                    Beconase                   1994              370         4%
                         Boclovent                  1999               90         1%



                                             38
                       Ceftin                 2000     847    9%
                       Fortaz                 1999     201    2%
                       Imitrex                2006     510    5%
                       Serevent               2008     110    1%
                       Ventolin               1989     523    6%
                       Zantac                 1997   5,668   61%
                       Zofran                 2005     983   11%
Hoechst-Roussel        Carafate               1986     465   25%    No
                       Claforan               1998     273   15%
                       DiaBeta                1994     476   26%
                       Lasix                  1990     115    6%
                       Trental                1997     503   27%
Hoffmann-La Roche      Accutane               2001     401   15%
                       Klonopin               1999     620   23%
                       Rocephin               2005   1,074   39%
                       Versed                 1999     634   23%
Johnson & Johnson      Duragesic                       242    6%    No
  (Janssen)
                         Hismanal             1999     552    14%
                         Nizoral              1999     325     8%
                         Propulsid            2007     411    10%   No
                         Risperdal            2007     300     7%
  (Ortho Biotech)        Procrit              2012     641    16%
  (Ortho Pharmaceutical) Ortho-Novum          2003   1,125    28%
  (Ortho-McNeil)         Floxin                        410    10%   No
Knoll                    Synthroid                     629   100%   No
Marion Merrell Dow       Cardizem             1992   2,135    65%
                         Seldane              1994   1,170    35%
Merck                    Mevacor              2001   2,778    22%
                         Pepcid               2000   1,578    13%
                         Prilosec             2001   2,303    18%
                         Primaxin             2002     395     3%
                         Prinivil             2001     610     5%
                         Proscar              2005     310     2%
                         Recombivax HB                 587     5%   No
                         Timoptic             1997     445     4%
                         Vasotec              2000   2,459    20%
                         Zocor                2000   1,041     8%
Pfizer                   Cardura              2000     266     3%
                         Diflucan             2004     889    11%
                         Feldene              1992     124     1%
                         Glucotrol            1994     698     8%
                         Norvasc              2007     803    10%
                         Procardia            1994   3,149    38%
                         Unasyn               1999     366     4%
                         Zithromax            2005     311     4%
                         Zoloft               2005   1,708    21%
Rhone-Poulenc            Azmacort                      429    71%   No
                         Lovenox              2012     172    29%   No



                                         39
Sandoz                  Clozaril          1994     497    23%
                        Lamisil           2006      90     4%
                        Lescol            2011     116     5%   No
                        Lotensin          2003     224    10%
                        Parlodel          1990     226    10%
                        Sandimmune        1995   1,033    47%
Sanofi Winthrop Pharm   Omnipaque         1998   1,309   100%   No
Schering-Plough         Claritin          2004     880    21%
                        Eulexin           2001     274     6%
                        Intron A          2002     238     6%
                        K-dur                      306     7%   No
                        Lotrisone                  146     3%   No
                        Nitro-dur                  356     8%   No
                        Proventil         1989   1,101    26%
                        Vancenase         1994     332     8%   No
                        Vanceril          1994     646    15%
SmithKline Beecham      Amoxil            1989     157     3%
                        Augmentin         2002   1,400    27%
                        Engerix-b         2004     628    12%
                        Kytril            2006     170     3%   No
                        Paxil             2008     847    16%
                        Relafen           2002     867    17%
                        Tagamet           1994   1,131    22%
Syntex                  Anaprox           1993     384    22%
                        Naprosyn          1993     691    40%
                        Toradol           1997     657    38%
Upjohn                  Cleocin           1990     149     6%
                        Micronase         1994     772    34%
                        Provera           1995     570    25%
                        Xanax             1993     811    35%
Warner-Lambert          Accupril          2002     288    20%
                        Dilantin          1993     484    34%
                        Lopid             1993     670    46%
Wyeth-Ayerst            Ativan            1994     416     8%
                        Effexor                    376     7%   No
                        Lodine            1997     650    12%
                        Oruvail                    229     4%   No
                        Premarin          1990   1,864    34%
                        Triphasil         1990     374     7%
 (Lederle)              Lupron            1996     945    17%
                        Minocin           1990     143     3%
                        Suprax                     468     9%   No
Zeneca                  Diprivan          1997     488    19%
                        Nolvadex          2002     634    24%
                        Tenormin          1991     398    15%
                        Zestril           2001     922    35%
                        Zoladex           2005     181     7%




                                     40
                                            Price Index




                    0.95




                               1.05




                                                1.15




                                                                                      1.25




                                                                                                                               1.35
              0.9




                                      1.1




                                                          1.2




                                                                                                                         1.3




                                                                                                                                      1.4
                           1
     Oct-85
     Feb-86
     Jun-86
     Oct-86
     Feb-87
     Jun-87
     Oct-87
     Feb-88
     Jun-88
     Oct-88
     Feb-89
     Jun-89
     Oct-89




                                                                                                                                            Cephalosporins
     Feb-90




                                                                                                                                               Figure 1
     Jun-90
                                                                Medicaid Best Price




     Oct-90
41




     Feb-91
     Jun-91
     Oct-91
     Feb-92
                                                                                             Health Care Reform Debate




     Jun-92
     Oct-92
     Feb-93
     Jun-93
     Oct-93
     Feb-94
     Jun-94
     Oct-94
     Feb-95
     Jun-95
     Oct-95
     Feb-96
     Jun-96
                               Price Index




                   0.2



                         0.4



                               0.6



                                               0.8




                                                                                     1.2



                                                                                                             1.4
               0




                                                     1
     Oct-85
     Mar-86
     Aug-86
     Jan-87
     Jun-87
     Nov-87
     Apr-88
     Sep-88




                                                                                           Generic Scandal
     Feb-89




                                                                                                                   Cephalosporins-Branded versus Generics
      Jul-89
     Dec-89
     May-90
     Oct-90
     Mar-91




                                                                                                                                  Figure 2
42




     Aug-91
                                                         Health Care Reform Debate



     Jan-92
     Jun-92
     Nov-92
     Apr-93
     Sep-93
     Feb-94
      Jul-94
     Dec-94
     May-95
     Oct-95
     Mar-96
     Aug-96
                                     Generic
                                     Branded
                                                                                 Figure 3
                                                          Changes in Prices or Indexes, December to December

                               10%




                               8%
Price/Index Change (Percent)




                               6%
                                                                                                                             PPI
                                                                                                                             CPI
                                                                                                                             CPI Overall
                                                                                                                             Top 106
                               4%




                               2%




                               0%
                                     1985



                                            1986



                                                   1987



                                                             1988



                                                                    1989



                                                                           1990



                                                                                  1991



                                                                                         1992



                                                                                                1993



                                                                                                       1994



                                                                                                               1995



                                                                                                                      1996
                                                                                  43
                                                 Figure 4
                        R&D Expenditure as a Percent of Sales by Sample Companies
14.0%



12.0%



10.0%



8.0%



6.0%

                                                                                          R&D as % of Sales

4.0%
                                                                                          Annual Chng in
                                                                                          R&D as % Sales
2.0%



0.0%
        1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991        1992   1993   1994   1995   1996

-2.0%



-4.0%




                                                  44
