NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GENERAL PURPOSE TECHNOLOGY AT WORK:
THE CORLISS STEAM ENGINE IN THE LATE 19TH CENTURY US
Nathan Rosenberg
Manuel Trajtenberg
Working Paper 8485
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8485
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2001

Brent Goldfarb has been immensely helpful throughout the preparation of this paper, most especially in gathering
and organizing the material connected with waterpower. Stanley Engerman, Catherine de Fontenay, Kenneth
Sokoloff, Peter Temin, Sidney Winter and Thomas Zeller provided astute comments. We are also grateful to
participants in the Economic Growth and Policy Program of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
(CIAR), and to participants in the Science and Technology Workshop of the Stanford Economics Department, for
constructive suggestions. We acknowledge with gratitude the financial support provided by CIAR, and by the
Israel-US Binational Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2001 by Nathan Rosenberg and Manuel Trajtenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

A General Purpose Technology at Work:
The Corliss Steam Engine in the late 19th Century US
Nathan Rosenberg and Manuel Trajtenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 8485
September 2001
JEL No. N11, N61, O18, O40

ABSTRACT

The steam engine is widely regarded as the icon of the Industrial Revolution and a prime example
of a “General Purpose Technology,” and yet its contribution to growth is far from transparent. This paper
examines the role that a particular innovative design in steam power, the Corliss engine, played in the
intertwined processes of industrialization and urbanization that characterized the growth of the US
economy in the late 19th century. Waterpower offered abundant and cheap energy, but restricted the
location of manufacturing just to areas with propitious topography and climate. Steam engines
offered the possibility of relaxing this severe constraint, allowing industry to locate where key
considerations such as access to markets for inputs and outputs directed. The enhanced performance
of the Corliss engine as well as its fuel efficiency helped tip the balance in favor of steam in the fierce
contest with waterpower. With the aid of detailed data on the location of Corliss engines and
waterwheels and a two-stage estimation strategy, we show that the deployment of Corliss engines
indeed served as a catalyst for the massive relocation of industry away from rural areas and into large
urban centers, thus fueling agglomeration economies, and attracting further population growth. This
illustrates what we believe is an important aspect of the dynamics of GPTs, whether it is electricity
in the early 20th century or Information Technologies in the present era: the fact that GPTs induce
the widespread and more efficient relocation of economic activity, which in turn fosters long-term
growth.

Nathan Rosenberg
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
nate@leland.stanford.edu

Manuel Trajtenberg
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
Israel
and NBER
manuel@post.tau.ac.il

1. Introduction
The steam engine has long been regarded as the icon of the Industrial Revolution,
even though the extent of its singular contribution to growth has been the subject of much
debate. A casual excursion into the history of this prime mover and of its vast array of uses
suggests that the steam engine fits well the notion of “General Purpose Technologies”
(GPTs), and may constitute a prime example of such epochal innovations. From pumping
water out of mines and driving the mechanized factories in Britain, to powering virtually
the entire industrial sector in the USA by the early 20th century, the steam engine found
its way to the major economic activities of the industrial nations over a span of a century.
Moreover, steam became in the course of the 19th century the main power source for water
and land transportation, breaking the barriers of geographic isolation and bringing about a
huge expansion of markets.
We focus in this paper on the Corliss steam engine, a highly innovative
embodiment of stationary, high-pressure steam engines, which became the dominant
design in the USA for large stationary engines in the late 19th century. Indeed, we shall
argue that the Corliss engine played a key role in the fierce contest between waterpower
and steam power, particularly in the Northeast. In so doing it helped propel the steam
engine to a dominant position in the intertwined processes of industrialization and
urbanization that characterized the growth of the US economy in the second half of the 19th
century.
The notion of GPTs1 rests on the historical observation that whole eras of technical
progress and economic growth appear to be driven by a few key technologies: closely
following upon the steam engine, electricity quite likely played such a role in the early
decades of the 20th century, and information technologies may be doing as much in our era.
GPTs unfold over the long haul through a sequence of innovations that take many shapes
as distinct embodiments of the basic technology: the engines that powered locomotives
1

See Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995), David (1991), Helpman and Trajtenberg, (1998), Helpman
(1998), Rosenberg (1976) and (1982).

2

were radically different from those that pumped water out of mines early on, much as a
Pentium processor differs from the integrated circuits of pocket calculators. Thus, by
focusing on the Corliss engine we hope to understand the dynamics of GPTs, and in
particular the mechanisms by which GPTs play their presumed role as “engines of
growth,” in the context of a narrowly circumscribed technological and historical setting.
Waterpower, by far the main American power source until the mid 19th century,
offered abundant and cheap energy for a wide range of industrial uses. However,
waterpower suffered from a crucial limitation: manufacturing plants had to locate
wherever topography and climate permitted, and not where key economic considerations
such as access to markets for inputs and outputs would have directed. Steam engines
offered the possibility of relaxing this severe locational constraint. However, in order for
industry to actually relocate on a large scale, the operation of the steam engine had to be
sufficiently advantageous compared to watermills. The Corliss engine, with its vast
improvements both in fuel efficiency and in key performance characteristics (primarily
regularity of motion and the ability to sustain dramatic changes in load), greatly
contributed to tipping the balance in favor of steam, particularly in and around New
England.2 In so doing, then, it helped set off the twin processes of substitution of steam
for water, and of relocation of industry from rural to urban environments. These, we
hypothesize, turned out to be some of the key pathways by which the steam engine
played its role as GPT in the second half of the 19th century.
We shall document these processes with highly detailed quantitative data and
econometric analysis, as well as with supporting qualitative historical evidence. The
original data come from the Petition that George Corliss submitted to Congress in 1869,
requesting a second extension to his highly successful patents. The Petition contains a
detailed list of buyers of Corliss engines, with their names, precise location and
horsepower, which we supplemented with information about the industrial composition
of these users. Our analysis is based on these data, in conjunction with comprehensive

2

Elsewhere the scarcity of appropriate water sites naturally favored steam as the leading prime mover.

3

data on waterpower (i.e. over 4,000 water sites in the north Atlantic states, with their
horsepower and industrial classification), and an array of Census data by counties.
We shall attempt to ascertain with the aid of these data the stringency of the
locational constraint imposed by the reliance on waterpower, and the extent to which
each of the competing power modes fostered or hindered urbanization. We do that by
pivoting on the deployment of Corliss engines and of watermills in the Northeast as of
1870, by county, and looking forward and backwards in time: first, we estimate
“adoption” equations for Corliss engines and for watermills as a function of population,
physical and human capital and other variables from the 1850 census. Second, we
estimate a model of population growth from 1870 to 1900, as a function of the stock of
Corliss engines, watermills, and controls. The findings indicate that Corliss engines did
indeed agglomerate in urban centers whereas waterwheels did not. Moreover, subsequent
population growth was positively related to the adoption of Corliss engines, and not to the
presence of waterpower-based industry.
These results support the hypothesized role of the Corliss in the dynamic
interaction between industrialization and urbanization. Freed of the locational constraints
of waterpower, manufacturing enterprises driven by steam chose to locate mostly in
urban areas, where they could take advantage of agglomeration economies. The presence
of Corliss-driven manufacturers contributed to these agglomeration effects, and probably
also signaled that more was coming, since Corliss engines were “trend setters”, both in
that they were deployed in advanced sectors, and in that they were of a larger scale. In
time, locations with relatively many Corliss-driven establishments attracted further
manufacturers and hence also fostered population growth. By contrast, watermills were
not part of such a positive loop: they located in sparsely populated areas to begin with,
and failed to attract further economic activity and hence further population to those areas.
The role of the Corliss in precipitating these growth-enhancing relocation
processes is, we suspect, far from unique: indeed, it would seem that one of the key
channels by which each successive GPT impacts the economy is through the massive

4

relocation and reorganization of economic activity that it induces, with concomitant gains
in efficiency. Thus, and following the steam engine, electricity brought about the
fractionalization of power within factories, enabling the much more efficient (re)location
of machines on the factory floor according to the workflow and not to power
requirements. The gasoline engine induced a massive relocation of people vis a vis the
workplace, extended greatly the radius from which inputs could be drawn, and altered
dramatically the loci and scale of commercial activity. And in the present era information
technologies appear to be redrawing once again the economic landscape, by shifting the
boundaries and location of corporate activity, enabling many of the facets of
globalization, and perhaps even making telecommuting a viable option. We still lack a
well defined framework to study these GPT-induced relocation processes and their
impact on growth. The case of the Corliss steam engine illustrates the potential of taking
such route, hopefully providing the stimuli for further research along these lines.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets the stage by putting the steam
engine in the context of the GPT framework. Section 3 describes the key innovations
made by Corliss and the main performance characteristics of the engine, and section 4
lays out the data. In section 5 we take a first look at the data, reviewing the range of
applications of Corliss engines and their geographical distribution. Section 6 offers an
historical perspective of power modes and geography, and formulates the hypothesis to
be tested. The adoption equations are estimated in section 7, and the population growth
equations in section 8. Section 9 expands on the role of the Corliss in making possible the
vast growth in the scale of industry, with emphasis on rolling mills. Section 10 discusses
the subsequent impact of the Corliss: as dominant design in the US, and its impact in
Europe. Section 11 offers some concluding remarks.

5

2. The Steam Engine as GPT
In order to set the stage for the subsequent discussion, it is worth recalling what a
GPT is all about: first, it is a technology characterized by general purposeness, that is, by
the fact that it performs some generic function that is vital to the functioning of a large
number of using products and/or production systems. Second, GPTs exhibit a great deal
of technological dynamism: continuous innovational efforts increase over time the
efficiency with which the generic function is performed, benefiting existing users, and
prompting further sectors to adopt the improved GPT. Third, GPTs exhibit “innovational
complementarities” with the application sectors, in the sense that technical advances in
the GPT make it more profitable for its users to innovate and improve their own
technologies. Thus, technical advance in the GPT fosters or makes possible advances
across a broad spectrum of application sectors. Improvements in those sectors increase in
turn the demand for the GPT itself, which makes it worthwhile to further invest in
improving it, thus closing up a positive loop that may result in faster, sustained growth
for the economy as a whole.3
The universal character (and hence general purposeness) of the GPT's of the first
and second industrial revolutions is easy to grasp: by definition, work involves the
transformation of energy from one of its possible states to any other i.e., heat, motion
(displacement), light, etc. It so happens that a vast array of disparate economic activities (in
transportation, manufacturing, mining, etc.) could potentially be conducted by the
application of one particular transformation, namely, that which results in continuous
rotary motion, as performed by the steam engine, and later on by the electric motor.4 It is
in fact an extraordinary coincidence, stemming from a rare combination of physical laws,
economic processes and ingenuity (which we do not pretend to fully grasp), that power
delivered as rotary motion turned out to be capable of sewing a cloth, lifting us in space,
3

See Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995) for a detailed account of the characteristics of GPTs, and Helpman
and Trajtenberg (1998) for their impact on growth.
4
The first steam engines (including Newcomen’s) did not operate in a rotary fashion but rather in a
straight-up-and-down manner; however, the vast majority of engines since Watt’s involved rotary motion,
certainly outside mining.

6

cooling the indoors, and a myriad of other uses.5 And indeed, the steam engine proved to
be of virtually universal usefulness, quite likely setting a historic high mark for “general
purposeness”: from mines to water and land transportation to the powering of virtually
the entire industrial sector in the USA,6 the steam engine found its way to the major
economic activities of the industrial nations over a span of almost two centuries. No
wonder the symbol of the centennial exhibition in Philadelphia (1876) was a huge Corliss
engine, the largest steam engine ever built.7
The technological dynamism of the steam engine has been documented extensively
elsewhere,8 and hence we shall not dwell on it here, except for succinct descriptions of the
advances that the Corliss design brought about. Identifying and quantifying the unfolding
of innovational complementarities is clearly the most important but also the most difficult
task in clarifying the role of a technology as GPT: what one would need is evidence to the
effect that advances in the GPT foster or enable (complementary) advances across a
broad spectrum of application sectors.9 We shall attempt to tackle innovational
complementarities in the context of the Corliss steam engine in various ways. First and
5

Note that many manual jobs (e.g. sewing, polishing, cutting) could hardly be seen ex ante as natural
candidates for replacement by mechanical actions originating in rotary motion, and thus it must have been
far from obvious that rotary motion would become such a universal functionality. Even by the
mid-nineteenth century there were still very many activities that few would have dreamt to mechanize, let
alone automate, with the “prime mover” being the steam engine. Indeed, in many cases the substitution did
not make economic sense until ever improving steam engines, and the Corliss among them, delivered such
functionality at favorable price/performance ratios.
6
Taking advantage of the list of buyers from Corliss’ Petition and the complementary data gathered, we
document in Section 6 the range of uses of the Corliss engine, both in itself and in comparison to that of
alternative power sources at the time. In so doing we delineate, at least in an ex post manner, the extent of
general purposeness that the steam engine achieved in the wake of Corliss’ innovations.
7
This engine and a companion one, were used to supply the power needs of the Machinery Hall at the
Centennial Exhibition of 1876. The pair of engines was rated at a staggering 1400 horsepower, but they
normally operated at far below their rated capacity. Although these engines offered nothing especially
innovative aside from their great size, they were seen as an appropriate symbol of recent American
industrial achievements.
8
See e.g. Hunter (1985), and the many sources quoted there, primarily of a technical nature.
9
The case of electric power provides a clear illustration - see du Boff (1967), Rosenberg (1982), and David
(1991). Electricity and electric motors diffused rapidly during the first three decades of the 20th century,
and it is widely believed that the large productivity gains registered during that period owe a great deal to
this process of electrification: the new energy source fostered a more efficient (re)design of factories and a
wholesale reorganization of work arrangements, taking advantage of the newfound flexibility of electric
power. Indeed, and as mentioned in the Introduction, the fractionalization of power brought about by
electricity meant that machines could be placed on the factory floor much more efficiently according to the
natural workflow, and not according to their power requirements, as was the case with the steam engine.

7

foremost, we argue that the improvements embodied in the Corliss engine helped tilt the
equilibrium away from water and towards steam as the main source of power in
manufacturing, and in so doing it fostered a massive process of relocation of industry,
away from remote, isolated locations and into urban centers. The dual processes of
industrialization and urbanization that ensued brought about the benefits of
agglomeration, and these externalities in turn further encouraged both the growth of cities
and the concentration of manufacturing there. Another mechanism was that the Corliss
engine allowed for a much larger scale in manufacturing, and with it the realization of
scale economies. Lastly, we discuss in some detail the importance of the Corliss engine
for rolling mills, a sector that played a key role in metallurgy during the closing decades
of the 19th century, particularly in the building of railroads.
We also devoted significant efforts toward searching for evidence of innovational
complementarities in the more straightforward sense of the Corliss engine “prompting”
improvements in specific user sectors. However, we could not find compelling, first hand
evidence to that effect. We did find repeated assertions that the improved regularity of
motion delivered by the Corliss allowed textile manufacturers to move up the quality
ladder from low-grade, coarse fabrics to finer grades of cotton yarns and other fibers such
as wool. There is also some material suggesting that the performance advantages of the
Corliss may have prompted the (re)design of more efficient textile mills. The problem is
that we could not find the empirical equivalent of a “smoking gun” in this respect, and
hence, while believing that the Corliss engine almost certainly played a role along those
lines, we base our analysis exclusively upon the other mechanisms.
Examining the Corliss engine as a particular episode in the evolution of a GPT
touches also on the fundamental methodological issues of how to assess, more generally,
the economic impact of presumed “major” innovations. Fogel’s (1964) seminal study of
railroads put forward an approach that centered on the painstaking comparison of costs
between the new technology and existing best practice, in that case between railroads and
water canals. His findings seemed to indicate that the overall economic impact of the
advent of railroads, as measured by cost savings expressed as a percentage of GDP, was

8

small, and hence professed to demystify the economic importance of any specific
innovation (see also Fishlow, 1966).
In our view a methodology that focuses on cost comparisons, and the concomitant
cost-savings calculations, by and large misses the deeper point. As previously mentioned,
the impact of a general purpose technology on growth operates primarily through
innovational complementarities and the positive loop that these set in motion, and not just
through cost advantages. Regardless of the size of the cost savings that a new technology
might bring about, if it does not prompt down-the-line innovations and related
complementary investments across a wide range of user sectors, it will not propel longterm growth, and hence it will not qualify as a GPT.10 Conversely, a technology that does
exhibit pervasive innovational complementarities may not result in significant cost
savings vis a vis its closest substitute, but this latter fact would not necessarily hinder its
role as a GPT.
Von Tunzelmann’s (1978) detailed study of steam power and British
industrialization starts off from a Fogel-type calculation, and also finds that the
measurable impact of the steam engine in terms of costs savings was very small as a
fraction of GDP in the UK, as of 1800.11 However, he goes further and dwells extensively
on “backward and forward linkages”, the latter notion closely related to innovational
complementarities. After examining the use of the steam engine in the cotton industry, in
other segments of textiles, and in mining, von Tunzelmann concludes that these forward
linkages were of relatively minor importance, at least through the first half of the 19th
century. That may well be the case, and von Tunzelmann certainly buttresses his
arguments with impressive scholarship. However, his emphasis is still on the impact of
changes in power costs on the adoption of mechanical innovations (such as the self-acting
mule and the power loom), rather than on other aspects of prime movers, such as
reliability of supply, regularity of motion, or locational flexibility. As already suggested,

10

This is as simple as the difference between a once and for all change in levels, and a change in trend.
Actually, von Tunzelmann studied the impact of Boulton & Watt steam engines, vis a vis all other prime
movers, including Newcomen’s atmospheric engines.
11

9

it is our intention here to move away from costs and shift the focus towards a different set
of mechanisms, particularly those related to location.

3. The innovative attributes of the Corliss engine
The key novelty of Corliss’ engine was its automatic variable cut-off mechanism.
What this meant was that the speed of the engine was subjected to precise control by the
ability to automatically vary the length of the time period during which steam entered the
cylinder. The variation in engine speed was regulated by the governor, which retarded or
advanced the point of cutoff in accordance with the rise or fall of the load that was placed
upon the engine. This design feature, which made possible a more efficient exploitation
of the expansive power of steam, resulted in the best-known feature of the engine: a
substantial improvement in energy efficiency. But perhaps even more important was the
fact that the engine was also far more “user-friendly” than its predecessors. In particular,
it was capable of delivering a continuous, uniform flow of rotary power in spite of sudden
changes in the load that might be imposed on the engine. The smoothness of power
delivery was very important, albeit in quite different ways, to the largest manufacturing
industries of the time: textiles and metallurgy. Crucially, it permitted higher speeds,
while at the same time it reduced the likelihood of breakage in threads that was so
disruptive in the textile industry. The uniformity of power delivery became increasingly
valuable as the industry moved up the quality ladder to more expensive goods. In
metallurgy, where huge, abrupt and punishing variations in load were imposed on the
engines that were driving the rolling mills, the engine proved capable of adjusting to
these variations far better than other engines of the period (see Section 9 below).
The automatic variable cutoff capability of the Corliss engine brought a huge
improvement in the efficiency with which the engine exploited the expansive power of
steam. This improvement was achieved by the ingenious design and location of the
valves and valve gears, a great advance over the earlier, widely-used slide-valve gear that
failed to make any use of steam’s expansive power.12 According to a widespread practice

12

For a detailed description of the Corliss engine see Hunter (1985, vol. II, chapter 5, and in particular pp.
256-7).

10

of the time, fuel efficiency was measured in terms of pounds of coal consumed per
horsepower per hour. By this criterion, Corliss’ engine was said, in sworn testimony of
numerous users in the Petition, to reduce the cost of fuel by a third or more.
But there was much more to the great commercial success and subsequent
economic impact of the Corliss engine than the reduction in fuel costs. The ability to
provide a smooth and responsive delivery of power was, as already suggested, of special
importance in cotton textiles, where achievement of higher speeds was central to
productivity improvement and, moreover, where irregularities in speed were very costly,
due to the ease with which cotton thread was subject to breakage.13 This consideration
became very important in allowing American cotton textile firms to move up the quality
ladder from low-grade, coarse cotton fabrics to finer grades of cotton yarns in response to
the demands of an increasingly affluent consuming public. At the same time, the
availability of steam power was a major factor in making possible the migration of large
cotton textile mills to the South in the 1880s and 1890s. The South was also a region
where the production costs of coarse goods were lower, and the demand for coarse goods
greater. Consequently, the New England cotton textile industry found itself increasingly
unable to withstand competition from the South in the category of coarse goods, and
accelerated its move up the quality ladder in the late nineteenth century.
The Petition exults in detailed descriptions of the operation of Corliss engines in
cotton textiles, given in sworn testimonies by users of the engines, such as “the most
perfect regulation of speed,” (Petition, p. 27), “a more perfect regulation of the speed of
the engine, which has given us a larger production of cloth” (Petition, p. 32), “its other
crowning excellence, uniformity of velocity,” and “an exacter nicety in its governance,
than any of [its] predecessors” (Petition, award of the Rumford Medal, pp. 46-7). A
textile manufacturer in Pittsburgh reported that “...with the avoidance of thread breakage
attending the irregular motion of his old engine brought a savings probably equal to that
from reduced fuel consumption, estimated at $200 monthly.” (Loc. cit.). The extent to

11

which Corliss came to dominate the market in the New England cotton textile industry
owed a great deal to this specific feature of his engine. The ability to deliver power, not
only at a high velocity, but also with a “uniformity of velocity,” was a critical competitive
factor throughout the textiles sector.
The excellence in the “regulation” of power remained a distinctive attribute of
Corliss engines all the way up until the next major power technology that was eventually
responsible for the displacement of the steam engine itself. In the earliest years of the use
of electricity for lighting purposes, Corliss engines were employed in the generation of
electricity. Although they were shortly to be replaced by turbines, Robert Thurston, the
most eminent and knowledgeable mechanical engineer in America in the late 19th
century, was unstinting in his praise of its “excellent regulation,” as compared to other
engines in its class.14

4. Data Sources
4.1 Data on the Corliss Engine
Starting from Hunter’s (1985) monumental work and the leads that he provides
there, we have mapped a wide array of bibliographical and data sources, both primary and
secondary, on the steam engine in general and the Corliss engine in particular.15 As it
turned out though, the American patent system was to play an especially important role in
this project. George Corliss was a prolific inventor who obtained many patents and,
moreover, was involved in protracted litigation and other legal matters related to these

13

“Increase of speed of spindles is by far the most effectual factor in obtaining this result [reduction in
costs]; and hence it is that any increase of speed that can be obtained without other disadvantages is in the
line of economy, regardless of the increased cost of power it may involve.” Sheldon (1892).
14
“Corliss engines are now very frequently adopted in electric lighting, and are always belted to the
dynamos. Their excellent regulation is as important a feature in this application, as is their economy in use
of steam...(T)hat these engines can be made to give very perfect uniformity of rotation will be evident,
when it is stated that the writer, in testing engines of this class, has found that the variation of speed was so
slight as to be practically inappreciable, even when the amount of work thrown on or off, was a very large
proportion of that done by the engine when working at its rated power.” Thurston (1884), p. 23.
15
One of the main sources is the collection of Corliss Papers at Brown University. Corliss became a very
prominent figure in his time, and had a long time association with Brown University (located in his home
town, Providence, RI). As a consequence, the Richard Hay Library at Brown University put together and
maintains a special collection of the Corliss Papers, which includes about 900 original items, ranging from
business contracts ,to letters, to newspapers clippings.

12

patents, a fact that generated a large amount of documents of which many have survived.
Corliss’ main patents on the improvements to the steam engine expired in 1863, but he
managed to secure a seven-year renewal. In 1869 he petitioned for yet another renewal,
which was turned down by Congress.
One of the happy consequences of Corliss’ unsuccessful request is that the formal
petition that he submitted to Congress contains detailed information concerning his
extensive business activities up to that date.16 In particular, the petition contains a list of
257 buyers of Corliss engines, including the names of the firms, their location (city and
state) and the horsepower of their engines. It also contains testimonies of several of these
buyers, spelling out the advantages of the Corliss engine in their mills (some with precise
calculations of cost savings), an extensive argumentation of why the extension is
warranted, a detailed account of litigation expenses, etc. The petition is a fascinating
historical document that provided the initial impetus for this project, and the list of buyers
in it is what made our quantitative analysis possible.
A great deal of our research effort has been directed at ascertaining the industrial
sector to which each buyer who appears in the Petition’s list belonged, a task that proved
to be exceedingly difficult, since it involved searching for information on firms that
operated sometime during the period 1850-1870, many of which have left no paper trail.
We have relied for that purpose on several sources: archival materials at several libraries,
city directories of the time (for some of the major cities where these firms operated),
directories of New England Manufacturers, business histories, county histories, etc. We
have managed to successfully classify 163 out of the 257 buyers (63.4%), who represent,
however, 73% of the total horsepower installed. We present in Appendix 1 a sample page
from the list of buyers, including our industrial classification, sources, etc.

16

The Petition was published in 1870 as a short booklet, in Providence, RI (see Corliss, 1870).

13

It should be emphasized that the list of 257 buyers in the Petition, having a stock
of about 470 engines,17 is not comprehensive: it includes only those who were prepared to
support Corliss’ petition for patent extension (see Appendix 2). According to Hunter,
about 1,200 Corliss engines with 118,500 horsepower (henceforth “HP”) were sold up to
1869, of which 25,000 HP were sold by licensees (Hunter 1985, p. 282). In fact, there is
some detailed information in the Petition about licensees, and in particular, about the
royalties paid by them to Corliss:18
Corliss Licensees, reported in the Petition
(sorted by royalties)
Engines Builder/location
Engines
Royalties*
1
Miller & Allen,
Chester, PA
103
25,173
2
H.S. Fairbanks, agent of Foundry and
57
22,703
Machine Co.,
Taunton,
MA
3
William A. Harris,
Providence, RI
57
14,462
4
Goss & Lombard
5,848
5
J.M. Poole & Co.
3,929
6
Wood & Mann Steam Engine Co.
2,052
7
Atlantic Works
942
8
C. & J. Cooper & Co.
700
9
S.C. Forsaith
552
10 Woodruff & Beach
250
*These are total royalties, including amounts due, as reported in the
Petition (cents rounded up).
However, we could not incorporate these (still very partial) data in the econometric
analysis, since we do not know who were the buyers of the engines sold by these
licensees. In addition, Corliss-type engines representing some 60,000 HP were produced
and marketed by other manufacturers infringing Corliss’ patent rights (Hunter, 1985).
Thus, in terms of HP, the listing in the Petition (our “sample”) with a total of 46,934 HP,
constitutes 50% of the engines built by Corliss himself up to 1869, 40% of the engines
17

The list consists of buyers, not of single engines, and we know that many of them owned more than one
engine. According to the figures in Hunter (1985), Corliss engines averaged 100 HP each; the list in the
Petition totals 46,934 HP, and hence we infer that the list comprises about 470 engines.
18
Corliss states in the Petition that his receipts for royalties involved payments from 11 engine builders,
“...seven of whom, having manufactories in Rhode Island, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Delaware, New

14

built by Corliss and the official licensees, and 26% of the total stock of Corliss engines
including those sold by infringers.
The coverage of the Petition list is thus quite wide but, can we presume it to be a
representative sample of the population of Corliss-type engines built by 1870? There are
two concentric issues regarding what “representative” means: the first is, do the buyers
who signed the Petition constitute a random sample of those who purchased engines from
Corliss himself? Secondly, is the Petition’s list representative of all Corliss-type engines
sold, including licensees and infringers? It is important to note from the outset that the
analysis that we shall perform here relies primarily on the location of Corliss engines and
of water-powered sites (i.e. on the distribution of engines and sites by county). Thus, the
issue of whether a sample of Corliss engines is “representative” or not is taken to mean
whether or not the sample may suffer from noticeable biases with respect to location.
Regarding the first question, we know that the buyers of Corliss engines were
engaged in a long-term relationship with Corliss, in that the latter provided maintenance,
parts, upgrades, and perhaps also future additional engines. By signing the petition these
buyers presumably improved the chances of getting better “service” from Corliss in the
future. Thus, we expect that buyers having a larger number of engines, those more likely
to acquire further engines in the future, or those for whom “uptime” was more important,
would have been more prone to sign. However, and as far as we have been able to
ascertain, these attributes were not correlated with location. The working assumption is
thus that the willingness of buyers of Corliss engines to join in signing the petition (and
hence the probability of appearing in our sample) had little to do with their specific
county location. The one possible exception is Providence, RI, Corliss’ hometown, and
the city with the largest number of listed buyers in the Petition: the close proximity to
Corliss may have induced a larger number of them to sign, and hence we shall regard this
observation as a potential influential outlier.

York and California, have been at liberty to build as many engines as they pleased, of any size they pleased,
to be located wherever they pleased, and to get any price for the same they could...” (Petition, p. 21).

15

Engines built by Corliss himself accounted as said for just about 26% of all
Corliss-type engines deployed by 1870, and hence the second question is to what extent
our list of buyers is representative (once again, in the geographic sense) not just of those
who purchased engines from Corliss, but of all Corliss-type engines built, including
licensees and infringers. We discuss this issue extensively in Section 8 below, and
conclude that the data may indeed suffer from some specific selectivity biases, but either
we can take care of it point wise (as in the case of Providence, RI), or the biases are likely
to work against our hypothesis (as in the case of eastern Pennsylvania), and hence would
not impair the validity of the econometric analysis.
According to the 1880 Census, there were 40,191 steam engines in the US by
1870, displaying a total capacity of 1.2 million HP. The vast majority of them were very
small though, with only 5 to 25 HP. Corliss-type engines, with 180,000 HP (including
infringers) accounted for 15% of total steam power,19 but they were much more powerful
than the run-of-the-mill engines, averaging 100 HP as opposed to a mean HP of 30 for all
steam engines. After the denial of the extension of patents in 1870 there was rapid entry
into the manufacturing of Corliss-type engines, and in fact the Corliss engine became the
dominant design of stationary engines for industry (see Section 12.1). Indeed, by the end
of the century Corliss-type engines still accounted for just 10% of the total number of
engines in the manufacturing sector, but they represented a staggering 46% of the total
horsepower.20
4.2 Data on Water Power
In order to be able to contrast the spread and impact of the Corliss steam engine to
waterpower, we needed data on water wheels at a level of “resolution” similar to that of
the Corliss data. We found that in the Census’ “Reports on Water-Power” for 1880
(Census, 1885), containing a comprehensive listing of sites in the US that operated water
wheels, with highly detailed data for each: river/stream, location (county), kind of
manufacturer, number of mills, HP, etc. (see Appendix 3). Except for a handful, all
19

In New England alone the Corliss engines listed in the Petition amounted to 27,797 HP, which accounted
for 18% of the total steam power in the region, 153,000 HP.

16

Corliss engines listed in the Petition were sold in the North and Mid-Atlantic states,21 and
hence we took from the Census’s Water-Power Report data on the sites located in those
states. The data on these 4,716 sites were entered into spreadsheets, followed by
extensive editing, filtering, consolidation, etc.22 The next stage consisted of aggregating
the data by county, which essentially meant summing up the number of mills per county
and the HP of those mills.23 We also consolidated the textual forms describing the type of
manufacturer, and matched the unified fields so created to the industrial classification
used in the Censuses of Manufacturers of the late 1800’s.24
4.3 Census Data
We complemented the data on steam engines and waterpower with demographic
data and data on manufacturing by county, from the censuses of 1850-1870, as well as
population counts by county for 1880-1900 (see Appendix 4). The census data were taken
from the internet site of the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
(ICPSR), in Ann Arbor, Michigan (see http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/index.html), as
viewed

for

browsing

at

the

site

of

the

University

of

Virginia

Library,

http://fisher.lib.virginia.edu/census/. Aside from population counts, these data comprise
variables on human capital, wealth, taxes, and manufacturing that we deem relevant for
the location of power sources (steam and water). We have also compiled data on the
population of each of the 87 towns and cities where Corliss engines were located, from
1860 through 1910. We use these more specific population data just for descriptive
purposes, and for a preliminary analysis confined to these locations (we could not use
these data for the full-scale analysis since we did not have data for waterpower by
localities, only by counties).
20

See 1899 Census of Manufacturers, p. 255, footnote 5.
To be precise, these include: Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware and Maryland.
22
The data entry and editing process were lengthy and arduous, both because the data had to be transcribed
from a small-print, low-quality copy, and because the way the information is displayed in the original
listing is by no means uniform.
23
We relied for that purpose on “net H.P.” and “utilized H.P. In some 20 entries (for Merrimack, MA and
NH), the figure reported is “Gross H.P.”, which we converted to “net H.P.” using the conversion ratio of
0.73 as suggested on page 37 of the section “Waterpower in Eastern New England”, U.S. Census (1885).
21

17

Summing up, our data comprise, (i) the stock of (a large sample of) buyers of
Corliss steam engines as of 1870,25 and in particular the geographical location of these
buyers and the installed HP, as well as their industrial composition; (ii) the location of all
water-powered sites and their HP as of 1880, and their sectoral composition; (iii)
demographic, human capital and wealth indicators and manufacturing data for 1850,
1860, and 1870, and population counts for every decade 1850 – 1900 (all these variables
are by county, for the 11 North and Mid-Atlantic states); and (iv) population data for the
towns and cities with Corliss engines.

5. A First Look at the Data
5.1 Range of applications
As mentioned above, one of the key characteristics of a GPT is that a wide and
expanding range of sectors adopts it, so that the dynamic interaction between the GPT
and the user sectors has economy-wide repercussions. The steam engine had in the course
of 2 centuries a very wide array of users, primarily in manufacturing, transportation and
mining. The Corliss was as said a stationary engine, and a relatively powerful one at that,
and hence most of its users were in the manufacturing sectors. As already mentioned, we
managed to gather information on the economic activities of 63% of the buyers appearing
in Corliss’ 1869 Petition (representing 73% of the HP), assigned them to 51 “subsectors”, and aggregated them up into 17 two-digit sectors as they appear in the standard
industrial classification of the late 19th century censuses (see Appendix 5).26,27

24

There were over 400 different textual forms for “type of manufacturer” (e.g. from “bleachery” and
“bleaching and dyeing”, to “wheelbarrows” and “wheelwrighting”), which we consolidated into the then
standard 21 industrial sectors.
25
It is really for 1869, but we shall refer to it as 1870, so as to make it fit the decennial pattern of the other
data.
26
The list of sub-sectors does not correspond to any preexisting classification, but rather we largely adopted
the industrial categories that emerged from the data as obtained from the primary sources. That is, if we
found in a city directory that a given firm was engaged in the production of "cotton goods", that is the way
it appears in the list. Beyond that we just did some rather straightforward consolidation, such as lumping
together "Iron" and "Iron Works", "Metal" and "Metal Works", etc.
27
For some of the buyers we knew only that they were engaged in manufacturing, or that they ran a mill.
Since some others were engaged in non-manufacturing, we kept in Appendix 4 the distinction between just
“manufacturing” or “mill” (lumped into “unknown type of manufacturing”), and those for which we know
nothing (“classification not available”).

18

Appendix 5 and Table 1 make it clear that the Corliss engine was indeed used in a
very wide range of applications, covering most of the spectrum of productive activities
that required a central power source at the time.28 One important further use of the Corliss
engine not listed in the Petition (since it happened after 1869) and hence not reflected in
the tables was in urban water systems. Corliss built a large pumping engine in 1878 for
the Pawtucket, Rhode Island waterworks system, which became a model and landmark
for efficiency, scale and fuel savings. By the turn of the century, this type of engine had
become standard in urban waterworks systems (see Hunter, p. 299), thus directly
impacting the process of urbanization of the US.
Table 2 compares the distribution of Corliss engines, by sectors, to that of water
power and of steam power in general (the latter inclusive of the Corliss, but recall that
Corliss engines constituted just 15% of total steam power by 1870). The differences are
quite striking: about 70% of Corliss engines’ HP was deployed in Textiles and in Primary
Metals, as opposed to just 18% of waterpower, and 25% of steam power generally. At the
other end, Food & Kindred Products and Lumber & Wood Products accounted for 68%
of waterpower and 51% of steam power, but just for 4% of the Corliss engines’ HP.29 To
this we should add Machinery, which was the third largest user of Corliss engines in
manufacturing (with 5.6% of HP), but ranked only 6th for waterpower (2%), and 5th for
steam power (4.8%). Notice that the distributions of steam power and of waterpower
across sectors are much more similar to each other than any of them is to the distribution
of the Corliss. Thus, as of 1870 it was not so much steam per se that was different from
water in terms of industrial composition (and similarly in terms of scale and geography);

28

Recall though that this constitutes only a partial picture of the range of applications of Corliss engines,
both because we managed to classify only 63% of the buyers appearing in the petition, and because these
represent only about 26% of Corliss engines manufactured up to 1869, including licensees and infringers
(i.e. the buyers classified account for just about 15% of all Corliss engines). Thus, ours almost certainly
understates the actual range and variety of applications.
29
Some of these differences are linked to geography: if we restrict ourselves to the North and Mid Atlantic
States (those where Corliss Engines were sold), then the share of waterpower deployed in Textiles and
Primary Metals rises to 27.5% (from 18% nationwide), whereas the share of Food & Kindred and Lumber
& Wood drops to 48% (from 68% nationwide). Still, the remaining differences are very large.

19

rather, it was the new type of steam engines, starting with the Corliss, that would make
the difference.
Textiles, Primary Metals, and Machinery were undoubtedly key sectors propelling
the process of industrialization of the late 19th century, with Primary Metals supplying
critical inputs both to manufacturing at large and to the rapidly expanding railroad system
(see Section 11.1 below). By contrast, Food & Kindred Products and Lumber & Wood
were two of the more traditional, technologically laggard industries, and consisted mostly
of innumerable small mills that served primarily local needs. The Corliss was thus
squarely positioned at the forefront of the incipient process of industrialization as of
1870, and in fact it anticipated later shifts in the locus of power deployment:
Sectors

% of Corliss
HP - 1870

1870

Textile Products and Primary
Metals

69.1

24.7

30.2

34.1

34.0

Food & Kindred and Lumber &
Wood

4.1

51.1

36.9

35.3

32.6

% of Steam Power
1890
1900

1910

Thus, while Textile Products and Primary Metal accounted for just 25% of total steam
power in 1870, their share grew to 34% by the turn of the century, and conversely, the
share of the “traditional” sectors declined steeply from over a half to about 1/3.

5.2 The geographic distribution of Corliss engines: is the Petition list a
representative sample?
The 257 Corliss buyers listed in the Petition were spread across 87 different
locations (towns, cities), belonging to 48 counties, in 14 states (see Appendix 6). The most
significant feature of the localities with Corliss engines was that they were overwhelmingly
urban (i.e. had populations of at least 2,500 people): 95% of the 87 localities with Corlissdriven establishments were urban, whereas for the US as a whole only 26% of towns were
urban. Moreover, Corliss engines were concentrated in very large urban centers: as
Appendix 6 reveals, the average population size of the five cities with the largest share of

20

Corliss HP was of 334,797, compared to an average population of 42,156 for all of the 87
adopting localities.30 These 5 cities (Providence, Philadelphia, Boston, Pittsburgh and New
York) commanded 44% of the total HP of Corliss engines, and 37% of the buyers.
Table 3 shows the distribution of Corliss engines and of watermills across states,
within the North and Mid Atlantic region. Corliss engines were much more geographically
concentrated: the 3 top states, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Rhode Island accounted for
78% of Corliss HP, whereas the three top states in terms of waterpower, New York,
Massachusetts and Pennsylvania accounted for 56% of the region’s water HP. Notice that
the most significant difference between the two power sources is Rhode Island, which
accounts for 23.3% of Corliss’ HP, but just a trifle 1.4% of water power. As it turns out,
both are in a sense outliers: On the one hand, it is quite likely that the fact that George
Corliss resided in Providence, RI, contributed to the rapid adoption of Corliss engines
there, and that this close proximity may also have made it easier to contact buyers and to
persuade them to sign the Petition (Providence had the largest number of buyers in our
data, 34, and the most HP). On the other hand, and as revealed in the regressions below,
waterpower clearly failed to take hold in Rhode Island, relative to other states in the region.
Thus, and mindful of the possibility that it might be an influential outlier, we shall conduct
the econometric analysis with and without the observation for Providence.

If Providence may overstate the deployment of Corliss engines in that region, we
have some fragmentary evidence indicating that our data may understate the adoption of
Corliss-type engines in Pennsylvania, and more specifically in locations where iron and
steel were thriving at the time. Thus, we know from the Petition that one of Corliss’
principal licensees, Miller & Allen, was located in Chester, Pennsylvania, and built 103
Corliss-type engines in the course of the 1860s (these are not included in our data). We
do not have specific information on those who purchased engines from Miller & Allen,
but we know quite a bit about Chester as a manufacturing center at the time. Chester was
expanding extremely rapidly in the decades of the 1860s and 1870s, when its population
more than tripled (from 4,600 in 1860, to 15,000 in 1880). Its location, immediately

30

These figures are for 1860, which is a more natural reference point, given that we are talking about
Corliss engines that were sold over the period 1850-69.

21

adjacent to Philadelphia, the largest manufacturing center in the country, and on
navigable waterways that connected it to the iron works of eastern Pennsylvania, was
ideal for shipbuilding. By 1870 Chester had the largest shipyards in the US as well as a
diversity of manufacturing firms, including 25 textile mills, the large Eddystone Print
Works (see V. Clark, II, 146-7), and a large number of iron-using firms. Miller & Allen’s
establishment, in addition to its manufacture of steam engines, also built boilers, shafting,
gearing, and rolling mill machinery (see Corliss’ Petition, p. 35).
Some further evidence from Conshohocken, PA, strengthens the presumption that
our data may fall far short in the count of Corliss engines in Pennsylvania. The Wood
enterprises, which had moved to Conshohocken in 1832, included in the 1850s the
Schuylkill Iron Works and the Conshohocken Rolling Mill, and came to include also, and
intriguingly, the Corliss Iron Works, which was built in 1864 and was eventually
incorporated as the J. Wood & Brothers Company in 1886.31 It is, at the least, reasonable
to suppose that Corliss had some sort of close business connections of a metallurgical
nature with the Wood family, who may have manufactured Corliss-type engines.
Thus, it is quite likely that a large portion of the iron and steel industry in eastern
Pennsylvania, which had previously drawn their power from the water flow off the
eastern slopes of the Allegheny mountains, acquired their first steam engines, if not from
Corliss himself, then from Corliss licensees or perhaps from infringers in southeastern
Pennsylvania. This happened at a crucial time, when the region made its transition from
waterpower to steam engines, rolling mills, and blast furnaces fed by anthracite coal.32
Our data, confined to the buyers listed in the Petition, may therefore substantially
understate the adoption of Corliss-type engines in that region. However, the region
experienced at the time very rapid population growth, and therefore the fact that our sample
may undercount the number of Corliss engines deployed there would militate against our
hypothesis and hence would not affect the validity of our findings. Still, we should be
mindful all along of the data limitations (and possible biases) imposed by the exclusive
reliance on the Corliss engines listed in the Petition.

31

The information about Wood draws upon archival records of the Hagley Library, Wilmington, Delaware
and Lesley (1859).
32
See Chandler (1972), for the critical role played by rolling mills powered by steam in Pennsylvania,
during the thrust towards industrialization in the second half of the 19th century.

22

6. Steam, water and geography: an historical perspective
In 1829, a full 60 years after James Watt took out his critical patent on the
improved steam engine, Zachariah Allen, of Providence, R.I., was still able to paint a
bucolic image of American manufacturing, an image that involved no mention of the
steam engine. American manufacturing activities, he pointed out, “are all carried on in
little hamlets, which often appear to spring up in the bosom of some forest, gathering
around the water fall which serves to turn the mill wheel” (Allen, 1829, p. 352). The
McLane Report of 1832, with extensive quantitative data (although still incomplete in its
coverage), described a manufacturing scene that was powered almost entirely by water. If
one excludes the area around Pittsburg, where there was an abundance of readily
accessible coal, no more than 4 of the 249 firms in America that had a capitalization of
over $50,000 were dependent for their power on steam engines. In fact, outside of the
Pittsburg area, as Chandler has pointed out, “...more firms reported the use of wind and
mule power than steam” (Chandler, 1977, pp. 61-2).
The limited intrusion of the steam engine into the American manufacturing scene
during the following decade may be readily calibrated by an examination of the 1838
Treasury survey of steam engines (U.S. Congress, 1838). According to this report, nearly
60% of all power generated by steam was accounted for by steamboat engines, and a
further 5% or so by railroad locomotives. Thus, only about one-third of all power
generated by steam engines in 1838 was accounted for by manufacturing; this amounted
to just 36,100 horsepower, which constituted a trifling 5% of total power used in
manufacturing (see Figures 1 - 3). Drawing upon the data of the 1838 Report, Peter
Temin concludes that “...steam-engine construction in 1838 was a small-scale business
carried on for a predominantly local market,” a conclusion that would appear to be
reinforced by the fact that the largest single category of users of stationary steam engines
in 1838 was sawmills (Temin, 1966, p. 190). The data show, surprisingly at first glance,
that Louisiana was a heavy user of stationary steam engines in 1838. This prominence
was due to the absence of waterpower sites in southern Louisiana, and the urgency of
crushing the sugar cane immediately after it had been cut.
23

Figure 1 shows the tremendous growth of power deployed in manufacturing for
the USA as a whole during the second half of the 19th century; in fact, power use
increased at a staggering average annual rate of 4.7% throughout those 50 years. This of
course mirrors the rapid growth that took place in manufacturing itself, and in fact
constitutes a lower bound for it, since the efficiency in the use of power also increased
during that period. The figure also makes it clear that it was indeed steam power that led
the growth spur throughout that period: starting from a bare 5% of total power in 1838, it
overtook water by the late 1860s, and reached a peak of over 80% by the turn of the
century, when electricity started to diffuse rapidly. Less noticeable in the figure (because
of the scale) but not less important, water power kept increasing in absolute terms up to
1910, and in fact total water hp deployed in manufacturing was twice as much in 1900 as
in 1850.
The picture that emerges is thus of a rapidly advancing power technology, the
steam engine, that made possible the growth of manufacturing (and hence of the economy
as a whole) during the second half of the 19th century, by providing it with an increasing
fraction of its power needs. The Corliss engine entered the scene by mid century, and our
data cover roughly the two decades 1850-70, which as Figure 1 reveals was the period of
intense competition between the two power sources. In the course of that period the
Corliss became the dominant design for large, stationary steam engines in manufacturing,
certainly after the expiration of his patents in 1870. This then is the backdrop of our study:
the takeoff of industrialization in the USA, which is inextricably linked with
urbanization, as steam and water fiercely compete for primacy in the process.
The first thing that needs to be said about the limitations of waterpower is that its
location and kinetic potential were largely (but not entirely) fixed by geology and
hydrology. It is a familiar part of the story of nineteenth century American industrial
development, that the westward movement of a growing population found itself in terrain
where waterpower locations were far less abundant than they were east of the
Appalachians. To this extent the westward movement after the Civil War rendered an

24

increasing reliance on steam, at the time the only available alternative, quite unavoidable.
That was not quite the case in the north Atlantic states: as Figure 2 reveals, the total
horsepower generated from water in New England continued to increase right into the
early twentieth century through a combination of measures, including the introduction of
new and improved turbines, but also through exploitation of marginal power sites and
through improvements in dam engineering.33 Thus, in New England steam overtook
water as the dominant power source only in the mid 1880s, whereas in the rest of the US
that happened more than two decades earlier (see figure 3).
Several factors played a role in the century-old contest between steam and water
power: exogenous movements (and growth) of population, the availability of water sites
and the rather complex issue of water rights (Horwitz, 1977, pp. 34-40). advances both
in the technology of water power and of steam engines, transport costs (for fuel), etc. But
the more subtle part of the story of the shift to steam is associated with the growth of
cities and with the advantages of the urban concentration of manufacturing industries (see
Krugman, 1991).34,35 As the economic benefits of urban agglomeration increased during
the second half of the 19th century, and as the transportation network (primarily the
railroads) widely expanded in scope and density, static cost comparisons between steam
and waterpower became progressively less germane to decision making with respect to
choice of prime mover.36 Rather, location became increasingly compelling: waterpower
was typically not available in urban locations and, for the most part, it was not available
on the scale that was required. Moreover, the Corliss engine eventually made steam
power available on terms that compared favorably not only with steam engines of other
designs, but also with waterpower even in locations where such power was plentiful.

33

In fact, total water hp in New England doubled since the early 1870s to 1910.
As Sokoloff (1988) has convincingly demonstrated through the use of patent records, inventive activity
in the first half of the 19th century was closely related to urbanization and the associated growth of markets.
35
Urbanization was already proceeding rapidly in the years preceding the Civil War. In 1820 there were
only 12 cities in the US with a population in excess of 10,000, and only 2 whose numbers exceeded
100,000. In 1860 there were already 8 cities with over 100,000, and the population of New York City
exceeded 1 million.
36
In this sense, much of the discussion in the historical literature, focusing on the continued availability of
certain waterpower sites, and the comparative costs of waterpower vs. steam, is of limited relevance (see
e.g. Atack, 1979, and Atack et al 1980).
34

25

The main hypothesis: removing the locational constraint
As already suggested, one of the key differences between water and steam power
was of course the degree of flexibility in the choice of location. The use of water required
that factories be located next to sufficiently copious streams having the “right” surrounding
topography so that water wheels could be placed and provide the power requirements.
However, it is clear that the optimal choice of location involves a variety of considerations
other than the availability of appropriate streams, such as proximity to markets,
transportation facilities (e.g. rail, ports), availability of labor, skills, capital, etc. The use of
waterpower implied then a constraint on the effective geographic choice set, its stringency
depending on the degree of coincidence between the availability of water and of the other
factors. It follows that the replacement of water by steam meant at first the removal of
such constraint, but in order to realize the benefits from the newly expanded choice set,
firms had to engage in complementary activities: first and foremost their actual relocation,
changes in the mix of inputs, in transport modes, etc. associated with the new locations, the
(re)design of factories that would take advantage of the specific characteristics of the steam
engine as prime mover (as opposed to waterwheels), etc.
We contend that the innovations that George Corliss introduced contributed greatly
to tilting the balance away from waterpower and in favor of steam, particularly in the north
Atlantic states.37 The adoption of steam meant the release of the geographical constraint,
which allowed the optimal (re)location of factories, and the implementation of
concomitant changes that were called for by the new locations and type of prime mover.
In so doing the Corliss engine fostered the growth of the big industrial urban centers,
which characterized the closing decades of the 19th century, thus contributing to and
enabling the reaping of the benefits from agglomeration economies, which were in turn
an important contributor to the growth of the economy. Of course, the feedback loop
from agglomeration to further industrialization meant increased demand for steam
engines, which in turn promoted further improvements in them.

26

The interesting empirical questions then have to do with the way in which the
historical contest between water and steam played out in the context of the intertwined
processes of industrialization and urbanization. In particular, how can we ascertain the
stringency of the locational constraint imposed by the reliance on waterpower? To what
extent did each of the competing power modes foster or hinder urbanization? Notice that
it is one thing to say that waterpower required a particular occurrence of topography and
climate, and quite another to postulate that such occurrence was necessarily at odds with
the location that would have been preferred otherwise by the using industries. In other
words, the stringency of the locational constraint needs to be established empirically.
Second, given the locations chosen by the industries using each type of power, they could
have in principle attracted further population and industrial activity to the proximity of
the manufacturing sites. In other words, it is an open question the extent to which the
existing locations of water and steam at a point in time were propitious for further
population and industrial growth, and hence for the generation of agglomeration
economies around those locations.
We intend to address these questions by pivoting on the deployment of Corliss
engines and of watermills in the Northeast as of 1870,38 and looking forward and
backwards in time: first, we estimate a location (or “adoption”) equation of Corliss
engines and of watermills as of 1870 (by county), as a function of population, physical
and human capital and other variables from the 1850 census. Second, we estimate a
model of population growth by county from 1870 onwards (up to 1900), as a function of
the stock of Corliss engines, watermills, and control variables taken from the 1870
census. The “model” is thus as follows:

37

Once again, west of the Appalachians water sources were much less abundant, and hence the direct cost
advantages of steam were an overriding consideration. Thus, the closest contest between water and steam
took place in the North and mid Atlantic states.
38
As already mentioned, the data for watermills come from the 1880 census (there are no detailed data for
1870), whereas that for Corliss engines come from the 1869 petition, and hence the two sets of equations
are not exactly aligned time wise. We proceed on the assumption that in the intervening decade (18701880) the distribution of watermills across counties within the North and Mid atlantic states change little .
We know from Fenichel (1966) that the total HP of watermills in New England grew just by 17% during
that decade (from 362 thousand in 1870 to 423 in 1880), and in the Middle Atlantic states it declined
slightly (from 376 to 357); this in contrast with the rapid growth of steam, which more than doubled in
those regions.

27

1850 - Census Variables: Population, physical and human,
capital, etc.
1860
Location
1870 - Stock of Corliss Engines and of Water Mills (1880)
Census Variables
1880
Population
Growth

1890 Population
1900 Population

7. The location of Corliss engines and of watermills
We now turn to the issue of what determined the location of Corliss engines on the
one hand, and of watermills on the other, in order to assess the stringency of the locational
constraint imposed by the geographic requirements of waterpower. The leading hypothesis
is that, freed of such constraints, the Corliss engine gravitated towards locations that
already had clear advantages for industry, particularly for advanced, large-scale
manufacturing, in terms of availability of inputs and skills, proximity to markets, etc. On
the other hand, if indeed those constraints were binding, water-powered mills could not.
We regard population size as the leading indicator for the existence of locational
characteristics propitious for the development of advanced, large-scale industry: larger
urban centers presumably offered a wider range of inputs and skills, constituted in and of
themselves larger markets and had better access to wider markets due to the availability of
transportation facilities, etc. Beyond population, we also use as regressors other indicators
that may capture the availability of inputs and skills:39 capital invested in manufacturing,
employment in manufacturing, the number of books in public libraries, and the number of
public libraries, all of these in per capita terms.
We ran two sets of regressions: one having as the dependent variable the number of
Corliss buyers by county as of 1870, the other the number of watermills, each as a function

28

of population, capital or employment in manufacturing per capita, books in public libraries
per capita (all of these from the 1850 census), and state dummies. The distribution of
Corliss buyers across counties is very skewed, with a large mass at zero:
Number of Corliss
buyers per county
0
1
2
3
4
5-9
10 - 19
20 +
Total

Number of
counties
200
13
11
5
3
3
3
4
242

% of counties
82.6%
5.4%
4.6%
2.1%
1.2%
1.2%
1.2%
1.7%
100.0%

The distribution of watermills is also skewed, with 25% of the counties having none. Both
constitute typical count data, and hence OLS is not appropriate; thus, we use the Poisson
and the Negative Binomial models to estimate both set of equations.
Table 4 shows the results for the various specifications (for completeness we also
report the OLS). The key finding, highly significant and robust across all specifications, is
that population strongly impacts the location of the Corliss, but not at all the geographic
distribution of waterpower. That is, counties with larger populations attracted Corlissdriven plants, whereas population size had no impact whatsoever on the location of
watermills. Similarly, counties that had by 1850 relatively more capital and/or more
employment in manufacturing (per capita) also drew larger numbers of Corliss engines, as
did counties with more books and/or more libraries. These effects are either not significant
for watermills, or much smaller than for the Corliss. The contrast between Corliss engines
and watermills in terms of the significance of these variables is sharper for the Negative
Binomial than for the Poisson, quite likely because the latter suffers from overdispersion.

39

Obviously, we were constrained in the choice of regressors by the set of variables available from the 1850
Census (see Appendix 3).

29

For the sake of brevity we have suppressed in Table 4 the estimates for the state
dummies; there is however one that is of interest, and that is the coefficient for Rhode
Island, the hometown of Corliss.40 While positive, this coefficient is barely significant in
most specifications for the Corliss equation;41 on the other hand, in quite a few of the
watermills equations the Rhode Island dummy comes out negative, large and significant.
Thus, the fact that Rhode Island attracted a relatively large number of Corliss engines and
few watermills had to do more with that state apparently not being suitable for waterpower
rather than to the fact that George Corliss was building engines there.
For the Corliss equation the right hand variables from the 1850 Census are clearly
exogenous: Corliss began to build his steam engines in the late 1840s, and most of them
were sold in the 1860s. For watermills that is not quite the case: presumably a large
proportion of the watermills (unfortunately unknown to us) in operation at the time of the
1880 survey were already in place by 1850. Thus, the waterpower equations may suffer
from simultaneity bias, in that counties that for reasons unaccounted for in the model had
attracted more watermills may have also drawn in a larger population, and perhaps also
more physical and human capital. However, notice that endogeneity would in this case bias
the estimates upwards, blunting the difference of the effect of the regressors on the Corliss
versus watermills, that is, simultaneity biases would militate against our hypothesis. Thus,
the real differences may be even more pronounced than what our results indicate, and
hence the presence of endogeneity in the watermills equations can only strengthen the
conclusions.

8. Population growth from 1870 onwards
The second part of the interplay between power modes and population looks
forward in time, the question being: to what extent did the presence of Corliss engines on
the one hand, and of watermills on the other, foster population growth across different
locations? At first we estimate for that purpose simple OLS equations with the rate of
40

The other consistent finding is the very large negative coefficient for Maine in the Corliss equations, for
which we do not have a convincing rationale.
41
It is large and significant only in the OLS equations, but these are the least plausible specifications; the
base state is New York.

30

post-1870 population growth by county as the dependent variable, the number of Corliss
buyers and of watermills as regressors, as well as a series of control variables from the
1870 Census, and state dummies. The results are shown in Table 5a: the population of
counties with relatively many Corliss-driven establishments as of 1870 grew indeed
faster in the following 2-3 decades, whereas counties with relatively many watermills
grew at a slower pace. This key finding is both significant and very robust.42 The actual
size of these effects is not very large, and yet it makes a difference over the long haul: the
population of counties with one standard deviation more watermills than the average (133
versus 66) grew at an annual rate 2/10 of 1 percent slower; cumulated over 2 – 3 decades
that is a non trivial amount. At the upper tail the effect is very substantial: counties with
at least 10 Corliss-driven establishments (there were 7 such counties) grew at an annual
rate 0.5-1% higher than counties with none.
The industrial composition of watermills versus that of the Corliss may have had
something to do with the differential impact on population growth: if we split the number
of watermills per county into two groups, one consisting of the top four sectors where the
Corliss was deployed (Textiles, Primary Metals, Non-manufacturing and Machinery,
which accounted for 81% of the HP of Corliss engines), and another group with all the
rest, the results are as follows: for watermills in those 4 sectors the coefficient is
insignificant, whereas for the others it remains negative, significant and of similar size as
in the original regressions with all watermills in there. That is, locations with watermills
that mimicked the industrial composition of the Corliss at least did not experience a
subsequent decline in their population, whereas counties with watermills in more
traditional sectors did.
The estimates for the “controls” are also of interest. Previous population growth
(either 1850-70 or 1860-70) is meant to capture underlying trends by county that just
persist into the future, and hence constitutes an important overall proxy for more
fundamental processes that are missing in the equation. The coefficients are large and
42

The only qualification is that the inclusion of the 1870 population size as a regressor (to test for
convergence) weakens the significance of the Corliss coefficient, but that is hardly surprising, given the

31

highly significant in all specifications, suggesting that indeed there are underlying
differences in the growth potential of counties that persist over the long run. The other
controls constitute a snapshot of counties as of 1870:43 Capital invested in manufacturing
per establishment comes out positive and highly significant, i.e. counties with more
capital-intensive industries attracted more population. This is an important control, in that
the effect of the Corliss goes beyond that of just capital intensity. The effect of taxes is
intuitively appealing: state taxes had a negative impact, but its size and significance
obviously drops as we include state dummies;44 on the other hand county taxes seem to
foster population growth, and the effect remains borderline significant in many
specifications. We interpret county taxes as indicative of the provision of local public
goods and hence having the potential to attract population, whereas higher state taxes
represent, from the point of view of individual counties, just a higher burden that does not
necessarily translate into more or better public goods. Last but not least, the R2s are
reassuringly large, implying that the effects captured in the model are first order in
accounting for differential population growth over the long run.
There remains though the concern that the number of Corliss buyers per county
may still suffer from endogeneity, in that some underlying long term phenomena not
properly accounted for by the controls (even not by pre-1870 population growth) brought
about both more adopters of Corliss steam engines prior to 1870, and faster population
growth afterwards. We thus resort to IV estimation, using as instrument for the number of
Corliss the predicted values from the “adoption” equations (see Table 4), i.e. from the
count regressions of number of Corliss buyers per county on county variables as of 1850.
The time gap between these 1850 level variables and population growth post-1870 makes
it more likely that the predicted values thus computed would be truly exogenous, and
hence constitutes a legitimate instrument. Table 5b presents the results, for different
specifications (i.e. taking the predicted values from the negative binomial, the Poisson
high collinearity between the two.
43
We tried many other such controls, including wages in manufacturing, different measures of wealth, etc.
However, strong multicollinearity did not allow for precise estimation, and hence we had to make judgment
calls as to which to include.

32

and the LS equations, and using in some population growth for 1860-70 and in others for
1850-70). Reassuringly, the coefficient of Corliss buyers remains basically unchanged
(vis a vis the OLS results in Table 5a), but its significance declines.45 Thus, even though
we obtain a less precise estimate, it is quite clear that the effect is there and the result is
robust: counties that adopted a larger number of Corliss engines exhibited faster growth
in the following decades.
These results support then the hypothesized role of the Corliss in the dynamic
interaction between industrialization and urbanization. Freed of the locational constraints
of waterpower, manufacturing enterprises driven by steam engines could choose to locate
“optimally”, and hence were attracted to areas where, inter alia, they could take
advantage of agglomeration economies. The presence of Corliss-driven manufacturers
both contributed to these agglomeration effects, and probably also signaled that more was
coming: Corliss engines were after all “trend setters” for industry, both in that they were
deployed in advanced sectors, and in that they were typically of a larger scale. In time,
locations

with

relatively many Corliss-driven establishments attracted further

manufacturers and hence also fostered population growth. By contrast, watermills were
no part of such positive loop: they located in sparsely populated areas to begin with, and
failed to attract further economic activity and hence further population to those areas. In
fact, the population in locations that had relatively many watermills actually declined
(recall the negative sign of the coefficients for watermills in Tables 5a and 5b),
gravitating instead towards the urban centers where steam took hold. To insist, this latter
result is far from obvious: it was not a priori clear that the topographical requisites (and
hence geographical constraints) of waterpower would also impair the clustering of
industry and hence of urban centers in those sites.
It is interesting to note that many watermills had “auxiliary steam power”, which
was used both to add to capacity and to run the mills at times when waterpower was
44

State taxes do vary across counties within states (since these are computed as per capita tax revenues),
but nevertheless the variation within states is too small to allow for precise estimation, and hence we
excluded this variable in all specifications where state dummies appear.

33

unavailable due to weather conditions. The 1880 Census had data on auxiliary steam
power just for 62 out of the 244 counties of the North and Mid Atlantic States;46 still, the
total steam power reported there amounted to 64,965 HP, significantly more than the
46,339 HP of the Corliss engines listed in the Petition. Auxiliary steam power in the New
England states alone amounted to 43,086 HP, which constituted 28% of the total steam
power in the region, versus 27,797 HP of Corliss engines. Thus, waterpower did attract
steam power, in what could have been the beginning of a positive loop (involving the
further growth of population in those locations, etc.). However, this auxiliary steam
power was just that, “auxiliary”, and did not offset the decisive advantage that steam held
by comparison with water, namely the freedom to locate optimally.

9. Enabling Scale, and Rolling on…
As already mentioned, Corliss engines were much more powerful than the vast
majority of steam engines at the time, and similarly in comparison to water wheels. Table
6 shows the average HP of mills run with waterpower versus the average HP of users of
Corliss engines:47 The scale of the latter was over 4 times larger on average than that of
establishments relying on waterpower, and only in one sector, Pulp & Paper, waterpowered mills were slightly larger than their counterpart Corliss users. Notice also that
the average HP of Corliss users displays a large variance across sectors (at the extreme,
the scale in Primary Metals is almost 9 times as large as in Printing). However, and as
Table 1 reveals, there were very few Corliss users in the small-scale sectors (except for
Machinery): each of the sectors with an average scale of less than 120 HP account for no
more that 1.7% of the total HP of Corliss engines, and then there is a big jump between
the top of these small sectors (Furniture, with an average HP of 120), and the next one,
Apparel with 228. In other words, 88% of the total HP of Corliss engines were deployed
in sectors that averaged anywhere between 200 and 300 HP per establishment, which

45

In particular, the t-values are lower when using as control 1850-70 (rather than 1860-70) population
growth; it is not clear why that it so.
46
We have not made use so far of these data because the coverage, as indicated, is not comprehensive, and
we don’t know what determined the reporting for some but not for other locations.
47
Some of the mills operating water wheels had also auxiliary steam power and hence their average HP
may be slightly understated, and likewise, some of the buyers of Corliss engines had also other types of
engines in the same establishment.

34

presumably meant at least 100 HP per engine, some 5 times larger than the typical
watermill or non-Corliss steam engine.
The large scale of establishments using Corliss engines in Metallurgy and in
Textiles is consistent with other supporting evidence.48 Furthermore, it relates to one of
the hypothesized mechanisms by which innovation complementarities played out in the
case of the Corliss engine, further enhancing the GPT nature of steam engines. We
conjecture that the introduction of the Corliss engine was an important factor enabling the
setting up of large-scale factories, and hence the realization of scale economies in
production and the advent of mass production, one of the distinctive features of
industrialization in the closing decades of the 19th century (see Chandler, 1977).
The fact that the Corliss may have played such an enabling role does not imply
that waterpower suffered from inherent technological or topographical limitations that
prevented it from running large-scale plants. True, watermills were on average of a much
more modest scale than plants running on Corliss engines, and moreover, there were very
few of truly large size: out of almost 16,000 mills that ran on water in 1880, only 90
deployed more than 500 HP on average (just over one half of one percent), and an
additional 859 mills had between 100 and 500 HP. Still, the fact that we do find some
watermills even with 1,000 HP and more clearly means that there were no visible
absolute constraints on scale for this power source. Moreover, what we see in the data is
an equilibrium distribution of scale, both between water and steam, and within
waterpower – obviously we do not know what would have been the scale of watermills
had steam not taken its predominant place in the upper tail of HP.
As with many other instances whereby two technologies compete, we do not need
to resort to the (clearly untenable) argument that waterpower had inherent scale
limitations in order to assert the enabling role of Corliss engines: it is the conjunction of
purely technological advantages and of other complementary economic factors that

35

makes one technology play that role and not the other. We conjecture that freedom of
location was, once again, the critical supporting factor: large-scale production required
not just the technical ability to operate large plants, but also easy access to markets, both
for inputs and for outputs. There were sites that could deliver large amounts of
waterpower, but the fact is that too few were located near transportation hubs and
population centers. Large-scale production may have been technologically and
topographically feasible with waterpower, but not economically viable.
The booming textile industry of Fall River, Massachusetts, from the 1860s through
the end of the 19th century exemplifies the twin processes of relocation and realization of
scale economies. The Corliss engine was hardly the only factor responsible for the
development of Fall River, but it undoubtedly contributed to it a great deal (see Smith,
1944, pp. 45 and 47).49 Yonekawa (1987) discusses the factors underlying the burst in the
formation of cotton spinning factories during the decades of 1870-1890, in vastly different
locations: Oldham (England), Fall River (Massachusetts), and Bombay (India), and then
also in Japan. Regarding Fall River, he writes:
“The invention by George Corliss in 1848 of a regulator allowing more
accurate control of the power, and hence the speed, of the machinery was
important in allowing the establishment of bigger and more powerful steam
engines. This in turn led to larger mills, with 30,000 spindles not being
uncommon.” … “The installation of large steam engines made it possible to
build higher capacity mills, with some 37,000 spindles and 900 looms, such as
Union Mills; organized in 1859, Union Mills was one of the earliest mills to
utilize steam power on this scale.” (Union Mills were located in Fall River)
However, it is the case of rolling mills, to which we now turn, that best
captures the pivotal role of the Corliss, both in enabling scale per se, and in playing
out the other technological advantages of the engine, particularly the ability to
manage drastic fluctuations in power requirements.
48

On metallurgy, see below the discussion on rolling mills; on textiles, we obtained information on the
number of employees of 12 textile firms (out of the 60 that purchased Corliss engines): 10 of them had
1000 employees or more, one had 630, and one had between 250 and 500 employees.
49
Steam provided just 25% of the power of textile mills in the US in 1870 and 44% in 1880; however, by
1875 steam had already accounted for 93% of the power for textile mills in Fall River. Moreover, Smith
(1944) notes that in 1875 there were 81 steam engines in operation in Fall River, generating 27,992 HP,
which makes for an average of 345 HP per engine, certainly a large figure for the time.

36

Iron, steel, and rails: the role of the Corliss
The operation of rolling mills, a key technology in the iron and steel industry as
well as in other metallurgical industries, acquired by mid-century a critical place in the
industrialization of America, particularly with the rapid expansion of the railroads. The
Corliss engine came to play a pivotal role in the growth of rolling mills, both in that it
allowed for a much larger scale of operations, and in that the engine’s unique facility in
responding to the specific (and, in the case of rolling mills, extreme) requirements of the
industrial user, proved to be a decisive advantage. The enabling role of the Corliss for
rolling mills, and through them its role in the building of railroads, constituted an
important pathway along which innovational complementarities stemming from it played
out.
The making of wrought iron in the first half of the nineteenth century had been
reshaped by the technologies of puddling furnaces and rolling mills. Puddling allowed the
introduction of mineral fuels in converting pig iron into wrought iron, and the
introduction of rolling offered a mechanical substitute for hugely labor-intensive
hammering at the forge in converting the wrought iron into certain desired shapes. By
1856 fully 95% of all wrought iron was made in rolling mills.50 As early as 1849 there
were no less than 56 rolling mills in eastern Pennsylvania exploiting the rich anthracite
deposits of the region, as well as 23 in western Pennsylvania. All but one of the western
Pennsylvania rolling mills employed steam power by 1849, whereas less than half in the
eastern part of the state did so (Temin, 1964, p. 108).
The new metallurgical technologies enabled a huge expansion of the industry’s
raw material base and the attainment of higher productivity levels, but they usually led
also to an expansion in the optimal scale of plant (the dependence of the earlier
technology upon the use of charcoal had effectively imposed rigid upper limits to the size
of plants). As the following table reveals, the overall trend toward larger scale was

50

Temin, 1964, p. 101. Chapter 5 of Temin’s book provides a useful overview of the economics of the
rolling mill in the nineteenth century.

37

persistent and was vastly intensified with the introduction of the Bessemer process, with
its huge fixed cost requirements, shortly after the end of the Civil War:

Average Size of Steel Works and Rolling Mills
1869-1899
Census

Capital

Census-Year

No. of Wage

Year

(thousand $)

Product (tons)

Earners

1869

156

3,000

119

1879

267

7,000

220

1889

661

14,000

332

1899
967
23,000
412
Source: U.S. Census of Manufactures, 1914, Abstract, pp. 640641; Appendix C, Table C.8. As reproduced in Temin, 1964, p.
166.
Indeed the shift from iron to steel after the Civil War (by use of the Bessemer
converter), and the construction of the nation’s railway system, constituted one of the
great transforming economic events of 19th century America. To cite only one narrow
measure of the impact of this transition on the operation of the railroad system itself, steel
rails had an expected life more than ten times as great as rails made of iron, which they
replaced (Fishlow, 1966, p. 639). There is no doubt that the dramatic reduction in
overland transportation costs associated with railroads was one of the critical factors that
made the twin processes of industrialization and urbanization feasible, and the railroad
rolling mills (rail mills) were a central part of this transformation.51
Although rolling mill practices had experienced considerable improvement before
the introduction of Bessemer steel, the voracious demands of the railroads, post
Bessemer, led to a great expansion of rolling mill output, along with a huge growth in the
51

An important improvement in rail mill practice that came to distinguish American practice from that in
Britain, was the invention of the three-high mill by John Fritz, at the Cambria Works, in 1857. “Within a
few years these mills were common throughout the country. They saved time and labor, particularly in the
manufacture of railway iron, by enabling the rails to be passed through the rolls in both directions, instead
of passing in only one direction as in the two-high mills still used in England...The first American
Bessemer rails produced commercially were rolled in 1867 by the Cambria Works. As steel rail
manufacturing developed, special mills of a heavier type were designed to deal with the new metal.” (V.
Clark, 1929, II, p. 79).

38

size of individual rolling mills. However, the technical problems involved in the
enlargement of rolling mill capabilities were formidable. The rolling of iron and steel
constituted one of the most difficult of industrial activities in terms of the demands that it
imposed on steam engines. Back in 1838 the 26 rolling mills reported in the US had an
average of 93 horsepower (Hunter, 1985, p. 83). By 1860, mills that rolled rails were
already far larger than other rolling mills, and the largest of the rolling mills were steampowered. By 1870 railroad rolling mill engines as large as 600 horsepower were being
utilized, but they required huge and costly gearing (Hunter, 1979, p. 438).
A key difficulty in rolling mills was that these huge engines were being called
upon to make drastic and rapid alterations in the delivery of power. Speed in dealing with
increasingly heavy loads was particularly urgent because red-hot ingots rapidly lose their
malleability as they cool. The Corliss engine was especially well suited for these
difficulties. It managed the fluctuations in power requirements far more successfully than
other engines of the time. As noted by the operator of a copper rolling mill making first
use of a Corliss engine, “Our power frequently varies from 60 to 360 horse power within
a minute, without perceptibly affecting the speed of the engine” (Corliss, 1870, p. 26).
Hunter, in a careful survey of engine performance of the period, concluded that “even
under the extreme operating conditions characteristic of rolling mills, with their wide and
abrupt fluctuations in load as the slabs or bars of metal entered and left the rolls, the
Corliss engine performed extraordinarily well.” (Hunter, 1985, p. 268)
It is difficult to visualize how waterpower could have been used to accommodate
the concentration of mechanical power at the specific points of use, as was required, in
the post-1870 iron and steel industry. The huge expansion in blast furnaces and rolling
mills in the Bessemer age had simply reached a point where they exceeded the capacities
of flowing water (Lesley, 1859). At rail mills in particular, horsepower requirements were
far greater than in the rest of the iron and steel industry, and steam engine performance
requirements were, as a consequence, far larger than elsewhere. Likewise, pre-Corliss
steam engines could not cope with the sudden alterations in the delivery of power
imposed by rolling mills – the key innovation of the Corliss, the automatic variable cut-

39

off mechanism, is what freed the steam engine from this chocking constraint. On both
accounts then, scope, and smoothness of operation under drastic fluctuations in power
requirements, the Corliss engine played a critical enabling role for rolling mills, and
hence for railroads.

10. Further impact, in the US and abroad
10.1 The Corliss engine as dominant design in the US
After the expiration of the Corliss patents in 1870, “Corliss” became the generic
name for the vast majority of large stationary steam engines produced, sometimes with
hyphenated names, to signify further improvements or modifications in the basic Corliss
design. The industrial impact of this engine design was rapidly diffused, and the
pervasiveness of Corliss’ influence extended far beyond the output of his own firm or that
of his licensees. A reference book published at the turn of the century (Shillitto, 1899)
listed and described the wide proliferation of Corliss engines and their entry into
numerous specialized uses. The descriptions include a large number of engines that
usually acquired hyphenated names, combining “Corliss” with the name of later engine
designers whose engines still incorporated the fundamental design innovations introduced
by Corliss: Hamilton-Corliss Engine, Reynolds-Corliss Engine,52 Harris-Corliss Engine,
Gordon’s Improved Corliss Valve Gear, Eclipse-Corliss Engine, Columbian-Corliss
Engine, Sioux-Corliss Engine, etc. Such was the reputation still attaching to the Corliss
name even in the early years of the 20th century, and more than 30 years after the
expiration of the patents, that prominent business advertisements of firms producing
heavy equipment continued to invoke the Corliss name (Corliss died in 1888, and his own
firm ran rapidly downhill thereafter).53
52

Edwin Reynolds was in some respects Corliss’ successor. After working for Corliss for 16 years he left in
1877 and joined the E.P. Allis Company in Milwaukee. He was employed by that firm for about 25 years,
as general superintendent and chief engineer, and devised some highly influential improvements in the
Corliss valve gear. He was also responsible for designing and introducing the “heavy duty” engine that was
widely adopted in rolling mills and mining operations (Hunter, 1985, pp. 299-300). This firm was later to
become one of the most prominent manufacturers of machinery in the US under the name of the AllisChalmers Co.
53
A sample from 1903: “Allis-Chalmers Co., Chicago, Illinois, Sole Builders of Reynolds Corliss
Engines;” “The Filer & Stowell Company, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Builders of Heavy-Duty Corliss
Engines;” “The Bass Foundry & Machine company, Fort Wayne, Indiana, Manufacturers of Corliss
Engines;” “The Mesta Machine Company, Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, Corliss and Piston Valve Engines.”

40

A further piece of evidence of the pervasiveness of the Corliss design comes from
a technical source: In 1903 James Tribe, author of a well-known handbook of instruction
on the operation of compound steam engines, published a second edition of his handbook
that, in the first edition, was simply called “Compound Engines.” In the preface to the
second edition he explained the switch to the new title, “Compound Corliss Engines:”
“This volume…has virtually become a new book. A new name also seems to be
appropriate, for since the nearest approach to perfect thermal efficiency is realized in the
Corliss type of Engines, and the variable cut-off features embodied in the same are
assumed in all the examples, it has become desirable to adopt the name “Compound
Corliss Engines.” (Tribe, 1903).
Perhaps the most impressive evidence, from a single firm, of the enduring
influence of the Corliss engine comes from the Mesta Machinery Company of Pittsburg.
This firm was probably the most prominent producer of heavy steel mill machinery in the
US at the turn of the century. In 1904 the company published a remarkably detailed,
profusely illustrated catalog of its products, which could be purchased through its branch
offices in New York, Chicago or Birmingham, Alabama. The catalog, which ran to well
over one hundred pages, bore a title calling attention to its technological lineage: “Corliss
and Piston-Valve Engines for Rolling Mills, Blast Furnaces and Power Plants.” The
catalog, which emphasizes its indebtedness to Corliss design and construction
throughout, particularly emphasizes also the superiority of their engines and other heavyduty equipment in withstanding the intense physical punishment to which rolling mill
equipment is subjected.54
10.2 Impact in Europe
The Corliss engine was much admired and experienced extensive sales in Europe,
even at an early date. The British economic historian D.L. Burn, in a classic article,

54

In the course of presenting its extensive descriptive material, the catalog also identified customers for
specific machines, which were located primarily in western Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois and Alabama, and
included such prominent names as the Carnegie Steel Company and the U.S. Steel Corporation.

41

observed that the Corliss engine was first introduced into Britain in 1862 (Burn, 1931):
“Within a few years it had established a reputation both for fuel economy and for
uniformity of speed under a variable load … By 1867 at least fifty Corliss engines had
been manufactured here, three of them for Woolwich Arsenal and one for John Platt; and
there were seven firms manufacturing them. One of these firms - Messrs. Hicks,
Hargreaves & Co. - is said to have produced 1,400 of these engines since that date.” [p.
301] Burns adds in a footnote (4): “The Corliss engine was also made in Germany and
Switzerland, and was made in England without English modifications by Galloway & Co.
It was adapted as a marine engine...In the United States it was made with standardized
parts, which was not the practice with steam-engine manufacture in England.”55
In the announcement of the award of the Rumford medal by the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences to George Corliss, Scott Russell, the distinguished British
engineer, was quoted as having stated that “several hundred” of Corliss’ engines had been
sold abroad (probably by 1867). Hunter states that Corliss engines were “widely taken up
in Europe after its appearance and recognition at the Paris Exposition of 1867. Here an
international jury awarded the highest competitive honor to the Corliss engine over a
hundred other entries. At the Vienna Exhibition of 1873, although not represented by an
engine, Corliss was given one of the highest awards available on the grounds (as stated
by Robert Thurston) that “a large proportion of the steam-engines entered having been
copied from his designs, he was really represented in every section of the Exhibition and
by the engine-builders of every manufacturing nation.” (Hunter, 1985, pp. 269-70). If this
last accolade is not an exaggeration, it would suggest that the Corliss engine had by 1873
achieved the status of a dominant design in large parts of industrial Europe.56

55

For an evaluation of American industrial technology by a highly sophisticated group of visiting British
engineers in the first half of the 1850s, see the parliamentary reports reprinted in Nathan Rosenberg (ed.),
The American System of Manufactures, Edinburgh University Press, 1968. The visiting group included
Joseph Whitworth (1803-87). Whitworth was recognized not only as an engineer of remarkable talents, but
also as the world’s foremost manufacturer of machine tools.
56
A few years later the French Societe industrielle de Mulhouse issued a report on the performance of a
Corliss engine built in France and installed in a Schlumberger factory in Mulhouse (Walther-Meunier and
Keller, 1878)

42

11.Concluding Remarks
Even though the steam engine is widely regarded as the icon of the Industrial
Revolution and a prime example of a “General Purpose Technology,” its role in driving
long-term growth is far from transparent. We have argued that the Corliss engine,
embodying key innovations in performance as well as fuel efficiency, helped tip the
balance in the fierce contest between steam and waterpower. In so doing, it helped propel
the steam engine to a dominant position in the intertwined processes of industrialization
and urbanization that characterized the growth of the US economy in the second half of the
19th century. Indeed, the deployment of Corliss engines served as a catalyst for the massive
relocation of industry away from rural areas and into large urban centers, thus fueling
agglomeration economies, attracting further population, and fostering economic growth.
This illustrates what we believe is an important aspect of the dynamics of GPTs, whether
it is electricity in the early 20th century or Information Technologies in the present era:
the fact that they induce the massive relocation (and concomitant reorganization) of
economic activity, which brings about widespread productivity gains and hence longterm growth.

43

References
Allen, Z., The Science of Mechanics, Providence: Miller and Hammond, 1829.
The American Machinist, Power, Mechanical Engineering, Transactions of the ASME
(various contemporary issues).
Atack, J., “Fact in Fiction? Relative Costs of Steam and Water Power: A Simulation
Approach.” Explorations in Economic History 16, 409-437,1979.
Atack, J., Bateman, F. and T. Weiss, “The Regional Diffusion and Adoption of the Steam
Engine in American Manufacturing.” The Journal of Economic History, 40(2), 281-308,
1980.
Bresnahan, T. and M. Trajtenberg, "General Purpose Technologies: Engines of Growth?"
Journal of Econometrics, 65(1), pp. 83-108, 1995.
Burn, D. L., “The Genesis of American Engineering Competition, 1850-1870,” Economic
History Review, January 1931.
Chandler, A. D. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business.
Cambridge, MA, Belknap Press, 1977.
Chandler, A. D. “Anthracite Coal and the Beginnings of the Industrial Revolution in the
United States,” The Business History Review, Summer, 1972.
Clark, V. S., History of Manufactures in the United States: 1607-1860, Vol. II, New
York, McGraw-Hill, 1929.
Corliss, G. H., In the Matter of the Petition of George H. Corliss for an Extension of His
letters Patent for Improvements in Steam Engines. Providence: Providence Press
Company, Printers, 1870.
The Corliss Papers collection at the John Hay Library, Brown University, Providence, RI.
David, P. A. (1991), "Computer and Dynamo: The Modern Productivity Paradox in a
Not-Too-Distant Mirror." in Technology and Productivity: The Challenge for Economic
Policy. Paris: OECD, pp. 315-347, 1991.
Du Boff, R. B., “The Introduction of Electrical Power in American Manufacturing”,
Economic History Review, December, 509-518, 1967.
Fenichel, A. H. “Growth and Diffusion of Power in Manufacturing 1839-1919.” In
Output, Employment and Productivity in the United States after 1800. National Bureau of
44

Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth Vol. 30, 443-478. New York,
Columbia University Press, 1966.
Fishlow A., “Productivity and Technological Change in the Railroad Sector, 1840-1910,”
in Output, Employment and Productivity in the United States after 1800, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth, 30. New York, Columbia
University Press, 1966.
Fogel, Robert W., Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric
History. Baltimore, Md.: The John Hopkins Press, 1964.
Helpman, E. and M. Trajtenberg, "A Time to Sow and a Time to Reap: Growth Based on
General Purpose Technologies." Helpman, E. (ed.) General Purpose Technologies and
Economic Growth. Cambridge, MIT Press, 1998.
Helpman, E. General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. Cambridge, MIT
Press, 1998.
Horwitz, M., The Transformation of American Law, 1780-1860, Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press, 1977.
Hunter, L. C. A History of Industrial Power in the US, 1780-1930, Vol I, Charlottesville:
The University Press of Virginia, 1979.
Hunter, L. C. A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 1780-1930, Vol. II:
Steam Power. Charlottesville: The University Press of Virginia, 1985.
Krugman, P. Geography and Trade. Mass and London: MIT Press. 1991.
Lesley J.P., The Iron Manufacturer’s Guide to the Furnaces, Forges and Rolling Mills of
the US, New York, J. Wiley, 1859.
Manuscript Collection on the Textile Industry at the Baker Library, Harvard Business
School.
Rosenberg, N., "Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry: 1840 - 1910. In:
Perspectives on Technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976.
Rosenberg, N., "Technological Interdependence in the American Economy". In: Inside
the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1982.
Rosenberg, Nathan, "Uncertainty and Technological Change". Landau, R., T. Taylor and
G. Wright, The Mosaic of Economic Growth, Part V. Stanford University Press,
Stanford, 1996.

45

Shillitto, F.W. HandBook of Corliss Steam Engines (2d Edition). Bridgeport, Conn.,
1899.
Sheldon, F. F., “Power and Speed in Cotton Mills,” Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Meeting of the Northeast Cotton Manufacturers’ Association, Boston, 1892.
Smith, T. R., The Cotton Textile Industry of Fall River, Mass., King's Crown Press,
1944.
Sokoloff, K., “Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent
Records, 1790-1846.” Journal of Economic History, 48(4) 813-50, 1988.
Temin, P. Iron and Steel in Nineteenth Century America, an Economy Inquiry.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964.
Temin, P., “Steam and Waterpower in the Early Nineteenth Century,” Journal of
Economic History, June 1966.
Thurston, R. H., Stationary Steam Engines; especially as adapted to Electric Lighting
Purposes, New York, 1884
Thurston, R. H. A History of the Growth of the Steam Engine. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1939.
Tribe, J. Compound Corliss Engines, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 1903.
Trowbridge, W. P. Reports on the Water-power of the United States: Statistics of Power
and Machinery Employed in Manufactures. 10th U.S. Census, 1880.
U.S. Census Office, Department of Interior, Statistics of Power and Machinery Employed
in Manufactures, Reports on the Water-Power of the United States, Part I. Washington,
Government Printing Office, 1885.
U.S. Congress, House, Documents Relative to the Manufactures in the United States,
collected by the Secretary of the Treasury, Louis McLane; Exec.Doc. No. 308, 22nd
Cong., 1st sess., 1833.
U.S. Congress, House, Report on the Steam Engines in the United States, H. Doc. No. 21,
25th Cong., 3d sess., 1838.
von Tunzelmann, G. N., Steam Power and British Industrialization to 1860. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1978.
Walther-Meunier, M. and Keller, M. G., Essai d’une machine Corliss construite par MM.
Berger-Andre & cie, a Thann, fonctionnant au tissage de MM. Schlumberger fils & cie, a

46

Mulhouse. Rapport presente a la Societe industrielle de Mulhouse, dans sa seance du 26
juin 1878, 1878.
Yonekawa, S. "Flotation Booms in the Cotton Industry, 1870-1890. A Comparative
Study," Business History Review, Winter 551-81, 1987.

47

Appendix 1
Sample List of Buyers of Corliss Engines
Buyers
#
1 Sharp's Rifle Manufacturing

Hartford

City

StateHP Sector
CT 250 Firearms

2 William L. Wood

Hartford

CT 30

3 Edward Miller & Co.

Meriden

CT 150 Wool

4 Foster, Merriam & Co.

Meriden

CT 50

Hardware

5 Metropolitan
Washing Machine Co.

Middlefield

CT 45

Washing Machines

6 Russell Manufacturing

Middletown

CT 100 Webbing

Dir. of N.E. Mfg 3a [Automoblile
Brake Linings] 59a [Webbing]

7 L. Candee & Co.

New Haven

CT 455 Rubber Goods

8 Cheney Brothers

So. Manchester CT 200 Silk

Directory of N.E. Mfg. 47a / City
directory
Directory of N.E. Mfg. 50a
(Silk Manufatures)

9 Peck Smith Manufcaturing

Southington

10 Mineral Springs
Manufacturing

Stafford Spring CT 60

11 W.C. Harding & Co.

Stamford

CT 100 Wool

12 Meriden Malleable Iron

W. Merieden

CT 35

13 Shaw & Knowles

New Castle

DE 175 NA

14 Giles, Bros. & Co.

Chicago

IL

125 Watches and Jewelry

15 Sherman House

Chicago

IL

20

16 Todd & Richardson

Louisville

KY 125 NA

17 S. & W. Foster

Attleboro

MA 60

18 Assabet Manufacturing

Boston

MA 150 Manufacturing

City directory (1860-1870)

19 Boston Elastic Fabric

Boston

MA 250 Textile

City directory (1860-1870)

20 Charles E. Hall & Co.

Boston

MA 80

City directory (1860-1870)

21 Chickering & Sons

Boston

MA 120 Musical Instruments

City directory (1860-1870)

22 Dearborn, Robinson & Co.

Boston

MA 250 Iron Works

City directory (1860-1870)

CT 85

Notes
City directory (1860-1870)

Wool

Directory of N.E. Mfg 30a

Manufacturing
Mineral

Iron Works

NA

NA

Marble

48

Appendix 2
Users of Corliss Engines Listed in Corliss’ Petition
(p.5 of the petition: motives for signing in, and beginning of list)

49

Appendix 3
Sample Page from the Census’ “Reports on Water-Power” for 1880

50

Appendix 4
Demographic and Manufacturing Variables
from the 1850 and 1870 Censuses, by County57
Variables from 1850 Census
TOTSLV50
Human Capital:
ADTLIT50
WHTLIT50
COLSTS50
LIBVOL50
PUBLIB50
Manufacturing:
CAPINV50
EMPMAN50
VALPRD50
Wealth
VCHRCH50

total number of slaves in 1850
aggregate number of adults who cannot read and write 1850
total number of white adults who cannot read and write 1850
number of pupils in colleges 1850
total number of volumes in public libraries 1850
number of public libraries 1850
capital invested in manufacturing establishments 1850
number of persons employed in manufacturing establishments
1850
value of annual product in manufacturing establishments 1850
total value of church property 1850

Variables from 1870 Census
Human Capital
ADNLIT70
Manufacturing
CAPINV70
NBMANU70
NBHNDS70
WAGES70
RAWMAT70
VALPRD70
Wealth
ASSPRP70
TRUPRP70
PRPVAL70
Taxes
TAXCIT70
TAXCT70
TXST70
TXSTLC70

total number of persons who cannot read and write 1870
total capital invested in dollars in manufacturing 1870
number of manufacturing establishments 1870
total number of hands employed in manufacturing 1870
total wages paid in manufacturing 1870
value materials used in manufacturing 1870
value products manufacturing 1870
asserted valuation real and personal property 1870
true valuation real and personal estate 1870
value property all denominations
total town city taxation 1870
total county taxation 1870
total state taxation 1870
total non national taxation 1870

57

In addition, we have the population of each county for each of the census years 1850-1900, and the
population of the localities (cities and towns) where buyers of Corliss engines were located.

51

Appendix 5

Distribution of Buyers of Corliss Engines by Sub-Sector
Sector and sub-sector
Apparel

# of Total HP Average % of HP
Buyers
HP

Clothing
Hats

5
1320
1
50
Chemical and allied products
Paints
3
190
Fabricated metal products
Pipes
1
30
Sterling Silver and Plated Ware
1
80
Wire and Cable
3
1355
Food and kindred products
Flour
3
850
Furniture and fixtures
Carpets and Rugs
1
180
Hangings
1
60
Leather and leather products
Leather
1
40
Lumber and wood products
Carpenters
3
225
Wood
4
345
Machinery
Firearms
3
340
Hardware
2
115
Machines
2
75
Screw Machine Products
1
25
Sewing Machines
1
450
Steam (Corliss) Engines
4
210
Stoves
2
80
Textile Machinery
3
120
Tools
4
295
Washing Machines
1
45
Watches and Jewelry
2
165
Nonmanufacturing
Dealers
1
60
Hotel Owners
2
60
Imports
1
300
Lunatic Asylum
1
15
Merchants
5
1640

52

264
50

2.81%
0.11%

63

0.40%

30
80
452

0.06%
0.17%
2.89%

283

1.81%

180
60

0.38%
0.13%

40

0.09%

75
86

0.48%
0.74%

113
58
38
25
450
53
40
40
74
45
83

0.72%
0.25%
0.16%
0.05%
0.96%
0.45%
0.17%
0.26%
0.63%
0.10%
0.35%

60
30
300
15
328

0.13%
0.13%
0.64%
0.03%
3.49%

Primary metal industries
Copper
2
470
235
Foundry
2
100
50
Iron Works
13
4820
371
Metal Works
2
1110
555
Mineral
1
60
60
Printing, publishing and allied products
Press and Printing
6
225
38
Professional instruments, miscellaneous
Instruments
1
40
40
Musical Instruments
1
120
120
Pulp, paper and allied products
Paper and Pulp
3
355
118
Rubber products
Rubber Goods
3
785
262
Stone, clay and glass products
Bricks
1
30
30
Marble
1
80
80
Textile mill products
Bleaching and dyeing
3
1325
442
Cordage
5
1650
330
Cotton and Wool
4
2005
501
Cotton Fabric and Goods
24
8737
364
Print Works
4
840
210
Silk
1
200
200
Tape
1
15
15
Textile
5
590
118
Webbing
1
100
100
Wool
12
1620
135
Transportation equipment
Locomotive Works
5
240
48
“Manufacturing”
“Mills”

0.48%
0.09%
0.26%
0.76%
1.67%
0.06%
0.17%
2.82%
3.52%
4.27%
18.62%
1.79%
0.43%
0.03%
1.26%
0.21%
3.45%
0.51%

Unknown type of manufacturing
21
2420
8
2230

115
279

5.16%
4.75%

65

8047

124

17.15%

257

46934

183

100.00%

Classification not available

Total

1.00%
0.21%
10.27%
2.37%
0.13%

53

Appendix 6
Distribution of Corliss Buyers by Cities
(sorted by HP)

City
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42

Providence
Philadelphia
Boston
Pittsburgh
New York
New Bedford
Chester
Lawrence
Fall River
Troy
Utica
Pawtucket
Waltham
Taunton
Manayunk
Bristol
Worcester
Gloucester
Frankford
Manchester
Nashua
New Haven
Squabetty
Newburyport
Chicopee
Newburgh
Paterson
Malden
Westerly
E. Greenwich
Hartford
Syracuse
Alleghany City
Lewiston
St. Louis
W. Wareham
Conshohoken
Watertown
Clinton
Baltimore
Meriden
So. Manchester

Population
State
Buyers
1860

HP

Avg. HP

RI
PA
MA
PA
NY
MA
PA
MA
MA
NY
NY
RI
MA
MA
PA
RI
MA
NJ
PA
NH
NH
CT
MA
MA
MA
NY
NJ
MA
RI
RI
CT
NY
PA
ME
MO
MA
PA
MA
MA
MD
CT
CT

8140
4505
2990
2615
2255
2250
1935
1520
1375
1340
1195
1005
990
755
680
670
665
610
500
480
475
455
450
410
400
350
325
300
300
285
280
280
250
250
250
250
230
215
210
200
200
200

239
237
157
654
113
750
74
380
344
1340
299
201
330
108
340
335
166
610
250
240
238
455
450
137
400
350
108
300
150
143
140
140
250
125
250
250
115
215
105
200
100
200

50666
565529
202917
49217
805658
22300
4631
17639
14026
39235
22529
4200
6397
15376
5271
24960
207
20107
10065
39262
13401
7261
15196
19586
5865
3470
2882
29152
28119
28702
7424
160773
3186
1741
3270
3859
212418
7426
3924

54

34
19
19
4
20
3
26
4
4
1
4
5
3
7
2
2
4
1
2
2
2
1
1
3
1
1
3
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1

43 Canton
MA
44 Lynn
MA
45 Newport
RI
46 New Castle
DE
47 Sherburne
NY
48 River Point
RI
49 Salem
MA
50 Hingham
MA
51 Montgomery Co.
PA
52 Chicago
IL
53 Non-available
54 Gardner
MA
55 Louisville
KY
56 New Brunswick
NJ
57 Huntington
MA
58 Middletown
CT
59 Stamford
CT
60 Brooklyn
NY
61 Easton
PA
62 Southington
CT
63 Uxbridge
MA
64 Trenton
NJ
65 Lambertville
NJ
66 Attleboro
MA
67 East Cambridge
MA
68 No. Dighton
MA
69 South Easton
MA
70 Stafford Spring
CT
71 W. Roxbury
MA
72 Castleton
VT
73 Hohokus
NJ
74 Norwich
NY
75 Plymouth
MA
76 Woonsocket
RI
77 Middlefield
CT
78 Springfield
MA
79 Woburn
MA
80 Germantown
PA
81 W. Merieden
CT
82 Falls of the Schuylkill PA
83 Great Falls
NH
84 Fort Palin
NY
85 Leicester
MA
86 Montrose
PA
87 Marlboro
MA
Total
*Average population per city

3242
19083
10508
3468
2701
22252
4351
109260
2646
68033
11256
1216
7185
266661
8944
3315
3133
17228
2699
1387
26060
1733
779
3397
2852
2352
4356
6276
21564
8620
15199
6287
2320
4864
2748
5911
42,156*

55

3
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
257

197
185
180
175
167
165
160
150
150
145
130
125
125
120
100
100
100
90
90
85
85
80
75
60
60
60
60
60
60
50
50
50
50
50
45
40
40
35
35
25
25
20
15
15
10
46,934

66
93
90
175
84
83
80
150
150
73
130
125
125
120
100
100
100
45
90
85
43
40
75
60
60
60
60
60
60
50
50
50
50
50
45
40
40
35
35
25
25
20
15
15
10
183

Appendix 7
Estimates of Steam and Water Horsepower (HP) prior to 1870
1. Estimates for the USA

Table A7.1
# of prime movers
Steam hp
(Atack, 1979)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
steam
waterwheels
Steam hp Average
engines in and turbines in (Fenichel,
hp per
use
use
1966)
engine

Water hp
(5)
(6)
Water hp Average hp
(Fenichel, per water
1966)
wheel

1838

1,420

29,324

36.1

25.4

644

22.0

1850

8,598

37,602

230

26.8

827

22.0

1860

25,577

46,260

724

28.3

1,018

22.0

1870

40,191

51,018

1,215

30.2

1,131

22.2

1880

56,123

55,404

2,186

39.0

1,227

22.1

In bold: estimates
Steam: First, we computed the average hp per engine for 1838 and 1870 (column 4),
dividing the figures in column (3) by those in column (1). We then interpolated the
average hp for 1850 and 1860 as follows: we computed the actual rate of growth of
average hp from 1838 to 1870, assumed a constant annual rate of growth throughout the
period, and computed on that basis the (estimated) average hp for 1850 and 1860. We
then multiplied these averages by the number of engines for those years, thus obtaining
the bold figures in column (3).
Water: The procedure was similar to that for steam, except that we did not have data for
1838 and hence could not interpolate. However, the average hp per waterwheel remained
constant between 1870 and 1880 (at about 22 hp) and hence we assumed that this same
average holds for 1850 and 1860. We then multiplied 22 hp by the number of
waterwheels in those years, to obtain the total water hp for 1850 and 1860. As to 1838:
we computed the average annual rate of growth of the number of waterwheels between

56

1850 and 1860,58 assumed that this same rate of growth applied between 1838 and 1850
for total hp, and thus extrapolated for 1838: 827/((1.02)**12) = 644.
2. Estimates for New England (NE)

Table A7.2
(2)
Steam hp
in NE
(Fenichel,
1966)
4.9

(3)
Average
hp per
engine

1838

(1)
# of steam
engines in NE
(Atack et al,
1980)
319

1850

1,271

1860

3,978

(5)
Water hp
in NE:
32% of (4)

25.4

(4)
Water hp
total USA
(from Table
A7.1, col. 5)
644

34.1

26.8

827

265

112.6

28.3

1,018

326

206

The estimates for steam were computed in the same manner as for the whole USA, i.e. we
took the average hp per engine from table A7.1, and multiplied them by the number of
engines in NE for 1850 and 1860. Since we did not have the number of waterwheels by
region, the estimates for water hp were computed as follows: In 1870 New England
accounted for 32% of all water hp in the USA; we simply assumed that this same
percentage held for the earlier years, and hence obtained column (5) simply by
multiplying 0.32 times the estimates of total water hp from column (4) (which in turn are
the estimates from Table A7.1). Clearly, these estimates of water hp in NE are more
questionable than those for steam, and should be taken as just ballpark “guesstimates.”
As to the estimates for the USA exclusive of New England, we just took the difference.
Sources:
Fenichel, (1966), Atack (1979), Atack et al. (1980),

58

That is, 46,260/37,602)**(1/10)-1=0.02.

57

Table 1
Distribution of Buyers of Corliss Engines, by Main Sector
Sector

(sorted by total HP)
# of
Total
Buyers
HP

% of Average
Total
HP
HP*

Textile mill products

60

17082

49.9

285

Primary metal industries

20

6560

19.2

328

Non-manufacturing

10

2060

6.0

206

Machinery

25

1920

5.6

77

Fabricated metal products

5

1465

4.3

293

Apparel

6

1370

4.0

228

Food and kindred products

3

850

2.5

283

Rubber products

3

785

2.3

262

Lumber and wood products

7

570

1.7

81

Pulp, paper and allied products

3

355

1.0

118

Furniture and fixtures

2

240

0.7

120

Transportation equipment
Printing, publishing and allied
products

5

240

0.7

48

6

225

0.7

38

Chemicals and allied products
Professional instruments,
miscellaneous

3

190

0.6

63

2

160

0.5

80

Stone, clay and glass products

2

110

0.3

55

Leather and leather products

1

40

0.1

40

Sub-Total for assigned buyers

163

34222

100.0

210

Unknown type of manufacturing

29

4650

9.9

160

Classification unknown

65

8062

17.2

124

Sub-Total for not assigned

94

12712

27.1

135

Grand Total

257

46934

100.0

183

* For the buyers classified into sectors, this is the percentage out of the (sub) total HP for
assigned buyers (34222 HP); these buyers constitute 73% of the total HP.

58

Table 2
Distribution of Corliss Engines, Water Power,
and Steam Power,* by sector, 1870

Sector

(sorted by column 4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Corliss
Water
Steam % Corliss
Engines
Power
Power
minus
% of total % of total % of total % Water

Textile mill products

49.9

15.6

8.5

34.3

Primary metal industries

19.2

2.6

16.2

16.6

Non-manufacturing

6.0

0.6

0.0

5.4

Apparel

4.0

0.3

0.9

3.7

Machinery

5.6

2.0

4.8

3.6

Fabricated metal products

4.3

1.5

3.1

2.8

Rubber products
Printing, publishing & allied
products

2.3

0.2

0.3

2.1

0.7

0.0

0.7

0.6

Tobacco manufacture
Professional instruments, &
misc.

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.5

0.4

0.8

0.0

Products of petroleum & coal

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.0

Transportation equipment

0.7

0.7

1.7

0.0

Chemicals & allied products

0.6

0.6

2.5

-0.1

Furniture & fixtures

0.7

1.1

1.5

-0.4

Stone, clay & glass products

0.3

0.8

2.1

-0.5

Leather & leather products

0.1

1.4

2.3

-1.3

Pulp, paper & allied products

1.0

3.9

1.1

-2.8

Lumber & wood products

1.7

31.4

31.8

-29.7

Food & kindred products

2.5

36.8

19.3

-34.4

Herfindhal index

30.0

26.2

17.8

*The data for steam and water power, from Fenichel (1960).

59

Table 3
Geographic Distribution of Corliss Engines (1870)
And of Water Mills (1880)
(sorted by Corliss’ HP)

Water Mills

Corliss Engines
Massachusetts

# of
Buyers
75

HP

% of HP Number
of Mills
30.6%
1,799

HP

% of HP

14,162

123,432

18.2%

Pennsylvania

62

11,160

24.1%

3,825

87,591

12.9%

Rhode Island

50

10,795

23.3%

121

9,203

1.4%

New York

34

5,747

12.4%

4,205

172,591

25.4%

Connecticut

12

1,560

3.4%

1,265

64,422

9.5%

New Jersey

9

1,260

2.7%

869

28,235

4.2%

New Hampshire

5

980

2.1%

1,275

73,480

10.8%

Maine

2

250

0.5%

883

65,416

9.6%

Maryland

1

200

0.4%

749

17,065

2.5%

Delaware

1

175

0.4%

132

4,819

0.7%

Vermont

1

50

0.1%

698

32,048

4.7%

60

Table 4
“Adoption” of Corliss Engines and Watermills, by County*
Negative Binomial Count – QML
constant
Population

Corliss

Water

Corliss

Water

Corliss

-4.4
(-7.8)
0.09
(4.8)
0.04
(4.3)

3.7
(13.2)
0.05
(0.9)
0.005
(1.5)

-4.2
(-7.4)
0.07
(3.0)

3.8
(13.4)
0.06
(1.0)

-3.4
(-6.9)
0.10
(3.5)
0.04
(5.2)

Capital invested in
Manufct. per capita
22.8
0.86
Employment in
(4.2)
(0.4)
Manufct. per capita
1.82
0.31
1.77
0.31
Books in Public
(2.7)
(0.8)
(2.6)
(0.84)
Libraries per capita
0.37
# of Public Libraries
(2.5)
per capita
LR index
0.52
0.02
0.51
0.02
0.52
(Pseudo R2)
z-statistics in parenthesis, based on QML (Huber/White) standard errors

Water
3.9
(17.4)
0.05
(0.9)
0.006
(1.5)

0.11
(2.0)
0.02

(b) Poisson Count (QML), and OLS
Poisson
Constant
Population

Corliss
-3.2
(-6.8)
0.075
(3.1)
0.03
(2.0)
1.6
(2.2)

Water
3.9
(20.)
0.01
(0.78)
0.004
(1.8)
0.38
(1.45)

OLS
Corliss
-4.9
(-6.1)
0.41
(8.9)
0.03
(2.7)
4.1
(3.8)

Water
38.3
(2.4)
0.90
(1.0)
0.39
(1.9)
3.1
(1.4)

Capital invested in
Manufct. per capita
Books in Public Libraries
per capita
LR index (Pseudo R2) for
0.65
0.18
0.51
0.23
Poisson, R2 for OLS
For the Possion: z-statistics in parenthesis, based on QML (Huber/White) standard
errors; for the OLS: regular t-statistics.
_______________
*All regressions include state dummy variables. The data for Corliss are as of 1869, for
watermills as of 1880; each comprises 225 counties/observations.

61

Table 5a
OLS – Average Annual Population Growth, by County
(in percentage points, inc. constant term)
1870-1900
# of Water Mills
# of Corliss Buyers
(exc. Providence, RA)

-0.002
(-2.6)
0.07
(3.1)

-0.002
(-3.0)
0.04
(3.9)

1880-1900
-0.002
(-2.9)
0.04
(3.3)

-0.002
(-2.2)
0.04
(2.9)

0.33
(5.7)

Pop. Growth 1850-70
0.27
(3.6)
3.2E-5
(2.7)
0.09
(1.4)

2.6E-5
(2.3)
0.07
(1.2)

0.30
(4.6)
3.4E-5
(2.8)
0.05
(0.7)

NO

YES

YES

YES

Obs.

237

234

227

236

R2

0.35

0.47

0.51

0.45

Pop. Growth 1860-70
Capital invst. in
Manufct. per est.
County Taxes
Per capita
State Taxes
Per capita
State Dummies

6.6E-5
(7.5)
0.13
(2.9)
-0.33
(-4.4)

t-values in parenthesis, based on White Heteroskedasticity- consistent standard
errors
* Excluding outliers: one obs. with pop. growth 1870-1900 > 6% per year, and one
with pop. growth 1860-70>10% per year.

62

Table 5b
TSLS – Average Annual Population Growth, by County
Using Predicted Corliss as IV
(in percentage points; inc. constant term and state dummies)
IV (predicted Corliss) from Adoption Eq.:

# of Water Mills
# of Corliss Buyers
(exc. Providence, RA)
Pop. Growth 1850-70
Pop. Growth 1860-70
Capital invst. in
Manufct. per est.
County Taxes
Per capita
Obs.
R2

Negative
Binomial

Negative
Binomial

Poisson

LS

Poisson

-0.002
(-2.9)
0.05
(1.9)

-0.002
(-2.9)
0.04
(2.2)

-0.002
(-2.9)
0.06
(2.2)

-0.002
(-2.8)
0.05
(1.7)
0.35
(5.7)

-0.002
(-2.8)
0.034
(1.8)
0.35
(5.7)

0.30
(3.7)
2.7E-05
(2.1)
0.10
(1.6)
223

0.30
(3.7)
3.0E-05
(2.4)
0.11
(1.7)
223

0.30
(3.7)
2.6E-05
(2.1)
0.10
(1.4)
223

2.5E-05
(2.2)
0.08
(1.2)
223

2.7E-05
(2.4)
0.08
(1.3)
223

0.48

0.48

0.48

0.52

0.52

t-values in parenthesis, based on White Heteroskedasticity- consistent standard
errors
* Excluding outliers: one obs. with pop. growth 1870-1900 > 6% per year, and one
with pop. growth 1860-70>10% per year.

63

Table 6
Scale (HP) of Waterpower* vs. Corliss Establishments
(sorted by Corliss’ Average HP)

Waterpower
Number of Average
Mills
HP

Sector

Corliss
Average
HP

Primary metal industries

307

50

328

Fabricated metal products

328

41

293

Textile mill products

1,271

135

285

Food and kindred products

5,342

30

283

Rubber products

20

120

262

Apparel

181

47

228

Non-manufacturing

8

26

206

Not assigned

27

22

135

Furniture and fixtures

430

31

120

Pulp, paper and allied products

484

147

118

5,724

30

Lumber and wood products
Professional instruments, etc. and
miscellaneous
Machinery

66

24

81
80

785

33

77

Chemicals and allied products

155

47

63

Stone, clay and glass products

133

29

55

Transportation equipment

119

25

48

Leather and leather products

376

26

40

Printing, publishing and allied products

44

20

38

Electric machinery

11

70

-

Products of petroleum and coal

3

21

-

Tobacco manufacture

15

18

15,829

43

183

Total

*The data for waterpower are from the 1880 census, and refers to the 11 North and MidAtlantic States

64

Figure 1
Power Use in US Manufacturing
(in thousand horsepower)

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0
1838

1850

1860

1870

1880

Source: Appendix 7
total power

steam

65

water

1890

1900

Figure 2
Steam and Water Power in New England
(in thousand horsepower )
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
1838

1850

1860

1870

1880

1890

source: Appendix 7

water NE

66

steam NE

1900

1910

1920

Figure 3
Steam vs. Water Power: New England and Rest of US
% of total power sources*
1.00
0.90

Steam
rest US

Water NE

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20

Water
t US

Steam NE

0.10
0.00

1838

1850

1860

1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

*including gas and electric from 1890 on
water NE

steam NE

water rest US

67

steam rest US

1920

