                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           FISCAL POLICY AND SOCIAL SECURITY POLICY DURING THE 1990s


                                             Douglas W. Elmendorf
                                              Jeffrey B. Liebman
                                               David W. Wilcox


                                              Working Paper 8488
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w8488


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       September 2001




This paper was presented at a conference on “American Economic Policy in the 1990s” held June 27 to 30, 2001 at the
John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and are not necessarily shared by any of the institutions with which they are affiliated. We thank Al Davis, Peter
Diamond, Edward Gramlich, Peter Orszag, Gene Sperling, and Lawrence Summers for comments on an earlier draft.
Elmendorf was formerly Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Treasury in the Office of Economic Policy, and prior to that
Senior Economist at the Council of Economic Advisers; Liebman was formerly Special Assistant to the President for
Economic Policy at the National Economic Council; and Wilcox was formerly Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for
Economic Policy. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Douglas W. Elmendorf, Jeffrey B. Liebman and David W. Wilcox. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Policy and Social Security Policy During the 1990s
Douglas W. Elmendorf, Jeffrey B. Liebman and David W. Wilcox
NBER Working Paper No. 8488
September 2001
JEL No. H55, H6, E62



                                              ABSTRACT


        This paper reviews the course of fiscal policy and Social Security policy during the 1990s. The
1990s witnessed two fundamental changes in U.S. fiscal policy: a dramatic improvement in the current
and projected budget balance, and a shift to a new political consensus in favor of balancing the budget
excluding Social Security rather than the unified budget. The dramatic improvement in the budget
outlook stemmed both from favorable developments in the economic environment and from deliberate
policy actions that reduced budget deficits and later did not spend down the surpluses.
        In contrast, the 1990s did not witness significant changes in Social Security policy, although
alternative visions of Social Security reform received tremendous analytic and popular attention. The
1994-1996 Advisory Council on Social Security presented three reform plans that placed important
emphasis on additional prefunding. Each involved some form of investment in equities – either centrally,
through the trust fund, or in a decentralized manner, through individual accounts. Late in the decade, with
the emergence of on-budget surpluses, the possibility of general revenue contributions to the Social
Security system came under serious consideration. In the end, President Clinton decided to pursue Social
Security reform based on general revenue contributions to the trust fund and centralized investment in
equities rather than creating individual accounts, but his proposal was not adopted.




Douglas W. Elmendorf             Jeffrey B. Liebman                       David W. Wilcox
Federal Reserve Board            Kennedy School of Government             Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551             Harvard University                       Washington, DC 20551
delmendorf@frb.gov               Cambridge, MA 02138                      dwilcox@frb.gov
                                 and NBER
                                 jeffrey_liebman@harvard.edu
                                     Table of Contents

                                                                            Page

1. Introduction                                                                1

2. Budget Outcomes and Projections                                             3
      Improved Budget Picture
      Sources of Improvement

3. Budget Deficit Reduction: 1990 through 1997                                 9
      OBRA90
      OBRA93
      What Did Deficit Reduction Ultimately Accomplish?
      The Republican-Controlled Congress
      BBA97

4. Entitlement Reform and Saving Social Security First                        24
       Entitlement Commissions
       Social Security
       Saving Social Security First

5. Social Security Reform Options                                             40
       Using Projected Budget Surpluses as Part of Social Security Reform
       Investments in Private Financial Assets
       Potential Compromise Reform Proposals
       The 1999 State of the Union Social Security Proposal

6. Budget Surpluses: 1998 through 2000                                        63
      The 1999 State of the Union Budget Framework
      Balancing the Budget Excluding Social Security
      Fiscal Policy in 2000
      A National Asset

7. Conclusion                                                                 78

References                                                                    80

Tables                                                                        84

Figures                                                                       86
1. Introduction

       The 1990s witnessed two fundamental changes in U.S. fiscal policy: a dramatic

improvement in the current and projected budget balance, and a shift to a new political consensus

in favor of balancing the budget excluding Social Security rather than the unified budget. In

contrast, the 1990s did not witness significant changes in Social Security policy, although

alternative visions of Social Security reform received tremendous analytic and popular attention.

This paper reviews the course of fiscal policy and Social Security policy during the 1990s,

including the economic and political forces that changed fiscal policy and left Social Security

policy largely unchanged.

       In January 1990 the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projected that the unified budget

deficit would exceed $100 billion during the fiscal year then under way and would remain at

about that level for the following five years. Two years later, the CBO projected that the budget

deficit would hit $350 billion in fiscal year 1992, fall by half over the following four years, and

then turn up again to pass $400 billion in 2002.1 Yet, by January 2001, the budget had recorded

its third consecutive unified surplus, and the CBO projected that, under unchanged law, unified

surpluses would total more than $5.5 trillion over the next decade. This dramatic in the budget

outlook stemmed both from favorable developments in the economic environment and from

deliberate policy actions that reduced budget deficits and later did not spend down the surpluses.

       The second respect in which the fiscal landscape was transformed during the 1990s was

in the presumed standard for determining whether the federal government was living within its

means. Until the past few years, debate and decisionmaking about the federal budget almost



       1
         The CBO was too pessimistic about FY1992: the unified deficit that year came in at
$290 billion.
invariably were conducted in terms of the unified budget, and the fiscal objective was generally

assumed – either implicitly or explicitly – to be balance in the unified budget. But in the summer

of 1999, buoyed by the progress of the preceding several years, the political consensus shifted

suddenly and dramatically to the objective of balancing the budget excluding the current

operations of the Social Security system, while aiming to put Social Security into 75-year

actuarial balance. This change has had important implications for the political conversation

about the budget. For example, in early 2001 Congress debated the disposition of roughly $3.1

trillion in projected on-budget surpluses over the next ten years rather than $5.6 trillion in unified

surpluses. The disposition of roughly $2.5 trillion in projected Social Security surpluses

essentially was not disputed; virtually everyone assumed that they would be used to pay down

debt held by the public.

       Changes of comparable magnitude did not occur in Social Security policy during the

1990s, although significant reforms of the program were debated at great length. It has been

clear for some time that the aging of the U.S. population will eventually require significant

changes in Social Security revenues or benefits. The reforms enacted in 1977 and 1983 set

payroll tax revenues above contemporaneous outlays, so that future benefits could be partly

prefunded through an accumulation of assets in the Social Security trust fund. The 1994-1996

Advisory Council on Social Security presented three reform plans that placed important emphasis

on additional prefunding. Each involved some form of investment in equities – either centrally,

through the trust fund, or in a decentralized manner, through individual accounts. Late in the

decade, with the emergence of on-budget surpluses, the possibility of general revenue

contributions to the Social Security system came under serious consideration. In the end,


                                                  2
President Clinton decided to pursue Social Security reform based on general revenue

contributions to the trust fund and centralized investment in equities rather than creating

individual accounts, but his proposal was not adopted.

       The remainder of the paper explores these themes more closely. The second section

summarizes the changing budget outlook, and the subsequent sections proceed chronologically

through a decade of fiscal policy and Social Security policy.



2. Budget Outcomes and Projections

       Figures 1 and 2 plot the unified federal budget surplus and federal debt held by the public,

both expressed as a share of GDP, since the end of World War II. The improvement in federal

finances during the 1990s is striking. Early in the decade, federal budget deficits exceeded

4 percent of GDP, and the debt held by the public reached nearly 50 percent of GDP for the first

time since the 1950s. By the end of the decade, the budget had recorded its third consecutive

unified surplus for the first time since 1947-49, as well as the largest surplus relative to GDP

since 1948; debt held by the public had dropped below 35 percent of GDP.



Improved Budget Picture

       Table 1 presents key budget data from the past fifteen years. The table shows that the

remarkable improvement in the unified budget balance during the 1990s resulted from a

significant increase in revenue and a nearly equal decrease in noninterest outlays, both as shares

of GDP, together with the resulting impact on interest payments. Tax revenue increased as a

share of GDP in part because of tax policy but also because of changing economic conditions; we


                                                 3
return to both of these topics later. Noninterest spending declined as a share of GDP in large part

because defense spending fell in nominal dollars and thus dropped sharply relative to GDP.

       The federal budget outlook beyond the 1990s also improved sharply during the decade.

The CBO’s first ten-year projection, published in January 1992, showed large and rising budget

deficits in the first years of the 21st century assuming that the law on the books in 1992 was

maintained. Further, the CBO’s first 75-year budget projection, released in May 1996, showed

public debt exceeding GDP by 2020. In contrast, the CBO’s ten-year projection in January 2001

showed large and rising budget surpluses during the next decade; it also showed the public debt

being eliminated (on a net basis) in fiscal year 2009. Moreover, the 75-year projections released

in October 2000 showed net public indebtedness below zero through 2050. The CBO

summarizes its very long-run projections in terms of an estimated “fiscal gap,” which is the

immediate, permanent tax increase or spending decrease needed to keep public debt below its

contemporaneous size relative to GDP for the 75 years following the date of the projection. In

May 1996 this gap was 5.4 percent of GDP; by October 2000 the gap had shrunk to 0.8 percent

of GDP.

       To be sure, some analysts believe that the assumptions underlying these projections are

too optimistic. Auerbach and Gale (2000) argue that, over the next decade, discretionary

spending is not likely to fall further as a share of GDP and that the number of people affected by

the alternative minimum tax (AMT) will not be allowed to increase by a factor of 10 — both of

which are implicit in the CBO projections. The CBO itself notes that the fiscal gap could be

substantially larger under alternative assumptions about health care costs and long-term

productivity growth. That said, for the purpose of assessing the extent of fiscal improvement over


                                                 4
the last several years, the relevant question is whether the assumptions underlying the projections

have become more optimistic in the last few years, and if so, by how much. Although it is

difficult to judge, we believe that the change in the projections likely provides a reasonable

measure of the progress that has been made.2



Sources of Improvement

        We explore the timing and sources of the budget improvement in several ways. Figure 3

shows the CBO’s surplus and deficit projections in January of 1990, 1993, 1995, 1998, and 2001.

As can be seen, the budget picture deteriorated between 1990 and 1993, but improved steadily

thereafter.

        This improvement stems from a variety of positive developments. The CBO parses the

revisions to its projections into the contributions of legislative factors (i.e., policy changes),

economic factors (i.e., changes in aggregate economic conditions such as productivity growth

and inflation), and technical factors (essentially a residual category showing the total budget

change that cannot be attributed to the first two categories). The most important technical factor

in the late 1990s was a surge in tax revenue relative to GDP beyond the increase that would be

expected given our progressive tax code. The CBO (2000) attributed this surge to a combination

of factors: an increase in corporate profits and workers’ wages and salaries relative to GDP, an

increase in the share of income received by people in the highest tax brackets, and a surge in



        2
         Between January 1998 and January 2001, the CBO increased its estimate of
productivity growth during the 10-year budget window by nearly 1 full percentage point. On the
other hand, the latest long-run outlook from the CBO also includes a substantial increase in the
projected rate of health spending growth.

                                                   5
capital gains from the booming stock market. Indeed, individual income taxes rose from 8.1

percent of GDP in 1995 to 10.2 percent in 2000, even though no significant tax increases were

enacted between those years. Another important technical factor during the late 1990s was a

sharp deceleration in federal health spending beyond that which was predicted based on changes

in Medicare policy.

       We present our summary of the CBO’s revisions in table 2. We total the revisions

between each pair of projection dates shown in figure 3. Each column pertains to a fixed budget

window. For example, column 1 shows the cumulative revisions between 1990 and 1993 in

surplus projections for fiscal years 1991 through 1995, the 5-year budget window for which

projections were released in January 1990. For the other pairs of years, the revisions apply to the

ten-year budget window following the first year in that pair; for example, the revisions between

1998 and 2001 apply to fiscal years 1999 through 2008. In order to decompose the revisions into

policy, economic, and technical factors, we cumulate the decompositions presented in each of the

CBO projections published between the two end points, typically three projections per year.

       Before discussing our results, we note four ways in which these calculations likely

understate the role of policy actions during the 1990s. First, the most significant policy actions

were taken early in the decade when the nominal amounts of revenues and outlays were smaller

and the budget window was shorter; this tends to downplay the true importance of these actions

compared with the favorable developments later in the decade. Second, because the CBO does

not retrospectively re-estimate policy effects, it may have underestimated the role of some

specific policy changes in the 1990s. For example, the increase in the top income tax rate in

1993 may have raised more revenue than expected because the CBO considerably


                                                 6
underestimated the share of income that would be received by people in the highest tax brackets.3

And health spending slowed much more sharply after the 1997 reforms than anticipated, perhaps

because the reforms had more bite than the CBO realized. Third, the policy actions presumably

played a role in improving economic conditions and thereby contributed to the positive economic

and technical factors. Fourth, the relative lack of policy actions in the face of large and growing

surpluses in the late 1990s could be viewed as an active contribution of policy, because the

political system had previously aimed simply to balance the unified budget. We return to the

third and fourth issues later.4

        Table 2 presents the results, which we summarize here and discuss in greater detail in our

chronology of the decade. During the early 1990s, budget projections deteriorated as the

substantial deficit-reduction actions in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990

(OBRA90) were more than offset by weaker-than-expected economic growth, higher-than-

expected federal spending on health programs, and the ballooning cost of dealing with failing

thrift institutions. However, the projections in early 1993 represented the nadir. The passage of

the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA93) reduced projected budget deficits

substantially, and—in contrast with OBRA90—had the good fortune to be followed by several

years in which economic and technical factors had little net effect on the budget outlook rather



        3
        Of course, people who faced higher tax rates after 1993 might have reported even higher
income in the absence of the policy change. Feldstein (this volume) elaborates on this point.
        4
          It is worth emphasizing that the CBO’s “no-policy change” baseline projections assume
that discretionary spending grows with inflation and therefore shrinks over time relative to GDP.
Under a baseline that assumed that discretionary spending would remain constant relative to
GDP, the policy category would receive credit for the fact that discretionary spending declined
relative to GDP over this decade.

                                                 7
than causing it to deteriorate substantially.5 Even so, in January 1995, the CBO was still

projecting rising deficits under current law. Three years later, the outlook was much better: the

beneficial effects of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (BBA97) and other policies, coupled with

very large gains in both economic and technical factors, produced a forecast of imminent

surpluses. By January 2001, the budget picture had again improved dramatically, owing to

positive economic and technical revisions of an astounding magnitude. Policy actions in the late

1990s were scored as reducing projected surpluses; the most prominent of these actions was the

sharp increase in late 2000 in the discretionary spending caps. However, the CBO tally does not

incorporate the effects of President Clinton’s “Save Social Security First” strategy (discussed

below) which arguably allowed hundreds of billions and perhaps trillions of dollars of surpluses

to flow through to pay down debt, rather than being used for additional spending or tax cuts.

       A final perspective on the improving fiscal situation during the 1990s is provided by

figure 4. This figure decomposes the difference between the CBO’s January 1993 projection and

the actual outcome (or the 2001 projection for the years beyond 2000). Thus, whereas table 2

cumulated revisions between several pairs of projection dates, figure 4 shows cumulative

revisions relative to a single projection date, 1993. During the years around the turn of the

century, policy changes contributed about one-quarter of the total improvement, with the rest

nearly evenly split between economic and technical factors. Over the entire period between 1994

and 2000, actual outcomes were roughly $2.6 trillion better than the CBO’s 1993



       5
          According to the CBO, OBRA93 reduced projected budget deficits by more than $400
billion over five years and by more than $1500 billion over ten years. The former figure was
central in the political discourse of the time, but the latter figure is consistent with the current
focus on ten-year budget windows and therefore is shown in our table.

                                                  8
projection—and policy changes accounted for one-third of this improvement. Moreover, as

discussed earlier, this estimate should be seen as a lower bound on the true contribution of

policy, in part because it omits all contributions from potential surplus-dissipating actions not

taken.

         In sum, the remarkable improvement in the budget outlook during the 1990s can be

attributed in substantial part to policy actions taken and avoided. But it also occurred in

important measure because of an economic boom that surpassed expectations, higher tax revenue

than would have been anticipated given overall economic conditions, and slower-than-expected

growth in health costs. We turn now to a chronological review of developments in budget and

Social Security policy during the decade.



3. Budget Deficit Reduction: 1990 through 1997

         In 1985, rising concern about large federal budget deficits led to passage of the Gramm-

Rudman-Hollings deficit-reduction law, which set explicit annual deficit targets that declined to

zero over several years. When the target proved too difficult to meet in 1987, the targets were

raised. Thus, when the 1990s began, the size of federal deficits—and the apparent inability of

the political process to reduce them—were central features of the political landscape.



OBRA90

         In the spring and summer of 1990, President Bush and the Congress debated and

negotiated alternative routes to deficit reduction. These initial discussions were inconclusive,

despite the President’s expressed willingness to increase taxes as part of a broader budget


                                                 9
package (which ran counter to the view expressed by many Republicans). However, the Iraqi

invasion of Kuwait and deteriorating economic conditions seemed to provide additional impetus

to the desire to “put our fiscal house in order,” and President Bush and the Congressional

leadership announced a budget agreement on October 1st. Yet, the House of Representatives

voted down the plan by a wide margin four days later, again throwing the budget picture into

disarray. Indeed. this initial failure of the long-term budget deal created a short-term problem as

well: a temporary appropriations bill lapsed, shutting down most of the government for a long

weekend. In late October, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady stated that President Bush was

open to a rate increase on upper-income taxpayers. Several days later, the Congress approved an

altered plan for deficit reduction as OBRA90.

       According to the CBO’s projections, OBRA90 reduced the deficit by nearly $500 billion

over five years compared with then-current law. This accomplishment had an important effect

on the fiscal outcomes of the 1990s and on the fiscal situation faced by the incoming Clinton

administration several years later. In two key respects, the plan represented an approach to

deficit reduction that differed significantly from that used in the late 1980s and that became a

model for fiscal constraints in the 1990s. First, the plan included a set of specific actions to

reduce the deficit, rather than a set of deficit targets. This new approach did not require

incremental fiscal stringency in response to a slowing economy. This was important because it

preserved the functioning of the automatic stabilizers, and it avoided forcing the Congress to

tighten the budget precisely when doing so would be most politically painful.

       Second, the plan introduced a new set of budget enforcement rules designed to deter

legislative actions that would worsen the deficit. One rule was a “pay-as-you-go,” or “paygo,”


                                                 10
constraint on taxes and entitlement spending: any tax cut and any increase in entitlement

spending would need to be offset by an equal amount of tax increase or entitlement spending

reduction. Another aspect of the enforcement system was “caps,” or limits, on discretionary

spending over the following several years. The caps were set so that they increased by less than

expected inflation, thereby squeezing down real discretionary spending over time. Because

discretionary spending is ultimately determined in annual appropriations bills, this approach

allowed policymakers to defer some difficult deficit-reduction decisions; nevertheless, the caps

were adhered to for a time, and in combination with the prevailing determination to shore up the

nation’s fiscal foundations, likely contributed to the improvement in the budget situation.



OBRA93

       During his campaign for the Presidency, Bill Clinton argued that America needed to

tackle both the budget deficit and the “public investment deficit.” His economic plan Putting

People First explained:

       “Our strategy puts people first by investing more than $50 billion each year over the next
       four years to put America back to work—the most dramatic economic growth program
       since the Second World War. Our strategy recognizes that the only way to lay the
       foundation for renewed American prosperity is to spur both public and private
       investment. To reclaim our future, we must strive to close both the budget deficit and the
       investment gap. . . .To pay for these investments and reduce our national debt, we will
       save nearly $300 billion by cutting spending, closing tax loopholes, and requiring the very
       wealthy to pay their fair share of taxes. Our plan will cut the deficit in half within four
       years and assure that it continues to fall each year after that” -- Putting People First (page
       7)

This plan ultimately evolved into OBRA93.




                                                11
The First Clinton Budget

       In February 1993, the Clinton administration put forward its first budget document, “A

Vision of Change for America.” President Clinton enunciated his economic strategy this way:

       “My plan has three key elements: economic stimulus to create jobs now while laying the
       foundation for long-term economic growth; long-term public investments to increase the
       productivity of our people and businesses; and a serious, fair, and balanced deficit-
       reduction plan to stop the government from draining the private investments that generate
       jobs and increase incomes.” -- A Vision of Change cover letter

The administration described its budget over five years as follows: First, the budget included

$328 billion of revenue increases, $329 billion of non-interest spending cuts, and $46 billion of

reduced debt service, for “gross deficit reduction” of $704 billion. The tax increases included a

new top income tax bracket, removal of the wage cap for Medicare taxes, and a broad-based

energy tax based on the energy content (measured in BTUs) of fuel consumed. The spending

reductions included cuts in Medicare provider reimbursements, defense spending, and a range of

nondefense discretionary spending, along with an extension of the discretionary spending caps

and paygo rules of OBRA90. Second, the budget proposal included $144 billion of additional

“investment outlays,” which we discuss shortly. Third, the plan had $77 billion of “tax

incentives,” including a significant expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit. Lastly, the plan

had about $15 billion of “stimulus outlays.” Overall, therefore, the plan was projected to provide

nearly $500 billion of net deficit reduction.6

       Woodward (1994) and Reich (1997) provide accounts of the behind-the-scenes

development of the Clinton budget. Both sources emphasize the ongoing conflict between the



       6
        In fact, about half of the stimulus outlays were scheduled to occur during fiscal year
1993, which was already underway and which preceded the 5-year budget window.

                                                 12
desire for deficit reduction and the desire to provide both short-term economic stimulus and long-

term public investments. We turn to these issues now.



Deficit Reduction and Economic Stimulus

       Traditional economic analysis of deficit reduction implies that reducing government

spending or increasing taxes depresses economic activity in the short run but by raising saving

and investment boosts productivity and the overall productive capacity of the economy down the

road. However, an alternative view of the short-run effect of deficit reduction was developed in

the 1980s by Blanchard (1984) and Branson (1985) among others. The idea is straightforward:

an expectation of lower future deficits reduces future short-term interest rates, and these lower

future short-term rates generate lower current long-term interest rates. Lower long-term interest

rates could stimulate business investment and other interest-sensitive spending immediately,

offsetting at least some part of the direct contractionary effect of deficit reduction. The net effect

on short-run output depends in part on the size of the reduction in the current deficit compared

with the expected reduction in the future deficit. Indeed, the 1984 Economic Report of the

President (pages 40 and 41) invoked this line of reasoning a decade earlier in arguing that a

credible phased-in deficit reduction plan would not hamper economic growth even in the short

run. This argument is basically the standard “crowding out” view of fiscal policy run in reverse:

greater fiscal restraint should lower interest rates and thereby “crowd in” private activity. The

novel twist is that the stimulus from the lower interest rates might be elicited even before the

contractionary impact of actual cuts in spending or increases in taxes had been felt.




                                                 13
       Yet as of 1993, this theory was largely untested, and President Clinton received differing

advice about its likely importance. Some members of the economic team believed that long-term

interest rates were unusually high because of expectations about the federal deficit, and that

altering those expectations would bring down long-term rates and thereby stimulate economic

growth. Others argued, however, that reducing the deficit would likely slow the economy and

“cost jobs” in the short run, although it would increase private investment and productivity over

time. While these advisers acknowledged the possibility that a decline in long-term interest rates

would cushion the economy from some of the direct contractionary effect of deficit reduction,

they tended to view a full offset as a long shot. The uncertainty about the short-run effect of

deficit reduction continued throughout the year. A July 15th memo to the President from the

Council of Economic Advisers reportedly noted that the economy was weaker than had been

anticipated and that the budget plan then working its way through Congress was more

contractionary in direct terms than the President’s original proposal. Nonetheless, the

administration retained its public commitment to deficit reduction.



Public Investments

       A key element of President Clinton’s campaign platform was targeted increases in public

spending. The detailed description of the economic plan referred to a significant increase in

infrastructure investment, the creation of a civilian research and development agency to

encourage conversion of a “defense-based economy to a peacetime one,” a nationwide network

of community development banks, additional police officers, “empowering those on welfare by

providing education, training and child care,” fully funding the Head Start and Women, Infants


                                                 14
and Children (WIC) programs, a Youth Opportunity Corps, greater availability of subsidized

college loans, and guaranteed health benefits for all Americans. Indeed, the first Clinton budget

stated: “Deficit reduction at the expense of public investment has been and will continue to be

self-defeating. The Clinton plan is explicitly and emphatically aimed at reducing the deficit

while increasing much-needed public investment” (page 10).

       Nevertheless, increasing these outlays was clearly at odds with the objective of reducing

the budget deficit, and the deterioration in deficit projections in late 1992 heightened this

conflict. While the President’s economic team was united in believing that both public

investments and deficit reduction were important, different members of the team put different

weights on the two objectives. Moreover, the President’s political advisers were said to be

generally quite critical of the focus on deficit reduction, viewing the proposed outlays as the

objectives over which they had fought the election.

       In the end, the additional outlays proposed during the campaign were whittled down very

substantially. The President was reported to have been torn — determined to rectify a perceived

deficit in public investment in both physical and human capital, but also believing that the best

way to gain the ability to address that agenda was to first get control of the fiscal situation. And

Robert Rubin (then Director of the National Economic Council and later Treasury Secretary) said

near the end of the administration that President Clinton had understood the potential stimulative

effects of lower budget deficits and lower interest rates: “Clinton said, ‘I have a jobs program,

and my jobs program is deficit reduction’” (New York Times, 12/25/00). Ultimately, the

President’s budget included only part of the new outlays proposed during the campaign, and only

a fraction of that amount was contained in the final legislation. In particular, while new funding


                                                 15
was provided for the Earned Income Tax Credit, Head Start, and WIC, the proposed

infrastructure spending was largely abandoned,.



Passage of OBRA93

       President Clinton presented his budget in mid-February. Several days later, Alan

Greenspan testified before the Senate Banking Committee, commenting that “the President is to

be commended for placing on the table for debate” a “serious” and “plausible” economic plan.

Newspaper stories interpreted Greenspan’s remarks as essentially endorsing Clinton’s overall

strategy while staying removed from the specifics.

       About one month later, the House of Representatives approved a budget resolution based

on the framework of the administration’s deficit-reduction plan, though as noted above the

resolution included only a fraction of the public investments that Clinton had proposed.

Separately, the House then passed the stimulus package as well. The Senate followed by passing

a budget resolution that was similar to the House’s, but balked at the stimulus package. After an

extended filibuster, Clinton announced in mid-April that he would withdraw the stimulus

package.7 Shortly thereafter, the proposed BTU tax also ran into heavy resistance, especially in

the critical Senate Finance Committee. In early June, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said

publicly that there would not be a BTU tax.

       The House and Senate passed separate budget plans by very narrow margins in May and

June, but the outcome of the conference process was still very uncertain. Finally, in August, the



       7
         A $4 billion bill extending unemployment compensation, which had been part of the
stimulus package, was passed separately.

                                                16
House approved a deficit-reduction plan by a 218-to-216 vote, with all Republican members

voting against and nearly all Democrats voting in favor. The next day, the Senate passed the bill,

on a vote of 50-50, again with all Republicans voting against, and with Vice President Al Gore

casting the tie-breaking vote in favor of passage. President Clinton signed this bill into law as

OBRA93.



What Did Deficit Reduction Ultimately Accomplish?

       Throughout the debate on OBRA93, sharply differing views were expressed about the

economic implications of the package. A number of the harshest critics prophesied that a

recession would surely result if the budget framework were enacted. As it turned out, economic

growth accelerated in 1994, and the second half of the 1990s witnessed an extraordinary

economic boom. What role did deficit reduction play in this success story? That is inherently a

difficult question to answer, but we believe that the fiscal discipline launched by OBRA90 and

OBRA93 made an important contribution to the 1990s economic expansion.8

       Most notably, the expansion was characterized by a remarkable surge in investment,

especially in business equipment and software. Between 1990 and 2000, outlays in this category

increased at an average annual rate of more than 10 percent in real terms. Several factors likely

contributed to this explosion, including strong output growth, robust profits, and rapid

technological progress. But investment was also supported by the sharp reduction in federal

government deficits that left more resources available for private use. Indeed, we think it likely




       8
           See Blinder and Yellen (2001) and Rubin (this volume) for endorsements of this view.

                                                 17
that both technical advances and greater national saving were necessary for the investment boom

that the country enjoyed, and that neither alone would have been sufficient.

          Figure 5 shows net national saving (that is, total saving less capital depreciation) and its

components as shares of GDP during the past 20 years. The turnaround in the federal budget

caused saving to be about 7 percent of GDP higher than it would have been if deficits had

remained at their 1992 level. Between 1992 and 1997, a decline in saving by households,

businesses and state and local governments offset some of the rise in federal saving, but national

saving still increased by almost 3 percent of GDP. After 1997, a sharp drop in non-federal

saving more than offset the continued increase in federal saving, and national saving declined.

Although a Ricardian might view the decline in private saving as a response to the additional

federal saving, the consensus view attributes that decline primarily to the dramatic runup in stock

prices.

          An alternative indication of the effect of deficit reduction can be gleaned from the path of

interest rates over the course of 1993. Interest rates reflect the balance of supply and demand in

the market for loanable funds. A reasonable presumption is that the private demand for funds

was, if anything, increasing over the course of 1993 as the economic recovery gathered strength.

Even so, market interest rates declined during 1993, suggesting that the net supply of funds (after

federal government demands had been satisfied) must have been seen as increasing. Moreover,

the day-to-day timing of the decline in interest rates aligns well with news about the prospects for

passage of OBRA93 (see the discussion in the 1994 Economic Report of the President).

          The significant increase in the nation’s capital stock generated by the investment boom of

the 1990s benefited the economy in several ways. First, it helped to raise productivity: labor


                                                   18
productivity increased nearly twice as fast between 1995 and 2000 as between 1975 and 1995.

Second, it helped contain inflation: the rate of change in the price index for personal

consumption expenditures excluding food and energy drifted downward through most of the

decade, even as the strength of the economic expansion increased.

       The improvement in the federal budget balance did not end the large deficits in

international trade that the United States began to run during the 1980s. At that time, popular

discourse linked the burgeoning budget and trade deficits together as the “twin deficits,” and not

without reason: as a matter of arithmetic, domestic investment must be financed either by

domestic saving or foreign saving. Therefore, assuming no change in domestic investment, a

decline in domestic saving resulting from a larger government deficit must be offset by more

foreign saving. But foreigners save by exporting more goods and services to us than we send to

them – in other words, by causing us to run a larger trade deficit. Thus, the popular moniker of

“twin deficits” was valid as far as it went, but it failed to account for changes in domestic

investment. And, as we have noted, one of the most dramatic developments in the 1990s was a

surge in domestic investment, to such an extent as to overwhelm the increase in domestic saving

and require an increase in the supply of funds from abroad.



The Republican-Controlled Congress

       The most prominent federal policy issue between the fall of 1993 and the fall of 1994 was

the Clinton administration’s proposal for national health care reform. This proposal is discussed

at length by Cutler and Gruber (this volume). Here we simply note that one concern about the

administration plan—both inside and outside the administration—was its likely effect on the


                                                 19
budget deficit. Indeed, when the CBO released its analysis of the administration proposal, it

estimated that the proposal would, on balance, increase the deficit. No comprehensive health-

care reform plan passed the Congress in 1994.

       Then, in the 1994 election, Republicans won majorities in both the Senate and the House

of Representatives. The Republican leadership said that it had a mandate for a multi-part

platform known as the “Contract with America.” The planks in this platform called for large tax

cuts, line-item veto power for the President, a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced

federal budget, and the elimination of the budget deficit by 2002.

       In 1995, Congressional Republicans tried to implement these policies. The House

approved a balanced-budget amendment in January — by nearly a 3-to-1 margin — but the

Senate rejected the amendment in March, as support fell just short of the two-thirds majority

needed. The House and Senate also approved line-item veto legislation that would have given

presidents the ability to reject individual items in spending bills without vetoing entire bills.

Although Clinton signed the legislation into law, the Supreme Court struck down the law as an

unconstitutional delegation of Congressional authority to the executive branch. Both houses of

Congress also passed bills cutting spending by $16 billion in the fiscal year then under way. And

both houses passed budget resolutions in May laying out broad frameworks for balancing the

budget by 2002.

       The Clinton administration responded to the Contract with America in part by trying to

occupy the political center. Thus, the administration’s budget included small middle-class tax

cuts as well as various spending cuts that, taken together, provided a small net reduction in

projected budget deficits. President Clinton attacked the balanced budget amendment and


                                                  20
charged that the Republicans’ proposed “deep cuts in federal spending amount to war on

children” (New York Times, February 25, 1995, page 1). He cast his first veto as president to

reject the legislated cuts in current-year spending, although he later approved a revised package

of cuts totaling the same amount. Then, in June, Clinton outlined a plan to balance the budget by

2005. By achieving balance more gradually than the Republicans, using the more optimistic

projections of the Office of Management and Budget rather than the CBO, and including smaller

tax cuts than the Republicans, the administration reduced the scale of the required spending

reductions. In particular, the administration emphasized that the Republican plan would have

entailed much larger cuts in Medicare and Medicaid than the administration’s plan.

       As budget negotiations stretched into the fall, Congressional Republicans tried to force

the administration to accept their budget framework using two different strategies. One strategy

was based on appropriations bills, and it resulted in two government shutdowns. By mid-

November, only three of the thirteen appropriations bills for the fiscal year already under way

had been passed. The continuing resolution (CR) that was funding the agencies not covered by

those three bills was expiring, and the Republicans refused to pass a further CR without

concessions on the overall budget plan that the administration refused to make. All “non-

essential” workers in those agencies were then furloughed for six days, until President Clinton

accepted the Republicans’ goal of balancing the budget in seven years and the Congress

approved another CR. Yet, negotiations broke down again by mid-December, and most of the

federal government was shuttered for another three weeks. Eventually, the Republicans

abandoned this strategy in January 1996.




                                                21
       The Congressional Republicans’ second strategy, pursued simultaneously with the

appropriations battle, was based on the statutory limit on federal debt. The government was on

track to exceed the debt limit by November; doing so would have caused the government to

default for the first time in history, because it would have been unable to borrow sufficient funds

to meet its obligations. The administration defeated this strategy by taking a variety of complex

steps to keep the officially measured debt below the statutory limit while still carrying on the

government’s activities. In mid-November, Treasury Secretary Rubin ordered the suspension of

new investments for the federal employees’ defined-contribution retirement plan and the early

redemption of some bonds held by the civil service defined-benefit retirement fund. In mid-

February, with the impasse over the debt limit still continuing, Rubin suspended investment of

Treasury’s Exchange Stabilization Fund, redeemed additional securities prior to maturity from

the civil service retirement fund, and authorized a set of asset exchanges among a government

trust fund, a government corporation, and the Treasury. Some members of Congress criticized

these actions, and Representative Gerald Solomon called for Rubin’s impeachment. In the end,

default was avoided, the debt limit was finally increased in March 1996, and the assets of these

various funds were restored to what they would have been absent these maneuvers.

       By April 1996, President Clinton and the Congress essentially agreed to disagree: they

passed a modest budget package that funded the government at close to current-law levels and

made small changes in tax policy. Many observers believed that President Clinton had won the

battle over the shutdown and had staked out the political center as a fiscally disciplined

moderate.




                                                 22
BBA97

        According to projections available in early 1997, deficits under then-current law would

persist and eventually increase again, despite the sharp improvement in the fiscal outlook during

the preceding several years. In February 1997, the administration put forward a budget designed

to achieve balance in five years. Negotiations between the administration and Congress stalled

until mid-March, when House Speaker Newt Gingrich expressed his willingness to scale back

Republican tax-cut plans. Budget talks resumed in early April, and a deal had nearly been

reached on an overall budget framework by May 1. Then the CBO told the administration and

Congressional leadership that it was reducing its projection of budget deficits over the following

five years by $225 billion. Taking advantage of that last-minute windfall, negotiators announced

the outline of an agreement the next day. Filling in the details of that outline proved to be a

contentious undertaking. After two weeks of haggling, a complete budget deal was announced

on May 15. But passing the specific bills needed to implement that deal involved further

sparring and, eventually, compromise. At the end of July, the Taxpayer Relief and Balanced

Budget Acts of 1997 passed by wide margins in both the House and Senate, and were signed into

law by President Clinton in early August.

        The CBO estimated that this legislation would produce much less deficit reduction than

OBRA90 or OBRA93, but would lead to a balanced unified budget in 2002. Outlays were

trimmed by nearly $200 billion over the following five years, including a reduction in payments

to Medicare providers and a modification and extension of the discretionary spending caps. But

taxes were cut by about $80 billion over the five-year period, including several new tax credits

favored by the administration and a cut in the capital gains tax rate favored by Republicans. In


                                                 23
retrospect, this law may have trimmed outlays by more than the CBO anticipated, because

Medicare spending fell well below CBO projections in subsequent years.9



4. Entitlement Reform and Saving Social Security First

       Throughout the 1990s, many institutions, analysts, and commissions sounded the alarm

about longer-term fiscal issues. The annual reports of the Social Security and Medicare Trustees

projected that both systems were significantly out of actuarial balance, and would eventually

require reform; new long-run budget models from OMB and CBO predicted exploding levels of

debt after 2010; and generational accounts calculated both inside and outside the government

showed large tax burdens on future generations. For example, the Social Security Trustees

projected in 1997 (Board of Trustees, 1997) that Social Security outlays would rise from 11

percent of payroll in 1997 to 20 percent of payroll in 2075, requiring a 50 percent increase in the

payroll tax if no other changes were made. At the same time, the CBO projected that total

government expenditures would exceed revenues by as much as 17 percent of GDP in 2030 and

that public debt would reach 100 percent of GDP in 2030.10 Generational accounts published in




       9
         More than half of the five-year reduction in outlays was scheduled to occur in FY 2002,
the target date for deficit elimination. Moreover, the net tax cut in FY 2002 was only about half
of the net tax cut in either FY2001 or FY2003, owing to shifts in the timing of tax obligations.
       10
           CBO (1997) presents deficit projections for 2030 that range from 8 percent to 17
percent of GDP. The lower estimate assumes that discretionary spending grows at the rate of
inflation, and therefore shrinks substantially as a share of GDP, and that there is no economic
feedback between the budget deficit and other economic variables. The higher estimate assumes
that discretionary spending remains constant as a share of GDP, and that—by soaking up national
saving that otherwise would have been available for investment in productive plant and
equipment—the deficit reduces economic growth.

                                                24
the 1993 federal budget suggested that lifetime net tax rates would have to rise from 34 percent

to 71 percent to sustain then-current fiscal policies.11

       The primary causes of these projected long-term imbalances were—and continue to

be—rising medical costs and the aging of the population. Declining fertility and rising life

expectancy imply that the ratio of workers to beneficiaries will fall from 3:1 to 2:1 between 2000

and 2030 (Board of Trustees, 2001). Because longevity gains and low fertility rates are expected

to persist, this is not simply a temporary phenomenon associated with the retirement of the baby

boom generation, but rather the leading edge of a new plateau. Moreover, spending on medical

care is projected to rise faster than GDP for decades to come due both to population aging and to

the adoption of new medical technology.



Entitlement Commissions

       Three important commissions on entitlement reform during the 1990s considered changes

in Social Security: the Bipartisan Commission on Entitlement and Tax Reform co-chaired by

Senators Bob Kerrey and John Danforth, the 1994-1996 Advisory Council on Social Security

chaired by Edward Gramlich, and the 1997-1998 National Commission on Retirement Policy co-

chaired by Senators John Breaux and Judd Gregg and Congressmen Jim Kolbe and Charles

Stenholm.



Kerrey-Danforth




       11
            See Auerbach, Gokhale and Kotlikoff (1994) for a description of these estimates.

                                                  25
       In order to secure Senator Kerrey’s decisive vote for the 1993 budget agreement,

President Clinton agreed to create a commission on entitlement reform and appoint the Senator

as chairman. The commission set for itself the goal of developing a package of revenue and

spending measures that would bring Social Security into long-run balance and hold the unified

budget deficit at its 1995 level relative to GDP in the long run. In December 1994, the

commission issued a staff report summarizing entitlement and tax reform options. The Social

Security options included raising the age of eligibility for full benefits, reducing cost-of-living

adjustments and spouses’ benefits, subjecting more benefits to taxation, and diverting a portion

of the Social Security payroll tax into mandatory private retirement accounts. Not all of these

options would have been required to bring the system into balance, but they are representative of

the approaches that were generally under consideration at the time. The Medicare options

included imposing a new monthly premium for beneficiaries and increasing the deductible from

$100 to as much as $1200. The options on the revenue side included eliminating deductions for

state and local taxes and for charitable contributions.

       A majority of commission members voted against the proposals ultimately put forth by

Senators Kerrey and Danforth (Bipartisan Commission, 1995), and Congressional leaders and

administration officials distanced themselves from the commission’s findings. For example,

incoming House Speaker Newt Gingrich responded to the proposals by saying “I think Social

Security is off the table for the foreseeable future. We have so many other more pressing and

more immediate problems and we ought to focus on the ones that are immediate, not the ones

that are 20 years out” (Washington Post, December 12, 1994, page A8). White House Chief of

Staff Leon Panetta stated that the administration was opposed to any proposal for reducing Social


                                                  26
Security spending (Washington Post, December 15, 1995, page A18). Nonetheless, Senator

Kerrey and commission member Senator Alan Simpson went on to introduce Social Security

reform legislation based on the commission’s work.12 The Kerrey-Simpson bills gradually raised

the early retirement age from 62 to 65 and the age of eligibility for full benefits to 70, reduced

cost of living adjustments for Social Security, and shrank benefits for spouses. The legislation

also permitted 25 percent of the Social Security trust fund to be invested in private-sector stocks

and bonds, and gave workers the option of diverting 2 percentage points of their payroll tax

payments to individual investment accounts in exchange for lower Social Security benefits.



Social Security Advisory Council

       Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala appointed the second major

commission, the 1994-1996 Advisory Council on Social Security, in response to a legal

requirement that an advisory council be empaneled every four years to review the Trustees’

estimates and comment on relevant policy issues.13 This particular advisory council was given an

usually broad mandate and charged with reviewing Social Security’s long-run financing, the

equity and adequacy of benefits, and the relative roles of the public and private sectors in the

provision of retirement income. The 13-member committee was chaired by Edward Gramlich

and followed the traditional practice of including three representatives from organized labor,


       12
            Senator Danforth retired from the Senate at the end of 1994.
       13
           By tradition, the quadrennial advisory councils in turn sponsored technical review
panels that examined the assumptions and methods underlying the Trustees’ estimates of
actuarial imbalance. The 1994 legislation making Social Security an independent agency
eliminated the quadrennial advisory councils and replaced them with a more permanent advisory
board.

                                                 27
three representatives from the employer community, and other experts. The council intended to

complete its work by the end of 1995, but the breadth of its mandate and the contentious nature

of its discussions led it to delay its final report until January 1997.14

        The members of the advisory council came to consensus on three key issues.15 First, there

should be substantially more advance funding of Social Security’s long term obligations in order

to boost national saving. Second, equity investments should play an important part in Social

Security reform. And third, reform should not only meet the traditional goal of bringing the

system into 75-year balance, but also leave the ratio of the trust fund to annual benefits stable at

the end of the 75-year period. However, council members disagreed quite strongly about the way

in which these changes should be implemented, splitting into three factions with different

recommended solutions for Social Security’s long-run financing problem.

        Six of the thirteen council members, led by former Social Security Commissioner Robert

Ball, favored a plan that aimed to preserve the present Social Security benefit structure as much

as possible. The key feature of this plan was investing 40 percent of the Social Security trust

fund in equities instead of the special Treasury bonds traditionally held by the trust fund.

Because equities are projected to earn a higher expected return than bonds, this change in the

trust fund’s portfolio would be scored as achieving 75-year solvency with relatively small




        14
             Schieber and Shoven (1999) provide a fascinating account of these discussions.
        15
          In addition to the issues we highlight, the advisory council also reached a consensus on
restructuring Social Security family benefits, extending mandatory coverage to all state and local
government workers, extending the period over which the indexed annual wage is computed,
accelerating the increase in the age of eligibility for full retirement benefits, and revising the
income taxation of Social Security benefits. See 1994-1996 Advisory Council (1997) for details.

                                                   28
changes in revenues and benefits.16 To prevent the system from ultimately drifting out of

balance, the plan also proposed raising the payroll tax by 1.6 percentage points beginning in

2045.

        Two members, led by council chairman Gramlich, proposed adding individual accounts

on top of the existing Social Security system. In contrast with the Kerrey-Simpson individual

account proposal, this plan maintained the entire 12.4 percent payroll tax for the traditional

defined-benefit program, which meant that its benefit cuts did not have to be as deep. The

individual accounts were to be funded by mandatory additional contributions of 1.6 percent of

covered payroll, which it was hoped would represent additional national saving. Individuals

would choose how to allocate their account balances among a limited number of equity and bond

index funds.17

        Five council members, led by Sylvester Schieber and Carolyn Weaver, proposed much

larger individual accounts. They suggested that 5 percentage points of the payroll tax be diverted

to individual accounts; another 5 percentage points would provide a flat benefit to all retirees at

about two-thirds of the poverty line; and the remaining 2.4 percentage points would be used to

continue survivor’s and disability insurance. Additional tax revenue equal to 1.5 percent of

payroll for the next 75 years would be needed to fund the transition to this system.




        16
          In the final report, the supporters of this plan did not actually recommend equity
investments. Instead, they wrote that the plan “envisions, after a period of study and evaluation,
the possibility of large-scale investment of [Social Security trust fund] monies in the equity
market in order to help bring the program into balance.” There was no recommendation for
eliminating the actuarial imbalance if equity investments were not ultimately pursued.
        17
             Gramlich (1998) explains the reasoning behind this plan.

                                                  29
       The Gramlich Commission struggled to reach consensus around a single plan, but

eventually published a final report that reflected these three starkly different visions of Social

Security reform. Ironically, the commission may have been considerably more valuable for not

having reached consensus, because its analysis of these three alternatives served as a valuable

launching pad for future analysis, including the work of Clinton administration staff.18 It is also

worth noting that, despite the divisions on the commission, the majority of members supported

some sort of individual accounts as part of Social Security. Thus, the idea of individual accounts

had, in a few short years, made a remarkable transition from the white papers of libertarian think

tanks to the mainstream policy debate.



Breaux-Gregg-Kolbe-Stenholm

       Unlike the first two commissions, the Center for Strategic and International Studies’

National Commission on Retirement Policy was not government-sponsored, although its co-

chairs Senators Breaux and Gregg and Congressmen Kolbe and Stenholm were committed to

introducing the commission’s ultimate recommendations in legislation. The group was launched

in January 1997 and released its proposal in May 1998. It recommended diverting 2 percentage

points of the payroll tax to create individual accounts. To rectify the imbalance in the traditional

system (made even deeper by the carve-out of tax revenue), the plan raised both the normal and

early retirement ages, assumed that further cost-reducing changes would be made to the



       18
          Another reason why the report was so valuable was that it incorporated a great deal of
analytical material developed under the direction of Harry Ballantyne and Steve Goss, Chief
Actuary and Deputy Chief Actuary, respectively, at the Social Security Administration, as well as
by the members of the technical review panels.

                                                 30
consumer price index, and reduced benefit levels by altering the formula that translates lifetime

earnings into benefits. In order to shield low-income households from some of the benefit cuts,

the plan introduced a new minimum benefit for workers with at least 20 years of earnings. This

benefit increased from 60 percent to 100 percent of the poverty line as a worker’s years of

earnings increased from 20 to 40, so a household headed by a worker with 40 years of earnings

would never fall below the poverty line.

        Despite the persistent belief during this period that current fiscal policy was not

sustainable in the long run, none of these proposals came close to being enacted. Quite

understandably, the need to reform a system that was projected to remain solvent for at least

another 30 years to second place on the political agenda to the urgency of addressing the near-

term fiscal deficits.19



Social Security

        Within the White House, serious consideration of tackling long-run entitlement issues

began in the middle of 1997. During the preparations for his second inaugural address, President

Clinton had told his advisers that he wanted to make strengthening Social Security one of his top

goals for his second term. In addition, Congress was insisting on creating a Medicare

commission as part of the 1997 budget agreement, and the administration needed to decide how

to respond. Most important, the administration realized that its next budget projections would


        19
          The other important piece of Social Security legislation during this period was
introduced by Senator Moynihan. It proposed to cut the payroll tax and gave workers the option
of using the tax savings to fund an individual account, in which case their contribution would be
matched by the employer share as well. The plan also included various benefits cuts and, in the
long run, increased the payroll tax to 13.4 percent of payroll.

                                                 31
include substantial unified surpluses between 2002 and 2007. Because these surpluses would fall

within the ten-year budget window, the administration would need to propose a policy for

allocating them.

       This imminent end to the era of deficits was viewed by the administration as creating both

opportunities and dangers. On one hand, the availability of surpluses gave the administration the

freedom to contemplate new ambitious goals. On the other hand, President Clinton had

successfully headed off Republican calls for deep tax cuts during the previous five years by

calling for fiscal responsibility and deficit reduction. In an era of surpluses, it was harder to see

what strategy would be more popular than Republican tax cuts, which were viewed by the

administration as likely to have adverse distributional consequences and to reduce national

saving at a time when the country should be saving more to prepare for the retirement of the

baby-boom generation.



Political Pressures

       The administration’s economic team met throughout the summer and fall of 1997 to

consider tax reform options, strategies for the new surplus era, and entitlement reform. Although

these meetings initially were conducted on separate tracks, it was realized eventually that these

topics were closely related, and the three topics were merged into a single set of “special issues”

meetings that focused on ways to use the projected surpluses.

       At an early point in this process, the President’s health advisers argued that fundamental

Medicare reform should not be pursued aggressively. These advisers believed that the

combination of population aging and rising health costs per beneficiary made Medicare’s long-


                                                  32
term financing problems too large to resolve at that time. They also felt that the 1997 budget

agreement already embodied many of the steps that the administration was ready to embrace with

respect to Medicare reform.

       Fundamental tax reform was also viewed as having substantial political and economic

risks. First, if the President opened the door to a major tax bill, the administration might well

lose control of the process to Congress. Then, a flat-tax plan with significant revenue loss (and

therefore a negative effect on national saving) and adverse distributional consequences could

have become the focus of the debate. Second, any reform that simplified the tax code or

encouraged saving to a significant degree would likely create millions of losers as well as

millions of winners, even with the commitment of substantial surplus funds. Lastly, no particular

tax reform proposal ever gathered momentum among the economic team.

       In contrast, there was considerable enthusiasm among the economic team for undertaking

Social Security reform. This enthusiasm stemmed in part from the plausible reform alternatives

laid out by the Gramlich Commission and in part from the Rooseveltian legacy for the President

that would come from putting Social Security on secure ground for the coming century. But the

President’s advisers also believed that proposing to use the surpluses for Social Security reform

was more likely than the other alternatives to block both tax cuts and new spending. Thus

reforming Social Security could do double duty – helping to solidify the improving budget

outlook—President Clinton’s most important economic accomplishment—by permitting the

projected surpluses to feed through to national saving, and facilitating the rejuvenation of the

nation’s most important social program. Indeed, the economic team believed that even in the




                                                 33
likely event that the reform effort failed, the debate over Social Security reform would be healthy

in and of itself, and could go a long way toward maintaining fiscal discipline.

       The administration’s economic team was also aware of a significant group within the

Democratic Party that downplayed the need for Social Security reform, partly in order to prevent

radical change in the program. This group emphasized that, under the Social Security Trustees’

low-cost assumptions, the system remains solvent throughout the 75-year projection period.

Given this possibility that the existing system might be viable, why open the Pandora’s box of

“reforming” the crown jewel of American social programs? The administration’s economists

gave less weight to this argument for two reasons. First, the low-cost projections assume that a

large number of factors such as fertility growth, mortality rates, immigration, and economic

growth all turn out much better than expected—which presumably has very low probability.

Second, recent research by academic demographers (for example, Lee and Tuljapurkar, 1998)

suggests that longevity would likely increase more rapidly than projected by the Social Security

Trustees, which would raise the costs of the program. Thus, the distribution of possible

outcomes seemed weighted toward a worse, not a better, financial situation than projected by the

Trustees.

       In a similar way, some observers noted that the Social Security Trustees’ assumption of

1.6 percent annual GDP growth in the long run was far below the 3.1 percent annual average

growth experienced in the last 30 years, and argued accordingly that the Trustees were being

much too pessimistic about growth.20 This argument missed the point that the growth of the

labor force is projected to slow from its current pace of about 1 percent per year to approximately


       20
            The numbers in this paragraph are taken from the 2001 Trustees’ Report.

                                                34
zero when the baby-boom generation begins retiring in earnest. GDP growth can be decomposed

into the sum of the growth of the labor force (the number of workers) and the growth of

productivity (output per worker). The Social Security Trustees are assuming that productivity

growth in the long run will roughly match its 1.5 percent annual historical average. With the

growth of the labor force dropping to about zero, productivity growth would have to roughly

double from its historical average rate in order for GDP growth to be maintained at its historical

average pace. Moreover, faster economic growth has limited ability to improve Social Security’s

finances in the long run because a retiree’s initial level of Social Security benefits is indexed to

aggregate wage growth during his or her working years. It is only because benefits after

retirement are indexed to inflation rather than wages that economic growth improves the actuarial

standing of the system.



National Saving

       The goal of increasing national saving was central to the administration’s thinking about

Social Security reform. Conventional wisdom indicates that the nation should save more now in

preparation for the retirement of the baby boom generation. With lower fertility and rising

longevity, the output generated by each worker will need to support the consumption of a larger

number of workers and retirees in the future than it does today. The nation can smooth

consumption in the face of this rising dependency burden by setting aside a larger share of

current output as saving, thereby increasing the future capital stock and making future workers

more productive.




                                                  35
       Despite this rationale, the economic case for increasing national saving is less clear cut

than one might think. The fundamental issue is whether current generations should consume less

in order to increase the well-being of future generations. In the absence of population aging,

determining the optimal amount of saving involves balancing two considerations. On one hand,

because future generations will benefit from gains in productivity over time, they are likely to be

substantially better off than current generations. On the other hand, because foregone

consumption compounds at the marginal product of capital, it is relatively inexpensive for

current generations to provide additional resources for future generations.

       Population aging introduces three additional considerations into the analysis. First, the

increase in the dependency ratio caused by population aging will reduce the standard of living of

future generations relative to what it would be without population aging, suggesting that

additional resources should be transferred to future generations and therefore that additional

saving would be desirable. Second, the slowdown in population growth will increase the capital-

labor ratio, and therefore depress the return on capital; the lower return on capital suggests that

less saving would be desirable (Cutler, Poterba, Sheiner and Summers, 1990). Elmendorf and

Sheiner (2000) use simulations to quantify these effects and conclude that the United States

probably should not undertake substantial additional saving in response to the anticipated

demographic shock. A third consideration is that tax rates would have to rise significantly over

time to fund current-law benefits on a pay-as-you-go basis. For example, current projections

imply that the Social Security payroll tax rate would have to rise from its current level of 12.4

percent to about 18 percent by 2070, an increase of roughly half. Since deadweight loss rises




                                                 36
with the square of the tax rate, economic efficiency would be increased by raising taxes on

current workers in order to decrease required future tax rates.

       Quite aside from issues of population aging, many economists believe that a number of

factors are causing U.S. national saving to be too low. For example, households may be short-

sighted in their preparation for retirement, government policies may discourage saving by

imposing a tax on capital income (interest, dividends, and capital gains), pay-as-you-go

retirement programs like Social Security may crowd out private saving, and positive externalities

from capital accumulation may drive the social return to saving above the private return.

       It is very difficult to predict the impact of a given Social Security reform plan on national

saving. For example, if budget policy is made with the aim of balancing the unified budget, any

increase in Social Security surpluses will result simply in additional spending or tax cuts in the

non-Social Security part of the budget. Similarly, households may respond to Social Security

reform by changing their own saving in ways that offset additional saving generated directly by

the reform plan. Elmendorf and Liebman (2000) estimate the effect on national saving of seven

different approaches to Social Security reform and show that the effects of alternative reforms

depend critically on how households and the rest of the federal budget respond to reform.



Saving Social Security First

       Before the January 1998 State of the Union address, the administration’s economic team

presented President Clinton with three options for pursuing Social Security reform. The first was

to make a surprise announcement of a complete reform plan in the State of the Union address.

The second was to name a commission to produce a reform plan in a short time, with the aim of


                                                 37
engaging the Republican leadership in high-level negotiations in Spring 1998. The third was to

launch a year of public education, with the aim of releasing a proposal after the fall 1998

Congressional elections, possibly in the 1999 State of the Union address.

       As work progressed, the discussion ultimately focused on two possibilities. One was to

allocate a specific percentage of the surplus to the Social Security trust fund and announce the

date to which trust fund solvency would be extended by this action; the other was to reserve the

entire surplus pending Social Security reform. The administration viewed the first proposal as a

more dramatic announcement and an approach that would free up the remainder of the surplus

for other priorities. But reserving all of the surplus was seen as a simpler and more sustainable

message than announcing that some seemingly arbitrary fraction should be reserved. Moreover,

it avoided the risk that a specific proposal to allocate surpluses to the trust fund would serve

simply as a lightning rod for criticism and end up reducing the chance of achieving reform.

       The administration ultimately adopted the second option, a strategy that became known as

“Save Social Security First.” In the State of the Union address, President Clinton announced that

his budget would reserve all of the projected unified budget surpluses pending Social Security

reform. This strategy did not mean that the entire surplus would necessarily be used for reform,

but rather that the President would not support other uses of the surplus—either for tax cuts or

spending increases—until reform was accomplished and it became clear how much of the surplus

was needed to finance that reform. Thus, the policy was intended both to preserve the projected

surpluses in case they were needed to finance the transition to a more fully funded Social

Security system, and to provide the reward of being able to use the remaining surpluses for tax

cuts or more spending as an incentive to Congress for tackling Social Security reform.


                                                 38
       President Clinton also launched a year-long national dialogue, including bipartisan

forums designed to educate the public that would culminate in a December 1998 White House

conference. At the first of these forums, in Kansas City, the President presented five principles

that he said should guide Social Security reform: 1) strengthen and protect Social Security for the

twenty-first century; 2) maintain universality and fairness; 3) provide a benefit people can count

on; 4) preserve financial security for low-income and disabled beneficiaries; and 5) maintain

fiscal discipline. The principles were designed to rule out proposals for radical privatization,

including opt-out plans21, and proposals that would adversely affect low-income beneficiaries.

The President also made clear that all reform options other than an increase in the payroll tax rate

should be on the table. Throughout the year, President Clinton accepted the advice of his

economic team and did not rule out an eventual increase in the normal retirement age.

Moreover, the President consistently maintained that individual reform elements should not be

judged in the abstract, but rather as components of complete plans, and that those plans should be

evaluated against the principles he laid out in Kansas City. He thought that by providing cover

for those who were willing to make politically unpopular proposals for Social Security reform, he

could increase the chance that reform would ultimately be accomplished.




       21
          “Opt-out” plans – in which individuals could choose whether to remain in a scaled back
version of the current system or to allocate instead a share of their payroll tax to individual
accounts -- were considered particularly risky because high-income individuals might
disproportionately opt out of the current system, turning it into a welfare program and depriving
it of universal political support.

                                                 39
5. Social Security Reform Options

       After the 1998 State of the Union address, the administration launched a systematic

process to develop a Social Security reform plan. A working group jointly chaired by National

Economic Council Director Gene Sperling and Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers

met once or twice nearly every week to develop and analyze reform options. These working

group meetings culminated in meetings with the economic team principals roughly once every

three weeks, and in intermittent meetings with the President that increased in frequency in

advance of key decisions.

       In order to be prepared for the debate that was expected to arise, the working group

studied a wide range of reform options—including many that the administration opposed. To be

clear, the President never determined whether there was any plan built around individual

accounts that he could have supported. To our knowledge, he never gave any of his advisers a

brief for negotiations with Congress, and the administration certainly was never on the verge of

striking a deal. The President’s advisers rejected all plans for individual accounts that would

have diverted resources away from the traditional defined-benefit program – so-called carve-out

plans. Whether a so-called “add-on” plan could have garnered the support of the President is

impossible to know. It was clear that any such plan would have put strict limits on the extent to

which an individual’s overall benefit might be at risk from poor investment results, in line with

one of the President’s principles for Social Security reform. Similarly, the administration would

have put considerable emphasis on the redistribution accomplished under a proposed reform plan

– again in line with one of the President’s principles – and might well have insisted that a

reformed system be more progressive than the current one.


                                                40
       The working group studied analytic issues that cut across various reform options. Most of

the analysis focused on two broad topics: mechanisms for using the projected budget surpluses to

pre-fund Social Security benefits, and mechanisms for investing those pre-funded amounts in

private financial assets. Much of the effort ultimately was directed toward devising ways of

bridging the gap between defenders of the current defined-benefit system and advocates of

individual accounts, including hybrid plans that included features of both approaches.

       Relatively little time was spent analyzing traditional reform options such as raising the

retirement age, adjusting the indexation of benefits, or changing the tax status of benefits. This

lack of attention largely reflected the familiarity of these options, owing in part to the analysis

conducted by the Gramlich Commission. What was new in the current situation was the

availability of additional resources, in the form of emerging surpluses, that might be used to

reduce the pain of putting the system on a sound footing. Moreover, it did not make much sense

to focus on specific revenue raisers and benefit cuts until the President had settled on a particular

approach to reform. Lastly, the administration believed that the specific painful elements of a

Social Security deal would need to be introduced at the last minute as part of bipartisan

negotiations with Congress. The administration’s view was that any specific painful options put

forward before a complete deal was reached would be attacked, and responsible policies would

be taken off the table prematurely.



Using Projected Budget Surpluses as Part of Social Security Reform

       There were two principal challenges in using near-term budget surpluses to help pay long-

term Social Security benefits. The first challenge was to set aside the money today in a way that


                                                  41
would actually boost the resources available to future generations, rather than being dissipated

down the road by future Presidents and Congresses. The second challenge was to ensure that the

incremental future resources would actually be used to finance retirement benefits.

        Maintaining budget surpluses – and thus paying down public debt – was seen as the most

direct way to boost national saving, but by itself this approach had several shortcomings. First, it

was not clear how to give Social Security a claim on the additional future resources that would be

made available by paying down the debt. Second, this strategy would pay off the entire public

debt long before Social Security was fully prefunded, raising the question of how the ensuing

“national asset” should be invested. Third, it was difficult to see how this strategy could be

locked in for any length of time: if future Presidents and Congresses decided to use the surpluses

for tax cuts or new spending, then these resources would not be available as planned.

        These concerns led the administration working group to devise a set of reform plans that

involved transferring some portion of the unified budget surplus to the Social Security trust fund.

Mechanically, these plans transferred funds from the non-Social Security part of the federal

government to Social Security. If written into law, these transfers would have given Social

Security a legal entitlement to future resources, and would have ensured that any later diversion

of the surpluses to other purposes would have had an adverse implication for the Social Security

trust fund. The transfers were also designed to take projected surpluses “off the table,” so that

they could not be allocated to tax cuts or new spending, but would be used to reduce the public

debt.

        One important disadvantage of these plans was their vulnerability to the charge of

“double counting” the Social Security surplus. Much of the projected unified budget surpluses


                                                42
originated in Social Security and therefore were already credited to the Social Security trust fund

under current law. Thus, according to the critics, transferring unified surpluses to Social Security

caused the same dollars of revenue in effect to be counted twice to the benefit of Social Security.

Yet, the status quo involved precisely the same approach to budgeting: as long as the budget

process was focused on balancing the unified budget, dollars that were credited to the Social

Security trust fund were still perceived to be available for new spending or tax cuts. The

administration’s economic team believed that a dollar of the unified budget surplus could

therefore legitimately be transferred to Social Security and credited to the trust fund, provided

that the dollar would take the dollar off the table and prevent it from being used for other

purposes. In that case, the transfer would result in an extra dollar’s worth of public debt being

paid down relative to the status quo, and therefore in an extra dollar of government saving.

       Nevertheless, the administration was well aware that this approach had “bad optics”, and

internally a number of economists argued vigorously against adopting a plan that would be

subject to this criticism.22 However, the obvious alternative of taking Social Security out of the

budget and transferring only non-Social Security surpluses to the trust fund was not a strong

alternative at this point because the non-Social Security part of the budget remained in deficit.

Thus, this approach would have imposed too much fiscal stringency and would have required the

administration to give up talking about its proudest economic accomplishment, the unified

budget surplus, and instead report an on-budget deficit.




       22
            In the Clinton White House, “bad optics” meant simply “did not look good.”

                                                 43
       Another disadvantage of this approach was the need for novel budget accounting in order

to truly take the surpluses “off the table.”23 Under conventional budget scoring, a dollar

transferred from the non-Social Security part of the budget to Social Security would not reduce

the unified budget—so the amount of surplus apparently available for tax cuts or new spending

would not actually be reduced. Therefore, the administration proposed a new scoring rule in

which every dollar transferred from the non-Social Security budget to the Social Security trust

fund would result in a one-dollar reduction in the reported unified surplus. There was

considerable internal debate over whether such a scoring rule would be sustainable, or whether

some future President or Congress would revert to conventional scoring methods and erase the

incremental government saving that would be achieved under this type of approach.



Investments in Private Financial Assets

       Beginning with the Gramlich Commission, nearly all Social Security reform proposals

involved some investments in private financial assets. Yet this consensus left a wide gap

between those favoring individual accounts and those favoring collective investing through the

Social Security trust fund. During the late 1990s, Henry Aaron, Peter Diamond, Robert

Reischauer and others emphasized the high administrative costs and portfolio risks associated

with individual accounts, and they devised mechanisms to protect collective investment systems

from political interference (Aaron and Reischauer, 1998, Diamond, 1996, 1997, 2000). On the

other side, Martin Feldstein, Andrew Samwick, and others argued that individual accounts need



       23
         See Penner (1998) for a discussion of budget scoring issues that arise in Social Security
reform plans.

                                                44
not involve high costs or risks, and were the most effective way of pre-funding Social Security

benefits (Feldstein and Samwick, 1997, 1998). The analysis conducted within the administration

built upon this academic work and extended it significantly along four dimensions:

administrative feasibility and costs, portfolio risk, political interference in markets and corporate

governance, and redistribution.



Administrative Feasibility and Costs

       Peter Diamond had shown that administering individual accounts had been very

expensive in Chile and the United Kingdom, and argued that costs might also be high in the

United States. In particular, he pointed out that an annual administrative cost of 100 basis

points—similar to many U.S. mutual funds today—would reduce the retirement income available

to an individual with 40 years of work history by roughly 20 percent. In order to ensure that the

economic team’s advice to the President would be accurate and did not promise something that

could not be achieved, Lawrence Summers insisted that the working group determine whether

setting up an individual accounts system was even remotely feasible, what kind of service it

could provide, and at what cost.

       The information technology staff at the Treasury Department and the Social Security

Administration were given the task of determining exactly how information and dollars would

flow from workers’ earnings statements to private investment managers. Extremely detailed

estimates were produced of how much additional manpower would be necessary for such a

system to function. For example, one option was for workers to indicate their choices of private

sector fund managers on their 1040 tax forms. The working group went so far as to determine


                                                 45
how many digits would be needed for each fund’s ID number and therefore how many key

strokes would be required to enter all of the ID numbers each year. Separate estimates of cost

and necessary manpower were produced depending on whether the processing would occur by

May of each year (sharply increasing IRS workload during its peak period) or by early August

(which was much cheaper).

       Two principal considerations were how long it would take to get a system up and running

and whether the system could provide service similar to what many workers now experience in

the 401(k) plans offered by their employers. On the first issue, it was considered important from

a political standpoint that the system be up and running before President Clinton left office in

early 2001. However, the information technology teams throughout the government were busy

with Y2K preparations, so it did not seem possible that substantial resources could be devoted to

setting up individual accounts until after those preparations were completed. At one point in

mid-1998, consideration was given to starting the process of setting up the administrative

structure for individual accounts right away, a year before there was any chance of a plan being

enacted by Congress, so as to shave a year off the time between enactment and the existence of

the accounts.

       On the issue of service quality, a major concern of the working group was whether

contributions could be made to individual accounts in a timely manner. Employers do not report

their workers’ annual earnings until the first quarter of the following year; it then takes the IRS

several months to process and reconcile these earnings records, so it is typically August before a

mostly complete set of earnings records for the previous year is available. The working group

thought that it would be unappealing for account contributions to be made as much as 18 months


                                                 46
after the earnings on which they were based. Options were developed for making estimated

contributions to accounts based on workers’ previous years’ earnings, or for investing all of the

funds in a default portfolio and then allocating them to individual accounts (including the within-

year returns) when the information on individual earnings became available.

       Yet, the working group remained very concerned that any feasible, inexpensive individual

account system would be perceived as providing inferior service compared with employer-run

accounts. Because the cost of a system of individual accounts depends mainly on the number of

accounts, rather than the amount invested in them, the existence in a public system of millions of

very small accounts could generate administrative costs that were much larger on a “load” basis

than for employer-run systems. Minimizing those costs would generally require a reduction in

service and flexibility relative to those private systems. Thus, Lawrence Summers was fond of

saying that we had to guard against the risk of setting up the Post Office when people were used

to dealing with Federal Express.

       The working group concluded that managing a system of individual accounts would be

feasible, but that the government would have to play a major role in the system and only bare-

boned accounts could be administered at a reasonable cost. In particular, the government would

have to collect the revenue and set up a clearinghouse to direct deposits to the private sector fund

managers selected by each worker. Other options such as having workers send contributions

directly to fund managers or mandating that employers administer the accounts would be

prohibitively expensive. One way to reduce costs was to allow people no investment choice until

their accounts reached a minimum size (perhaps $5000); until then the funds would be invested

collectively. Moreover, the range of investment choices would need to be sharply limited, to


                                                 47
perhaps a dozen firms offering broad-based index funds. Account statements would be mailed at

most once a year, and phone inquiries would not be toll-free. Borrowing against account

balances would be prohibited, partly to preserve the balances exclusively for retirement use, and

partly because load administration has proved very costly in the private sector.

       The working group’s best estimate was that such a system could be run at an annual cost

of $20 to $30 per account, while accounts with service similar to that in current 401(k)s (though

not including loans) would be two or three times as expensive. With roughly 180 million

accounts, total annual costs could exceed $5 billion a year in today’s dollars (more than half as

large as the current budget of the IRS and therefore more than half the cost of administering the

entire federal tax code) and tens of thousands of new government workers would be needed to

answer phone inquiries and process worker choices of fund managers. Thus, even though

administering an individual account system was thought to be feasible, administrative costs

remained a significant downside to that approach. The group also believed that it was important

that costs be spread across all accounts in proportion to their assets; otherwise a very substantial

share of the investment returns of lower-income people with small account balances would be

consumed by the administrative costs.



Portfolio Risk

       Social Security reform plans that involve investment in equities could introduce two sorts

of portfolio risk. First, aggregate stock-market fluctuations could leave different cohorts with

higher-than-expected or lower-than-expected retirement income. Second, retirement income

could differ among members of the same cohort if individuals were allowed to make their own


                                                 48
investment choices. The extent of these risks varies considerably across different reform plans.

Collective investment by the trust fund would produce no variation in benefits among members

of the same generation, and—to the extent that there is some mean reversion in equity

prices—could smooth some of the risk across generations as well. On the other hand, individual

accounts with relatively unrestricted IRA-style investment options could result in substantial

numbers of ill-informed investors making very different investment choices. As a result, two

individuals born in the same year and with identical earnings histories might retire with very

different benefits because they assumed different idiosyncratic risks or because aggregate stock-

market fluctuations had affected them differently.

       The economic team emphasized to President Clinton the portfolio risks under different

reform proposals and the reasons to be cautious about equity investments. For example, the S&P

500 did not regain its 1968 value in real terms until 1983 (even including reinvested dividends),

and Japan’s Nikkei index had fallen by 60 percent since 1989. Moreover, a persuasive

explanation for why the return on stocks in the twentieth century was so much higher than the

return on bonds has never been given, raising concerns about whether this gap will persist in the

future. Robert Rubin was particularly concerned about adding portfolio risk to the Social

Security system, and he argued that it would be a mistake to have Social Security benefits depend

on equity returns whether it was the trust fund or individuals doing the investing. He worried

that the stock-market boom of the 1990s had erased people’s memories of earlier periods such as

the 1970s during which stock prices did not rise at all, and reminded the economic team of the

Business Week cover story from 1979: “The Death of Equities?”




                                                49
       On balance, however, the economic team did not think that market risk was a sufficiently

important concern to rule out plans that involved equities, for several reasons.24 First, steps

would have been taken to closely circumscribe the exposure of benefits to equity risk. If

investment were undertaken, only a limited fraction of the trust fund would have been eligible for

investment in equities. If individual accounts were part of the picture, they would have been

small add-on accounts with limited investment options. Second, in the United States, even large

stock market declines have ultimately been more than made up for in subsequent rebounds. For

example, the S&P 500 lost 85 percent of its value between September 1929 and June 1932, but

had returned to its 1929 level by the end of 1936. Nevertheless, there was some concern that

there might not be sufficient political patience to remain invested in equities after a large market

downturn. Third, although valuations were then very high relative to historic levels, a correction

during the next decade or so would be relatively unimportant for retirement benefits since total

equity holdings would not yet have grown very much. Fourth, under the reform plans the

administration was considering, the existing Social Security payroll tax would still be allocated

entirely to the purchase of Treasury securities by the trust fund. Only general revenue

contributions to the system would be invested in equities. Thus, even in the unimaginable

circumstance in which all of the stock investments became worthless (in which case, the

solvency of Social Security would probably not be first on the list of the country’s problems!),

Social Security would be no worse off than under current law. Fifth, the current Social Security

system already involves substantial risks, including the political risk that benefit rules will


       24
          To be clear, the economic team nonetheless viewed risk as a significant downside of
plans that involved equities, a downside that needed to be weighed against the possible
advantages of equities.

                                                  50
change, the demographic risk that forecasts of mortality and fertility will be wrong, and the

economic risk that productivity growth will be higher or lower than currently projected.

Introducing equities would add a new form of risk, and might increase the total amount risk, but

it would not be converting a currently riskless system into a risky one. Nonetheless, the

economic team viewed market risk as a significant drawback of plans that involved equities, and

this drawback would need to be balanced against any potential benefits of such an approach.

       The administration working group also analyzed policy options that could reduce the risk

faced by holders of individual accounts. One problem was that individuals might shift out of

equities after a market decline, missing the recovery in equity prices. Another problem was that

individuals who retired shortly after a substantial market drop—and annuitized their account

balances based on those lower equity prices—might believe it was unfair that workers who had

retired only shortly before were receiving much larger annuity payments. Indeed, this perceived

unfairness might be acute even if the later retirees received higher annuities by investing in

equities throughout their working lives than if they had invested entirely in government bonds.

This issue could be addressed, at least in part, by mandating gradual annuitization or investment

in variable-rate annuities, which would reduce the dependence of retirement income on equity

prices at a moment in time. Another way to reduce risk would be a guarantee that each worker

would do at least as well as if he or she had invested in government bonds. Yet, this approach

presented the danger that guarantees would induce people to take too much risk in their portfolios

or would simply represent a large contingent liability for the government.25



       25
          Indeed, research by Kent Smetters (2001) suggested that the contingent liability implicit
in such a guarantee might be essentially as large as the unfunded liability in the current system.

                                                 51
Political Interference in Markets and Corporate Governance

       Although the administration working group thought that centralized investment in

equities had important advantages, the group also recognized that such investment had significant

potential disadvantages. Chief among these was that government ownership of private financial

assets raised difficult issues of corporate governance and potential political interference in capital

markets.

       Under the Social Security reform proposals of Robert Ball and Henry Aaron and Robert

Reischauer, as much as 50 percent of the Social Security trust fund would be invested in equities.

This holding would represent a large share of the U.S. stock market—somewhere between 15

percent and 30 percent in 2030, depending on the relative growth rates of GDP and the stock

market. Even with a smaller part of the trust fund invested in equities, the government could still

end up as the largest shareholder of many companies. If political considerations influenced the

investment decisions of the trust fund, the efficiency of capital markets in allocating resources

could be degraded. Certainly, the track record of state and local governments in the United

States as well as foreign governments around the world was sufficient to give one pause on this

issue. It is not difficult to compile a sobering list of examples in which political intrusion had

materially reduced investment returns and arguably reduced the efficiency of various economies.

Moreover, government ownership of equities might discourage the government from pursuing

other policies that could lower equity prices. If the government were a major stockholder in

Corporation XYZ, would the Justice Department shy away from pursuing a meritorious anti-trust




                                                 52
case against XYZ? Or would the Environmental Protection Agency or Occupational Safety and

Health Administration refrain from enforcing their regulations against XYZ?

       A related problem is how the government would exercise its rights as a shareholder to

choose corporations’ managers and participate in business decisions. Simply abstaining from

voting might not be an adequate strategy since it could effectively turn minority shareholders into

majority shareholders who would not necessarily look out for the interests of the other

shareholders. In addition, voting rights may represent an important source of value in owning

equity; would the government be fulfilling its fiduciary responsibilities if it simply ignored that

source of value altogether?

       Some members of the economic team believed that these problems were not

insurmountable. They argued that investments could be handled by an independent board

modeled after the Federal Reserve Board, with members chosen from the private sector and

charged with acting in the sole interest of trust fund beneficiaries. Investments could be limited

to “widely used index funds,” in order to inhibit investments in index funds that excluded

particular firms engaged in some specified out-of-favor activity. The private fund managers

could be chosen in a competitive process, instructed to vote proxies on behalf of the trust fund’s

beneficiaries, and required to commingle the public money with the assets of their private clients.

Even still, future Congresses could alter such safeguards at any time, so developing a culture of

non-interference would be very important.

       The working group also came to appreciate that many of these same issues would arise, to

at least some degree, under a system of individual accounts, especially to the extent that

investment choices were tightly constrained. Indeed, most legislation proposing individual


                                                 53
accounts would put strict limits on investment choices; it was not hard to believe that political

interference might well affect the choices offered.26 At the same time, individuals may be more

vigilant in policing deviations from return-maximizing investment policies for accounts that they

own personally rather than accounts that are held by the government—and Congress may

therefore be more constrained in deviating from performance-maximizing choices with regard to

such accounts. For example, the Thrift Savings Plan is a defined-contribution plan for federal

employees that has existed for years without political interference.



Redistribution

       A central principle for the administration was that Social Security reform should not

reduce the extent of redistribution in Social Security from high-income households to low-

income households. In particular, the administration believed that reform should help the

demographic groups that are most dependent on Social Security for staying out of poverty, such

as elderly women who are widowed, divorced, or never married. Indeed, Gene Sperling argued

that any negotiations with Congressional Republicans about individual account plans should be

limited to only those plans that would result in a more progressive system overall than current-

law Social Security.

       The most frequently proposed way of funding individual accounts was to make

contributions proportional to an individual’s earnings, such as two percent of earnings. Because



       26
          For example, the Archer-Shaw proposal discussed later required all individual accounts
to be invested in index funds with 60 percent equities and 40 percent bonds. The Breaux-Gregg-
Kolbe-Stenholm plan limited investments to a small number of options similar to those in the
federal Thrift Savings Plan.

                                                 54
this approach would provide no redistribution to lower-income workers, the administration

working group studied other options for funding individual accounts.27 One approach was to use

the projected budget surpluses to fund equal-dollar contributions to each worker’s account.

Contributions of $300 per worker had roughly the same aggregate cost as contributions of one

percent of payroll, so contributions of $600 would be a highly progressive alternative to

contributions of two percent of earnings.28 Contributions equal to $300 plus one percent of

earnings would come very close to replicating the redistribution in the current Social Security

system.29 In April 1998, Newt Gingrich proposed using the surplus to give every American a tax

cut in the form of an equal-dollar contribution to a “Social Security Plus” individual saving

account; thus, there was some hope that a plan along these lines could receive bipartisan

support.30

       An alternative to funding individual accounts in a redistributive manner would be to

make the traditional system more redistributive at the same time that non-redistributive

individual accounts were introduced. This approach was used in the Breaux-Gregg-Kolbe-


       27
          With mandatory annuitization at a single price, “two percent accounts” would appear to
redistribute from poor to rich, because the rich tend to live longer. However, the overall
distributional impact of such a plan depends on the source of the contributions. If the funding is
generated from a progressive source like the personal income tax, then even accounts funded
proportionally to earnings can be progressive.
       28
          Contributions would likely be limited to workers with at least a threshold amount of
earnings in the year (perhaps the amount that would qualify a worker for four quarters of Social
Security coverage, currently around $3000).
       29
             See Feldstein and Liebman (2001) and Liebman (2001) for further discussion.
       30
         Of course, there are many other redistributive formulas that could be used. For
example, contributions could equal ten percent of the first few thousand dollars of earnings, five
percent of the next few thousand dollars, and a smaller percentage of additional earnings.

                                                 55
Stenholm plan. The administration’s economic team had serious concerns about this approach

because it would lower even further the return received by higher income people in the

traditional system, and thus run the risk of eroding support for a universal program.

       The working group also gave a great deal of attention to ways of reducing poverty among

elderly women. Elderly women who are divorced, widowed, or never married now have poverty

rates around 20 percent, roughly twice the population-wide average. An inter-agency process

developed a set of options for addressing this problem, and produced a report that was issued in

conjunction with a Presidential event on the importance of Social Security to women.31 The

options included: increasing Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits; providing Social

Security earnings credits for years spent out of the labor force raising children; and offering a

new widow benefit equal to 75 percent of the benefit received by the married couple before the

deceased spouse passed away (capped at the benefit received by a worker with average

earnings).32 These options were seen both as good policy and as a way to sweeten a Social

Security reform package, particularly one with individual accounts, for Congressional

Democrats. Although these proposals were never formally advanced by President Clinton,

versions of them were put forth later by Vice President Gore during his Presidential campaign.

       Another important concern was to make sure that Social Security reform did not reduce

the income of Social Security disability beneficiaries. Because the formulas for retirement


       31
            Women and Retirement Security, available at www.ssa.gov/policy/pubs/womenrs.html.
       32
          Providing earnings credits for time spent out of the labor force raising children
implicitly values that time the same regardless of a woman’s earnings level. In contrast, the more
traditional proposal to provide “drop-out” years in the Social Security benefit formula implicitly
values the time of high-earning women more highly than the time of low-earning women. Thus,
the new option was essentially a more progressive version of the traditional proposal.

                                                 56
benefits and disability benefits are linked, cuts to retirement benefits would generally reduce

disability benefits as well. Yet, many disabled beneficiaries would not have had a chance to

accumulate significant individual account balances by the time they become disabled, so they

could not compensate for cuts to the traditional benefit using the proceeds of their individual

accounts in the same way that retirees could. Therefore, the working group believed that any cuts

to traditional retirement benefits should not pass through to disability benefits; all of the reform

plans constructed by the group were scored under this assumption.



Potential Compromise Reform Proposals

       The administration working group believed that there was more potential for substantive

consensus on Social Security reform than the heated rhetoric on the topic suggested. Clearly, the

political challenge of achieving reform was immense, and the substantive gap among competing

proposals remained wide. Nonetheless, the administration believed that the concept of using the

proceeds of fiscal discipline to help address the nation’s long run fiscal challenges – and

therefore to justify general revenue transfers to the Social Security trust fund – had the potential

for bipartisan support. And on two of the most disputed issues—whether investments in private

securities should be handled collectively or individually, and whether individual accounts should

be created as part of Social Security—there was nearly a continuum of options, and proposals

from the left and the right seemed to be moving toward each other.

       On the first issue, proponents of individual accounts had originally argued that investment

options should be completely unrestricted. For example, Martin Feldstein had initially proposed

that individual accounts be funded through a tax credit and invested in any of the assets that are


                                                 57
eligible for use in an IRA. Yet, in response to concerns about administrative costs and naive

investors, the main Republican legislative proposals ended up restricting investment choices to a

few broad index funds. Similarly, early plans for private investments by the Social Security trust

fund envisioned the government investing directly through a single large fund. But as concerns

about government interference in markets were raised, proposals tended to set up independent

investment boards and to spread the investments across a number of private managers. Thus, by

late 1998, alternative investment mechanisms appeared to be converging to some degree.

       A similar convergence may have been occurring on whether individual accounts should

be part of Social Security. Some Democrats argued that individual accounts had the potential to

create wealth for all Americans, provide choice for individuals, and allow for some bequests.33

Other Democrats were willing to consider supplementing Social Security benefits with

government-subsidized accounts targeted at low-income households. At the same time, some

Republicans who had initially favored diverting a portion of the existing Social Security payroll

tax to individual accounts—and then cutting the traditional benefit substantially—turned to

proposals in which general revenue was used to fund individual accounts.34 Indeed, there was a

growing understanding that reshuffling the revenue stream already dedicated to paying retirement

benefits would not help close the underlying financing gap, and that additional resources would



       33
          Clearly, an individual account system that allowed for bequests would have lower
average retirement benefits than a system that used the account balances of deceased workers to
supplement the retirement benefits of survivors—unless additional resources were contributed to
the system.
       34
         In some of these plans, part of the Social Security payroll tax was diverted to individual
accounts, while general revenue was directed to the trust fund to make up for the diverted
monies.

                                                58
be needed. Moreover, some of the Republican proposals involved redistributive funding of

individual accounts. Thus, by late 1998, there appeared to be the possibility for convergence

around using non-Social Security funds to make redistributive contributions to individual

accounts, contributions that might or might not bear any direct mechanical relationship to the

traditional Social Security system.

        Three main types of Social Security reform plans occupied the “policy space” defined by

this possible convergence of views. The first and simplest were add-on individual accounts like

those proposed by Edward Gramlich. Under this approach, the entire existing Social Security

payroll tax would continue to be used exclusively for funding traditional Social Security benefits,

and benefit cuts and revenue raisers would be used to bring the system into financial balance. At

the same time, general revenue would be contributed to individual accounts to compensate for

the reduction in the traditional benefit.35

        The second type of eligible plan was a so-called “clawback” plan, initially developed by

Martin Feldstein and Andrew Samwick. Under this approach, general revenue from the budget

surplus would be contributed to individual accounts, and a significant share of the account

balances (possibly in excess of 75 percent) would be “clawed back” when workers reached

retirement in order to finance traditional Social Security benefits; individuals would receive the




        35
         It would also be possible to fund add-on accounts by requiring workers to make
mandatory contributions to these accounts above and beyond their current payroll taxes. This
approach was taken in the Gramlich plan.

                                                59
remaining account balances directly.36 House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Archer

and his colleague Clay Shaw introduced a plan of this form.

       The third type of possible consensus plan was a so-called “hybrid” plan that included both

trust fund investments in equities and the establishment of small individual accounts. Some

analysts saw these plans as “splitting the difference” between the two sides in the political

debate. In addition, this approach offered an interesting opportunity for addressing concerns

about government interference in markets: trust fund investments could simply mirror the

investment choices that individuals made in their own accounts. This could be done through a

single fund that matched the aggregation of individuals’ choices, or it could be done through

individual “mirror accounts” in the name of each worker that were invested on behalf of the trust

fund. On the other hand, some analysts argued that the smaller individual accounts in hybrid

plans made little sense, because the fixed costs of administering the accounts would consume an

excessive fraction of the investment returns.

       An important concern of the economic team was that a reform plan involving modest

individual accounts in the beginning might be a “slippery slope” toward total privatization. Yet,

there was considerable disagreement about what sort of reform presented the greatest such risk.

Some members of the team argued that a clawback approach would best preserve the existing

system, since nearly all of the retirement benefits would continue to be paid out through the

traditional defined-benefit formula. From that perspective, a clawback plan could be viewed as a


       36
          A typical proposed clawback rate was 75 percent, leaving 25 percent of the account
balances for individuals to consume directly. The clawback can also be specified as a reduction
in Social Security benefits equal to some fraction of account withdrawals. For example, a worker
might lose 75 cents of his or her traditional benefit for each dollar of retirement income from an
individual account.

                                                 60
back-door way for the Social Security trust fund to invest in equities while leaving the

investment decisions to individuals rather than the government. Other members of the economic

team argued that the clawback approach tied Social Security benefits too closely to individual

accounts, and that it would not be politically feasible to tax such a large portion of the accounts at

retirement. Under this view, clawback plans were simply a way of building up sufficient assets

to make total privatization possible (and likely) at a later date.

       More generally, the working group recognized that the details of reform proposals would

have a tremendous impact on their economic and social consequences—and thus on the

acceptability of those proposals to the administration. Thus, an “individual accounts” proposal

that was funded out of the existing payroll tax in a non-progressive manner with unrestricted

investment options and high administrative costs represented a completely different view of the

future than a proposal with a similar label but different funding source and account design.



The 1999 State of the Union Social Security Proposal

       Throughout 1998 the administration working group studied the analytic issues underlying

Social Security reform and constructed specific illustrative reform plans. Briefings for President

Clinton covered not only the substantive issues detailed in the preceding pages, but also political

strategies for achieving bipartisan agreement on reform. Options that were given some very

preliminary thought included: the “Andrews Air Force Base approach,” echoing the negotiations

over the 1990 budget deal, in which White House officials and the Congressional leadership were

sequestered in non-stop negotiations at the base just outside Washington, DC; the “spontaneous”

emergence of a bipartisan piece of legislation from a moderate Democrat on the Senate Finance


                                                  61
Committee, as had almost worked on tobacco legislation; and the formation of a commission

made up of key members of Congress and administration officials.

       The administration also spent 1998 pursuing an active “external” strategy on Social

Security reform. This effort included briefings for members of Congress, public education

efforts surrounding the three national Social Security forums, and preparation for the December

White House conference. Congressional distrust of the administration’s work on Social Security

reform ran very deep, in part because of the potentially momentous importance of the issue.

Some Democrats doubted whether the administration had a bedrock commitment to preserving

Social Security in its current form to the greatest extent possible. Congressional Republicans

were even less trusting of the administration, and they sought assurances that President Clinton

was serious about achieving bipartisan reform and not simply trying to trick Republicans into

taking an unpopular position on the issue that Democrats could then use to re-take control of the

Congress. Indeed, when Archer and Shaw introduced a specific reform plan, some of their

Republican colleagues complained that they had fallen into the Clinton administration’s trap.

       In the end, President Clinton decided to pursue Social Security reform based on

bolstering the Social Security trust fund rather than on creating individual accounts. The

President proposed transferring general revenue into the trust fund and investing a portion of the

transferred amounts in equities. The equity investments would be restricted to never exceed five

percent of the total U.S. stock market. This decision may have been influenced by the changing

political dynamic in late 1998, as the possibility that the President would be impeached came

clearly into view. Whether the President would have pursued a different approach in the absence

of impeachment will never be known.


                                                62
       The other key decision that was made in the run up to the 1999 State of the Union address

was whether to stick with a unified budget framework or to switch to a budget framework that

allocated only the non-Social Security surplus. The central advantage of the unified budget

framework was that there would be sufficient funds available not only to shore up Social Security

but also to extend Medicare solvency, provide for additional discretionary spending, and

establish progressive individual savings accounts outside of Social Security. A key disadvantage

was that transferring a portion of the unified budget surplus to Social Security might be seen as

“double counting.” In contrast, the on-budget approach would avoid the double counting

critique, but there would not be sufficient resources available for all of the non-Social Security

initiatives. Moreover, it would be necessary to project on-budget deficits for some of the

individual years in the ten-year budget window. Ultimately, the President decided to stick with

the unified budget approach to budgeting that had been the norm since the Johnson

Administration.



6. Budget Surpluses: 1998 through 2000

       During the final years of the Clinton administration, attention focused on the rapidly

rising budget surpluses and their appropriate disposition. We review the economics and politics

of that budget debate in this section.



The 1999 State of the Union Budget Framework

       In his 1999 State of the Union address, President Clinton built on the earlier strategy to

“Save Social Security First” by proposing a specific budget framework for Social Security reform


                                                 63
and long-term fiscal discipline. This framework proposed an allocation of unified budget

surpluses. In contrast with prevailing practice, this allocation extended over the unusually long

time frame of fifteen years because there were insufficient resources in the first ten years to

accomplish all of the President’s objectives. In line with the earlier strategy, all of the proposed

uses of the surpluses were conditioned on reforming Social Security.

       The proposed allocation of the unified surpluses was as follows: First, 62 percent of the

surpluses were allocated to Social Security and 15 percent to Medicare. Transfers in these

amounts would be made to the respective trust funds, and the associated budget resources would

be viewed as fully “used” and hence not available for other purposes. Because the monies were

not needed by these programs to pay current benefits, they would be used predominantly to pay

down the publicly held debt of the Federal government, with a limited amount of the revenue

transferred to Social Security used to purchase equities. The plan was projected to extend the

solvency of the Social Security trust fund to 2055 and the Medicare Part A trust fund to 2020.

       Another 12 percent of the surpluses were allocated to create new Universal Savings

Accounts (USAs). As the administration described in more detail later in the spring, the

accounts would involve an automatic contribution by the government for all workers earning less

than a specified amount, as well as a matching contribution also available to workers with

income below a certain threshold. A primary motivation for these accounts was to serve as a

bridge between the proponents and opponents of introducing individual accounts into the Social

Security system. On one hand, USAs gave the administration a means of promoting wealth

creation on a broad scale, and they signaled the President’s willingness to discuss the appropriate

role of individual accounts in the U.S. retirement system. On the other hand, the administration


                                                 64
emphasized that the accounts would have been entirely separate from Social Security—funded

from revenue outside the existing payroll tax, and having no implication for an account holder’s

traditional Social Security benefits. Indeed, to reinforce the separateness of USAs from Social

Security, and to ensure that USAs were not seen as undermining the existing private pension

system, the administration proposed that contributions to 401(k) plans would qualify for

government matching. As it turned out, however, USAs never received serious legislative

consideration.

       The budget framework also allowed for additional tax cuts for child care, long-term care,

school construction, and investment in economically depressed areas, but the cost of these

proposals was financed entirely by other revenue-raising provisions such as curtailing tax

subsidies and closing some tax shelters and other loopholes. The final 11 percent of the

surpluses were allocated to military readiness and other spending.

       Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan testified to Congress on the day after the State

of the Union address. His prepared remarks concerned macroeconomic conditions and therefore

did not mention the President’s proposals of the previous evening. However, in the question-

and-answer session, he provided crucial support for transfers to the Social Security trust fund

while reiterating his strong opposition to government investment in private markets:

       [Greenspan] endorsed President Clinton’s proposal to let federal budget surpluses
       accumulate by locking up most of the money in the Social Security and Medicare trust
       funds. But he attacked Mr. Clinton’s plan to invest as much as 15 percent of the Social
       Security trust fund in the stock market, arguing that it would be “virtually impossible” to
       insulate investment managers from political influence. – Wall Street Journal




                                                65
Much of the media coverage focused on Greenspan’s opposition to government ownership of

private equities. Even so, these testimonies helped the administration build credibility within the

Beltway for the plan’s central device for preserving a large fraction of the unified surpluses.

       The proposed budget framework was also criticized on the grounds that it “double

counted” the projected Social Security surpluses. As we discussed earlier, the unified surplus

equals the “off-budget” surplus (overwhelmingly the Social Security surplus) plus the “on-

budget” surplus (essentially, the surplus on the non-Social Security portion of the government’s

operations). The critics argued that the administration’s plan for allocating unified surpluses was

transferring to Social Security some budgetary resources that had originated in the Social

Security system, and therefore had already been credited to the Social Security trust fund once.

Consider, for example, the hypothetical case in which all of the unified surpluses originated in

Social Security. In that case, a $1 surplus in the Social Security system would have increased the

trust fund balance by $1.62—$1 as under current law, and an additional 62 cents from the

proposed transfers. The administration responded that the budget debate in preceding decades

had been a debate about the unified budget, with an implicit—though often unspoken—objective

of balancing the unified budget. By contrast, the administration now aimed to leave a unified

surplus. If one accepted the administration’s assertion that “business as usual” would have left

no unified surpluses, then the State of the Union plan generated incremental government saving,

and the budget framework simply proposed to allocate this incremental saving to Social Security.

       Republicans responded to the President’s proposals by pledging to create a “lockbox” to

ensure that the Social Security surplus would be used to pay down debt. In addition, they




                                                 66
proposed to allocate the on-budget surplus primarily to a ten percent across-the-board tax cut and

increases in defense spending.



Balancing the Budget Excluding Social Security

       Against a backdrop of the double-counting allegation and continued dramatic

improvement in budget projections, the administration significantly revamped its budget

framework for the Mid-Session Review (MSR) released in June 1999. The new framework

proposed to balance the budget in each year exclusive of the operations of the Social Security

system. The MSR projected that the on-budget account would run a surplus of $5 billion in fiscal

year 2000 if no policy changes were enacted; as it turned out, the on-budget account finished

fiscal year 1999 with a surplus of less than $1 billion, the first surplus by that measure in 40

years, and followed that with a surplus of more than $86 billion in fiscal year 2000.



The Logic

       Social Security had been taken officially “off-budget” in 1983, and this action was

reaffirmed in the budget legislation of 1985 and 1990 (Koitz, 1998). But none of this legislative

action was sufficient to redirect policy attention to the on-budget balance. The key objective of

the administration and others who favored the MSR approach to budgeting was to refocus the

political conversation on the disposition of the on-budget surpluses. This step would establish

the presumption that the Social Security surpluses would result in unified surpluses of at least the

same size on average, and thus be used to pay down public debt. While the new framework




                                                 67
clearly had political value to the administration in potentially blocking Republican tax-cut

proposals, it was also motivated by economic policy considerations.

       The administration’s economic team viewed the MSR approach as significantly

improving the legitimacy of the Social Security trust fund as a mechanism for pre-funding the

government’s future retirement-related obligations. Under the old approach, in which the

implicit fiscal objective was to balance the unified budget, an incipient Social Security surplus

would tend to elicit either tax cuts or new spending. Depending on the size of this offset, the net

result could be little or no government contribution to national saving, even though the balance in

the Social Security trust fund would have increased. Thus, in the preceding fifteen years, Social

Security surpluses probably raised government saving by much less than 100 percent of the

accumulation in the trust fund. In essence, the nation had been doing less to prepare itself for the

retirement of the baby-boom generation than one would have thought by looking at the rising

trust fund balance.

       In contrast, the new approach implies that Social Security trust fund accumulations would

be backed, dollar-for-dollar, by government contributions to national saving. By itself, the new

approach leaves open the question of how much pre-funding of future Social Security obligations

should be undertaken, but it provides much more assurance that the government is doing as much

pre-funding as it appears to be doing.37 By bringing trust fund accumulations and increments to

government saving into alignment, the new framework took an important step toward “truth in



       37
         One view is that the objective of balancing the on-budget account should be
complemented with the objective of putting the Social Security system into some form of long-
term actuarial balance. Determining how to satisfy that second leg of the overall fiscal objective
would supply the answer as to how much prefunding we should be undertaking.

                                                68
government.” Put differently, this approach takes the “double counting” critique completely off

the table, because Social Security surpluses unambiguously would be “used” once and only once

(to pay down the debt held by the public).

       The new framework also provided an organized context for executing general revenue

transfers into the Social Security trust fund. Such transfers would be scored as an “expense” of

the on-budget account; if the accepted goal is to balance the on-budget account, then this expense

would reduce the resources available for other uses. As a result, all accumulations in the trust

fund would be matched, dollar for dollar, by an incremental increase in government saving. In

this budget framework, general revenue transfers to Social Security are not simply a paper

transaction, but generate true economic pre-funding of future obligations. The administration

proposed sufficient transfers in the 1999 MSR to extend the solvency of the Social Security trust

fund to 2053. To motivate a specific amount of those transfers, they were set equal to the interest

savings that would result from using the Social Security surpluses to pay down public debt rather

than cut taxes or raise spending. The transfers would have begun in 2011 based on debt

reduction in the preceding decade.

       The MSR plan did not fully resolve the difficulties with general revenue transfers,

because it left Medicare as part of the on-budget account while proposing to transfer general

revenue into the Hospital Insurance (Medicare Part A) trust fund. Under traditional budget

scoring rules, the net effect of these transfers on the on-budget surplus would have been zero,

because the transfers would have appeared as both an outlay and a receipt. To deal with this

problem, the administration adopted the obvious modification to the usual accounting

rules—treating the transfers as a “full use” of those monies, and therefore as reducing the amount


                                                69
of on-budget surpluses available for other uses. The proposed transfers were projected to extend

the solvency of the Medicare trust fund to 2027, by far the longest solvency horizon in the history

of the program. However, no action was taken by the Congress to implement either the Social

Security or Medicare transfers.



The Lockbox

       Because the details of national saving and budget accounting are not viewed as attractive

material for political messages, the new approach was proposed to be implemented through

creation of a Social Security “lockbox.” The lockbox was designed to create a mental picture of

a strong safe that would contain not only the current-law Social Security surpluses but also the

proposed general revenue transfers. By placing these funds in a “lockbox,” the administration

meant to increase the public’s assurance that those monies would be saved—which in this

instance meant that they would be used to pay down debt held by the public. The substance of

the lockbox consisted of a set of procedural hurdles that the Congress (and especially the Senate)

would have to overcome before the government could run a deficit in the on-budget account.

       That said, the most important guarantor of the new framework is something more

amorphous—specifically, the terms of the political debate. So long as the political debate

focuses on the disposition of the on-budget surpluses, the procedural hurdles underlying the

lockbox probably will not come under serious challenge. But if the consensus changes, the

Congress will find ways around those hurdles. Thus far, the political consensus appears to be

holding, and it remains politically dangerous to “dip into the Social Security surpluses.”




                                                70
However, it is far from certain that this consensus will continue to hold if the on-budget account

returns to deficit.

        A critical factor that smoothed the way to shifting the focus of the budget debate was the

ongoing improvement in the fiscal situation. After the budget stringency that had been required

to balance the budget on a unified basis, there would have been little appetite for balancing the

on-budget account if doing so would have entailed substantial additional pain. That said, it

would be a mistake to underestimate the discipline that was required to achieve the higher

standard. At every step of the way, the opportunity cost in terms of foregone tax cuts and

additional spending was keenly felt.

        Congressional Republicans generally embraced the shift in budget objective toward

balancing the on-budget account, but they rejected President Clinton’s proposed disposition of

the projected on-budget surpluses. In the MSR plan, the President allocated these resources to

transfers to Social Security and Medicare, new spending (especially a Medicare drug benefit),

and a limited set of tax cuts. The framework also incorporated a comprehensive reform of

Medicare, which is discussed in greater detail by Newhouse (this volume). All told, the debt held

by the public would have been paid off, on a net basis, by 2015 under the President’s plan. In

contrast, Congressional Republicans continued to place much greater emphasis on tax

reduction—at one point proposing that the entire projected on-budget surpluses be devoted to a

tax cut, and providing no new resources for either Social Security or Medicare.



Fiscal Policy in 2000




                                                71
       During its last year the Clinton administration framed its fiscal policy around the goal of

eliminating the debt held by the public. Treasury Secretary Summers explained the logic of this

objective in a May speech. First, Summers argued, paying down the debt “will maximize

investment at a time when the reward for investing is especially great.” Summers piggybacked

on the observation of Alan Greenspan that the return to investment appeared to be historically

high, and therefore that the opportunity cost of failing to invest also was historically high.

Second, paying down the debt “will help to increase supply in our economy, rather than

demand.” The economy was then operating beyond its normal productive capacity, and even the

administration’s own economic projection showed a gradual upward drift in the unemployment

rate over the succeeding few years. Against that backdrop, many analysts believed that fiscal

policy should aim to increase aggregate supply by adding to the available pool of capital, rather

than fueling aggregate demand. Third, a failure to pay down debt “is likely to exacerbate the

U.S. trade deficit.” The size of the trade deficit may just have reflected the relative economic

strength of the United States and its major trading partners. But it was one of the few economic

imbalances at the time, and the moment seemed inopportune for a more expansionary fiscal

policy that might appreciate the dollar, reduce foreign demand for our goods and services, and

increase our demand for theirs. Fourth, Summers said, a failure to pay down debt “will reduce

our capacity to meet the demographic challenges ahead.” Summers strongly endorsed the view

that the most important preparation the federal government could make for the retirement of the

babyboom generation was to improve its fiscal position, thereby increasing national saving and

expanding the productive capacity of the economy. And finally, “the current strength of our

economy and budget, combined with the enormous uncertainty attached to budget projections,


                                                 72
make this a time when we should be prudent in our commitments.” Summers argued implicitly

that it was preferable to be too cautious rather than too aggressive in extrapolating recent

economic performance.

       In line with this view, the administration’s budget framework released in early 2000 was

aimed at preserving fiscal discipline. The projected Social Security surpluses were again

protected in a “lockbox,” and the administration again proposed that general revenue be

transferred to the Social Security trust fund and added to the “lockbox.” These transfers would

begin in 2011 based on the interest savings from debt reduction between 2000 and 2010.

Roughly $300 billion in general revenue would be transferred to the Medicare trust fund over ten

years and used for debt reduction. The remaining on-budget surplus was divided into nearly

$200 billion of additional spending for a prescription drug benefit for Medicare beneficiaries and

health insurance coverage for low-income Americans, and more than $250 billion of tax cuts

focused on retirement saving, marriage penalty relief, educational opportunities, community

revitalization, affordable health care, and tax simplification.

       In June the administration announced another upward revision to the baseline budget

surpluses over the next ten years, this time in the amount of $1.3 trillion. The Mid-Session

Review proposed the next step toward shoring up the conceptual foundations of the budget by

taking Medicare out of the budget in the same way that Social Security was out of the budget.

Accordingly, the MSR allocated baseline surpluses over the following ten years excluding both

Social Security and Medicare. The administration maintained its policies on Medicare reform,

health coverage, and targeted tax cuts, and set aside $500 billion as a “reserve for America’s




                                                  73
future.” Even if all of these funds were used for spending increases or tax reductions, the debt

held by the public was still projected to be paid off, on a net basis, by 2012.

       The Congress did not adopt the central features of this budget framework. Neither Social

Security nor Medicare reforms were enacted.38 Although no fewer than five “lock box” bills to

set aside both the Social Security and Medicare surpluses passed the Republican-controlled

House between 1999 and 2001, none were passed by the Senate and therefore no legislation

taking Medicare out of the budget (which would have given it the same treatment as Social

Security) was ever enacted.

       Just working out the annual appropriations bills proved an especially arduous

undertaking: a succession of continuing resolutions kept the government functioning after the

beginning of the new fiscal year on October 1, and the final bills were not approved until

December 15. President Clinton announced the administration’s final set of budget projections

in late December. Based on these projections, the debt held by the public could be eliminated on

a net basis by 2010.



A National Asset




       38
          Notable changes to the Social Security earnings test did occur during this decade. The
earnings test reduces or eliminates benefit payments to beneficiaries with income from work that
exceeds a threshold amount. These beneficiaries subsequently receive higher benefits to
compensate them for the withheld benefits. Legislation in 1996 significantly raised the level of
earnings that would trigger benefit reductions. Legislation in 2000 eliminated the earnings test
altogether for beneficiaries who are at or above the normal retirement age (currently 65 years and
two months and scheduled to increase to 67 by 2022). See Gruber and Orszag (2000) for an
overview of the impact of the earnings test on labor supply and benefit receipt.

                                                 74
          Toward the end of the Clinton administration, the possibility of eliminating the debt held

by the public became increasingly realistic. The arithmetic associated with this possibility is

straightforward: if the on-budget account is kept in balance over the next ten to fifteen years, the

Social Security surpluses will be enough to pay down the entire pubic debt. Beyond that point,

the continued Social Security surpluses that are now projected would transform the Federal

government from a net debtor to the rest of the economy into a net creditor. In other words, the

government might become a net holder of private assets.39 The Clinton administration

recognized this possibility, but did not wrestle with the associated policy issues at any great

length.

          Indeed, under current projections, the accumulation of assets is likely to begin even

sooner than the basic math suggests. First, part of the debt held by the public is in forms that

would be difficult or unpopular to retire. For example, there are roughly $200 billion in

outstanding savings bonds, and this program—which provides a convenient savings vehicle

especially for low- and moderate-income households—seems unlikely to be terminated in the

name of increasing national saving. Second, part of the debt is scheduled to mature well after the

debt would be eliminated on a net basis. Some portion could be bought back before its scheduled

maturity date, but at some unknown point, the holders of this long-term debt might demand an




          39
           In some very limited respects, the Federal government already holds private assets. For
example, the Treasury maintains cash balances in commercial banks, the Thrift Saving Plan
holds equities on behalf of its individual beneficiaries, and the Pension Benefit Guarantee
Corporation holds private assets in part as legacies from retirement plans that have been turned
over to it. However, these current holdings are dwarfed in size by the investments that might be
conducted on behalf of the Social Security trust fund or the central government.

                                                  75
increasing premium in order to give it up.40 In sum, the debt elimination date is only about a

decade away, assuming that Social Security surpluses materialize as projected and continue to be

used to pay down debt.

       Accumulation of private financial assets by the Federal government raises all of the same

issues regarding corporate governance and potential political interference in capital markets that

arise when considering whether to invest part of the Social Security trust fund in private assets.

Indeed, some have argued that the dangers are even greater in this situation, since the Social

Security trust fund is at least somewhat removed from the political process and is intimately

linked with a popular cause and powerful lobby. In general, the same potential solutions to these

problems pertain. The federal government could attempt to set up a neutral, nondistortionary

method of investing the surplus monies in the private market, running all the risks that would be

inherent in that approach. Alternatively, the Social Security trust fund could invest in private

securities, thereby commensurately increasing the amount of government debt in private hands.

Still another possibility is that individual accounts might be used to preserve some of the saving

inherent in the projected surpluses, while reducing (though not avoiding altogether) the

governance and political interference concerns associated with centralized investment. Finally,

increases in spending or larger tax cuts obviously could eliminate unwanted asset accumulation,

though at the sacrifice of some or all of the potential government contribution to national saving.

Such a return to balancing the unified budget instead of the budget excluding Social Security



       40
         The extent of this problem depends on the Treasury Department’s debt issuance policy
from here forward. Already, there has been considerable speculation in the financial press that
Treasury’s 30-year bonds might be discontinued because new bonds of that maturity would
extend so far beyond the currently projected debt-elimination date.

                                                 76
would also break the link between government saving and the accumulation in the Social

Security trust fund, impairing the validity of that fund as a signal of the preparation that the

nation is undertaking for the retirement of the baby-boom generation.

       The current long-term outlook for fiscal policy also raises questions with regard to the

social value of Treasury debt. In particular, a number of commentators have pointed out that the

existence of a deep and liquid market for Treasury securities has provided significant benefits to

U.S. capital markets. For example, Treasury securities have served as pricing benchmarks for

other debt instruments, meaning that prices and yields on corporate and other securities are often

quoted relative to Treasury securities rather than in absolute terms. In addition, Treasury

securities have been seen as convenient vehicles for hedging interest-rate risk.

       Yet, it is not evident whether these functions require the existence of Treasury debt per se

or simply the existence of some debt market that is very deep and very liquid. Indeed, as market

participants have come to recognize the possibility of at least a substantial paydown of Treasury

debt (even if not total elimination), there has been substantial market innovation. Alternative

instruments are now vying for the role that has been played by Treasury securities; where this

process will lead is unclear, especially because the market may dictate that there is room for only

one successor rather than many.41 Thus, the current situation leaves open the question of whether

a large market for Treasury securities provides some benefit for the economy that: (a) cannot be

provided by any private issuer, (b) can be provided more efficiently by the Federal government,

or (c) represents a valuable monopoly franchise that should be provided by the Federal


       41
         If there were more than one potential successor to Treasury debt, the market might
eventually “tip” to one or the other in order to gain the extra efficiency associated with maximum
depth and liquidity in a single market.

                                                  77
government so that taxpayers can reap the financial rewards rather than private monopolists.

Quantifying the benefits of a deep and liquid Treasury market is very difficult. Moreover, those

benefits must be weighed against the costs of either less saving or the holding of private assets by

the government. Indeed, if the social value of government debt is great enough, it could even be

optimal for the government to gross up its balance sheet by issuing extra debt and purchasing

private assets simply to maintain a viable debt market.



7.     Conclusion

       The 1990s were marked by an unexpected turn-around in the U.S. fiscal situation as a

seemingly intractable budget deficit problem gave way to large budget surpluses.42 A potent

symbol of the improvement in the fiscal situation over the decade was the announcement on May

13, 2000 that the “debt clock” in New York’s Times Square would be dismantled in September

2000, essentially for lack of interest.43 The tax increases and spending discipline imposed by the

1990, 1993, and 1997 budget deals played a significant part in this improvement in the budget

picture, as did the restraint of the Congress and the President from enacting tax cuts or spending

increases that would have dissipated the incipient surpluses. But good luck in the form of a

strong economy also was important. And the impact of the initial policy decisions on the

subsequent economic performance should not be discounted.




       42
         Larry Lindsey is the only person we are aware of who predicted this transformation.
His 1990 book, The Growth Experiment contains a chapter titled “The Great Surplus of ‘99."
       43
            See http://www.cnn.com/2000/US/09/07/debt.clock/

                                                78
       While the Clinton Administration’s fiscal policy helped to bring the budget deficit under

control and reduce the level of debt to GDP from 50 percent down to 35 percent, the

Administration was only partially able to lock in fiscal discipline for the future. The consensus

that emerged in 1999 to pay down debt with the Social Security surplus will, assuming the

consensus holds, ensure that the debt to GDP ratio continues to fall steadily for the next decade.

But the Administration’s attempts to preserve the budget surpluses to help solve the entitlement

problem ended in failure as it took the subsequent Administration less than six months to

dissipate much of the surpluses by passing a large consumption-oriented tax cut. Given the

magnitude of the long-run fiscal imbalance and of the budget surpluses that could potentially

have been allocated to address this problem, a significant opportunity to prefund future

retirement and health benefits was missed.




                                                79
                                          References


1994-1996 Advisory Council on Social Security. 1997. Report of the 1994-1996 Advisory
      Council on Social Security. Washington, DC.

A Vision of Change for America. 1993. Washington DC.

Aaron, Henry J. and Robert D. Reischauer. 1998. Countdown to Reform: The Great Social
       Security Debate. New York: Century Foundation Press.

Auerbach, Alan J. and William G. Gale. 2000. “Perspectives on the Budget Surplus.” Working
      Paper 7837, Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research (August).

Auerbach, Alan, Jagadeesh Gokhale and Lawrence Kotlikoff. 1994. “Generational Accounting:
      A Meaningful Way to Evaluate Fiscal Policy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 8,
      1:73:94.

Bipartisan Commission on Entitlement and Tax Reform. Final Report to the President.
        Washington, DC January 1995.

Blanchard, Olivier J. 1984. “Current and Anticipated Deficits, Interest Rates and Economic
      Activity.” European Economic Review 25: 7-27.

Blinder, Alan S. and Janet L. Yellen. 2001. “The Fabulous Decade: A Macroeconomic History
       of the 1990s.” Paper prepared for Russell Sage Foundation/ Century Foundation Project
       on Sustainable Employment.

Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors and Disability Insurance Trust Funds.
       1997. The 1997 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and
       Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds. Washington: Social Security
       Administration.

Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors and Disability Insurance Trust Funds.
       2001. The 2001 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and
       Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds. Washington: Social Security
       Administration.

Branson, William. 1985. "Causes of Appreciation and Volatility of the Dollar" in The U.S.
      Dollar -- Recent Developments, Outlook, and Policy Options Federal Reserve Bank of
      Kansas City Annual Conference, pp. 33-63.

Clinton, Bill and Al Gore. 1992. Putting People First. New York: Times Books.


                                              80
Congressional Budget Office. Various years. The Economic and Budget Outlook.

Congressional Budget Office. Various years. The Economic and Budget Outlook: An Update.

Congressional Budget Office. Various years. An Analysis of the President’s Budgetary
      Proposals.

Congressional Budget Office. 1997. Long-Term Budgetary Pressures and Policy Option.
      Washington (March).

Congressional Budget Office. 2000. The Long-Term Budget Outlook. Washington (October).

Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, Louise M. Sheiner, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1990. “An
        Aging Society: Opportunity or Challenge?” Bookings Papers on Economic Activity 1. 1-
        56.

Cutler, David M. and Jonathan Gruber. “Health Policy in the Clinton Era: Once Bitten, Twice
        Shy.” This volume.

Diamond, Peter A. 1996. “Proposals to Restructure Social Security” Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 10(3): 67-88.

Diamond, Peter A. 1997. “Macroeconomics of Social Security Reform,” Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity, 2: 1- 87.

Diamond, Peter A. 2000. “Administrative Costs and Equilibrium Charges with Individual
      Accounts.” In John B. Shoven editor, Administrative Aspects of Investment-based Social
      Security Reform.

Economic Report of the President. 1984. Washington, DC.

Economic Report of the President. 1994. Washington, DC.

Elmendorf Douglas W. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2000. “Social Security Reform and National
      Saving in an Era of Budget Surpluses.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1-71.

Elmendorf, Douglas W. and Louise M. Sheiner. 2000. “Should America Save for Its Old Age?
      Fiscal Policy, Population Aging, and National Saving” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
      14(3): 57-74.

Feldstein, Martin. “Discussion.” This volume.




                                                81
Feldstein, Martin and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2001. “The Distributional Effects of An Investment-
       Based Social Security System.” NBER Working Paper 7492. Forthcoming in Martin
       Feldstein and Jeffrey Liebman, editors, Distributional Aspects of Investment-based Social
       Security Reform. University of Chicago Press.

Feldstein, Martin and Andrew A. Samwick. 1997. “The Economics of Prefunding Social
       Security and Medicare Benefits, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, The MIT Press,
       Cambridge, MA, pp 115-147.

Feldstein, Martin and Andrew A. Samwick. 1998. “Potential Effects of Two Percent Personal
       Retirement Accounts,” Tax Notes, Vol. 79 No. 5. May 4, 1998, pp 615-20.

Gramlich, Edward. 1998. Is It Time to Reform Social Security? The University of Michigan
      Press, Ann Arbor.

Gruber, Jonathan and Peter Orszag. 2000. Does the Social Security Earnings Test Affect Labor
       Supply and Benefits Receipt? NBER Working Paper 7923.

Koitz, David Stuart. 1998. Social Security and the Federal Budget: What Does Social Security’s
       Being ‘Off Budget’ Mean? Report for Congress 98-422. Washington: Congressional
       Research Service.

Lee, Ronald and Shripad Tuljapurkar (1998). “Uncertain Demographic Futures and Social
       Security Finances.” American Economic Review 88(2): 237-41.

Liebman, Jeffrey B. 2001. “Redistribution in the Current U.S. Social Security System.”
      Forthcoming in Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey Liebman, editors, Distributional Aspects of
      Investment-based Social Security Reform. University of Chicago Press.

Lindsey, Lawrence B. 1990. The Growth Experiment. New York: Basic Books.

Newhouse, Joseph P. “Medicare.” This volume.

Penner, Rudolph G. 1998. “Trust Fund Accounting and the Scoring Rules for Proposed
       Reforms of the Social Security System.” In Social Security Reform: Economic and
       Budget Concepts, Enforcement, and Scorekeeping Perspectives. Washington: Committee
       for a Responsible Federal Budget.

Reich, Robert B. 1997. Locked in the Cabinet. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Rubin, Robert E. “Discussion.” This volume.




                                              82
Schieber, Sylvester J. and John B. Shoven. The Real Deal: The History and Future of Social
       Security. Yale University Press. New Haven. 1999.

Smetters, Kent. 2001. “The Effect of Pay-When-Needed Benefit Guarantees on the Impact of
       Social Security Privatization.” In John Campbell and Martin Feldstein editors, Risk
       Aspects of Investment-Based Social Security Reform (University of Chicago Press).

Woodward, Bob. 1994. The Agenda. New York: Simon and Schuster.




                                              83
                                        Table 1
                         The Turnaround in the Federal Budget
                              (share of GDP; fiscal years)
Year     Unified      Receipts    Non-       Debt     Individual   Defense    Entitlement
         Budget                  Interest   Held by     Income     Spending    Spending
         Balance                 Outlays    Public       Taxes



1986       -5.0          17.5      19.4      39.6          7.9        6.2          10.5
1987       -3.2          18.4      18.6      40.6          8.4        6.1          10.2
1988       -3.1          18.1      18.2      40.9          8.0        5.8          10.1
1989       -2.8          18.3      18.1      40.5          8.2        5.6          10.2



1990       -3.9          18.0      18.6      42.0          8.1        5.2          10.9
1991       -4.5          17.8      19.0      45.4          7.9        5.4          11.8
1992       -4.7          17.5      19.0      48.2          7.7        4.9          11.5
1993       -3.9          17.6      18.5      49.5          7.8        4.5          11.2
1994       -2.9          18.1      18.1      49.4          7.8        4.1          11.3



1995       -2.2          18.5      17.5      49.2          8.1        3.7          11.2
1996       -1.4          18.9      17.2      48.5          8.5        3.5          11.1
1997       -0.3          19.3      16.5      46.0          9.0        3.3          10.9
1998        0.8          19.9      16.3      42.9          9.6        3.1          10.8
1999        1.4          20.0      16.1      39.7          9.6        3.0          10.7



2000        2.4          20.6      15.9      34.7         10.2        3.0          10.5
Source: CBO (2001).




                                            84
                                      Table 2
               Sources of Improvement in the CBO’s Budget Projections
Source of         Revision to              Revision to Projected 10-Year Surpluses
Revision          Projected 5-
                  Year Surplus
                  from Jan. 1990       from Jan. 1993    from Jan. 1995    from Jan. 1998
                    to Jan. 1993         to Jan. 1995      to Jan. 1998      to Jan. 2001


Total             -$782 billion        $1603 billion     $3107 billion     $3196 billion
                   (100%)               (100%)            (100%)            (100%)


Policy               460                 1570               501             -1606
                    (59%)                (98%)             (16%)             (50%)
Economic             -330                  -39             1272              2669
                    (42%)                 (2%)             (41%)             (84%)
Technical            -337                   44             1247              2126
                    (43%)                 (3%)             (40%)             (67%)
Other                -575                   28                87                 7
                    (74%)                 (2%)              (3%)               (0%)
Notes. Revisions are from January to January of the years shown. Decomposition is by the
CBO, cumulated by the authors across projection updates. Percentages apply to the total
revision during the period indicated without regard to sign.




                                            85
 Figure 1: Federal Budget Surplus : 1946 - 2000
(percent of GDP)
                                                                              9




                                                                              6




                                                                              3



                                                                              +
                                                                              0
                                                                              –



                                                                              3




                                                                              6




                                                                              9
1946       1952     1958   1964    1970    1976   1982   1988   1994   2000

 Figure 2: Debt Held by the Public: 1946 - 2000
 (percent of GDP)
                                                                              125




                                                                              100




                                                                              75




                                                                              50




                                                                              25




                                                                              0
1946       1952     1958   1964    1970    1976   1982   1988   1994   2000
Figure 3: CBO Budget Surplus Projections
 (billions of dollars, projections as of January of year shown)
                                                                                                      1200

                                                                                                      1000

                                                                                                      800

                                                                                                      600
                                                                                    2001
                                                                                                      400

                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                      0
                                                                  1998                                –
         1990                                                                                         200

                                                  1995                                                400
                                 1993

                                                                                                      600

                                                                                                      800
1990            1993         1996          1999           2002           2005        2008      2011
Figure 4: Revisions to CBO Surplus Projections Between 1993 and 2001
(billions of dollars)
                                                                                                      1200

                                                                                                      1100

                                                                                                      1000
              *Includes small revisions
               where source was not                                                                   900
                                                                    Total
               reported by the CBO.
                                                                                                      800

                                                                                                      700

                                                                  Technical*
                                                                                                      600

                                                                                                      500

                                                                                                      400

                                                                  Economic                            300

                                                                                                      200
                                                                  Policy                              100

                                                                                                      0
  1994        1995      1996        1997     1998        1999     2000       2001     2002   2003
Figure 5: Net National Saving and its Components
(percent of GDP)
                                                                                             14

                                                                                             12
                               Private and state and local government saving
                                                                                             10

                                                                                             8

                                                 National saving                             6

                                                                                             4

                                                                                             2
                                                                                             +
                                                                                             0
                                                                                             –
                   Federal government saving
                                                                                             2

                                                                                             4

                                                                                             6
    1981                1985             1989              1993                1997   2001
