                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INSURANCE AND THE UTILIZATION OF MEDICAL SERVICES
                          AMONG THE SELF-EMPLOYED


                                            Craig William Perry
                                             Harvey S. Rosen


                                            Working Paper 8490
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w8490


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2001




We are grateful to Brookes Billman, Sijbren Cnossen, Gebhard Flaig, Jonathan Gruber, Douglas Holtz-Eakin,
Helen Levy, James Poterba, Amy K. Taylor, Diane Whitmore, and seminars at Princeton and Columbia for useful
suggestions, to Karen Neukirchen for help in preparing the manuscript, and to Princeton’s Center for Economic
Policy Studies and the National Science Foundation for financial support. This paper was presented at the CESifo
conference, “Public Finances and Public Policy in the New Millennium: A Conference on the Occasion of Richard
Musgrave's 90th and CES's 10th Birthdays," in Munich on January 12-13, 2001. We thank the participants at the
conference and two referees for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Craig William Perry and Harvey S. Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Insurance and the Utilization of Medical Services Among the Self-Employed
Craig William Perry and Harvey S. Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 8490
September 2001
JEL No. I12



                                               ABSTRACT


        There has been substantial public policy concern over the relatively low rates of health insurance
coverage among the self-employed in the United States. We use data from the Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey conducted in 1996 to analyze how the self-employed and wage-earners differ both with
respect to insurance coverage and utilization of a variety of health care services. Our results suggest that
for the self-employed, the link between insurance and utilization of health care services is not as strong
as assumed in the policy debate. For a number of medical care services, the self-employed have the same
rates of utilization as wage-earners, despite the fact that they are substantially less likely to be insured.
And when the self-employed are less likely than wage-earners to utilize a particular medical service, the
differences generally do not seem very large. The self-employed thus appear to be able to finance access
to health care from sources other than insurance. Further, analysis of out-of-pocket expenditures on
health care suggests that doing so does not lead to substantial reductions in their ability to consume other
goods and services. Finally, there is no evidence that children of the self-employed have less access to
health care than the children of wage-earners. Hence, the public policy concerns that the relative lack of
health insurance among the self-employed substantially reduces utilization of health care services or
creates economic hardship appear to be misplaced.




Craig William Perry                                                Harvey S. Rosen
Princeton University Investment Co.                                Department of Economics
22 Chambers Street                                                 Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08542                                                Princeton, NJ 08544
cwperry@princeton.edu                                              and NBER
                                                                   hsr@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

           About 44.2 million Americans, over 16 percent of the population, lack any kind of

medical insurance. This phenomenon is central to policy debates about health care. As

former President Clinton observed, "This is a problem that America cannot let go." Self

–employed people have received particular attention in this context because of their lower

than average insurance rates—only 68 percent of those under 63 years of age had any

coverage in 1996, according to our tabulations from the Medical Expenditure Panel

Survey.

           The principal public policy response to the situation of the self-employed has

been to subsidize their purchases of health insurance through the personal income tax.

Currently, self-employed workers are allowed to deduct 60 percent of their health-

insurance premiums, which is up from 45 percent in 1998. According to recent

legislation, this figure is scheduled to increase to 70 percent in 2002 and 100 percent in

2003 and thereafter. 1 Rules Committee Chairman David Dreir hailed the bill's passage

by saying: "The American people are concerned that they can't gain access to quality

health care...Accessibility is our key. We're moving toward it" (Murray and McGinley

[1999]). According to news reports, insurance companies have been lobbying the

congress to accelerate this schedule2, a proposal supported by Elizabeth Dole during her

brief run for the Republican presidential nomination.

           Congressman Dreir’s statement is useful because it spells out clearly the putative

reasoning behind the policy of subsidizing insurance purchases for the self-employed—



1
    See Internal Revenue Service Code section 162(1).
2
    See Wall Street Journal, October 7, 1999, p. A2.
                                                                                                              2


lack of insurance translates into lack of utilization of health care.3 It is, in fact, well

documented that the self-employed are less likely to be insured than wage-earners, even

after taking into account their differing demographic characteristics (Holtz-Eakin,

Penrod, and Rosen [1996] and Hamilton [2000]). However, it is not obvious that, for this

group of people, lack of insurance does indeed translate into lack of utilization of health

care services. Health care, after all, can be financed from sources other than insurance.

In fact, we know of no research that examines whether the self-employed utilize health

services less than their wage-earning counterparts. This paper investigates the links

between health insurance and utilization among the self-employed. The centerpiece of

the study is a statistical analysis of the differences in utilization rates for various medical

services between the self-employed and wage-earners.

         Section 2 provides a brief review of previous literature. Section 3 outlines the

empirical strategy and describes our data set, the 1996 wave of the Medical Expenditure

Panel Survey (MEPS). The MEPS has rich information on individuals’ utilization of a

variety of medical services, including a set of important diagnostic tests. Section 4

discusses econometric issues and presents the results. The main finding is that even

though the self-employed are less likely to have insurance than wage-earners, the gap in

the utilization of health care services is generally fairly small. Indeed, for some

important services, there is no substantial gap at all. In Section 5 we turn to the closely

related question of whether the medical expenditures incurred by the self-employed

substantially reduce their capacity to purchase other commodities, and find no evidence

to support this concern. Further, in Section 6 we find that, to the extent that we are able

3
 Conventional economic analysis suggests other reasons why a subsidy might be worth considering, for
example, horizontal equity. Nevertheless, utilization per se appears to be the primary issue in much of the
                                                                                                     3


to measure, the children of the self-employed are no less likely to have access to medical

services than the children of wage-earners. Hence, concerns that the self-employed need

insurance subsidies in order to increase their utilization of medical services, to maintain

their standard of living, or to help their children obtain health care may be misplaced.

Section 7 provides a summary and suggestions for future research.



2. Previous Literature

         The determinants of health care utilization have been the subject of several

studies. Kass, Weinick and Monheit [1999] used the MEPS data to examine differences

in utilization rates by race. A noteworthy aspect of their study is that they moved beyond

the conventional approach of considering only doctor visits or hospital admissions.

Instead they studied a wide variety of health services, including diagnostic tests such as

breast exams, which many medical practitioners view as being important for maintaining

good health. Their analysis, however, was confined to comparisons of means by race.

They did no multivariate analysis to take into account other variables that might affect

utilization rates. Gilleskie [1997] studied utilization decisions in the context of worker

absentee decisions, but only considered doctor visits. Currie and Gruber's [1995] careful

examination of the effect of changes in Medicaid eligibility on medical care utilization

looked only at doctor visits and hospitalizations and focused on the low-income part of

the population. In the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, individuals were randomly

assigned to health insurance plans with different co-payments and deductibles

(Newhouse, et al. [1993]). The results suggested that the greater the cost sharing, the

smaller the individual’s health expenditures. Similarly, Hurd and McGarry [1997] found


policy debate, and is our focus here. Other possible rationales for a subsidy are discussed below.
                                                                                                4


that, among the elderly, those who have the most insurance use the most health care

services. None of these studies considered issues relating to self-employment.

       In short, the papers in the existing empirical literature either look at a restrictive

set of utilization measures or ignore the multivariate nature of the problem of explaining

differential utilization rates across groups. What is more important given the public

policy debate on subsidizing health insurance for the self-employed, none of them studies

the links among insurance, utilization, and self-employment.4

       Our focus has been on the literature analyzing the positive question of how

insurance relates to utilization rather than the normative question of whether the

government should subsidize insurance purchases in order to increase utilization. The

issue is particularly cogent in the United States , where in general the government

provides insurance only to certain low-income individuals (through Medicaid) and to the

elderly (through Medicare). The normative literature has noted that adverse selection can

lead to under-provision of health insurance in such a (primarily) private market. In this

context, a tax subsidy to encourage purchases of health insurance can enhance efficiency.

On the other hand, authors such as Feldstein [1995] have argued that adverse selection is

not of major practical importance in the U.S. context, and that the tax subsidy leads to

over-provision of health insurance. Determining the optimal government intervention in

a private health insurance market is a complicated issue beyond the scope of this paper.

We merely note that the answer to the normative question must ultimately depend, inter

alia., on the positive question of how utilization of health care, and ultimately health

status itself, are linked to insurance coverage.
                                                                                                               5




3. Data

          3.1 Description

          Our basic goal is to see if the differences between the self-employed and wage-

earners in their insurance rates are associated with differences in their utilization of

various medical services. We require information on individuals’ utilization of various

medical services and insurance coverage, along with a set of exogenous characteristics

that might be expected to influence utilization and insurance decisions. We draw upon

the Household Component of the 1996 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). The

panel consists of approximately 22,000 respondents who comprise 9,500 families. The

respondents were asked a series of questions relating to their demographic characteristics,

insurance coverage, employment status, and medical care use. We exclude from the

sample those with missing information on education and insurance status as well as

individuals who were not employed. Further, we exclude any persons younger than 18

and older than 62.5 Those under 18 are unlikely to have developed a strong attachment to

the labor market, and the decisions of those over 62 are complicated by impending

retirement. Further, about 95 percent of individuals over 65 are covered by Medicare.

All of these exclusions left a group of 9552 individuals, of whom 1158 (12 percent) were

self-employed. This corresponds fairly closely to other estimates of the self-employment

rate in 1996 (U.S. Bureau of the Census [1998, p. 412]).

          As noted in section 2, most previous studies of access have relied on a very

4
 In contrast, there is a substantial literature on how the implicit subsidy for health insurance in the tax code
affects insurance coverage for the self-employed. See, for example, Gruber and Poterba [1994] and
Marquis and Long [1995].
                                                                                                                6


limited set of utilization measures. An important strength of the MEPS is that in addition

to insurance status, it contains information on a large variety of medical services,

including not only conventional items such as doctor visits and hospital stays, but also

visits to other kinds of practitioners like dentists and chiropractors. As well, it provides

data on the utilization of some important diagnostic procedures, such as breast

examinations and blood pressure tests. Somewhat arbitrarily, we divide the procedures

into two groups. The first group, site-based services, consists of doctor visits, hospital

admissions, hospital stays, chiropractor visits, optometrist visits, and alternative care.

The second group, screening and preventative care services, consists of breast exams,

physical exams, dentist visits, flu shots, mammograms, prostate exams, prescription

medicine purchases, blood pressure checks, and cholesterol checks.6

         Of course, utilization rates do not necessarily measure adequately the quality of

services received. Two people who both visit the doctor during the year are not

automatically receiving the same health care. For example, during a given visit, a

physician might spend more time with an insured patient than an uninsured patient, or

order more diagnostic tests for the former than the latter. In Section 5 below we examine

this conjecture using data on expenditures per doctor visit. Another possible problem

with studying utilization measures is that we ultimately care about the “output” health

status rather than the health services “inputs” per se. This is a legitimate concern, and we

have examined health outcomes in another paper (Perry and Rosen [2001]). However,

access to health care is of independent interest, if for no other reason than it clearly drives

5
  We lose 28 observations because of missing data on education, 3612 because of missing data on
employment, 4 because of missing insurance data, and 10,034 from the exclusion of those over 62.
6
  For several of these procedures (e.g. breast exam, cholesterol check, prostate exam) the MEPS provides
the history of utilization. That is, we know if the individual had the procedure within the past year, within
                                                                                                           7


the public policy debate. Recall Congressman Dreir’s statement that was quoted above:

"Accessibility is our key.”



        3.2 A Preliminary Look at the Data

        Table 1 focuses on insurance coverage and rates of health care utilization by

employment status. For each variable, column (1) shows the mean for the entire sample;

column (2) the mean for the self-employed; and column (3) the mean for wage-earners.

The fourth column displays the t-statistics associated with the hypothesis that the means

of the relevant variables are equal.

        The first row of the table shows rates of insurance for each group. It is based on a

dichotomous variable in the MEPS file that takes a value of one if the individual has

health insurance coverage and zero otherwise. Specifically, the variable equals one if the

individual is covered under Medicare, Medicaid, CHAMPUS/CHAMPVA7, other public

hospital/physician or private hospital/physician insurance. (An individual who receives

spousal coverage is construed as being covered for purposes of defining this variable.)

The results in the first row of the table indicate that the self-employed are substantially

less likely than wage-earners to have any health insurance. Only 68 percent of the self-

employed in our sample have insurance compared with 81 percent of the wage-earners.

From column (4), this difference is significant at all conventional levels, a finding

consistent with tabulations from other data sets.8


the past two years, within the past 5 years, more than 5 years ago, or never had one. Since we only have
insurance data from the past year, we focus exclusively on utilization within the past year.
7
  CHAMPUS is a health benefits program designed to provide medical coverage for the dependents of
active duty military servicemen/women. CHAMPVA is intended for dependents and survivors of severely
disabled veterans.
8
  See, for example, Holtz-Eakin, Penrod, and Rosen's [1996] tabulations from the SIPP data or Health
Insurance Association of America [1999].
                                                                                                               8


         A key question is whether the relative lack of insurance on the part of the self-

employed is associated with a commensurate lack of utilization of health services. The

results in Table 1 are quite interesting in this respect. For some services (hospital

admissions, hospital stays, cholesterol exams, dental checkups, mammograms, and

optometrist visits), there are no statistically significant differences in utilization rates.

Second, for other services, there are statistically significant differences, but the self-

employed have higher utilization rates (alternative care, prostate exams, chiropractor

visits). In the cases where the utilization rates are statistically significantly lower for the

self-employed, the question is whether or not the differences are large. “Large,” of

course, is in the eyes of the beholder. It strikes us that at least some of the differences

are not substantial. For example, the probability of visiting a doctor is only 4.3

percentage points (or 6 percent) less. On the other hand, the probability of receiving a

breast exam is 9.3 percentage points (or 31 percent) less.

         In short, the tabulations in Table 1 suggest that despite their relatively low

insurance rates, the self-employed are not necessarily less likely than their wage-earning

counterparts to utilize a variety of health care services. Further, where the self-employed

are statistically less likely to use services, the percentage differences are often not very

large.9 That said, we should not make too much of the specific results in Table 1,

because a variety of factors might influence utilization of health care services, and some

of these could be correlated with self-employment status. Hence, while the results are

suggestive, we now turn to a multivariate approach.

9
  We also did two-way comparisons of utilization rates by employment status and insurance status. For
most services, the average utilization rates are less for the self-employed than for wage-earners, even when
they have the same insurance status. This is consistent with the message of Table 1, that insurance cannot
entirely "explain" the differences between wage-earners and the self-employed. However, this finding
                                                                                                          9




4. Multivariate Analysis of Utilization Rates

         The preliminary calculations in Table 1 suggest that self-employed individuals’

low propensity to have medical insurance does not necessarily translate into less

utilization of medical services. But such univariate comparisons ignore the fact that

variables other than employment status may affect utilization rates. An appropriate

empirical model should allow the probability that an individual utilizes a given medical

service to depend on his or her relevant personal characteristics as well as self-

employment status. We use the conventional probit model, which posits that the

probability that individual i utilizes some service is given by



         Prob (Utili>0) = F[βXi + δSEi ] ,                                       (4.1)



where Xi is a vector of observable demographic characteristics, SEi is a dichotomous

variable equal to one if the individual is self-employed and zero otherwise, and F[ ] is the

cumulative normal distribution.

         An important issue is what variables to include in the vector of demographic

characteristics Xi. The MEPS contains fairly extensive demographic information. We

attempted to select only those characteristics that were very likely to be exogenous to

insurance and health care utilization decisions. Age is included because it affects the

likelihood of needing health services—health problems tend to increase with age

(Lakdawlka and Philipson [1998]). Also, certain procedures like mammograms and


must be viewed with caution, because it is based on stratification by an endogenous variable (insurance
                                                                                                          10


prostate exams become highly recommended only after certain ages are reached. We also

include the square of age because previous research suggests that a quadratic function

may be appropriate.10 Education can be expected to influence both individuals’ physical

condition and their capacity to pay for care (Taubman and Rosen [1982]); hence we

include a set of dichotomous variables for educational attainment. On the basis of

previous analyses, we also include a set of race/ethnicity dichotomous variables (Kass,

Weinick, Monheit [1996]), a set of indicator variables for the region of the country in

which the person lives (Skinner and Wennberg [1998], Cutler and Sheiner [1999]),11 a

dichotomous variable for the individual’s sex12, a dichotomous variable for marital status,

and a continuous variable for family size--number of adults plus dependents (Taubman

and Rosen [1982]). 13

         Our specification omits certain variables that have appeared as covariates in

several previous studies of health care utilization. For example, Stabile [1998] and Ross

and Mirowsky [2000] include on the right hand side of their utilization equations

indicator variables for the individual's insurance status, self-assessed health, and the

presence of any chronic health conditions. Ross and Mirowsky include income as well.

Such variables might very well be endogenous, however. With respect to insurance, for

example, Gruber [2000, p. 46] notes, "insurance coverage itself may be a function of

health status, leading to endogeneity bias in estimates of the effects of insurance on


status).
10
   We also entered age as a set of dichotomous variables instead of a quadratic, and it had no impact on our
substantive results.
11
   The regional classifications correspond to those used by the Census Bureau.
12
   See Hagan, Simpson, and Gillis [1987] and Barber and Odean [2000] on differences in risk preferences
by sex.
13
   However, one can imagine that marital status and family size may be endogenous to medical services
utilization. We therefore estimated our models without these two variables. Doing so had no impact upon
the basic results.
                                                                                                            11


health and on the utilization of medical care." In the same way, there is a substantial

literature documenting the links between income and health status, but the direction of

causality is not known. (See, for example, Deaton and Paxson [1999] and Ettner [1996].)

To the extent that individuals’ incomes are low because they are in poor health (and

utilizing health care services intensively), then income is an endogenous variable and

should be excluded from the reduced form. 14 Using income in the context of

comparisons between wage-earners and the self-employed is particularly problematic.

Self-employment income may be measured incorrectly because individuals fail to take

into account, among other things, the opportunity cost of the capital they have invested in

their enterprises (Hamilton [2000]).

         We try to include only exogenous variables on the right hand side of equation

(4.1). While this makes it difficult to attach a structural interpretation to the results, it

does increase the likelihood of obtaining consistent parameter estimates. 15

As noted above, we control for a number of demographic variables. 16 A relevant

question in this context is whether there is unobservable heterogeneity with respect to the

14
   Nevertheless, as an experiment, we estimated our canonical model including income on the right hand
side. We found that while income was positively related to insurance coverage and utilization, our
substantive results did not change. Specifically, the self-employment effect on insurance coverage was still
about the same magnitude and statistically significant (-0.220 with a standard error of 0.017). The self-
employment differential on doctor visits was even smaller than in Table 3 (-0.0195 with a standard error of
0.00686), and for most of the other services, the self-employment differentials were about the same as in
Tables 3 and 4 (e.g., the prostate exam differential was -0.0558 (s.e. = 0.0143) and the cholesterol test
differential was -0.0743 (s.e. = 0.0158)). In the same spirit, we also augmented the equation with
dichotomous variables for the industry in which the individual worked. This, too, left our substantive
results unchanged.
15
   Despite the likely endogeneity of insurance status, for the sake of completeness, we estimated the basic
equation including the insurance dichotomous variable and its interaction with the self-employment
indicator on the right hand side. As expected, for most health care services, insurance increases the
probability has a positive and significant coefficient. Importantly, the results with respect to the impact of
self-employment are very similar to those reported below.
16
   In our sample, on average the self-employed are more likely to be white, male, and married with a spouse
present. Further, the self-employed tend to be older (5.2 years) on average than wage-earners. These
findings on demographic differences between self-employed and wage-earning individuals generally echo
                                                                                                              12


utilization of health care services. Do the self-employed and wage-earners differ

systematically in their underlying demands in a way that cannot be captured by our

covariates? In particular, might there be unobservable variables that drive both the

demand for health care services and the propensity to become self-employed? Suppose,

for example, that self-employment requires a lot of energy and vigor. Healthy people

(who tend not to demand many medical services) will therefore tend to enter self-

employment, ceteris paribus. The self-employed, then, utilize fewer health services

simply because they are healthier than wage-earners. Put another way, if there is some

underlying relationship between health and employment status, it may muddy the

interpretation of our results.

         Previous research suggests that this is probably not much of a problem. Holtz-

Eakin, Penrod, and Rosen [1996] employed both the Survey of Income and Program

Participation (SIPP) and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data to examine

transitions from wage-earning to self-employment. Both data sets indicate that in a given

year, those wage-earners who become self-employed in the future are not statistically

different in their health status or health care utilization from the ones who remain wage-

earners.17 This result is confirmed by Perry and Rosen [2001], who analyze transitions

from wage-earning to self-employment and vice versa in the MEPS data. While these

findings cannot definitively exclude the possibility of unobservable heterogeneity, they


those of previous research; see, e.g., Fairlie and Meyer [1999]. Summary statistics are available upon
request to the authors.
17
   In the SIPP data, the health measures were combined days in bed during the last 4 months and a self-
reported health status variable. The utilization measures were combined nights in a hospital in the last 4
(and 12) months and the combined number of doctor visits in the last 4 (and 12) months. In the PSID the
health measures were hours of work lost due to illness and a self-reported health variable. The utilization
measure was number of nights in the hospital during the year. These results are cited in Holtz-Eakin,
Penrod and Rosen [1996]; more detailed documentation is reported in the National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper with the same title, number 4880 (October 1994).
                                                                                                            13


certainly provide no evidence that people who select into self-employment are

systematically different with respect to health-related attributes. 18



         4.2 Basic Results.

         Following the same tack as our discussion of the unadjusted differences between

self-employed and wage-earning individuals surrounding Table 1, our first multivariate

analysis uses an equation analogous to (4.1) to examine the probability of being insured;

we then turn to the various utilization measures.

         Insurance coverage. The results are presented in column (1) of Table 2. The

figures are the marginal effects of each of the variables on the probability of having

insurance coverage. Importantly, the coefficient on the self-employed variable is both

negative and statistically significant. To put the coefficient of -0.203 in perspective, note

that 80.9 percent of the wage-earners have insurance. Hence, the self-employed are 25.1

percent less likely to be insured even after controlling for other variables such as

education and race.

         Utilization. With the results on insurance coverage in hand, we now turn to the

analysis of the various utilization measures. Column 2 of Table 2 reports the results for

the probability of a doctor visit in 1996. The coefficient on the self-employment variable

is negative (-.0585) and significant (t = -3.58). Given that the probability for a wage-

earner visiting the doctor is 0.62, this implies that the self-employed are about 9.3 percent

less likely to visit the doctor than wage-earners. As before, we face the problem of

determining whether this figure is “large.” While nontrivial, it is considerably less than

18
  These considerations suggest that to obtain a consistent estimate of the impact of insurance on utilization,
one could use instrumental variables, with self-employment status as an instrument for insurance. Such a
                                                                                                             14


one might expect given the differential in insurance probabilities, especially in light of

Hurd and McGarry’s [1997, p. 131] observation that, in general, “the empirical literature

does demonstrate a strong correlation between insurance coverage and service use.”

         As stressed above, we are interested in a variety of medical services, not just

doctor visits, so we next re-estimate the model for each of a series of utilization

measures. These results are displayed in columns (3) through (7) of Table 2. Taken in

conjunction with the insurance results in column (1), the coefficients on the self-

employment variables in (3) through (7) suggest several related conclusions. First, for

some services such as hospital admissions, hospital stays and optometrist visits, the

differences in utilization probabilities between wage-earners and the self-employed are

not statistically significant at conventional levels. The absence of any differences for

optometrist visits comes as no surprise because they are generally not covered by

insurance, but this is not the case for hospital admissions and hospital stays. Second, for

two categories, visits to chiropractors and alternative care, the self-employed have higher

utilization rates. We conjecture that relative price effects are at work here. To the extent

that services in these categories are not covered by insurance for a particular individual,

they are expensive relative to other medical services that are. In effect, the prices of

chiropractors and alternative care relative to conventional medical services are lower for

those without insurance. Because the self-employed are less likely to be insured, then,

their demand is higher than that of their wage-earning counterparts. Tastes may play a

role here as well. The benefits from alternative medicine--acupuncture, massage, bio-

feedback training, hypnosis, etc.--are far less well documented than those from

conventional therapies. Schumpeterian tradition views the self-employed as being less


strategy would not enable one to obtain a direct estimate of the impact of self-employment on utilization.
                                                                                               15


risk-averse and more adventuresome than wage-earners; hence, they may find such

treatments more attractive.

        Table 3 presents the probit results for screening and preventative care utilization.

In general, the self-employed are less likely to utilize such services than wage-earners.

For three services (flu shots, mammograms, and prostate exams), the percentage

differences are quite large; the others are modest in magnitude in light of the insurance

differential.

        An important message from Tables 2 and 3 is that the utilization differentials vary

across services. A natural question is whether the services with particularly large

differentials are in some sense "important." Should there be public policy concern over

the fact that the self-employed are substantially less likely than wage-earners to consume

these particular services? The three services with the largest differentials in percentage

terms are mammograms, prostate exams, and flu shots. The relative infrequency of

mammograms and prostate exams seems a serious issue. It may be, however, that the

figures in Table 3 overstate the differential for these two tests. They are generally

recommended only for people over the age of 40. When we re-estimated the relevant

probit equations including only individuals over 40, we found that, within this age group,

self-employed women are 14 percent less likely to have mammograms than their wage-

earning counterparts, and self-employed men are 17 percent less likely to have prostate

exams than their wage-earning counterparts. These figures are substantially smaller than

those in Table 3. In any case, to the extent that there are substantial differentials in the

utilization of certain tests, it is not clear that the solution is a special deduction for health

insurance in the tax code. Targeted policies such as price subsidies might be more
                                                                                            16


appropriate.



       4.3 Alternative Specifications

       We subjected our model to a variety of tests to see whether our substantive results

were sensitive to changes in specification.

       Males versus females. The canonical specification in Tables 3 and 4 imposes the

constraint that men and women differ in their insurance coverage and utilization rates

only by an intercept. However, medical conditions and risk aversion differ by sex, so the

process governing the relationships among insurance, utilization, and employment status

may be different as well. We therefore re-estimated the basic specification separately by

sex. The results, available upon request, suggest that, in general, there are no substantial

differences by sex in the magnitudes of the self-employment effects on the utilization of

the various services.

       Hours of work. It is well documented that the compensation packages of part-time

workers are less likely than those of full-time workers to include benefits such as medical

insurance (Campling [1987], Committee on Ways and Means [1998, p. 1107]). At the

same time, hours of work might be correlated with self-employment status. In fact, the

correlation in our data is 0.106. Hence, our estimates of the effects of self-employment

on insurance coverage and utilization rates might be biased because of the failure to take

into account differences in hours worked. We therefore augmented our basic

specifications from Tables 2 and 3 with a set of dichotomous variables for hours worked
                                                                                                              17


per week.19 Of course, hours of work might itself be endogenous--people who use health

care intensively may be ill and work fewer hours, ceteris paribus. This is why we chose

not to include it in our canonical model.

         In results available upon request, we found that the inclusion of hours of work has

barely any impact on the self-employment effect. The most substantial changes occurred

in the estimates for breast exams and cholesterol checks. Interestingly, in those cases, the

coefficients on the self-employment variable become less negative once indicators for

hours of work are included on the right hand side. The changes are on the order of 2

percentage points. Thus, the inclusion of hours of work in the model reduces the

differences in utilization rates associated with self-employment.

         Organizational form. So far, we have assumed that the self-employed are a

homogeneous group with respect to the institutional environments in which they function.

However, self-employed individuals operate in different organizational forms--sole

proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations--and the probability of being insured

could vary with organizational form. In particular, those who are incorporated might be

more likely to have insurance for two reasons. First, their expenditures for health

insurance are fully deductible; for members of partnerships and sole proprietors, they are

not. Second, to the extent that corporate enterprises have more employees, the owners

can purchase insurance at advantageous group rates.20 Under these assumptions, we can

use the MEPS data on organizational form to examine further whether differences in

insurance coverage drive differences in utilization. Specifically, to the extent that


19
   There are three indicator variables. The first is equal to one if the individual works between 20 and 35
hours per week; the second between 35 and 45 hours; and the third more than 45 hours. The omitted
category is less than 20 hours per week.
20
   See Thomasson [2000] on the advantages of group coverage.
                                                                                             18


insurance is an important factor, one would expect incorporated self-employed

individuals to utilize more medical services than their unincorporated counterparts,

ceteris paribus.

       To investigate this possibility, we augment our basic specification with a set of

interactions between organizational form and self-employment status:



       Prob (Utili>0) = F[βXi + δSEi + γSEi*INCORPi + λSEi*PROPi ] ,           (4.2)



where INCORPi is a dichotomous variable equal to one if an individual is incorporated,

PROPi equals one if the individual is organized as a sole proprietor, and the other

variables are as defined above. This augmented specification allows for differential

effects by organizational form-- δ is the effect if the self-employed individual is in a

partnership, δ+γ if incorporated, and δ+λ if a sole proprietor (all relative to being a wage-

earner).

       Table 4 reports the estimates of the key parameters of equation (4.2), δ, γ, and λ.

The first row shows the results for the probability of having insurance. According to the

point estimate in column (1), a self-employed individual in a partnership is 25 percentage

points less likely to have insurance coverage than a wage-earner. From columns (1) and

(2), an incorporated individual is only 15 percentage points (= -.25 + .10) less likely to

have insurance, and from columns (1) and (3), a sole proprietor is 24.2 percentage points

(= -.25 + .008) less likely, essentially the same figure as for a partner. Column (4) is the

p-value of a chi-square test of the hypothesis that the effect of self-employment is zero; it

is rejected at all conventional levels. Column (5) provides the p-value of the test of the
                                                                                             19


hypothesis that the total effect for incorporated individuals is zero; and column (6)

presents the result for sole proprietors. In both cases, one can easily reject the hypothesis

that the effects are zero. The key result is that the data are consistent with our conjecture

above: relative to their counterparts in partnerships and sole proprietorships, incorporated

individuals are more likely to have insurance (although still less likely than wage-

earners).

       Is this differential in insurance coverage associated with differential utilization of

medical services for incorporated individuals? As we move down column (2) of the

table, the answer is generally no. Except for blood pressure checks and flu shots, the

interaction terms are statistically insignificant. Further, according to the figures in

column (5), for about half the procedures, the incorporated self-employed have about the

same utilization rates as wage-earners, despite the fact that their coverage rates are 15

percentage points less.

       An implicit assumption behind this discussion is that operating as a corporation is

primarily an indicator for insurance status. It could reasonably be argued, however, that

it is mainly an indicator for income—self-employed individuals who have gotten to the

stage where it is worthwhile to incorporate have higher incomes than partners and sole

proprietors, ceteris paribus. Note that we would expect income and insurance to work in

the same direction as far as their effects on utilization of medical services—both would

tend to have a positive effect. While this clouds the meaning of statistically significant

interaction terms in column (2), it does not substantially affect our interpretation of

insignificant effects—a zero is entirely consistent with no insurance effect.

       Intensity of utilization: doctor visits. In general, the MEPS tells us only whether
                                                                                                        20


or not an individual utilized a given kind of health care, not how intensively. This

accounts for our focus on the probabilities of using various medical services. However,

information on the number of times that the individual went to the doctor is available.

We take advantage of these data to estimate how the self-employed differ from wage-

earners with respect to the number of doctor visits. The idea is to see if our story on

differences in the use of medical services changes when we allow the intensity of

utilization to vary across individuals.

        We employed the same explanatory variables as in our basic model, equation

(4.1). A complication is introduced by the fact that a substantial number of observations

are at zero hours (see Table 1). We therefore use a Tobit estimator. The coefficient on

the self-employment variable is -0.69 with a standard error of 0.25—the self-employed

pay fewer visits to their doctors, ceteris paribus.21 To assess the quantitative significance

of the coefficient, we began by computing the expected number of visits assuming SE is

equal to zero and setting all the other variables at their means. We then repeated the

exercise assuming SE is one. This exercise suggested that the impact of being self-

employed is .03 fewer visits, or 1.09 percent.22 Thus, when we take advantage of the

extra information on intensity of utilization of doctor visits, it reinforces the results from

Table 2 on the dichotomous choice—the differential between the self-employed and

wage-earners with respect to doctor visits is not very large, particularly in light of the

differential in insurance coverage.




21
  The full set of Tobit results is available upon request.
22
 The expectations were computed according to the standard formula E(Y)=F(β*X/σ)* β*X + σ*f(β*X/σ),
where σ is the standard error associated with the Tobit index, F( ) is the cumulative normal distribution,
and f( ) is the standard normal distribution (Maddala [1983, p. 159]).
                                                                                           21


5. Health Care Expenditures

       So far our focus has been on differential utilization rates. This reflects the

dominant question in the public policy debate--are the relatively low rates of insurance

among the self-employed associated with less access to health care? The MEPS data also

contain information about expenditures on health care, both out-of-pocket and total.

Analysis of these data can cast further light on the question of whether a public policy

response is required to the relatively low rates of health insurance among the self-

employed.

       To begin, we note that the debate over health care sometimes loses sight of the

key function of insurance--to spread consumption over different states of the world.

Hence, even if the self-employed have access to health care, we cannot necessarily be

sanguine about their relative lack of insurance. We need to know if paying for health

care causes serious reductions in their standard of living.

       The MEPS data contain information about family out-of-pocket expenditures on

health care (including expenses on insurance and medical services). To examine whether

the self-employed's lack of insurance forces large reductions in their living standards, we

began by analyzing how these expenditures vary with employment status. Specifically,

we estimated a model in which individual out-of-pocket expenditures depend upon the

same variables as the basic utilization equations of Table 2. Because a substantial

number of individuals have zero out-of-pocket health care expenditures (21.7 percent),

we again use the Tobit statistical model.

       The coefficient on the self-employment variable is 141 with a standard error of

28.3. This result confirms what intuition might suggest--the self-employed have more
                                                                                            22


out-of-pocket health care costs than wage-earners, ceteris paribus. However, from a

quantitative standpoint, the difference is not very large--using the same computational

method as in Section 4.2, the expected difference in out-of-pocket expenditures is only

$84.42. A similar exercise indicates that total expenditures on health care are smaller for

the self-employed (by $228), again as one might expect.

       In this context, it is perhaps more informative to ask how out-of-pocket

expenditures relative to income depend on employment status. We therefore re-estimated

the model with expenditures as a fraction of income on the left-hand side, again using a

Tobit model.23 The coefficient on the self-employment variable is both positive

(0.00748) and significant (s.e. = 0.00194), indicating a higher fraction of out-of-pocket

costs for the self-employed. However, again proceeding as in Section 4.2, our results

imply that, on average, the self-employed devote only 0.4 percent more of their incomes

to out-of-pocket medical expenditures than wage-earners.

       Because the purpose of insurance is to smooth consumption, if a substantial

number of the self-employed experience major health expenditures relative to their

incomes, we might be concerned even if, on average, the ratios of out-of-pocket

expenditures to income are about the same. It is therefore useful to know more about the

distribution of the ratio of out-of-pocket costs to income than its mean. Hence, we

computed the ratio at various percentiles. Within the sample of wage-earners, the ratio

of out-of-pocket costs to income at the 75th percentile is 0.0137; for the self-employed it

is 0.0160. At the 90th percentile, the figures are 0.0347 and 0.0479 for wage-earners and

the self-employed, respectively. The distributions of the level of out-of -pocket
                                                                                                           23


expenditures are qualitatively similar. At the 75th percentile, expenditures are $454 and

$335 for the self-employed and wage-earners, respectively. At the 90th percentile, the

comparable figures are $1,877 and $1,226. It is hard to imagine that such differences are

sufficient to merit public policy concern.

         Another problem in the interpretation of our results on utilization is that they do

not take into account possible differences in the quality of services. For example, we

showed in Table 2 that the self-employed were only about 9 percent less likely to visit the

doctor than wage-earners. But what if the quality of their visits was lower because they

lacked insurance? In the absence of insurance, perhaps the self-employed visit less

experienced physicians who charge lower fees. Or perhaps a given physician demands a

lower fee from an uninsured self-employed patient, but then spends less time with him or

her.

         The MEPS provides no direct way to investigate this issue. However, as a very

rough measure for quality, we can compare total expenditures (i.e., out-of-pocket plus

insurance) per doctor visit for wage-earners and the self-employed. Given that a "doctor

visit" is far from a homogeneous commodity 24, it is not clear how much one can learn

from such an exercise. Without making too much of it, therefore, we merely note that,

conditional on making at least one visit to the doctor, mean expenditures per visit are

$625.04 for wage-earners and $450.69 for the self-employed, a difference that is not

statistically significant at conventional levels (t = 1.160). In this context, recall from

Table 3 that, for a variety of diagnostic tests, there are not substantial differences in

23
  For families with implausibly low incomes, the ratio of expenditures to income may be very high,
possibly skewing the results. Hence, for this exercise, we exclude observations for which income is less
than $5,000. This reduced the sample size by 601.
                                                                                                               24


utilization rates between wage-earners and the self-employed. To the extent that such

tests themselves can be viewed as indicators of the quality of health care, the Table 3

findings are consistent with insubstantial differences in quality between the two groups.



6. Children's Issues

         In recent years, much of the debate over health insurance has focused on the

needs of children. In the fall of 2000, for example, the New York Times noted that

"Health care for children has become a major issue in the presidential campaign" [Pear,

2000, p. A1]. Even if health services utilization is not a problem for the self-employed,

one still might make a case for insurance subsidies if this promoted access to health care

for their children. The MEPS data contain a set of questions relating to preventative care

for children as well as information on their doctor and hospital visits.25 In this section we

examine how children's medical services utilization depends on their parents'

employment status.

         Because the relevant question is the impact on the child's utilization of the parents'

self-employment status, we create a dichotomous variable, PARENTSE, which is equal

to one if both parents are self-employed or only one parent works and he/she is self-

employed, and equal to zero otherwise. Following the same strategy as before, we begin

by asking how the probability of the child's having health insurance varies with

PARENTSE, ceteris paribus. We estimate a probit model in which the probability of

insurance coverage depends upon the child’s age, race, sex, and region as well as


24
   See Eichner, McClellan and Wise [1999] for a careful analysis of sources of differences in health care
expenditures among employer-provided health plans.
25
   The preventative care information is for children seven or under, and the doctor visit information is for
children 17 and under.
                                                                                              25


PARENTSE. The coefficient on the self-employment variable is 0.040 with a standard

error of 0.0322 -- children of the self-employed are about as likely to have insurance

coverage as wage-earners' children. In light of the insurance gap between self-employed

and wage-earning adults (see Table 2), this result is striking. It suggests that parents

place a premium on having their children insured. There is certainly anecdotal evidence

to this effect. Several months ago, the New York Times interviewed a father who

continued to purchase health insurance for his children even after a very substantial

increase in the premium. The father observed, “these are my kids we’re talking about

here. You never know what might happen…I wouldn’t dream of them being without

insurance” (Verhovek [2000, p. A1]).

       In short, whatever problems the self-employed have in getting insurance for

themselves do not seem to stand in the way of their obtaining insurance for their children.

With this information in hand, the rest of the analysis is somewhat anti-climactic. We

found that, ceteris paribus, the children of the self-employed are about as likely to visit

the doctor or be admitted to the hospital as the children of wage-earners, are more likely

to receive hepatitis vaccinations, and are about as likely to be vaccinated for

measles/mumps/rubella. (Detailed results are available upon request.) In short, analysis

of this admittedly limited set of children's utilization measures suggests that a child-based

justification for an insurance subsidy for the self-employed is implausible.



7. Conclusion

       Using data from the 1996 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, we have analyzed

differences between the self-employed and wage-earners with respect to insurance
                                                                                               26


coverage and utilization of a variety of health care services. Our results suggest that for

the self-employed, the link between insurance and utilization of health care services is

weaker than some have suggested. For a number of medical care services, the self-

employed had the same utilization rates as wage-earners, despite the fact that they were

substantially less likely to be insured. In most cases where the self-employed did utilize

services less, the differences were not major. These findings were robust to a number of

reasonable changes in the specification of our statistical model, and are particularly

striking against the backdrop of a literature that, in general, finds strong correlations

between insurance coverage and utilization of health care services (Hurd and McGarry

[1997, p. 131]).

       The self-employed thus appear to be able to finance access to health care from

sources other than insurance. Perhaps the source is their own wealth, or perhaps they

have better access to borrowing than wage-earners.26 In any case, to the extent that the

goal of public policy is to increase the utilization of health care services among the self-

employed, providing them with health insurance subsidies may not be an efficacious

measure. That said, there are reasons other than increasing utilization that might lead

one to favor a subsidy. For example, to the extent that other parties are incurring the

costs of treating the self-employed, there may be an efficiency rationale for inducing

them to buy insurance (Coate [1995]). Another possible justification for a subsidy is

horizontal equity--health insurance purchases of wage-earners and the self-employed

should be treated in the same way (although to the extent that differences in the taxation

of health insurance are capitalized into the returns to self-employment, this rationale is
                                                                                                            27


less compelling).

         Of course, as Fuchs [1998], Gruber [2000], and others have observed, despite the

focus of the public policy debate on insurance coverage and utilization rates, what we

ultimately care about are health outcomes. The extent to which medical care has a

positive effect on health is not clear. According to some studies, access to health care

accounts for only a relatively small part of health, and more important determinants are

genetics, environment, and health behaviors (Institute for the Future [2000, p. 23]).

Consistent with this notion, Meara [1998] shows that access to health care is less

important than maternal behaviors when it comes to explaining low birth weights, and

Skinner et al. [2001] document that at a given point in time, variation in health care

intensity appears not to improve survival probabilities among the elderly. An important

question for future research is whether the large differences in their propensities to be

insured lead to substantial differences in health status between wage-earners and the self-

employed.27




26
   Recent press reports indicate that self-employed individuals are particularly likely to take advantage of
"buyers' clubs" for health care services, which offer below-market prices on doctor visits, medical tests, and
so on (Freudenheim, [2000, p. A1]). However, there are no data on the importance of this phenomenon.
27
   For some results along these lines, see Perry and Rosen [2001].
                                                                                           28




                                     REFERENCES

Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, "Boys will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and
Common Stock Investment," Working Paper, University of California, Davis, February
2000.

Campling, R.F., “Employee Benefits and the Part-Time Worker,” Working Paper,
Queen's at Kingston – School of Industrial Relations, 1987.

Coate, Stephen, “Altruism, the Samaritan’s Dilemma, and Government Transfer Policy,”
American Economic Review 85, March 1995, pp. 46-57.

Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives, 1998 Green Book, U. S.
Government Printing Office: Washington, DC, 1998.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber, “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
5052, March 1995.

Cutler, David and Louise Sheiner, "The Geography of Medicare," American Economic
Review, May 1999, pp. 228-233.

Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson, “Mortality, Education, Income and Inequality
among American Cohorts,” Working Paper, Research Program in Development Studies:
Princeton University, June 1999.

Eichner, Matthew, Mark McClellan, and David A. Wise, "The Sources of Cost
Difference in Health Insurance Plans: A Decomposition Analysis," National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper 7443, December 1999.

Ettner, Susan L., "New Evidence on the Relationship Betwen Income and Health,"
Journal of Health Economics 15, 1996, pp. 67-85.

Fairlie, Robert W. and Bruce D. Meyer, “Trends in Self-Employment Among White and
Black Men: 1910-1990,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7182,
June 1999.

Feldstein, Martin, “The Economics of Health Care: What Have We Learned? What
Have I Learned?” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper, February
1995.

Freudenheim, Milt, "'Buyers' Clubs for Medical Services Crop Up," New York Times,
August 25, 2000, p. A1.
                                                                                      29


Fuchs, Victor, “Health, Government, and Irving Fisher,” National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper 6710, August 1998.

Gilleskie, Donna, “A Dynamic Stochastic Model of Medical Care Use and Work
Absence,” Econometrica, Vol. 66, No. 1, January 1998, pp. 1-46.

Gruber, Jonathan, ”Medicaid," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
7829, August 2000.

Gruber, Jonathan and James M. Poterba, "Tax Incentives and the Decision to Purchase
Health Insurance: Evidence from the Self-Employed," Quarterly Journal of Economics
104, August 1994, pp. 701-733.

Hagan, John, John Simpson, and A.R. Gillis, "Class in the Household: A Power Control
Theory of Gender and Delinquency," American Journal of Sociology 92, no. 4, January
1987, pp. 788-816.

Hamilton, Barton H., "Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the
Returns to Self-Employment," Journal of Political Economy 3, June 2000, pp. 604-631.

Health Insurance Association of America, Source Book of Health Insurance Data, 1999-
2000, Washington D.C., 2000.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, John Penrod and Harvey S. Rosen, “Health Insurance and the
Supply of the Entrepreneurs,” Journal of Public Economics 62, 1996, pp. 209-235.

Hurd, Michael D. and Kathleen McGarry, “Medical Insurance and the Use of Health Care
Services by the Elderly,” Journal of Health Economics 16, 1997, pp. 129-154.

Institute for the Future, Health and Health Care 2010—The Forecast, The Challenge,
Jossey-Bass Publishers: San Francisco, 2000.

Kass, B.L., Weinick R.M., Monheit A.C., “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health,
1996,” Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, 1999.

Lakdawalla, Darius and Tomas Philipson,“The Rise in Old Age Longevity and the
Market for Long-Term Care,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
6547, May 1998.

Lueck, Sarah, “U.S. Sees Rise in the Number of Uninsured,” Wall Street Journal,
October 4, 1999, p. B4.

Maddala, G.S., Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics, Oxford
University Press: New York, 1983.
                                                                                         30


Marquis, M. and S. Long, “Worker Demand for Health Insurance in Non-group Market,”
Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 14, pp. 47-63, 1995.

Meara, Ellen, "Why is Health Related to Socioeconomic Status?" Working Paper,
Harvard University, November 1998.

Newhouse, Joseph. Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment,
Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1993.

Pear, Robert, “Insurers Ask Government to Extend Health Plans,” New York Times, May
23, 1999, p. 16.

Pear, Robert, "40 States Forfeit Health Care Funds for Poor Children," New York Times,
September 24, 2000, p. A1.

Perry, Craig W. and Harvey S. Rosen, "The Self-Employed Are Less Likely to Have
Health Insurance than Wage-Earners. So What?" National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper 8316, June 2001.

Ross, Catherine E. and John Mirowsky, "Does Medical Insurance Contribute to
Socioeconomic Differentials in Health?" The Milbank Quarterly 78, no. 2, 2000, pp. 291-
321.

Skinner, Jonathan and John Wennberg, “How Much is Enough? Efficiency and Medicare
Spending in the Last Six Months of Life,” National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper 6513, April 1998.

Skinner, Jonathan, Elliott S. Fisher and John E. Wennberg, “The Efficiency of
Medicare,” National Bureau of Economic Rsearch, Working Paper 8395, July 2001.

Stabile, Mark, “Private Insurance Subsidies and Public Health Care Markets: Evidence
from Canada,” Department of Economics: University of Toronto, 1999.

Taubman, Paul and Sherwin Rosen, “Healthiness, Education, and Marital Status,”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 611, August 1982.

Thomasson, Melissa A., “The Importance of Group Coverage: How Tax Policy Shaped
U.S. Health Insurance,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 7543,
February 2000.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1998 (118th Edition),
Washington, DC, 1998.

Verhovek, Sam Howe, "Frustration Grows with Cost of Health Insurance," New York
Times, September 18, 2000, p. A1.
                                                                                                31


                                             Table 1*

            Summary Statistics: Insurance and Utilization Rates of Health Care Services

                              (1)                (2)                 (3)                  (4)

                     Entire Sample      Self-Employed       Wage-Earners        Test Statistic of
                                                                                Difference in
                                                                                Means Between
                                                                                (2) and (3)

Insurance            .794               .681                .809                -10.2
                     (.405)             (.470)              (.393)

Doctor Visits        .623               .585                .628                -2.79
                     (.485)             (.493)              (.482)

Hospital             .0534              .0423               .0549               -1.79
Admissions           (.225)             (.201)              (.228)


Hospital Stays       .0537              .0440               .0550               -1.56
                     (.225)             (.205)              (.228)

Chiropractor         .0380              .0604               .0349               4.27
Visits               (.191)             (.238)              (.184)

Optometrist          .0420              .0458               .0412               .725
Visits               (.200)             (.209)              (.199)

Alternative Care     .0652              .100                .0604               5.15
                     (.247)             (.300)              (.238)

Blood Pressure       .713               .662                .720                -4.08
Exam                 (.452)             (.473)              (.449)

Cholesterol          .363               .355                .364                -0.623
Exam                 (.481)             (.479)              (.481)

Breast Exam          .290               .208                .301                -6.57
                     (.454)             (.406)              (.459)

Physical Exam        .404               .358                .410                -3.35
                     (.491)             (.480)              (.492)
Dentist Checkup      .432               .440                .430                0.643
                     (.495)             (.497)              (.495)

Flu Shot             .166               .142                .169                -2.33
                     (.372)             (.349)              (.375)
                                                                                                  32



                                       Table 1 - continued

                             (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)

                    Entire Sample        Self-Employed       Wage-Earners         Test Statistic of
                                                                                  Difference in
                                                                                  means between
                                                                                  (2) and (3)

Mammogram           .107                 .0959               .109                 -1.30
                    (.309)               (.295)              (.311)

Prostate Exam       .104                 .135                .0994                3.70
                    (.305)               (.342)              (.299)

Prescription        .599                 .560                .604                 -2.88
Medicine            (.490)               (.49)               (.489)
Purchase

__________________________________
* Each entry in columns (1), (2), and (3) shows the proportion of the relevant group that utilized
each health care service within the last year. Figures in parenthesis are standard errors. The first
entry in each column shows the proportion of individuals who were covered by health insurance.
Means for breast exams, prostate exams, and mammograms are taken only over the appropriate
gender group. Column (4) shows t-tests on the differences in the means in columns (2) and (3).
                                                                   Table 2*

                                Probit Estimates for Insurance Coverage and for Site-Based Services Utilization

                      (1)          (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)          (7)

                Insurance    Doctor Visits    Hospital          Hospital Stays    Chiropractor      Optometrist   Alternative
                Status                        Admissions                          Visits            Visits        Care

Self-Employed   -.203        -.0585           -.0115            -.0106            .017              .000133       .0322
                (.0160)      (.0163)          (.00618)          (.00626)          (.006)            (.00593)      (.00805)
                [-25.1%]     [-9.32%]         [-20.9%]          [-19.2%]          [48.7%]           [3.23%]       [53.3%]

Age             .00532       -.00842          -.00268           -.00278           .00148            -.00211       .00557
                (.00249)     (.00323)         (.00136)          (.00136)          (.00118)          (.00118)      (.00242)

Age Squared     -.0000205    .000155          .0000375          .0000388          -.0000198         .0000318      -.0000556
                (.0000316)   (.0000409)       (.000017)         (.0000171)        (.0000144)        (.0000143)    (.0000177)

GED             .0872        .146             .0157             .0157             -.0118            .0421         .0300
                (.0129)      (.0225)          (.0133)           (.0134)           (.00902)          (.0203)       (.0183)

H.S. Diploma    .203         .129             -.00772           -.00750           .0161             .0330         .0185
                (.0111)      (.0154)          (.00668)          (.00671)          (.00644)          (.00787)      (.00808)

B.A.            .197         .187             -.0114            -.0114            .0196             .0503         .0538
                (.00687)     (.0156)          (.00723)          (.00727)          (.00949)          (.0141)       (.0136)

M.A.            .178         .206             -.00975           -.00980           .0282             .0738         .0726
                (.00579)     (.0188)          (.00963)          (.00967)          (.0141)           (.0219)       (.0199)

PhD             .171         .204             .0175             .0246             -.00599           .0735         .0376
                (.00581)     (.0312)          (.0222)           (.0234)           (.0158)           (.0363)       (.0283)

Other Degree    .157         .129             -.00417           -.00300           .0221             .0608         .0421
                (.00722)     (.0109)          (.00933)          (.00948)          (.00122)          (.0191)       (.0161)
                                                                                                                                34




                                                        Table 2 - continued

                         (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)

                Insurance      Doctor Visits   Hospital           Hospital Stays   Chiropractor   Optometrist    Alternative
                Status                         Admissions                          Visits         Visits         Care

Family Size     -.0123         -.0338          .00278             .00275           -.00542        -.00408        -.00866
                (.00271)       (.00355)        (.00145)           (.00146)         (.00138)       (.00138)       (.00176)

American        -.000836       .0556           .00806             .00808           -.0101         -.0166         -.00916
Indian          (.0336)        (.0431)         (.0201)            (.0202)          (.0131)        (.0126)        (.0206)

Aleut, Eskimo   -.0566         .237            .266               .265                     --              --    .118
                (.185)         (.122)          (.200)             (.200)                                         (.166)

Asian           -.0645         -.0683          -.0208             -.0210           -.0133         -.0179         .00963
                (.0289)        (.0322)         (.0101)            (.0101)          (.00766)       (.00752)       (.0136)

Black           -.0298         -.0397          -.00806            -.00801          -.0187         -.0117         -.0192
                (.0131)        (.0161)         (.0201)            (.00625)         (.00426)       (.00523)       (.00579)

Other           -.204          -.198           .0366              .0378               --          .112              --
                (.200)         (.202)          (.0833)            (.0843)                         (.143)

Northeast       .0320          .0416           .00868             .00850           -.00828        -.0141         -.0323
                (.0116)        (.0155)         (.00753)           (.00756)         (.00464)       (.00455)       (.00434)

Midwest         .0515          .0315           .00248             .00242           .00980         -.0129         -.0284
                (.0108)        (.0151)         (.00690)           (.00693)         (.00539)       (.00447)       (.00446)
                                                                                                                                                                 35




                                                               Table 2 - Continued

                          (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)

                  Insurance          Doctor Visits     Hospital           Hospital Stays     Chiropractor      Optometrist        Alternative
                  Status                               Admissions                            Visits            Visits             Care

South             -.00371            .0256             .00934             .0103              -.0173            -.0224             -.0432
                  (.0108)            (.0139)           (.00633)           (.00693)           (.0426)           (.00439)           (.00474)

Male              -.0371             -.213             -.0375             -.0379             -.0117            -.0162             -.0387
                  (.00808)           (.00987)          (.00460)           (.00462)           (.00356)          (.00390)           (.00452)

Married           .135               .0963             .0167              .0167              .0107             .00309             -.0109
                  (.0103)            (.0122)           (.00504)           (.00506)           (.00394)          (.00431)           (.00452)


Log Likelihood    -4179              -5841             -1932              -1940              -1465             -1600              -2013

Observations      9552               9552              9552               9552               9536              9546               9500

_____________________________________
*The coefficients give the marginal effects of the associated right hand side variable on the probability of being covered by insurance (column(1)) and on the
probabilities of utilizing various services (columns (2) through (7)). The standard errors appear in parentheses. The figures in square brackets in the “self-
employed” row give the implied percentage differences in the probabilities between self-employed and wage-earners.
                                                                                                                                                      36




                                                                           Table 3*

                                       Probit Estimates for Utilization of Screening and Preventative Care Services*

                    (1)          (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)           (8)         (9)

               Breast       Physical           Dentist         Flu Shot          Mammogram       Prostate        Prescription   Blood       Cholesterol
               Exam         Exam               Visits                                            Exam            Medicine       Pressure    Check
                                                                                                                 Purchase       Check

Self-          -.0800       -.0649             -.0159          -.0518            -.0694          -.0541          -.0598         -.0825      -.0648
Employed       (.0265)      (.0153)            (.016)          (.0101)           (.0345)         (.0140)         (.0164)        (.0155)     (.0155)
               [-26.6%]     [-15.8%]           [-3.70%]        [-30.7%]          [-63.6%]        [-54.4%]        [-9.90%]       [-11.5%]    [-17.8%]

Age            -.00596      -.0113             -.000880        -.00126           .143            .00495          -.0122         -.00579     .00496
               (.00466)     (.00323)           (.0033)         (.00249)          (.0305)         (.00427)        (.00326)       (.00291)    (.00346)

Age Squared    .0000849     .000198            .0000257        .0000823          -.00126         .000076         .000204        .000124     .0000843
               (.0000591)   (.0000403)         (.00004)        (.0000309)        (.000306)       (.0000513)      (.0000411)     (.000037)   (.000043)

GED            .0519        .0453              .109            .0689             .00849          .127            .111           .0845       .0630
               (.0383)      (.0290)            (.031)          (.0267)           (.0702)         (.0426)         (.0252)        (.0197)     (.0308)

H.S. Diploma   .105         .0373              .212            .0530             .0754           .0797           .0713          .0778       .0719
               (.0240)      (.0163)            (.017)          (.0131)           (.0376)         (.0195)         (.0158)        (.0137)     (.0170)

B.A.           .206         .0833              .347            .0905             .144            .134            .127           .129        .131
               (.0229)      (.0198)            (.018)          (.0182)           (.0438)         (.0272)         (.0175)        (.0132)     (.0209)

M.A.           .257         .0994              .413            .124              .167            .134            .141           .147        .164
               (.0231)      (.0266)            (.020)          (.0260)           (.0488)         (.0374)         (.0227)        (.0153)     (.0278)

PhD            .198         .169               .329            .207              .347            .130            .149           .125        .188
               (.0524)      (.0464)            (.037)          (.0457)           (.0707)         (.0604)         (.0384)        (.0280)     (.0486)
                                                                                                                           37




                                                    Table 3 - continued

                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)            (8)        (9)

                Breast     Physical   Dentist    Flu Shot      Mammogram   Prostate   Prescription   Blood      Cholesterol
                Exam       Exam       Visits                               Exam       Medicine       Pressure   Check
                                                                                      Purchase       Check

Other Degree    .182       .0846      .277       .0987         .194        .159       .101           .123       .104
                (.0258)    (.0245)    (.023)     (.0229)       (.0485)     (.0371)    (.0218)        (.0155)    (.0257)

Family Size     -.0391     -.00522    -.0230     -.0137        -.0311      -.000731   -.0303         -.0226     -.00611
                (.00549)   (.00357)   (.004)     (.00294)      (.00913)    (.00434)   (.00362)       (.00311)   (.00381)

American        -.0606     .0126      -.0573     -.0106        -.139       .0572      -.0423         -.00438    .0784
Indian          (.0648)    (.0460)    (.046)     (.0336)       (.0965)     (.0564)    (.0442)        (.0397)    (.0496)

Aleut, Eskimo   .179       .314       -.0809     -.00964             --         --    .0680          .0570      .447
                (.154)     (.166)     (.194)     (.127)                               (.201)         (.168)     (.157)

Asian           -.0334     .0171      -.0496     .0322         -.0568      -.0615     -.119          -.0538     .0518
                (.0478)    (.0312)    (.031)     (.0247)       (.0686)     (.0291)    (.0322)        (.0297)    (.0324)

Black           .0886      .143       -.123      -.0254        .0756       .0526      -.0555         -.00649    .101
                (.0206)    (.0163)    (.016)     (.0116)       (.0344)     (.0216)    (.0163)        (.0146)    (.0173)

Other           -.0404     .138       .101            --             --         --    -.425          .152       .333
                (.287)     (.172)     (.195)                                          (.174)         (.0918)    (.160)

Northeast       .00891     .139       .0323      -.0218        .107        .0846      .0191          .0534      .108
                (.0236)    (.0164)    (.016)     (.0114)       (.0358)     (.0209)    (.0159)        (.0132)    (.0172)
                                                                                                                                                                   38




                                                                       Table 3 - continued

                         (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)             (9)

                  Breast           Physical        Dentist          Flu Shot        Mammogram        Prostate        Prescription    Blood            Cholesterol
                  Exam             Exam            Visits                                            Exam            Medicine        Pressure         Check
                                                                                                                     Purchase        Check

Midwest           -.0267           .0219           .0428            -.00481         .0322            -.00220         .0549           .0519            .00487
                  (.0225)          (.0156)         (.016)           (.0112)         (.0344)          (.0179)         (.0151)         (.0128)          (.0160)

South             -.0259           .0451           -.0469           -.00810         .0214            .00854          .0370           .0403            .063
                  (.0207)          (.0142)         (.014)           (.0104)         (.0321)          (.0165)         (.0140)         (.0120)          (.0148)

Male                      --       -.119           -.122            -.0466                  --               --      -.210           -.166            -.0735
                                   (.0102)         (.010)           (.00774)                                         (.0100)         (.00901)         (.0106)

Married           .114             .0665           .0585            .0183           .0926            .0730           .104            .0714            .0462
                  (.0169)          (.0119)         (.012)           (.00901)        (.0259)          (.0144)         (.0123)         (.0112)          (.0125)


Log Likelihood    -2719            -6171           -6041            -4005           -1333            -2067           -5996           -4956            -5527

Observations      4352             9552            9552             9283            2060             5009            8110             9263            8976


________________________________
*The coefficients give the marginal effects of the associated right hand side variable on the probabilities of utilizing various screening services. The standard
errors appear in parentheses. The figures in square brackets in the “self-employed” row give the implied percentage differences in the probabilities between self-
employed and wage-earners.
                                              Table 4*

                 Differential Self-Employment Effects by Organizational Form

                      (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)              (6)
                 Self-employed    Incorp*SE    Proprietor-         Test of      Test of         Test of
                                                ship*SE
                      (δ)             (γ)          (λ)         δ= γ= λ=0       δ+ γ =0          δ+ λ =0

Insurance        -0.25           0.101        .008           0.0             .0018        0.0
Coverage         (.045)          (.022)       (.25)

Doctor           -.0853          .0201        .0324          0.0032          .0277        .0094
Visits           (.0459)         (.0508)      (.0461)

Hospital         -.0235          -.0101       .0306          .0623           .0155        .7744
Admissions       (.0157)         (.0231)      (.0333)

Hospital Stays   -.0167          -.0175       .0197          .0840           .0152        .8727
                 (.0164)         (.0188)      (.0280)

Prescription     -.056           -.022        .004           0.0027          0.0074       0.0089
Medicine         (.047)          (.054)       (.049)

Chiropractor     .032            -.014        -.008          0.008           0.4132       0.0051
Visits           (.019)          (.009)       (.01)

Optometrist      .014            -.012        -.012          0.8419          0.9615       0.9769
Visits           (.018)          (.013)       (.012)

Cholesterol      -.0881          .0762        .00617         0.0001          0.5594       0.0
Check            (.0439)         (.0567)      (.0509)

Breast Exam      -0.142          .118         .0468          0.0076          0.8913       0.0029
                 (.0775)         (.0761)      (.0742)

Blood            -.170           .108         .0646          0.0             0.2512       0.0
Pressure         (.0452)         (.0329)      (.0354)
Check

Physical         -.0866          .0503        .0152          0.0004          0.1677       0.0002
                 (.0428)         (.0541)      (.0492)

Alternative      .00989          .0142        .0264          0.0             0.037        0.0
Care             (.0197)         (.0243)      (.0250)

Dentist Visit    -.0088          .0202        .00940         0.4201          0.7938       0.1119
                 (.0436)         (.0520)      (.0473)
                                                                                                        40



                                             Table 4 - continued

                       (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)
                  Self-employed    Incorp*SE       Proprietor-         Test of      Test of      Test of
                                                    ship*SE
                       (δ)             (γ)             (λ)         δ= γ= λ=0       δ+ γ =0      δ+ λ =0

Flu Shot          -.106           .122           .0851           0.0             0.1501       0.0001
                  (.0237)         (.0606)        (.0522)

Mammogram         -0.147          .144           .0703           0.1313          0.9558       0.0592
                  (.0940)         (.112)         (.105)

Prostate Exam     -0.081          .037           .040            0.0041          .0063        .0006
                  (.038)          (.060)         (.058)




  _______________________________________
  *These are the results for the self-employment variables when we augment our canonical model
  with interaction terms to control for differences in organizational form. (See Equation (4.2).)
  Column (1) gives the effects if the individual is in a partnership; column (2) if incorporated; and
  column (3) if a sole proprietor. In each cell, the figure is the marginal effect on the probability of
  the relevant left hand side variable, and the number in parentheses is the standard error.
  Columns (4) through (6) give the p-values of the associated tests.
