                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO RICH AND POOR COUNTRIES SPECIALIZE IN A DIFFERENT MIX OF GOODS?
             EVIDENCE FROM PRODUCT-LEVEL US TRADE DATA


                                              Peter K. Schott


                                           Working Paper 8492
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w8492


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2001




Special thanks to Richard Baldwin. Thanks as well to Andrew Bernard, Peter Kenen and seminar participants at
Columbia University, the 7th Annual EIIT Conference, the University of Florida, the London School of Economics,
the University of Oregon, the NBER Summer Institute, Princeton University and the Yale School of Management.
Written comments from two anonymous referees and the NBER ITI group were very helpful. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Rich and Poor Countries Specialize in a Different Mix of Goods?
Evidence from Product-Level US Trade Data
Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 8492
September 2001
JEL No. F11, F14, F2, C21



                                             ABSTRACT


        Unit values of US imports at the product level reveal a substantial degree of vertical product
differentiation among countries exporting to the US. This specialization is not apparent by looking solely
at trade flows. Two trends stand out. First, the portion of US import products originating in either rich
or poor countries exclusively has fallen dramatically as US trade barriers have fallen, from 41% in 1972
to 17% in 1994. Indeed, by 1994, nearly three quarters the products imported into the US were sourced
simultaneously from rich and poor countries. Second, within-product unit value dispersion is positively
and significantly correlated with source country income: men’s shirts imported from Japan in 1994, for
example, are about thirty times as expensive as shirts originating in the Philippines. These unit value
premia, and their increase over time, are consistent with the factor proportions framework but convey a
stark warning: industry trade flow data alone are too coarse to meet the assumptions underlying most
tests of trade theory.




Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Tel: 203-436-4260
Fax: 203-432-6947
Email: peter.schott@yale.edu
homepage: http://www.som.yale.edu/faculty/pks4/
                 Do Rich and Poor Countries Specialize in a Different Mix of Goods?
                               Evidence from Product-Level US Trade Data


1 Issues

           Do rich and poor countries compete by producing and trading the same mix of goods?
Both Heckscher-Ohlin and product cycle models of trade imply low levels of direct competition
between rich and poor countries because each has a cost advantage in producing a different mix
of goods. Labor abundant countries should produce labor intensive products, for example, and
capital abundant countries should produce capital intensive products. Nevertheless, empirically
assessing the relevance of endowment-motivated trade is hampered by the coarse division of
output contained in most international trade data. When products are assigned to just a few
dozen industries, most countries are observed to import and export all of them, hampering our
ability to differentiate vertical trade in different products from horizontal trade in different
varieties. In this paper we use product-level unit values to distinguish between these two types
of intra-industry trade.
           Controlling for vertical differentiation is important for interpreting existing tests of
standard trade theory. The factor proportions framework traditionally is estimated by drawing
upon trade flow, endowment and input intensity data to determine whether the factors embodied
in a country’s trade are equal to its relative factor abundance.1 Most recent contributions to this
literature assume – implicitly or explicitly – that countries produce the same mix of goods and
that they manufacture them using identical techniques.2 Support for the model is generally weak
in these tests, and the field has turned toward generalizing them to allow for international
productivity differences and home bias (e.g. Davis and Weinstein 1998; Trefler 1995).
However, the greater the vertical product differentiation between rich and poor countries, the
more unreliable these tests are. Indeed, the degree of differentiation reported here is a strong


1
    See, for example, Bowen et al (1987), Leamer (1984), Harrigan (1995,1997) and Trefler (1993, 1995).
2
    Davis and Weinstein (1998) allow input intensities to vary with country capital abundance and report strong
evidence for endowment-motivated trade. Schott (2001) takes a different tack in finding strong support for the
factor proportions framework; he shows that countries do appear to enter and exit industries in a manner consistent
with theory when industries are redefined according to input intensity rather than end use. This adjustment is a
means of teasing product level information out of industry-level data.


                                                           1
argument for directing greater suspicion at specialization in resolving what has become known as
the “mystery of the missing trade” (Trefler 1995).
       We attack this problem head-on by exploiting highly detailed US trade flow data that
segment trade into thousands of products and record product-level unit value by origin country.
We examine a much broader set of countries – 120 of the poorest and richest versus the 30 or so
OECD countries typically studied – because vertical Heckscher-Ohlin specialization is more apt
to appear between more dissimilar countries.
       Two trends stand out. First, if we rank US trade partners by per capita GDP, we find that
the number of products imported from rich or poor countries exclusively has declined sharply
with time: in 1972, 41% of import products originated only in rich countries and 1% originated
only in poor countries; by 1994, these shares had fallen by half, to 17% and 0.4%, respectively.
Second, and more striking, we find that unit values rise with origin country income. Men’s shirts
from Japan, for example, are about thirty times as expensive as shirts originating in the
Philippines. By comparison, the Economist reports that the global price variation of the
McDonald’s Big Mac, a highly standardized good, was 3.3 using existing exchange rates in
March 1999. In our sample of goods going to the same market, the median high to low unit
value ratio across all products in 1994 is 24, and this ratio increased over time.
       By itself, the rising product mix overlap between rich and poor countries is surprising and
appears to contradict the factor proportions framework. Observation of unit values, however,
resolves this puzzle by showing that, within product classifications, labor abundant poor
countries are shipping the US different goods than capital and skill abundant rich countries.
Indeed, these unit value premia increase over time, a trend highly suggestive of rich countries’
efforts to reduce direct competition with poor countries as trade barriers fall. Together, these
trends contain a stark warning: industry trade flow data alone are too coarse to differentiate
vertical from horizontal trade specialization and therefore do not meet the assumptions
underlying most tests of trade theory.
       Using unit values to discern trade specialization is a recent addition to a long line of
research aimed more broadly at measuring intra-industry trade. This research begins with Grubel
and Lloyd (1975), who develop a widely used index for measuring bilateral, within-industry
trade flows. Subsequent work by Greenaway and Milner (1983) highlights the insensitivity of
this index to vertical versus horizontal intra-industry trade. Our approach is most similar to


                                                  2
Greenaway, Hine and Milner (1995), who use per-ton industry unit values to measure the relative
importance of vertical and horizontal trade in Canadian imports. A significant advantage of this
paper is the use of unit values by product and classification (e.g. dollars per dozen shirts) rather
than industry and weight. Also, we emphasize the importance of endowments in explaining
vertical trade rather than the role of market structure and scale economies in spurring horizontal
trade. Nevertheless, the high but relatively equal unit values we find among rich countries is
consistent with the horizontal specialization implied by “new” trade theory (e.g. Krugman 1979,
1981; Lancaster 1980; Stiglitz 1987). Indeed, use of product-level unit values would seem to be
a useful addition to empirical investigation of those models (e.g. Hummels and Levinsohn 1993,
1995).
           Understanding the extent of vertical product specialization, along with market structure
and scale, is a key part of identifying who wins and loses as a result of international trade.3
From 1972 to 1994, the portion of US manufacturing value imported from the poorest countries
increased fourfold, from 2% to 8%. But the share of trade “touched” by poor countries is much
larger: by 1994, manufacturing import products with at least one poor country as a source
represented nearly three quarters of the total value of manufacturing imports. The effect of this
poor country competition on firms in rich countries is under-explored and deserves more
attention.4 In the Heckscher-Ohlin framework, for example, rich country firms producing a good
in common with Chinese firms have two options if economic integration lowers the good’s world
price. The first is to match the price decline and continue direct competition by either lowering
wages or increasing productivity (possibly by outsourcing). The second is to exit the market
either outright or by introducing a related but higher end product that takes advantage of their
countries’ greater skill and capital abundance. To the extent that firms exit or upgrade, the link



3
    Greenaway, Hine and Milner (1995) and Gibson and Harris (1996) offer detailed discussions of the theory of how
these relate to welfare gains from trade.
4
    Caves (1998) and Sutton (1997) provide summaries of research in firm turnover and growth. To the extent that
this work does take on an international focus, it is typically with the purpose of understanding the effect of trade
liberalization on firms in developing countries (Tybout 2000, 2001). Two exceptions to this trend are Feenstra and
Hanson (1996) and Bernard and Jensen (2001). The former study outsourcing by US firms; the latter show that US
plant closures occur more frequently in regions that are experiencing rapidly changing relative factor supplies and in
industries with factor requirements at odds with the new supplies.


                                                           3
between the low-end good’s world price and rich country factor rewards is weakened, an affect
which may mitigate political opposition to trade. In this paper we find that rich countries have
widened the distance between their products and those of poor countries over time.
           Finally, we note that an important limitation of our analysis is that it is not a true “test” of
the factor content of trade in the sense advocated by Bowen et al (1987). On the other hand,
such a test is not possible here because input intensities are not available at the product level. In
addition, because empirically distinguishing measures of relative endowments and technological
prowess is quite difficult, we cannot determine the extent to which Ricardian technological
differences (e.g. Dornbush, Fisher and Samuelson 1977) play a role in the vertical specialization
we uncover. Nevertheless, these limitations are offset by the significant compensating advantage
of being able to peer into products for the first time.
           The paper proceeds as follows: section 2 briefly outlines the theory behind trade
specialization and highlights its empirical implications; section 3 provides a brief description of
the product-level US import data used in the empirical analysis; section 4 reports the evidence;
and section 5 concludes with suggestions for future research.


2 Specialization and Trade

           In the multiple cone equilibrium of Heckscher-Ohlin (HO) trade theory, a country’s
product mix varies according to its relative factor endowments. The top panel of Figure 1
displays a two factor, four product world. The four products, in order of increasing capital
intensity, are Apparel, Textiles, Machinery and Chemicals. Under standard assumptions (see
Dixit and Norman 1980), the four products’ unit-value isoquants delineate three cones of
diversification, the word cone referring to the set of endowment vectors that all select the same
mix of products. Because production of a good outside of the cone in which a country resides
results in negative profit, GDP-maximizing countries produce only the two goods anchoring their
cones. As drawn, Japan and the Philippines each have a distinct product mix, with capital
abundant Japan specializing in relatively capital intense Machinery and Chemicals and labor
abundant Philippines specializing in relatively labor intense Apparel and Textiles.5


5
    In this example, countries in neighboring cones produce one good in common. More generally, with F factors, two
countries in neighboring cones can produce from zero to F-1 such common goods. See Bernard, Jenson and Schott


                                                          4
         If, as indicated by the arrow in the figure, a country accumulates capital relative to labor,
its product output per total labor force evolves as indicated in the bottom panel of Figure 1.
First, in the labor abundant (or poor country) cone, capital accumulation reduces Apparel output
while raising Textile output. Second, in the middle cone, capital accumulation reduces Textile
output at the expense of Machinery output. Finally, in the capital abundant (or rich country)
cone, capital accumulation reduces Machinery output at the expense of Chemical output.
         Capital accumulation also moves a country into cones with progressively higher wages
and lower capital rental rates. This change in relative factor rewards can be seen by connecting
isoquants with their respective isocost lines. Unit value isoquants are tangent to their respective
isocost lines as a result of perfect competition. In Figure 1, a decline in the price of Textiles
lowers nominal wages in the labor abundant cone but does not affect nominal wages in the most
capital abundant cone. Thus, factor price equality is maintained within cones but can vary across
countries in different cones. This feature of the model highlights the importance of measuring
vertical product specialization. If Japan is sufficiently more capital abundant than the
Philippines to produce a non-overlapping mix of goods, the competition between workers in the
two countries is weakened. All else equal, a decline in the world price of Apparel raises real
wages in Japan.
         The development paths in Figure 1 highlight the similarity between HO and technology-
driven product cycle (PC) specialization. To the extent that product capital intensity is correlated
with technological sophistication, and country capital abundance is correlated with innovative
prowess, both predict similar product entrance and exit patterns. In product cycle theory, Leader
output rises until Followers figure out how to manufacture and enter the market, whereupon
Leader output declines. Leaders have the advantage because their large, rich markets provide
firms with a strong incentive to invent sophisticated products (Posner 1961, Vernon 1966, 1979).
A “quality ladder” variant of this model has Leader and Follower trading dominance of a
particular good over time, as Leaders re-enter the market for a given good by innovating and
offering a more advanced version (Grossman and Helpman 1991). Without clearer measures of




(2001) and Leamer (1987) for more detailed discussions of output specialization when standard HO assumptions,
including evenness, are relaxed.


                                                       5
industry sophistication and its correlation with endowments, empirically differentiating HO and
PC development paths is quite difficult.6
           Countries rarely exhibit product mix specialization at the industry level. At the level of
aggregation used in most empirical trade research (i.e. the three digit International Standard
Industrial Classification that breaks manufacturing into 28 industries), countries produce and
trade all industries. The difficulties associated with this coarseness can be observed in Figure 1
by renaming the four products T-shirts, Televisions, Gore-Tex Jackets and Flat Panel Displays in
order of capital intensity. If these products are grouped into two industries, Apparel and
Electronics, then Japan and the Philippines have positive production of both industries. In that
case, the two countries experience intra-industry trade and only unit value data permit us to
distinguish vertical from horizontal specialization. This data would show a correlation of unit
value with source country capital abundance. If we add an additional capital abundant economy
and allow for both red and blue Gore-Tex Jacket production, the identical unit values of these
two Apparel products would be evidence of the type of horizontal differentiation implied by new
trade theory (e.g. Helpman and Krugman 1984).
           We search for two trends in support of endowment-driven trade. The first is that products
imported from the poorest countries are different from products originating in the richest
countries. The second is that when poor countries invade import product markets previously
held by rich countries, rich countries upgrade their product mix to reduce direct competition.
Examination of unit values is key to uncovering both trends.


3 Data Description and Summary

           The NBER Trade Database (NBERTD) compiled by Feenstra (1996) lists the customs
value of all US imports by source country for the years 1972 through 1994.7 Imports are




6
    Feenstra and Rose (2000) find that the order in which countries first export goods to the US is consistent with
macroeconomic rankings typically associated with technological prowess. However, that study relies upon industry
rather than product data and does not examine whether Leaders exit once Followers enter, which we do not find.
Indeed, the export persistence we report below is consistent with Gagnon and Rose’s (1995) finding that
disaggregated national trade balances switch sign very slowly.


                                                             6
classified according to the seven digit Tariff Schedule of the United States (TS) from 1972
through 1988 and according to the ten digit Harmonized System (HS) from 1989 through 1994.
The switch from TS, an exclusively US system, to HS, a multilateral system governed by the
World Customs Organization, was motivated by an effort to increase international
standardization of reporting trade statistics. For the remainder of this proposal, we refer to seven
digit TS (TS7) and ten digit HS (HS10) imports as “goods” or “products”. Imports at higher
levels of aggregation, such as the one digit Standard International Trade Classification (SITC1),
are referred to as “industries”. Table 1 lists examples of HS10 products, by SITC1 industry. In
the empirical work to follow, we omit products belonging to the ninth SITC1 industry, Not
Elsewhere Classified.
           The NBERTD also provides quantity and unit information for a large number of goods,
rendering possible the calculation of unit values.8 Availability of unit value information ranges
from 77% of country-good observations in 1972 to 82% in 1994, with unit values for natural
resources generally being more available than for manufactures. Machinery, arguably the most
heterogeneous industry, has the lowest coverage, growing from 56% of country-good pairs in
1972 to roughly 70% in 1994. This growth is largely attributable to an increase in electronics
trade.
           Examples of the units employed include dozens of shirts in apparel, square meters of
carpet in textiles and pounds of folic acid in chemicals. Our use of US import data to discern
vertical product differentiation assumes implicitly that what other countries export to the US
reflects their productive potential. This assumption is partially justified by the relative openness
of the US economy and its attractiveness as an export destination. Nevertheless, the existence of
tariff and non-tariff barriers may cause some countries to produce a broader range of goods than



7
    As noted in the documentation accompanying the NBERTD, customs value is the value upon which duties are
assessed. It does not include shipping charges and is intended to serve as an arm’s-length transaction value for the
commodity.
8
    NBERTD unit values are not without error. In a 1995 study, the General Accounting Office identified underlying
product variation (studied more broadly here) and classification error as the two major sources of unit value
dispersion in an in-depth analysis of eight products. Classification error included inaccurate recording of units and
misclassification of goods. Value-weighted unit values are used in cases where multiple product-country
observations exist in a single year.


                                                           7
they send to the US. To the extent that rich countries produce but do not export goods that are
exported by poor countries, and vice versa, this limitation can lead us to overstate the level of
international specialization. Data which might be used to measure this problem are not available.
Some solace can be taken from the likelihood that production but not export of a good signals a
lack of international competitiveness.
           The total number of products imported into the US ranges from roughly 8,000 in 1972 to
approximately 16,000 in 1994. The left panel of Figure 2 provides a breakdown of the number
of products by SITC1 industry and shows that the principal effect of switching from TS7 to
HS10 in 1989 was to reduce the number of Manufactured Materials goods at the expense of
Machinery, Chemical and Food goods.9 This drop, and the large number of apparel and textile
goods, in Miscellaneous Manufactures and Manufactured Materials, respectively, may have a
political economy element: it may have been easier for the US to restrict trade from poor
countries prior to 1988 under the unilateral TS than under the subsequent multilateral HS.
           The bottom panel of Figure 2 plots import value by industry. Machinery accounts for the
largest share of value and rose substantially in the mid 1980s with the surge in US auto imports.
The figure also illustrates the sharp volatility of Fuel imports, a factor which may affect unit
values and is discussed again in Section 4.2. The relative value of Miscellaneous Manufactures
rises steadily starting in the early 1980s, spurred by a more-than-doubling of the value of apparel
imports from 1982 to 1994. Overall, from 1972 through 1994, real imports grew at an average
annual rate of approximately 7% per year.
           Finally, Figure 3 illustrates the extent to which aggregation can obscure specialization by
making it appear as if all countries export all goods to the US. At the SITC1 industry level, 75%
of country-industry observations have positive exports to the US in 1994. At the TS/HS product
level, however, just 10% of country-product observations are non-zero in the same year. This
discrepancy is even starker in manufacturing, where all countries export all SITC1
manufacturing industries to the US in all years.



9
    A breakdown of SITC2 industries (not shown) reveals that Textiles (SITC2 65) and Apparel (SITC2 84)
consistently have the largest number of goods under both systems, accounting for 30% and 15% of all goods under
TS, respectively. Each accounts for roughly 11% of goods under HS. By comparison, the next largest SITC2
industry, Organic Chemicals (SITC2 51), contains roughly 5% of total goods under both systems.


                                                         8
4 Measuring Specialization via Origin Country Endowment Cohorts

       Because specialization is more apt to appear the more dissimilar the countries examined,
it is important to seek the largest possible sample of countries. Here, we use per capita GDP
(PCGDP) from the 2000 World Bank CD-ROM rather than capital per worker to identify capital
abundance because the former is available for roughly twice the number of countries (i.e. 120
versus 60). In any case, the correlation between the two series, for countries for which both are
available, is on the order of 90%.


4.1 US Import Products Increasingly Originate from a Diverse Set of Countries

       We rank countries as “poor”, “middle” and “rich” according to their position in the world
income distribution using the 30th and 70th PCGDP percentiles as cutoffs. Countries are poor if
they are in the 0-30th percentile range; middle if they are in the 30th-70th percentile range, and
rich if they are in the 70th-100th percentile range. Countries are re-ranked each year to control for
movement along the types of development paths outlined in section 1.2. Under this system, in
1994 Japan is a rich country, the Philippines is a middle country and Nicaragua is a poor country.
Several countries – including three from Asia – transition permanently out of “poor” and into
“middle” between 1972 and 1994. We list them in Table 2 along with their year of transition.
They are discussed further below.
       Using country ranks, we group products into to six origin country cohorts depending
upon the mix of countries that export the product to the US. If a product is in the Poor, Middle
or Rich cohorts, it originates solely in poor, solely in middle or solely in rich countries,
respectively. These groups are meant to correspond to capture the type of HO specialization
outlined above: highly labor intense products, for example, should originate solely in poor
countries. Products are in the Poor & Middle (P&M) or Middle & Rich (M&R) cohorts, on the
other hand, if they are sourced simultaneously from at least one country of each type. These two
cohorts are constructed as a partial robustness check on our income cutoffs and are meant to
capture goods that come from mostly poor and mostly rich countries, respectively. Finally, if a
product is in the Poor, Middle & Rich (PM&R) cohort, it originates in at least one country of all
three income types. Origin cohorts are mutually exclusive.
       The evolution of import products and value by origin cohort is striking. Figure 4 reveals
that in 1972, 41% of import products and 19% of import value originated solely in rich countries.

                                                   9
By 1994, these shares had fallen substantially. During the same period, the share of products
originating in countries of all three income types (i.e. PM&R products) rises steadily, from 48%
in 1972 to 74% in 1994.10 A similar trend occurs with respect to value. Even more dramatic
shifts (not shown) occur at the SITC1 industry level: while 70% of Chemical products originate
in rich countries in the 1970s, for example, less than 30% do so by 1994. Alone, these results
imply that intra-industry trade is growing substantially between the very set of countries – rich
versus poor – where it is least expected according to endowment-driven trade models.
            We also find that products do not tend to cycle between rich and poor countries over
time. Origin-cohort transition probabilities (not reported) indicate that the share of PM&R goods
remaining PM&R goods increases with time and is roughly 90% in 1994. Conversely, Rich
products have an increasing tendency to become PM&R products and a declining tendency to
remain Rich products over time. These trends violate the product cycle implications of
endowment- and technology-driven trade.
            Rapidly developing economies provide a partial explanation for why poor countries are
invading markets previously dominated by rich countries. Between 1972 and 1994 the portion of
PM&R products imported from just one poor country increases from 20% to 35%, with most of
the rise occurring between 1987 and 1994. One explanation for these single-poor-country
PM&R products is that relative endowments in rapidly growing economies render them ready to
adopt a rich country product mix before it is reflected in their GDP. It is also possible that firms
in rapidly growing economies, rationally anticipating relative endowment growth, begin
production of rich country products before it is statically optimal to do so. If these hypotheses
are correct, then the transitioning poor countries identified in Table 2 should be influential in
defining the single-poor-country PM&R products.
            Figure 5 reports a breakdown of the single-poor-country PM&R products over time. The
transitioning economies (primarily Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia) comprise roughly
20% of the single-poor-country PM&R products until the mid 1980s, after which they are no


10
     Results are not sensitive to a 30th-70th percentile split for classifying countries by income. Qualitatively similar
results are obtained when using 10th-90th and 20th-80th splits; a major difference is that the portion of trade
attributed to poor countries falls off faster. Results are also very similar if we increase the threshold for counting
countries’ participation in a product to either (1) the 10th or 20th percentile of all goods’ import values; or (2) the
10th or 20th percentile of each good’s import value.


                                                              10
longer poor. The influence of China and India in defining these goods is stronger, but even
though they do not formally jump income cohorts during the sample period, both move from
being very poor in 1972 to quite near the 30th percentile in 1994. The influence of these large
countries may also be due to their relatively high intra-national specialization. Coastal provinces
in China, for example, increasingly resemble manufacturing-intense Asian tigers, while inland
provinces remain heavily concentrated in agriculture.


4.2 Unit Values Rise with Origin Country Income

       Characterizing trade without information on both price and quantity is inadequate.
Figure 6 provides a vivid view of vertical product differentiation via scatter plots of unit value
versus source country PCGDP for four products in 1994. In the figure, the size of country labels
is scaled according to value.
       The first three scatters in the figure – for CRT monitors, men’s cotton shirts and dyed
woven fabrics – focus on manufactures, while the fourth – fuel oil – is a natural resource
commodity. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Fuel oil exhibits no relationship between price and source
country income. Each of the manufactured goods, however, exhibits a positive and significant
correlation between origin country income and unit value. Indeed, as indicated in the upper right
panel, men’s shirts from Japan are about thirty times as expensive as shirts originating in the
Philippines. By comparison, the Economist reports that the global price variation of the
McDonald’s Big Mac, a highly standardized good, was 3.3 using existing exchange rates in
March 1999. In our sample of goods going to the same market, the median high to low unit
value ratio across all products in 1994 was 24.
       We characterize the extent of the correlation between unit value and origin country per
capita GDP across goods more formally by estimating regression slopes by product and year

                          log(u pict ) = α pit + β pit log( pcgdp ct ) + ε pict ,   (1)


where u pict is country c’s unit value of product p in industry i in year t and pcgdp ct is country

c’s per capita GDP in year t. Table 3 summarizes the significance of β pit across all PM&R




                                                       11
goods with at least five country observations.11 Each row of the table reports the percent of
significant slope coefficients at the 10% level for each year as well as the number of products
with at least five observations in that year. As indicated, the number of products containing
vertical product specialization increases over time, from 30% in 1972 to 43% in 1994.
           To gauge the sensitivity of unit values to per capita GDP within and outside
manufacturing, we pool products by SITC1 industry and include fixed effects to estimate a single
slope for each industry and year

                                 log(u pict ) = α pit + β it log( pcgdp ct ) + ε pict .   (2)


Results are reported in Table 4. Each column of the table contains the slopes for a different
industry; each row for a different year. Coefficients are in boldfaced type if they are significant
at the 1% level. The correlation between unit value and per capita GDP is weak for Beverages,
Fuels and Animal Oils, but economically strong and statistically significant in the four
manufacturing industries. In Machinery in 1994, for example, a 10% increase in per capita GDP
is associated with a 13% increase in unit value. In addition, the rising value of slopes suggests
an increase in the degree of vertical specialization over time in all manufacturing industries
except Machinery, where it is relatively high throughout. The strong link between unit value and
origin country income in the Food and Materials industries is somewhat inconsistent with our
thinking of them as resource-intense industries, but may be due to the fact that many products in
these industries involve a fair amount of capital-intensive processing (e.g. the canning of food or
the roasting of coffee).
           A more careful measurement of the degree to which vertical specialization increases over
time must rely upon a non-varying set of products. Toward that end, we re-estimate equation (2)
on the constant set of products classified as PM&R in 1972. Resulting slopes and 95%
confidence intervals are presented graphically by manufacturing industry and year in Figure 7.
The estimated degree of unit value dispersion does increase with time in Chemicals,
Manufactured Materials and Miscellaneous Manufacturing. This increase is a strong signal that
rich countries respond to poor country competition via vertical product differentiation.



11
     Results do not change substantially with higher observation cutoffs.


                                                              12
        Figure 7 highlights an interesting bubble in unit value dispersion in Chemicals,
Machinery and Manufactured Material during the 1970s. Comparison of this figure with the
breakdown of import value in the bottom panel of Figure 2 suggests that this bubble is influenced
by Petroleum prices. To the extent that Chemical and Machinery products are manufactured in a
more petroleum-intensive manner in rich countries than in poor countries, the unit values of
these products may rise disproportionately during oil price shocks. Then, after the crises pass,
the abnormal jump in unit value premia reverses. This hypothesis cannot be verified formally
without data on input intensities across countries, and that data is not available at the product
level. Nevertheless, it is supported by the fact that the unit value dispersion bubble is most
pronounced in Chemicals, which, among the four manufacturing industries, is most likely to be
petroleum intense.
        Before concluding, we note that alternate interpretations of unit value dispersion merit
further exploration. Unit value measurements, for example, may be contaminated by intra-firm
transfer pricing. The decline in the share of products originating solely in rich countries,
exhibited above, is likely due both to freer consumer trade and to more prevalent global
outsourcing (Feenstra and Hanson 1996). To the extent that US-based multinationals source
inputs from developing countries with lower labor costs, and seek to minimize tax liability in
those locations, actual unit values may vary from the unit values reported on customs documents.
Such behavior could increase the likelihood of finding evidence of specialization, but controlling
for it is difficult with existing datasets. One check that is possible is to determine whether unit
value dispersion is due to intermediate input trade. Following Ng and Yeats (1999), we classify
imports as intermediate inputs if their TS7 or HS10 descriptions contain the word “parts”.
Regression results are not sensitive to omitting these products but deeper inquiry is likely to be
fruitful.
        It is also possible that unit values are contaminated by asymmetric US importer leverage.
If US importers are able to obtain lower prices from producers in poor countries than producers
in rich countries, perhaps due to imperfect information, unit value ratios will be biased upwards.
Though it is hard to believe such asymmetry would endure, data for testing this hypothesis
should be sought.




                                                 13
5 Further Research

        This paper documents two striking trends. First, we show that the number of US imports
originating simultaneously in rich, middle and poor countries has increased markedly over time.
Second, we find that even though imports are originating in an increasingly diverse set of
countries, their unit values are positively and significantly correlated with source country
income.
        Taken together, these trends support the kind of vertical product specialization implied by
the Heckscher-Ohlin model of trade. Unfortunately, data constraints prevent a more complete
test of the model at the product level. In particular, the absence of cross-country, product-level
input intensity measures prevents us from determining whether the factors embodied in product-
level world trade are equal to countries’ relative endowments. We also cannot rule out the
possibility that vertical specialization is driven by variation in technology rather than
endowments because country income is too general to distinguish between the two. These
limitations are mitigated by the ability to measure within-product variation among such a large
set of countries for the first time.
        The tendency for rich country unit values to be high and poor country unit values to be
low is also consistent with the kind of horizontal trade in varieties implied by trade theory
incorporating monopolistic competition and scale economies. Both rich and poor countries
appear to send the US varieties that are priced similarly to those of other countries in their
income cohort. Thus, our results provide support both “old” and “new” trade theory. Further
effort to incorporate product-level unit value data into tests of hybrid trade models, therefore, is
likely to be fruitful.
        Finally, our results indicate that a deeper exploration of vertical product differentiation is
necessary to advance our understanding of the affects of globalization on firms and workers. As
rich countries seek to differentiate their product mix from that offered by poor countries, direct
competition between workers earning vastly different salaries may decline, impacting welfare
gains as well as political opposition to trade. Variation in poor country import competition at the
product and industry levels likely plays a strong role in how US output, employment and
productivity have evolved over the last few decades. In addition, differential exposure to such
competition may also shed light on historical and future variation in US regional economic
performance.


                                                  14
                                        Bibliography

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 2001. Who Dies? International Trade, Market
Structure and Plant Closures. NBER Working Paper 8327.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K Schott. 2001. Factor Price Equality and the
Economies of the United States. NBER Working Paper W8068.

Bowen, Harry P, Edward E. Leamer and Leo Sveikauskas. 1987. Multicountry, Multifactor
Tests of the Factor Abundance Theory. American Economic Review 77(5):791-809.

Caves, Richard E. 1998. Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and
Mobility of Firms. Journal of Economic Literature 36:1947-1982.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein. 1998. An Account of Global Factor Trade. Mimeo,
Harvard University.

Dixit, A. and V. Norman. 1980. Theory of International Trade. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Dornbush, R., Stanley Fisher and Paul Samuelson. 1977. Comparative Advantage, Trade and
Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods. American Economic Review
67:823-839.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1996. U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances. NBER Working
Paper 5515.

Feenstra, Robert C and Gordon Hanson. 1996. Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage
Inequality. NBER Working Paper 5424.

Feenstra, Robert C and Andrew K. Rose. 2000. Putting Things in Order: Trade Dynamics and
Product Cycles. Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming).

Gagnon, Joseph E. and Andrew K. Rose. 1995. Dynamic Persistence of Industry Trade
Balances: How Pervasive is the Product Cycle? Oxford Economic Papers 47: 229-248.

General Accounting Office. 1995. US Imports: Unit Values Vary Widely for Identically
Classified Commodities. Report GAO/GGD-95-90.

Gibson, John K. and Richard I. D. Harris. 1996. Trade Liberalization and Plant Exit in New
Zealand Manufacturing. Review of Economics and Statistics 78:521-529.

Greenaway, David and Chris Milner. 1983. On the Measurement of Intra-Industry Trade.
Economic Journal 93: 900-908.

Greenaway, David, Robert Hine, Chris Milner. 1995. Economic Journal 105:1505-1518.

                                              15
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Grubel, H. G. and P. J. Lloyd. 1975. Intra-industry Trade: The Theory and Measurement of
International Trade in Differentiated Products. New York: Wiley.
Harrigan, James. 1995. Factor Endowments and the International Location of Production:
Econometric Evidence for the OECD, 1970-1985. Journal of International Economics 39:123-
141.

Harrigan, James. 1997. Technology, Factor Supplies and International Specialization:
Estimating the Neoclassical Model. American Economic Review 87(4):475-494.

Helpman, E. and P. Krugman. 1984. Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Hummels, David, and James Levinsohn. 1995. Monopolistic Competition and International
Trade: Reconsidering the Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110:799-836.

Hummels, David, and James Levinsohn. 1993. Product Differentiation as a Source of
Comparative Advantage? American Economic Review 83:445-449.

Krugman, Paul. 1979. Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition and International Trade.
Journal of International Economics 9:469-479.

Krugman, Paul. 1981. Intraindustry Specialization and the Gains from Trade. Journal of
Political Economy 89:959-973.

Lancaster, Kevin. 1980. Increasing Returns to Scale, Monopolistic Competition and
International Trade. Journal of International Economics 10:151-75.

Leamer, Edward E. 1987. Paths of Development in the Three-Factor, n-Good General
Equilibrium Model. Journal of Political Economy 95:961-999.

Leamer, Edward E. 1984. Sources of International Comparative Advantage. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Ng, Francis and Alexander Yeats. 1999. Production Sharing in East Asia: Who Does What for
Whom and Why? World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series.

Posner, M. V. 1961. International Trade and Technical Change. Oxford Economic Papers 41:323-341.

Schott, Peter K. 1999. One Size Fits All? Specialization, Trade and Income Inequality. NBER
Working Paper W8244




                                               16
Stiglitz, J. E. 1987. The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality on Price.
Journal of Economic Literature 25:1-48.

Sutton, John. 1997. Gibrat’s Legacy. Journal of Economic Literature 35:40-59.

Trefler, Daniel. 1995. The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries. American
Economic Review 85(5):1029-1046.

Trefler, Daniel. 1993. International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right! Journal of
Political Economy 101:961-987.

Tybout, James R. 2001. Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on “New” Trade Theories. NBER
Working Paper 8418.

Tybout, James R. 2000. Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They
Do, and Why? Journal of Economic Literature 38:11-44.

Vernon, Raymond. 1979. The Product Cycle Hypothesis in a New International Environment.
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 41:255-267.

Vernon, Raymond. 1966. International Investment and International Trade in the Product
Cycle. Quarterly Journal of Economics.




                                              17
 Figure 1: Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization and Product Cycles


                    High Wages

       K                 Japan
                                       k2
             Chemicals




                                                 k1
                  Machinery
                                                              Low Wages

                           Textiles                           Philippines
                                             Apparel

                                                          L


Output per
 Country
  Labor
                                             Chemicals
 (Qpc/Lc)
                                 Machinery

                  Textiles




                 Apparel



                     k1               k2          Kc/Lc




                                       18
                                    Figure 2: Breakdown of US Import Products and Value by SITC1 Industry

                                                                 Product Breakdown
                               50
                                                     TS                          HS



                               40                                                            6 Manufactured Materials
  Percent of Import Products




                                                                                             8 Misc Manunfactures
                                                                                             7 Machinery
                               30
                                                                                             5 Chemicals
                                                                                             0 Food
                               20                                                            2 Materials
                                                                                             1 Beverages
                                                                                             3 Fuels
                               10                                                            4 Animal Oils


                                0
                                1972        1977          1982         1987        1992



                                                                 Value Breakdown
                               50                                                  HS
                                                    TS



                               40                                                            7 Machinery
Percent of Import Value




                                                                                             8 Misc Manunfacturing
                                                                                             6 Manufactured Materials
                               30
                                                                                             3 Fuels
                                                                                             5 Chemicals
                               20                                                            0 Food
                                                                                             2 Materials
                                                                                             1 Beverages
                               10                                                            4 Animal Oils


                                0
                                1972        1977          1982         1987        1992




                                                                        19
                                                 Figure 3: Percent of Non-Zero Country-Industry
                                                 Observations By Level of Industry Aggregation


                                         90
  Percent of Non-Zero Country-Industry


                                         75

                                         60
                                                                                            One Digit SITC
              Observations




                                                                                            Two Digit SITC
                                         45
                                                                                            Four Digit SITC
                                         30                                                 TS7/HS10

                                         15

                                         0
                                          1972       1977    1982     1987     1992

[1] Trends report portion of country-industry cells with zero exports to the US in
each Year.
[2] SITC is Standard International Trade Classification. SITC4 industries are more
finely defined than SITC1 industries.
[3] TS7 product codes are used from 1972-1988. HS10 product codes are used from
1989-1994.




                                                                      20
                              Figure 4: US Import Products and Value by Origin Income Cohort

                                                   Product Breakdown
 Percent of Import Products   100

                               80
                                                                              Poor Only
                               60                                             Middle Only
                                                                              Rich Only
                               40                                             Poor&Middle
                                                                              Middle&Rich
                               20                                             Poor, Middle&Rich

                                0
                                 1972   1977    1982    1987    1992



                                                    Value Breakdown
                              100
  Percent of Import Value




                               80
                                                                              Poor Only
                               60                                             Middle Only
                                                                              Rich Only
                               40                                             Poor&Middle
                                                                              Middle&Rich
                               20                                             Poor, Middle&Rich

                                0
                                 1972   1977    1982    1987    1992


[1] Origin income cohorts classify US import products by the income level of countries in
which they originate. "Poor Only" products originate solely in poor countries; PM&R
products, on the other hand, are imported from at least one country of each type. Origin
income cohorts are mutually exclusive.
[2] Countries are "poor", "middle" or "rich" if their per capita GDP is in the 0-30, 30-70
or 70-100 percentile range; countries are re-ranked each year.




                                                           21
                                       Figure 5: Breakdown of Poor, Middle & Rich (PM&R) Products
                                                     Defined by A Single Poor Country



                                  40
   Percent of All PM&R Products




                                  30

                                                                                               Other
                                                                                               Transitioning
                                  20                                                           India
                                                                                               China

                                  10



                                   0
                                       1972   1976     1980     1984     1988    1992


[1] Bars track the portion of PM&R products defined by a single poor country and identify
which poor country it is.
[2] PM&R products are imported from at least one poor, one middle and one rich country.
Countries are "poor", "middle" or "rich" if their per capita GDP is in the 0-30, 30-70 or 70-
100 percentile range; countries are re-ranked each year.




                                                                   22
        Figure 6: 1994 US Import Unit Value vs Origin Country Per Capita GDP for Four Products
                                 CRT Monitors (8471923200)                                                                          Men's Cotton Shirts NES (6205202065)
15,035                                                                                   FRA              670                                                                                         JPN
                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                             ESP BEL
                                                                                    ISR BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                FIN




                                                                                                        $ Per Dozen Shirts.
                                                                                                                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                              AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                             NZL FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                         GRC     CHE
  $ Per Monitor.




                                                                                                                                                                                           IRL
                                                                               ESP
                                                                                 ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                           NOR
                                                                                         SWE
                                                                                          DEU                                                             GIN                                    DEU
                                                                                                                                                                               VEN                DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                                                                                          PRT                   GBR
                                                                              PRT        CAN
                                                                                         JPN                                                                       MYS
                                                                                                                                                                    MEX        SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                HKG
                                              JOR                                   ISR AUT
                                                                                   IRL ITA
                                                                                                                                                            BOL                 TTOHUN
                                                                                                                                                                               BRA
                                                                                                                                                                              THA
                                                                                         FRA                                         MLI
                                                                                                                                                        IDN
                                                                                                                                                          PHL PAN  MUS KORISR
                                                                                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                                                                                   IND            COL
                                                                VEN                        BMU
                                                                                            ISL                                          NGA           LKA
                                                                                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                                                                      HND
                                                                                                                                                       ZWE JAM  BGR MEX
                                                                                                                                                              FJI POL
                                                                                                                                                            LBN
                                                                                                                                                                         ARG
                                                                 BRA
                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                            JPN                                                           GTM
                                                                                                                                                            PER
                                                                                                                                                           DOM  TUR          CYP
                                                                                                                                                                           BHR
                                                                BRA
                                                                                     GBR                                                     BGD  PAK         BLZ       SAU
                                                                                                                                                                      KNA     ARE
                                                                                     FIN                                                  KEN
                                                                                                                                            NPLMNG
                                                                                                                                              TGOGHA
                                                                                                                                                GMB
                                                                                                                                                CIV
                                                                                                                                                        JORSLV     CHL
                                                                   MEX
                                                                                       AUSCHE
                                                                                         DNK                                      ETH   YEM     LAONICEGY                      NLD
                                                                  CHL
                                                                  CHL                  SGP                                                                             ECU                            NOR
                                                                                                                                                                       MAR
                                                                                                                                                                               ROMZAF
                                                                                                                                                                       SYR
                                 IND                              MUS                                                             TZAMOZ
                                                ECU
                                                                                          HKG                                                                         GUY
                                                          TUN  MEX HUN                                                                                                                           SWE
                        KEN
                                          IDN               THA MYS    KOR
                                                                        KOR
                                                                                                                                                    VNM                                 CZE
                                        CHN
                                          IDN PHL              MYS
  156                                         PHL                                                                     21                            SEN


                        955                                                          24,547                                       468                                                          24,547
                                             Per Capita GDP ($)                                                                                       Per Capita GDP ($)

                              Dyed Woven Fabrics (5208398090)                                                                       Number 6-Type Fuel Oil (2710000530)
           10                                                                            GBR
                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                            DNK                       21                                                                              NOR



                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                         SWE
                                                                                          DEU

                                                                                                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                           AUT                                                                  EGY
                                                                                           BEL                                                      GHA
                                                                                                           $ Per Barrel.                                                                        GBR
  $ Per Sq Meter.




                                       IND                                                  JPN                                                                          PAN
                                                                              PRT                                                                                       DZA
                                                                                                                                              SEN                                                SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   DNK
                                                                                                                                               CMR AGO                        BRA               NZLDEU
                                                                                   ESP                                                                                                        IRL NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                             ESP
                                                                       MEX                                                                                                                          CAN
                                                                                                                                    NGA
                                                                                                                                      COG                       IDN                                BEL
                                                                                          AUS                                                        IND                        ZAF
                                   GHA              GTM                                                                                                                  TUN TTO
                                                                                                                                                                              COL      ARG     ITA
                                                                                                                                  YEM                                                    PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                        KOR
                                                                                                                                                                              GABMEX       BHS
                                                                                                                                                                  ECU                          SGP
                                CMR                                          CZE                                                                                                       SAU
                                                                                                                                                                     PER                           CAN
                                                                                                                                                                             VEN
                                 CIV



                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHE
                    0   BFA
                                                                                                                              9                                                 MEX

                        776                                                          24,547                                       646                                                          24,547
                                             Per Capita GDP ($)                                                                                       Per Capita GDP ($)
  [1] HS10 product code provided in parentheses.
  [2] Country labels are proportional to log import value.
  [3] Axes are log scaled.




                                                                                                   23
         Figure 7: The Widening Gap Between Rich and Poor Country Products Over Time:
                       Manufacturing Industry β st ’s and 95% Confidence Intervals
                                   from Equation 2 on 1972 PM&R Products

                Chemicals (SITC1=5)                                  Manufactured Materials (SITC1=6)

  1.20                                                        1.20

  1.00
                                                              1.00

  0.80
                                                              0.80
  0.60
                                                              0.60
  0.40

                                                              0.40
  0.20

  0.00                                                        0.20
     1970       1975        1980        1985      1990            1970     1975       1980       1985       1990


                Machinery (SITC1=7)                              Miscellaneous Manufactures (SITC1=8)

  2.00                                                        1.20

  1.80
                                                              1.00
  1.60
                                                              0.80
  1.40

  1.20                                                        0.60

  1.00
                                                              0.40
  0.80
                                                              0.20
  0.60

  0.40                                                        0.00
     1970       1975        1980        1985      1990            1970     1975       1980       1985        1990


[1] Graphs display industry specific slope and 95% confidence interval from regression of equation 2 on the
constant set of 1972 PM&R goods over time.
[2] Regressions include all products with at least 5 observations which originate in at least one poor, one middle
and one rich country in 1972.




                                                         24
                             Table 1: Mapping SITC1 Industries to HS10 Products
                                                                                                      Number of Products in
SITC1 Industry                    Example of SITC2 Industries         Example of HS Product            this Industry in 1994
0 Food                            Meat, Dairy Products, Fruit         Sheep, live                                       1823
1 Beverages/Tobacco               Wine, Cigarettes                    Carbonated soft drinks                             163
2 Crude Materials                 Rubber, Cork, Wood, Textile         Silkworm cocoons suitable                          833
                                  Fibers                              for reeling
3 Mineral Fuels                   Coal, Coke, Petroleum, Natural      Unleaded gasoline                                 101
                                  Gas, Electric Current
4 Animal and Vegetable Oils       Lard, Soybean Oil, Linseed Oil      Tallow, edible                                     82

5 Chemicals                       Organic Chemicals, Dyes,            Chloroform                                       1930
                                  Medicines, Fertilizers, Plastics
6 Manufactured Materials          Leather, Textile Yarn, Paper,       Diaries and address books, of                    4219
                                  Steel, Cork Products                paper or paperboard
7 Machinery                       Power Generating Machinery,         Ultrasonic scanning                              2898
                                  Computers, Autos                    apparatus
8 Miscellaneous Manunfacturing    Apparel, Footwear, Plumbing,        Boys' shorts cotton playsuit                     3866
                                  Scientific Equipment, Cameras       parts, not knit
9 Not Elsewhere Classified        Special Transactions, Coins, Gold   Sound recordings for State                         65
                                                                      Dept use




                                                           25
Table 2: Countries Jumping from Poor to Middle
     Income Group and Year of Transition

            Country         Transition Year
        Thailand (THA)           1979
       Cameroon (CMR)            1981
          Egypt (EGY)            1985
         Samoa (WSM)             1988
       Philippines (PHL)         1990
         Senegal (SEN)           1990
        Indonesia (IDN)          1991
       Sri Lanka (LKA)           1993




                       26
           Table 3: Unit Value versus Origin Country Per Capita GDP: Summary of
                  Product-Level Slope Significance at the 10% Level, by Year

        Percent of            Number of                      Percent of            Number of
Year Significant Slopes     PM&R Products            Year Significant Slopes     PM&R Products
1972         30                 2,070                1984         32                 3,212
1973         31                 1,966                1985         35                 4,344
1974         29                 2,048                1986         35                 4,033
1975         27                 1,705                1987         34                 4,249
1976         30                 1,746                1988         37                 4,079
1977         29                 1,717                1989         35                 4,962
1978         31                 2,213                1990         36                 5,118
1979         31                 2,146                1991         38                 5,223
1980         30                 2,360                1992         44                 3,167
1981         29                 2,607                1993         43                 3,519
1982         31                 2,703                1994         43                 3,800
1983         31                 2,865

[1] Table reports number of PM&R products with positive and significant relationship between log
unit value and log per capita GDP at the 10% level of significance
[2] Regressions run on all PM&R products with at least 5 country observations.




                                                27
        Table 4: Slopes From Regression of Unit Value on Origin Country Per Capita GDP:
                                  Products Pooled by Year and SITC1 Industry
                                           Coefficient on Log Per Capita GDP, By Industry
                                                                               Manufactured                  Misc
           Food     Beverages    Materials Fuels Animal Oils Chemicals           Materials    Machinery   Manufactures
         SITC 0        SITC 1        SITC 2 SITC 3        SITC 4        SITC 5    SITC 6       SITC 7       SITC 8
  1972     0.20          0.11          0.21       0.16      0.06          0.32     0.31         0.90         0.64
  1973     0.22         -0.07          0.18       0.14      0.11          0.33     0.37         1.02         0.66
  1974     0.20          0.04          0.24       0.23      0.14          0.10     0.33         0.97         0.66
  1975     0.25         -0.09          0.31       0.11     -0.16          0.38     0.44         1.21         0.86
  1976     0.23         -0.03          0.28       0.18      0.43          0.36     0.49         1.05         0.80
  1977     0.17         -0.05          0.29       0.26      0.09          0.39     0.49         0.73         0.87
  1978     0.26          0.05          0.32       0.46      0.04          0.53     0.47         1.43         0.91
  1979     0.29          0.01          0.38       0.36      0.04          0.53     0.56         1.08         0.96
  1980     0.27          0.07          0.25       0.26      0.39          0.55     0.56         1.08         0.95
  1981     0.25         -0.04          0.23       0.12     -0.36          0.41     0.52         1.07         0.88
  1982     0.28         -0.09          0.23       0.29      0.18          0.51     0.48         1.05         0.90
  1983     0.35          0.02          0.21       0.22     -0.03          0.50     0.48         0.88         0.92
  1984     0.25         -0.01          0.23       0.13      0.24          0.41     0.53         0.87         0.86
  1985     0.21         -0.01          0.28       0.22      0.10          0.34     0.49         0.89         0.88
  1986     0.30          0.02          0.38       0.21     -0.07          0.39     0.57         0.91         0.93
  1987     0.33          0.12          0.28       0.23      0.46          0.51     0.67         0.94         0.96
  1988     0.40          0.01          0.27       0.17      0.13          0.47     0.78         0.97         0.99
  1989     0.36         -0.05          0.43       0.34      0.33          0.56     0.81         1.25         1.07
  1990     0.41          0.01          0.52       0.25      0.20          0.68     0.88         1.48         1.12
  1991     0.43          0.16          0.46       0.42      0.17          0.66     0.89         1.57         1.19
  1992     0.47          0.13          0.49       0.31      0.35          0.63     0.93         1.40         1.10
  1993     0.45          0.15          0.46       0.09      0.67          0.70     0.90         1.28         1.13
  1994     0.43          0.15          0.48       0.16      0.27          0.79     0.88         1.31         1.07
[1] Bold coefficients are significant at the 1% level.
[2] Regressions include all PM&R products with at least 5 country observations.




                                                               28
