NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEPOSIT INSURANCE AROUND THE GLOBE:
WHERE DOES IT WORK?
Edward J. Kane
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
Working Paper 8493
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8493
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2001

We would like to thank Thorsten Beck, Jerry Caprio, Stijn Claessens, Ross Levine and Rick Mishkin for valuable
discussions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent..

© 2001 by Edward J. Kane and Asli Demirguc-Kunt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Deposit Insurance Around the Globe: Where Does it Work?
Edward J. Kane and Asli Demirguc-Kunt
NBER Working Paper No. 8493
September 2001
JEL No. G2, F3, K2

ABSTRACT
Explicit deposit insurance has been spreading rapidly in recent years, even to countries with low
levels of financial and institutional development. Economic theory indicates that deposit-insurance design
features interact--for good or ill--with country-specific elements of the financial and governmental
contracting environment. This paper documents the extent of cross-country differences in depositinsurance design and reviews empirical evidence on how particular design features affect private market
discipline, banking stability, financial development, and the effectiveness of crisis resolution. This
evidence challenges the wisdom of encouraging countries to adopt explicit deposit insurance without first
stopping to assess and remedy weaknesses in their informational and supervisory environments.

Edward J. Kane
Finance Department
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

Asli Demirguc-Kunt
The World Bank
1818 H St., NW
Washington, DC 20433

1. Introduction
During the last two decades, a wave of systemic banking crises has rolled back
and forth around the globe. The wave has struck developed and developing countries
alike, resulting in 112 episodes of systemic crisis in 93 countries and 51 episodes of
borderline crisis in 46 countries (Figure 1).1
Proliferation of large-scale banking crises is disruptive and costly. Depositors
lose access to their funds, good borrowers can lose access to credit and even be forced
into bankruptcy, and some sound banks may be driven out of business. Would-be issuers
of debt and equity instruments find that markets have dried up. And taxpayers are
typically presented with a large bill for mitigating these disruptions. The full costs of
these crises go beyond direct fiscal costs to include such consequences as derailed
stabilization programs, growth slowdowns and increased poverty. Still, total fiscal costs
incurred in the 1997 Thai and Korean crises exceeded 30 percent of GDP, and in
Indonesia budgetary costs approached 50 percent of GDP.2
When a crisis spreads beyond the banking sector, it triggers a full-fledged
financial crisis. The most recent example of this is Turkey where weaknesses in the
banking system triggered a crisis of confidence in other domestic financial institutions
and led to a large-scale flight of foreign capital and a severe currency crisis.
Both to make systemic breakdowns less likely and to limit the disruption and
fiscal costs generated when they occur, in every country policymakers erect a financial
safety net. A country's safety net comprises a collection of disruption-mitigating
financial policies. These policies include implicit and explicit deposit insurance, lender1

See Caprio and Klingebiel (1999) and Mishkin (1996) for a discussion of causes of these crises.

2

of-last-resort facilities at the central bank, specified procedures for investigating and
resolving bank insolvencies, strategies for regulating and supervising banks, and
provisions for accessing emergency assistance from multinational institutions such as the
IMF.
Among safety net policies, the use of explicit deposit insurance has spread rapidly
in recent years. Figure 2 shows that during the last 26 years the number of countries
offering explicit deposit insurance guarantees has almost tripled. Establishing a system
of explicit deposit insurance guarantees has become a principal feature of policy advice
on financial architecture that outside experts give to developing countries (see FolkertsLandau and Lindgren, 1997; and Garcia, 1999). In 1994, deposit insurance was
incorporated into the newly created single banking market of the European Union.
Today, most OECD countries and an increasing number of developing countries feature
some form of explicit depositor protection.
It is not hard to see why explicit deposit insurance schemes appeal to
policymakers. In the short run, since no immediate budgetary expenditure needs to be
booked, they represent a seemingly costless solution to problems of bank runs or panics.
Besides stabilizing the financial sector, an insurance scheme offers political benefits:
protecting small depositors and improving opportunities for small banks to compete with
larger institutions for deposits.
Mostly dismissed or denigrated by policymakers but long-recognized and
persistently emphasized by the academics, is the fact that explicit deposit insurance has
the potential to increase bank risk-taking. Because it reduces the incentive of depositors
to monitor banks, deposit insurance can encourage excessive risk-taking – i.e., create
2

Total fiscal costs are measured as increases in the stock of public debt relative to GDP in the year if the

3

moral hazard, and reward imprudent banking practices. But perhaps one of the most
persuasive arguments in favor of establishing explicit deposit insurance is that it can be
presented as a way to limit the government’s commitment to depositors. Lacking
coverage limits built into an explicit insurance system, depositors may expect to exert
enough political pressure to force taxpayers to supply unlimited deposit guarantees ex
post. Such expectations generate moral hazard too.
The U.S. was the first country to introduce a national deposit insurance system.
Its goal was to restore confidence in the liquidity of bank deposits rather than to protect
small depositors (Golembe, 1960). Indeed, other means of protecting small depositors
had long been recognized. For example, in Europe, savings banks maintained liquidity
by investing in safe instruments. After decades of debate and largely adverse experience
with moral hazard in state-level schemes, federal deposit insurance was enacted in 1933,
in the midst of a banking crisis. For the first four decades after its establishment, the
absence of failures among large institutions fostered the illusion that deposit insurance is
a low cost way of preventing banking crises. But the ripening of the Savings and Loan
insurance mess in the 1980s dispelled this illusion, revealing how substantially deposit
insurance had exposed taxpayers to loss from risk-taking at insured institutions.
Modern theorists view deposit insurance design as a multiparty principal-agent
contracting problem (Kane, 1995; Calomiris, 1996). Contracting parties consist of banks,
depositors, supervisors, politicians, and taxpayers. Events that generate losses for insured
institutions obligate taxpayers to supply risk capital only when weaknesses in supervisory
efforts at loss control allow an institution’s losses to surpass the value of its stockholdercontributed net worth. To reduce the chances of future taxpayer losses, authorities in

crisis. See World Bank (2001).

4

developed countries have since agreed to impose risk-based capital standards and to
recalibrate these standards when and as regulation-induced innovation undermines their
effectiveness. In the U.S., The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
Improvement Act of 1991 goes even further, imposing on U.S. regulators a duty to act
promptly to resolve violations of capital standards. In 1993, Congress offered U.S.
taxpayers additional protection by passing the Depositor Preference Act, which in future
bank liquidations subordinates the claims of non-deposit creditors to those of the FDIC.
Whether to adopt an explicit deposit insurance system and how to design it
depend on the financial and supervisory environment in which it must function. Given
the potential trade-off between stability and moral hazard, empirical guidance from crosscountry experience promises to be very useful. Figure 2 indicates that the policymakers
are moving ahead at an alarming rate. All too often experts that recommend deposit
insurance either assume countries have an appropriate institutional infrastructure or
ignore the impact of imperfections in their contracting environments.
Expert advice needs to be grounded in carefully interpreted cross-country
empirical evidence. However, an empirical database on which to test policy advice was
slow to emerge. A recent World Bank research project developed such a database for
researchers worldwide and answered questions about how explicit deposit insurance
affects financial stability, how markets discipline bank risk-taking, and the development
of the overall financial system.3

3

See Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Edward J. Kane, March 1998, “Deposit Insurance: Issues of Principle,
Design and Implementation,” A World Bank Research Proposal. The data set and the papers of the
research project are available on the project website:
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

5

The purpose of this paper is twofold: to challenge the wisdom of encouraging
countries to adopt deposit insurance without first remedying observable weaknesses in
their institutional environment and to buttress this challenge by reviewing cross-country
empirical evidence on the effects of deposit insurance. The next section characterizes the
data set and uses it to summarize the extent of cross-country differences in deposit
insurance design. Section 3 explains why cross-country differences in design are
appropriate and that differences in the informational and contracting environments of
individual countries are bound to affect the optimal design. Section 4 summarizes
empirical evidence on the impact of deposit insurance. Section 5 develops policy
implications.

2. Deposit Insurance Around the World
Table 1 documents the many ways in which deposit-insurance design varies
across countries.4 An optimal worldwide blueprint is not likely to be found. For
example, account coverage varies from unlimited guarantees to tight coverage limits. On
the one hand, Mexico, Turkey and Japan promise 100 percent depositor coverage.
However, countries like Chile, Switzerland, and U.K. cover only an amount of deposits
that is actually less than their per capita GDP. Also, although many countries cover
deposits denominated in foreign currency, most schemes exclude interbank deposits.
Besides setting a maximum level of coverage, some countries insist that accountholders
"coinsure" a proportion of their deposit balances. Coinsurance provisions are still
relatively rare, but are more frequent in recently adopted schemes.

4

For the complete database, see Demirgüç-Kunt and Sobaci (forthcoming) which builds on earlier studies
by Kyei (1995) and Garcia (1999).

6

Deposit insurance obligations are typically advance-funded, most commonly from
a mixture of government and bank sources. To allow the insurer to build and maintain an
appropriate fund of reserves against its loss exposures, in such countries banks are
generally assessed an annual premium that is based entirely or in large part on the amount
of their insured deposits. Efforts to make these annual premiums sensitive to bank risk
exposure have begun in recent years.
Insurance schemes are typically managed in a government agency or in a publicprivate partnership. However, a few countries, such as Switzerland, Germany and
Argentina, manage their schemes privately. Finally, in almost all countries, membership
is compulsory for chartered banks. The most notable exception is Switzerland.
Table 1 also records the establishment dates of each country’s scheme. A
number of countries adopted or expanded their deposit insurance scheme during crises.
For example, Thailand, Malaysia, and Korea moved to blanket coverage in response to
their recent crises. The 1990s saw a rapid spread in transitional countries – perhaps
partly motivated by their long-term interest in joining the EU – and in some African
countries. Countries that adopted deposit insurance in 1999 are Ecuador, El Salvador,
and as part of the Central African Currency Union, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Republic of Congo. Most of these new schemes
show generous coverage levels. For example, Central African Republic and Chad have
coverage ratios that lie between 13 and 15 times their GDP per capita.
Precisely because the range of design features is so extensive, the data set can
permit analysts to compare and contrast how well different features work in different
circumstances. Section 4 of this paper summarizes the implications of research that uses
this database to make inferences about key deposit-insurance issues.
7

3. Deposit Insurance Design: Can One Size Fit All?
Figure 2 underscores the trend in adopting explicit deposit insurance. The identity
of the countries listed in Table 1 clarifies that the use of this policy instrument is growing
especially fast in developing countries. Whether this is a healthy trend depends on the
balance of deposit insurance costs and benefits in particular countries. In countries
whose governments have a strong system for collecting taxes or substantial access to
foreign credit, the primary benefit of establishing a deposit insurance scheme is to
eliminate the immediate threat of financial panic. Since all countries have a safety net,
where rigorous enforcement of coverage ceilings is feasible, deposit insurance can cap
the government’s future commitments to depositors of insolvent institutions. Similarly,
offering deposit insurance may allow a government to negotiate increased rights to
intervene in a timely fashion into the affairs of insolvent institutions. Protecting
unsophisticated small depositors and helping small banks to compete with large ones are
often categorized as secondary benefits.
Besides the budgeted costs of running an insurance enterprise, adopting deposit
insurance generates unbudgeted indirect costs. The major indirect cost of deposit
insurance comes from its potential to subsidize inefficient types of bank risk-taking. The
danger that insurance will induce a willful increase in inappropriate risk-taking is called
moral hazard. The increase in risk-taking is described as willful because it responds to
the extent that a given scheme undermines pre-existing incentives of depositors to
8

monitor and police bank risk-taking. To control taxpayers’ exposure to moral hazard, the
insurer must involve itself or surrogate parties in monitoring and disciplining banks. The
balance of benefits and costs engendered by individual deposit insurance features is
bound to vary with the character of insurer loss control and how this loss control interacts
with weaknesses in the informational and contracting environments of individual
countries.
Kane (2000) emphasizes that controlling bank risk-taking requires transparency
and deterrency, and that assuring that an insurer acts efficiently requires accountability to
taxpayers for successes and failures. Complete transparency is obtained when institutions
disclose information that perfectly and costlessly informs either bank creditors or
supervisors about changes in a bank's financial condition and risk-taking. Perfect
deterrency describes a situation where individual creditors or supervisors can
immediately understand the implications of information flows and can protect themselves
completely and costlessly from any adverse consequences. Perfect accountability occurs
when taxpayers can identify the actions of government officials and hold them fully
responsible for the outcomes their actions engender.
Transparency, deterrency and accountability are dimensions of a country's
institutional environment. High readings on these dimensions assure that counterparties
in private and public sectors can enforce appropriate bank behavior by evaluating bank
activities, disciplining their risk-taking, and resolving their financial difficulties promptly.
Around the globe, large differences exist in each of these contracting features. Across
countries and cultures, proxies for transparency, deterrency and accountability tend to
increase with per capita GDP (Kane, 2000), but other elements of social capital play a
role as well.
9

Safety nets seek to prevent social costs of financial disruption and government
intervention from exceeding the social benefits of damage mitigation. Safety-net design -and deposit insurance arrangements in particular-- must address the particular weaknesses
that exist in the institutional environment of individual countries. Recognizing that
contracting environments tend to become more diverse as per capita income falls has two
consequences. First, it implies that recommending a single combination of "best-practice"
design features may generate counterproductive consequences in many developing
countries. Second, for countries in which transparency, deterrency and accountability are
very weak, implementing an efficient explicit deposit insurance scheme may simply be
impossible.
Three central dimensions of every country's deposit-insurance system are: the
extent to which it relies on private management and/or private funding; the breadth of its
formal and informal coverages; and its susceptibility to hidden risk-shifting by insolvent
banks. In moving to a system of explicit guarantees, conscientious government officials
must adopt coverage, funding, and managerial structures that efficiently mitigate the
particular weaknesses in transparency, deterrency, and accountability that left their
country vulnerable to financial crises in the past.
The harder it has been for depositors to observe the economic value of bank
capital and the character of bank risk-taking, the more important it becomes for regulators
to establish informative protocols for reporting the performance and financial condition
of insured banks. If the country's system of corporate governance previously gave
depositors few protections against risk shifting, officials must enact special deterrent
rights for the insurer. Finally, the less accountability the political system imposes on

10

public officials generally, the more accountable deposit-insurance managers must be for
accurately measuring the incremental social value their activities produce.
Historically, in environments that combine low transparency with low deterrency,
it has made sense to extend stockholder liability for bank losses beyond the amount of
paid-in capital in closely held banks (Kane and Wilson, 2001) and to make large
depositors and substantial nondeposit creditors effectively coinsure bank losses. In lowaccountability environments, deposit-insurance managers need contractual incentives to
optimize the degree of transparency and deterrency that they, minority shareholders, and
coinsuring depositors receive. In environments that are low in accountability and
transparency, private participation in funding and management can help to create the
incentives needed to discipline safety-net loss exposures. To the extent that insurer
performance can be measured meaningfully, it is useful to establish a fund of deferred
compensation for top managers with the payoffs tied to appropriate measures of depositinsurance performance during their particular term in office.
As transparency, deterrency, and accountability evolve through time, so should
the design features of a country's safety net. To maintain efficiency over time, the system
must respond to fluctuations in private and government regulators' capacity for valuing
institutions, for disciplining risk-taking and resolving insolvencies promptly, and for
being appropriately rewarded or chastised for how well they perform these tasks.
Kane (2000) also discusses the dangers of using blanket deposit guarantees as a
way of dealing with banking crises. In managing a crisis, the urgency of stopping a
panic must not be allowed to over-ride the need to identify hopelessly insolvent
institutions and cut off their opportunities to expand their risk-taking. To end a panic
efficiently, liquidity must be offered only to potentially solvent institutions.
11

Indiscriminately issuing government guarantees and other forms of bailout support
rewards bad bankers and penalizes good ones. Because such a policy perverts market
discipline and risk-taking incentives and imposes unbooked obligations on the national
treasury, it promises new and deeper crises in years to come.

4. Deposit Insurance: Theory and Empirical Evidence
An extensive theoretical literature analyzes the benefits and costs of deposit
insurance and explores the challenge of balancing these benefits and costs to produce an
optimal deposit-insurance system. This literature has been summarized by Kane (2000),
Calomiris (1996), and others.
However, cross-country empirical evidence on the efficiency of real-world
deposit-insurance systems has been harder to come by. We begin this section by posing
four empirical questions whose answers indicate how effective an individual country's
deposit-insurance system happens to be. The four questions are:
•

How does deposit insurance affect bank stability?

•

How does deposit insurance affect market discipline?

•

How does deposit insurance impact financial development?

•

What role does deposit insurance play in managing crises?

We go on to identify pertinent literature bearing on each question and to review empirical
evidence on how the answer to each question varies across different countries and
contracting environments.

How does explicit deposit insurance affect bank stability?

12

In the midst of a systemic crisis, expanding or firming up depositor guarantees has
great appeal to policymakers as a crisis-mitigating device. However, the deferred costs
of treating a crisis myopically can be substantial. The best long-run way to incorporate
deposit insurance into a country's safety net is a matter of controversy among economists.
A classic paper by Diamond and Dybvig (1983) frames deposit insurance as an optimal
policy in a contracting environment where limited transparency allows bank stability to
be threatened by self-fulfilling depositor runs and runs on solvent banks are depositors'
only deterrent instrument for reducing their loss exposure. In Allen and Gale (1998),
greater transparency allows runs to be triggered only by an actual deterioration in bank
asset quality. In this higher-transparency environment, the optimal safety-net strategy is
to use central-bank loans to supply liquidity to the banking system.
Precisely because safety nets are so effective in arresting runs, safety nets
generate moral hazard. This moral hazard comes both from banks and their regulators.
Opportunistic bankers can exploit weaknesses in supervisory transparency and deterrency
by taking inefficient risks and even engaging in fraudulent activity. In practice,
regulators and politicians who control the supervisory elements of the safety net often
have insufficient incentive to monitor and enforce prudential regulations. Kane (1989)
shows that regulatory activity encouraged risk-taking by insured thrift institutions during
the U.S. S&L debacle.
Incentives for risk-shifting and looting by banks decline with bank capital and
with transparency, deterrency, and accountability. Transparency and bank capital tend to
decline in the face of adverse economic shocks (Merton, 1977 and Calomiris, 1990).
Looting often takes the form of bankers making loans to themselves or related parties at

13

below-market terms. As a bank's capital becomes exhausted, the costs of corrupt lending
fall more and more on the safety net (Akerlof and Romer, 1993).
Economic theory offers a mixed message. On the one hand, credible deposit
insurance contributes to financial stability by making depositor runs less likely. On the
other hand, unless insured institutions' capital positions and risk-taking are supervised
carefully, the insurer will accrue loss exposures that undermine bank stability in the long
run. Because deposit-insurance theory embraces good and bad outcomes, it is critical to
explore empirical evidence. Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2000) are the first to use
the cross-county database to study the link between deposit insurance and financial
crises. They use data from 61 countries for the period 1980-1997 to estimate a model of
banking crisis. After controlling for other determinants, they find that the presence of
poorly designed explicit deposit insurance tends to increase the likelihood that a country
will experience a banking crisis and that this result does not appear to be driven by
reverse causality.
Recognizing that the design of explicit deposit insurance varies significantly
across countries, Demirgüç -Kunt and Detragiache (DKD) focus on whether and how
individual design features mitigate the adverse impact of deposit insurance on bank
stability. The regression experiment reproduced in Table 2 shows that deposit insurance
causes the most trouble in countries where coverage is extensive, where authorities amass
a large fund of explicit reserves and earmark it for insolvency resolution, and where the
scheme is administered by government officials rather than the private sector. These
findings underscore the importance of confronting squarely the moral hazard that deposit
insurance threatens to generate. DKD also show that the contribution of deposit
insurance to bank fragility is significant in countries where the institutional environment
14

lacks transparency and deterrency, but is not significant in countries whose environment
is strong. These findings support the hypothesis that where the contracting environment
controls incentive conflict, effective prudential regulation and supervision can offset the
adverse incentives created by deposit insurance so that moral hazard need not be
worrisome.
Eichengreen and Arteta (2000) find that DKD’s deposit insurance evidence is not
robust to the twin effects of omitting developed countries from their sample and
employing a single-dimensional dummy variable to capture the existence of explicit
deposit insurance. This finding is not truly inconsistent with DKD whose results are
significant when they incorporate deposit insurance design features and institutional
characteristics into their analysis. On average, the more a system embraces features that
intensify moral hazard, the more vulnerable it is to banking crisis. 5
However, DKD only imperfectly control for the other components of the financial
safety net, particularly for variation in the quality of regulatory and supervisory
enforcement. DKD proxy the quality of regulation and supervision by institutional
indicators such as bureaucratic quality, bureaucratic delay, lack of corruption, and the
quality of contract enforcement and legal efficiency. Barth, Caprio and Levine (2001)
compile a comprehensive data base on regulation and supervision of commercial banks
and confirm DKD’s findings controlling for variation in the character of government
oversight.
Policymakers should view the positive correlation between explicit deposit
insurance and banking crises as a wakeup call. Credible deposit insurance allows banks
to gather deposits regardless of the risks they take. We would expect a positive

15

correlation if deposit insurance greatly reduces monitoring by private parties and replaces
it by ineffective regulatory and supervisory discipline. In countries with strong
institutions, we would expect most or all of this reduction in depositor monitoring to be
compensated by official monitoring, so that the impact of deposit insurance on bank
fragility would not prove significant. But is there any direct evidence of the impact of
deposit insurance on market discipline? We turn to this issue next.

How does deposit insurance affect market discipline?
In high-transparency environments, depositors can discipline banks that engage in
excessive risk-taking by demanding higher deposit interest rates or by withdrawing their
deposits. However, to the extent that deposit insurance reduces the stake that depositors
have in monitoring and policing bank capital and loss exposures, it shifts responsibility
for controlling bank risk-taking to the regulatory system. Wherever deposit-insurance
managers displace more discipline than they exert, bank performance is undermined. To
understand this, we must investigate two questions:
•

How do depositors exert market discipline?

•

How does deposit insurance lessen depositor discipline?
Evidence on market discipline as reflected in bank interest cost comes primarily

from U.S. experience. Flannery (1998) surveys research on how the interest cost of
uninsured bank deposits and other debt instruments in the U.S. responds to observable
measures of default risk. In the U.S., balances in excess of $100,000 are not insured.
5

Indeed, Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2000)’s results with a simple dummy are also only significant at

16

Typically, researchers find that interest rates paid on these partially insured instruments
(certificates of deposits, CDs) increase significantly with bank riskiness (Baer and
Brewer 1986, Hannan and Hanweck 1988, and Brewer and Mondschean 1994). Linking
movements in CD rates to bank-specific news embedded in movements in stock prices,
Ellis and Flannery (1992) show that bank CD rates respond generally to market
perceptions of bank-specific risks.
Cook and Spellman (1994) find that, even on fully insured deposits, risk
premiums at U.S. savings and loan associations (S&Ls) responded to individualinstitution risk factors in 1987. This sensitivity to risk emerged because the deep
economic insolvency of their federal guarantor was becoming clear at that time. These
premiums served simultaneously to rein in gambling by aggressive S&Ls and their
insolvent insurer. This evidence indicates that inadequacies in supervision and insurer net
worth can reduce the credibility of an insurer's guarantees.
Moving beyond depositor reactions, Flannery and Sorescu (1996) study market
yield spreads between uninsured bank debentures and callable treasury bonds. These
spreads showed significant sensitivity to bank risk during the years 1989-1991 when the
mess was being cleaned up. This was also a time when doubts were emerging about
whether the FDIC could or would fully rescue creditors of insolvent bank holding
companies. The importance of variation in the credibility of implicit and explicit
guarantees is supported in a negative way by the behavior of spreads on bank derivatives
in the less stressful era of 1983-1984. Analyzing data from that era, Avery, Belton and
Goldberg (1988) and Gorton and Santomero (1990) failed to uncover any risk sensitivity.
Apparently, interest costs on insured deposits and uninsured instruments discipline

the 10 percent level.

17

depository institutions ever more strongly when doubts arise about the insurer's ability to
cover its guarantees. Such doubts are endemic to developing countries and can accelerate
quickly.
Evidence on whether the deposit growth of banks is retarded by default risk
premiums is available from a wide spectrum of countries and time periods. Gorton and
Pennacchi (1990) explain why we should expect deposit growth to slow at a troubled
institution. Statistical analysis uncovers similar patterns around the world. MartinezPeria and Schmukler (1998), find that deposits at banks in Argentina, Chile and Mexico
respond negatively to risk measures generated from accounting data. They also show that
in Chile, where deposit insurance appeared most credible, uninsured depositors were
effective monitors of bank risk.
Examining a sample of New York City banks in the 1920s and 1930s, Calomiris
and Wilson (1998) show that depositors successfully discriminated among banks on the
basis of their riskiness and tended to shift funds to safer havens. Similarly, Kane (1987)
reports that when the Ohio Deposit Guarantee Fund (ODGF) fell into crisis in 1985, Ohio
depositors removed funds only from ODGF-insured institutions. Park (1995) and Park
and Peristiani (1998) show that, during the 1980s, deposit growth at individual U.S.
thrifts was negatively related to their estimated probability of default, so that riskier
thrifts experienced smaller deposit growth.
Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga (DKH, 2000) build a bank-level dataset covering
43 countries over 1990-1997, and study both dimensions of depositor discipline by
looking at interest rates and deposit growth. The evidence shows that explicit insurance
lowers banks’ interest expenses and makes interest payments less sensitive to bank risk
and liquidity. However, regardless of the character of a country’s safety net, some
18

market discipline survives. Consistent with the U.S. evidence on interest sensitivity, the
market discipline DKH can observe responds to gaps in coverage, weaknesses in the
credibility of the guarantees, and delays and other costs entailed in recovering funds from
the guarantor.
DKH particularly focus on how variation in design characteristics affect market
discipline. They find that market discipline is stronger in countries with higher levels of
institutional development. Nevertheless, even in countries whose institutional
development is strong, badly designed deposit insurance curtails market discipline.
Setting higher coverage limits, extending coverage to interbank deposits, establishing an
ex-ante fund of reserves, funding reserves from government sources, and insisting on
public management each displaces market discipline. On the other hand, market
discipline is enhanced by coinsurance provisions, covering foreign currency deposits, and
establishing private or joint management of the insurance enterprise.
The value deposit insurance offers banks and their creditors can be measured by
the reduction it creates in required interest rates. Society pays for increases in the
perceived safety of deposits by accepting the administrative costs of supervising banks
and the consequences of any net reduction in market discipline. “Correct” pricing
through insurance premia could in principle eliminate risk shifting, but such pricing is
politically and administratively difficult, especially in developing countries. Leaven
(2001) extracts estimates of annual implicit subsidies to banks for a sample of 14
countries from market prices of bank stock. He finds that the cost of deposit insurance
is highly country-specific, being highest in countries with low per-capita GDP and poor
institutional environments. German banks take very low risks and accrue the smallest
gross subsidies from deposit insurance. This reinforces the conclusions reached by Beck
19

(2001) in his case study of German deposit insurance. Beck finds that private
management, mutual liability and the anti-bankruptcy bias curb risk-taking incentives at
German banks.6
Such individual-bank data provide direct evidence of the way in which deposit
insurance design can affect bank risk-taking incentives. Although deposit insurance
displaces market discipline even in advanced countries, the net effect may be improved
by strong regulation and supervision. These findings reinforce the evidence on deposit
insurance and banking crises. Countries with poor contracting environments are most
likely to suffer adverse consequences from deposit insurance.
Some argue that in institutionally underdeveloped countries explicit deposit
insurance may have other advantages that offset its negative effects on market discipline
and systemic stability. Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren (1998) maintain that the principal
benefit of deposit insurance is to provide a risk-free asset to small savers. Critics of this
view point out that this benefit may be obtained without destabilization costs by issuing
assets such as postal savings or money market funds backed by government debt
(Calomiris, 1996, Stiglitz, 1992), or by insisting that banks issuing insured deposits could
be constrained to remain “narrow” banks. A second and specifically evolutionary view
maintains that in countries with underdeveloped institutions, deposit insurance may be
expected to create a launching pad for improving the banking system so that it performs
financial intermediation more efficiently. We examine empirical evidence on this
hypothesis in the next section.

How Does Deposit Insurance Impact Financial Development?
6

The first two factors can also explain the good performance of the U.S. scheme for insuring credit unions

20

Countries adopt deposit insurance for different reasons. However, a common
reason is to increase the flow of bank credit by increasing the confidence that the general
public has in the formal banking system without having to explicitly raise or expend
current fiscal resources. To the extent that deposit insurance bolsters depositors’ faith in
the stability of the banking system, it may mobilize household savings for use by the
financial system. The question is whether or not the funds mobilized go on to support
improved patterns of investment and sustainably higher aggregate economic growth.
Recent adopters of deposit insurance have included African and Latin American
countries with low levels of financial development. To investigate whether and how
explicit deposit insurance contributes to financial development, Cull, Senbet and Sorge
(2000) examine time-series data for 58 countries. These authors find that explicit deposit
insurance favorably impacts the level of financial activity and its volatility only in the
presence of strong institutional development. If deposit-insurance arrangements do not
include a regulatory scheme that can overcome weaknesses in the institutional
environment, instability is fostered and subsequent financial development is harmed.
Examining a cross section of 49 countries, Cecchetti and Krause (2000) show that
deposit insurance retards the evolution of nonbank financing mechanisms. Countries
with more extensive bank deposit insurance tend to have smaller capital and financial
markets and a lower number of publicly traded firms per capita.
Thus, in institutionally weak environments, deposit insurance appears to retard
rather than to foster financial development. Cross-country research underscores the longrun danger facing countries that adopt explicit deposit insurance without stopping to
repair demonstrable inadequacies in their contracting environments. This evidence

(Kane and Hendershott, 1996).

21

amounts to a caution flag for authorities considering whether to adopt deposit insurance.
Their decision making process should begin with an audit of the degree of transparency,
deterrency, and accountability present in their institutional framework. Good safety-net
design does not consist of merely copying what works in developed countries. Good
design adapts itself to the need to mitigate problems specific to a country’s framework for
financial contracting. Officials often act as if institutional audits and country-specific
adaptations may be set aside in times of crisis. According to this view, countries whose
creditors pressure them to adopt deposit insurance in the midst of a financial crisis have
little opportunity to think about longer-term consequences. It is fair to ask whether
provision of blanket deposit insurance is of much help in managing crises. Again, we
turn to empirical evidence.

What Role Does Deposit Insurance Play in Managing Crises?
It is common practice to issue blanket guarantees to arrest a banking crisis.
Countries adopting this strategy include Sweden (1992), Japan (1996), Thailand (1997),
Korea (1997), Malaysia (1998), and Indonesia (1998). More recently, Turkey tried to
halt its financial panic by guaranteeing not just bank depositors, but all domestic and
foreign nondeposit creditors of Turkish banks.
Advocates of using blanket guarantees to halt a systemic crisis argue that
sweeping guarantees can be helpful, even essential, in halting depositors’ flight to
quality. However, because blanket guarantees create an expectation of their future use in
similar circumstances, they undermine market discipline and may prove greatly
destabilizing over longer periods. Although some countries have managed to scale back

22

formal insurance coverage once a crisis has receded, it is very difficult to scale back
informal coverage in a credible manner.
It is clear that a policy of credibly extending blanket guarantees is sufficient to
stop a depositor run. However, for governments in developing countries, establishing
and subsequently maintaining the credibility of its guarantees is a costly matter.
Extensive government guarantees shift accrued losses and loss exposures from bank
stakeholders to taxpayers. The fiscal cost of making good on blanket guarantees is an
implicit government expenditure that generates an equal amount of implicit government
debt. This unbooked spending and unbooked debt subtly undermine the country's
foreign-exchange reserves. Hence, in countries whose fiscal capacity is weak, financially
sophisticated parties face continuing incentives to move wealth offshore. If this capital
flight begins soon enough, blanket guarantees may not work even in the short run without
extensive outside support.
Even if successful in stopping an immediate crisis, introducing guarantees to stop
a crisis creates the expectation of similar bailouts in future crises. The more frequently
this remedy is used and the more enthusiastically it is approved by foreign and
multinational institutions, the harder it becomes for banks and their creditors to take
seriously post-crisis attempts to roll formal coverages back to less-disruptive levels.
Honohan and Klingebiel (2000) analyze the impact of blanket guarantees and other crisismanagement strategies on the ultimate fiscal cost of resolving banking-system distress.
Data covering forty crises around the world indicate that unlimited depositor guarantees,
open-ended liquidity support, and regulatory forbearance significantly increase the
ultimate fiscal cost of resolving a banking crisis. Moreover, these authors find no tradeoff between fiscal costs and the speed of economic recovery. In their sample, depositor
23

guarantees and regulatory forbearance failed to significantly reduce either crisis duration
or the crisis-induced decline in aggregate real output. Providing liquidity support for
insolvent institutions appears to prolong a crisis by destabilizing bank-lending incentives
so extensively that healthy adjustments are delayed and additional output loss is
generated.
Even in the midst of a crisis, it is inefficient to sacrifice long-term goals to resolve
immediate pressures. Efficient crisis management begins with triage. Hopelessly
insolvent institutions must be identified and their risk-taking brought under control.
Providing open-ended liquidity support to moribund institutions and extending blanket
guarantees to their creditors is apt to spawn new and more-virulent crises down the line.
Even when conceived entirely as a temporary emergency measure, blanket depositinsurance guarantees engender high fiscal costs. Incurring these costs is unlikely to help
the real economy to recover faster from banking crisis or to experience a smaller output
loss.

5. Conclusions and Policy Implications
The empirical research reviewed here answers two main questions:
•

Whether some countries would do well to avoid explicit deposit insurance all
together?

•

How should deposit-insurance design respond to cross-country differences in
transparency, deterrency, and accountability?

Should every country adopt explicit deposit insurance?
Cross-country empirical research on deposit insurance strongly supports the
hypothesis that in institutionally weak environments, poorly designed deposit-insurance
24

arrangements tend to increase the probability of future banking crises. This finding is
statistically robust, in that it emerges using different data sets and two very different
research protocols. When researchers compare the incidence of observed banking crises
in different countries around the world, countries with poorly designed explicit depositinsurance systems are found to experience more crises. Moreover, the frequency of these
crises is worse in countries that have weak contracting environments. When researchers
focus instead on bank-level interest costs and deposit growth in different countries, net
private and government monitoring of banks proves decisively weaker in poorly designed
systems.
The most plausible interpretation of these results is that governments should
address weaknesses in their transparency, deterrency, and accountability before adopting
explicit deposit insurance schemes. Improving banking regulation and supervision,
reforming the legal system such that property rights are protected and contract
enforcement is strengthened, upgrading accounting and disclosure rules so that accurate
information reaches the markets in a timely fashion exemplify the kinds of institutional
reforms that improve incentive structures and limit excess risk-taking.
In poor contracting environments, risk-shifting is magnified because insuranceinduced reductions in private monitoring are intensified by deficiencies in the nature of
official monitoring. Banks are tempted to exploit monitoring weakness by issuing
insured deposits and using them to finance projects with substantial downside risks. As
the expanding value of unbooked guarantees subtly exhausts the fiscal capacity of the
government, the fragility of a country's financial system increases. Although government
officials have often been led to believe that deposit insurance helps to develop a robust
financial system, it cannot do this unless the contracting environment can support it.
25

Poor supervision leads banks to lend on positively skewed, but negative present-value
projects. Such lending undermines bank solvency, destroys real economic capital, and
deters financial development.
Cross-country empirical research verifies the importance of a nation's financialcontracting environment. A country must prepare itself to support explicit deposit
insurance in an efficient manner. Governments that are thinking of adopting deposit
insurance must recognize that a strong contracting environment is a precondition. Indeed,
if a country's contracting environment is not characterized by a reasonable degree of
transparency, accountability and deterrency, an explicit deposit insurance scheme is
likely to do more harm than good. For countries with weak institutions, adopting explicit
deposit insurance promises at best to assist financial development only in the very short
run. Over longer periods, it is likely to undermine market discipline, aggravate moral
hazard and intensify financial fragility. This policy conclusion is distressingly relevant
because many of the countries recently adopting explicit deposit insurance have a
demonstrably poor contracting environment.

How should explicit deposit insurance be designed?
Cross-country empirical research offers lessons for countries that have installed or
are in the process of adopting explicit deposit-insurance schemes. Even in favorable
circumstances, using explicit deposit insurance to increase depositor confidence threatens
to heighten financial fragility by reducing the degree of market discipline that banks
experience. However, appropriate design features can both control and offset these
effects to minimize social costs.

26

Empirical research supports the hypothesis that the following features enhance
market discipline and reduce moral hazard:
•

Credibly low coverage limits per account

•

Narrow coverage (e.g., excluding interbank deposits)

•

Coinsurance (and alternative private loss-sharing arrangements such as subordinated
debt and extended stockholder liability)

•

Compulsory membership

•

Ex-post funding

•

Targeting surviving banks to cover losses (although taxpayers may be asked to assist
banks in a truly systemic crisis)

•

Private-public joint management
The advantages of credibly limiting insurance coverage and requiring compulsory

membership are obvious and not at all controversial. Limiting coverage in a believable
way ensures that identifiable groups of private individuals – large depositors,
subordinated debtholders or other banks –understand that their funds are inescapably at
risk. This exposure to loss gives them an incentive to monitor the behavior of both banks
and safety-net managers. Compulsory membership increases the size of the insurance
pool and prevents low-risk institutions from selecting out of the system. This means that
low-risk, well-managed banks can help officials to monitor and police high-flying
competitors.
The preference for ex-post funding and private involvement in insurance design
and management is inevitably a harder sell. On the one hand, not having immediate
access to a pool of accumulated liquid reserves threatens to delay authorities from dealing
with insolvent institutions in a timely manner. However, cross-country evidence
indicates that in weak institutional environments the net economic value of depositinsurance reserves is routinely overstated by failing to account for the implicit liabilities
27

that weak and insolvent clients implicitly shift onto these reserves. Indeed, an overvalued
fund tends to intensify moral hazard by leading depositors and competing institutions to
ignore evidence of individual bank insolvencies.
Even if left unfunded, a country's deposit-insurance scheme could still be given
immediate access to a credit line either from its national treasury or from reinsurance
contracts written with reliable outside insurers. In weak contracting environments, it is
useful to assign additional decision-making units, such as the treasury or foreign
reinsurers, meaningful responsibility for overseeing design and management decisions.
Irrespective of whether net deposit-insurance losses are funded ex ante or ex post, it must
be made clear that funds to cover losses will come principally from surviving banks.
Otherwise, government backup threatens to reduce market discipline and increase
fragility.
Empirical evidence also indicates that involving private parties in managing
deposit-insurance arrangements reduces moral hazard and fragility. While private
managers can also shirk their duties and even misappropriate funds, stakeholders in any
private scheme have strong incentives to monitor and police managerial actions.
Finally, the importance of the research summarized here is to focus attention on
the need to identify institutional prerequisites for adopting deposit insurance and to make
a concerted effort to get system's design right. Cross-country research does not show that
deposit insurance is universally a mistake or that all countries with explicit systems
should abandon their scheme at the first opportunity. In countries where the contracting
environment is well developed, systemic problems are rare and correlations between
design features and crises are weaker and often insignificant.

28

References
Akerlof, George A. and Paul Romer, 1993, “Looting: The Economic Underworld of
Bankruptcy for Profit,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2, 1-73.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1998, “Optimal Banking Crises”, Journal of Finance,
53 (4), pp. 1245-1284.
Avery, Robert B, Terrence M. Belton and Michael A. Goldberg, 1988, Market discipline
in regulating bank risk: new evidence from the capital markets, Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 20, 597-610.
Baer, Herbert and Elijah Brewer, 1986, Uninsured deposits as a source of market
discipline: a new look, Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics 24, 3-20.
Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, 2001. “Prudential Regulation and
Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t,” World Bank mimeo.
Beck, Thorsten, 2001, “Deposit Insurance as a Private Club: The Case of Germany,”
Quarterly Review of Economic and Finance, forthcoming.
Brewer, Elijah III and Thomas H. Mondschean, 1994, An empirical test of the incentive
effects of deposit insurance, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 26, 146-164.
Calomiris, Charles W., 1990, “ Is Deposit Insurance Necessary? A Historical
Perspective,” Journal of Economic History (June), 283-295.
Calomiris, Charles, W., 1996, “Building an Incentive-Compatible Safety Net: Special
Problems for Developing Countries”, mimeo, Columbia University.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Andrew Powell, 2000, “Can Emerging Market Bank
Regulators Establish Credible Discipline? The Case of Argentina,” World Bank
mimeo.
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

Calomiris, Charles and Berry Wilson, 1998, Bank Capital and Portfolio Management:
The 1930’s “Capital Crunch” and Scramble to Shed Risk,” NBER Working Paper
No. 6649.
Caprio, Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel, 1999, “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline
Financial Crises.” World Bank, Financial Sector Strategy and Policy Department,
Washington D.C.
Cecchetti, Stephen and Stefan Krause, 2000, Deposit Insurance and External Finance,
Ohio State University mimeo.
Cook, Douglas O. and Lewis J. Spellman, 1994, “Repudiation risk and restitution costs:
29

toward understanding premiums on insured deposits,” Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 26, 439-459.
Cull, Robert, Lemma W. Senbet, and Marco Sorge, 2000, “Deposit Insurance and
Financial Development,” World Bank mimeo.
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Tolga Sobaci, 2001, “Deposit Insurance Around the World: A
Database,” World Bank Economic Review, forthcoming.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache, 2000, “Does Deposit Insurance Increase
Banking System Stability? An Empirical Investigation,” World Bank mimeo.
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Harry Huizinga, 2000, “ Market Discipline and Financial
Safety Net Design,” World Bank mimeo.
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig, 1983, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy, 91 (3), pp. 401-19.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Carlos Arteta, 2000, “Banking Crises in Emerging Markets:
Presumptions and Evidence,” University of California, Berkeley, mimeo.
Ellis, David M. and Mark J. Flannery, 1992, Does the debt market assess large banks’
risk?, Journal of Monetary Economics 30, 481-502.
Flannery, Mark J., 1998, Using market information in prudential bank supervision: a
review of the U.S. empirical evidence, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 30,
273-305.
Flannery, Mark J. and Sorin M. Sorescu, 1996, Evidence of bank market discipline in
subordinated debenture yields: 1983-1991, Journal of Finance 51, 1347-1377.
Folkerts-Landau, David, and Carl-Johan Lindgren, 1998, Toward a Framework for
Financial Stability, (Washington, International Monetary Fund).
Garcia, Gillian, 1999, “Deposit Insurance: A Survey of Actual and Best Practices”, IMF
Working Paper No. 99/54.
Golembe, Carter H. 1960, “ The Deposit Insurance Legislation of 1933: An Examination
of Its Antecedents and Its Purposes,” Political Science Quarterly, 75 (2,June):
181-200.
Gorton, G. and G. Pennacchi, 1990, “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,”
Journal of Finance, 45, 49-72.
Gorton, Gary and Athony M. Santomero, 1990, Market discipline and bank subordinated
30

debt, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 22, 119-128.
Hannan, Timothy H. and Gerald A. Hanweck, 1988, Bank insolvency risk and the market
for large certificates of deposit, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 20, 203211.
Honohan, Patrick and Daniela Klingebiel, 2000, “ Controlling Fiscal Costs of Banking
Crises,” World Bank mimeo.
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

Kane, Edward J., 1987, Who should learn what from the failure and delayed bailout of
the ODGF? in Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Proceedings from a Conference
on Bank Structure and Competition, 306-326
Kane, Edward J., 1989, The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did it Happen?, (Washington:
Urban Institute Press).
Kane, Edward J.,1995, “ Three Paradigms for the Role of Capitalization Requirements in
Insured Financial Institutions,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 19, 431-459.
Kane, Edward J., 2000, Designing Financial Safety Nets to Fit Country Circumstances,”
World Bank mimeo.
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

Kane, Edward J., and Robert H. Hendershott, 1996. "The Federal Deposit Insurance Fund
that Didn’t Put a Bite on U.S. Taxpayers," Journal of Banking and Finance
20(September), pp. 1305-1327.
Kane, Edward J., and Berry Wilson, 2001. "Evidence of Safety Net Support During
Economic Development in Canada, the U.K., and the U.S." unpublished working
paper, Boston College.
Kyei, Alexander, “Deposit Protection Arrangements: A Survey”, IMF Working Paper
No. 95/134.
Laeven, Luc, 2001, International Evidence on the Cost of Deposit Insurance, Quarterly
Review of Economics and Finance, forthcoming.
Martinez Peria, Maria Soledad and Sergio L. Schmukler, 1999, Do depositors punish
banks for “bad” behavior?, Policy Research Paper no. 2058, World Bank,
Washington, D.C. (forthcoming Journal of Finance)
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

Merton, Robert C., 1977, “An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance Loan
Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory,” Journal of
Banking and Finance (June), 3-11.

31

Mishkin, Fredrick, 1996, “Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country
Perspective” in the proceedings of the Annual World Bank Conference on
Development Economics.
Park, Sangkyun, 1995, Market discipline by depositors: evidence from reduced-form
equations, Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 35, 497-514.
Park, Sangkyun and Stavros Peristiani, 1998, Market discipline by thrift depositors,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 30, 347-364.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1992, “S&L Bailout”, in James R. Barth and R. Dan Brunbaugh Jr.
(Eds.),The Reform of Federal Deposit Insurance, (New York, HarperBusiness).
World Bank, 2001, Finance for Growth: Policy Choices in a Volatile World, Policy
Research Report, Washington D.C.

32

Figure 1.

Bank Insolvency since late 1970s

Systemic banking crises
Episodes of non-systemic banking crises
No crises
Insufficient information

Source: Caprio and Klingebiel (1999).

33

Figure 2. Number of explicit deposit insurance systems in existence, 1934-99
Cumulative frequency of explicit DI systems established
80

60

40

20

0

1934

1962

1966

1969

1974

1977

1980

1983

Source: Demirguc-Kunt and Sobaci, World Bank, 2000.

34

1985

1987

1989

1993

1995

1997

1999

Table 1. Deposit Insurance Around the World : Design of Explicit Deposit Insurance
Countries

Date Enacted
/ Revised

Argentina
Austria

1979/1992/
1995
1979/1996

Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belgium

1993
1984
1974/1995

Brazil
Bulgaria
Cameroon

1995
1995
1999

Canada
Central
African Rep.

1967
1999

Chad

1999

Chile

1986

Colombia

1985

Croatia
Czech Rep.

1997
1994

Denmark
Dominican
Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Equatorial
Guinea

1988/1998
1962

Coverage Limits

Coverage
CoPermanent Annual Premiums
Ratios
insurance
Fund
US$ or ECU
Limit/gdp
Y=Yes
% of insured deposits
per capita
N=No
unless otherwise noted
30000
3
N
Y
risk-based, 0.36 to
0.72
$24,075 but coinsurance
1
Y
N
pro rata, expost
for businesses
5640
1
N
N
ex post
2123
6
N
Y
0.005
15,000 ECU until year
1
N
Y
0.02 + 0.04 of insured
2000
liabilities
17000
4
N
Y
0.3
1784
1
N
Y
risk based to 0.5
5336
9
N
Y
risk based: 0.15% of
deposits + 0.5% of net
non-performing loans
40770
2
N
Y
0.33 max
3557
13
N
Y
risk based: 0.15% of
deposits + 0.5% of net
non-performing loans
3557
15
N
Y
risk based: 0.15% of
deposits + 0.5% of net
non-performing loans
demand deposits in full
1
Y
N
none
and 90% coinsurance to
UF 120 of $3,600 for
savings deposits
in full untill 2001, then
2
Y
Y
0.3
coinsurance to $5,500
15300
3
N
Y
0.8
coinsurance to $11,756
2
Y
Y
commercial banks 0.5,
savings banks 0.1
20000 ECU
1
N
Y
0.2 (maximum)
coinsurance to $13,000
7
Y
Y
0.1875

1999
1999
1999

in full to year 2001
4720
3557

Estonia

1998

Finland

1969/1992/
1998
1980/1995
1999

coinsurance 90% of
$1383, but 20,000 ECU
in year 2010
29435
65387
5336

France
Gabon
Germany

1966/1969/
1998

Gibraltar

1998

Source of
Administration
Funding
P= Private, O=Official
J=Joint
P
P
J

P

P
J
J

J
O
J

P
J
J

P
J
J

J
J

O
J

J

J

O

O

P

O

J
J

J
O

J
J

J
J

n.a.
J
J

O
O
J

J

J

2
3

N
N
N

Y
Y
Y

0

Y

Y

0.65
risk-based, 0.1 to 0.3
risk based: 0.15% of
deposits + 0.5% of net
non-performing loans
0.5 (maximum)

1

N

Y

risk based: 0.05 to 0.3

J

P

3
1

N
N

N
Y

P
J

P
J

private: 30% of capital;
1
official coinsurance 90%
to 20000 ECU
lesser of 90% coinsurance or 20,000
ECU

Y

Y

on demand but limited
risk based: 0.15%
deposits + 0.5% net
non-performing loans
official is 0.03 but can
be doubled

P

P

Y

N

P

J

P

J

J
P
J

J
O
O

Greece

1993/1995

20,000 ECU

2

N

Y

Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland

1993
1985/1996
1961
1998
1989/1995

1
1
6

N
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

1

Y

Y

0.2

P

O

Italy

1987/1996

4,165 ECU or $4,564
20,000 ECU
2355
Blanket guarantee
coinsurance 90% to
15,000 ECU
125000

administrative
expenses and expost
contributions
decreasing by size:
1.250 to 0.025
risk based to 0.3
0.15
0.05

6

N

N

J

J

5512

2

N

Y

risk adj., expost 0.4 to
0.8 of protected funds
0.1

J

O

Jamaica

1998

35

Countries
Japan
Kenya
Korea
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malaysia
Marshall
Islands
Mexico
Micronesia
Netherlands
Nigeria

Norway
Oman
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Republic of
Congo
Romania
Slovak
Republic
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden

Date Enacted
Coverage Limits
Coverage
CoPermanent Annual Premiums
/ Revised
Ratios insurance
Fund
1971
$71,000, but in full until March 2001
N
Y
0.0048 + 0.036
1985
1750
5
N
Y
0.15
1996
$14,600, but in full until the year
N
Y
0.05
2000
1998
$830 until year 2000
0
N
Y
0.3
1967
3300
1
N
Y
0.05
1996
$6,250 then coinsurance
2
Y
Y
1.5
1989
coinsurance 90% to
0
Y
N
ex post
ECU 15000 thru 1999,
then to ECU 20000
1996
coinsurance 75% to
0
Y
Y
1.5%, risk-based 1%
$183
to 5%
1998
Blanket guarantee
1975
100000
N
Y
risk-based, 0.00 to
0.27
1986/1990 in full except subordinated debt until
N
Y
0.3 (max 0.5) plus 0.7
2005
as needed
1963
100000
N
Y
risk-based, 0.00 to
0.27
1979/1995 20,000 ECU
1
N
N
expost
1988/1989 $588(at market
2
N
Y
0.9375
exchange rate), $2435
(at official exchange
rate)
1961/1997 260800
8
N
Y
0.005 of assets and
0.01 of total deposits
1995
coinsurance 75% to
9
Y
Y
0.02
$52,630
1992
21160
9
N
Y
risk-based from 0.65
to 1.45
1963
2375
3
N
Y
0.2
1995
1,000 ECU, then 90%
0
Y
Y
not more than 0.4
coinsurance for the next
4,000 ECU
1992/1995 15,000 ECU,
1
Y
Y
risk-based, 0.08 to
coinsurance to 45,000
0.12 + more in
ECU
emergencies
1999
3557
5
N
Y
risk based: 0.15% of
deposits + 0.5% of net
non-performing loans
1996
3600
2
N
Y
risk-based: 0.3 to 0.6
1996
7900
2
N
Y
0.1 to 0.3 for banks
1977/1996
1987
1996

Switzerland
Taiwan
Tanzania
Thailand
Trinidad &
Tobago
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine

1984/1993
1985
1994
1997
1986

United
Kingdom

1982/1995

United States

1934/1991

Venezuela

1983
1994
1998

1985

15,000 ECU through
1999, then 20,000 ECU
1470
28,663 ECU, $31,412

Source of
Funding
J
J
J

Administration

J
J
J
P

O
J
O
P

J

J

P

O

J

O

P

O

J
J

O
O

J

P

J

O

J

J

J
J

O
O

J

O

J

J

J
J

J
J

J
O
O

1

N

Y

maximum of 0.2

J

J

2
1

N
N

Y
Y

J
J

O
O

P
J
J

P
O
P

19700
38500
376
Blanket guarantee
7957

1
3
2

N
N
N

N
Y
Y

0.15
risk-based, 0.5 now,
0.1 later (future date is
not available)
on demand
0.015
0.1

2

N

Y

0.2

J

O

in full
2310
250

8
0

N
N
N

Y
Y
Y

risk-based 1.0 to 1.2
0.2
0.5 plus special
charges
on demand

J
J
J

O
O
O

P

P

J

O

J

O

larger of 90%
coinsurance to $33,333
or 22,222 ECU
100000

1

Y

N

3

N

Y

7309

2

N

Y

risk-based, 0.00 to
0.27
2

Source: Demirguc-Kunt and Sobaci, “Deposit Insurance Around the World: A Database,” World Bank Economic
Review, forthcoming. Full data base available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/confs/upcoming/deposit_insurance/home.htm

36

Table 2. Deposit Insurance Design and Banking Crises
The dependent variable is a crisis dummy which takes the value one if there is a crisis and the value zero otherwise. A logit
probability model is estimated. Variables are defined as follows: Explicit coverage limit takes the value 0 if implicit insurance but
equals coverage limit divided by deposits per capita lagged one period. Funding variable takes the value 0 if implicit insurance, 1 if
explicit insurance with no fund, and 2 if explicit insurance with deposit insurance fund. Management variables take the value 1 if
private, joint, or official management and zero otherwise, respectively. The moral hazard index is the first principal component of
deposit insurance design features: coinsurance, coverage, scope of coverage, type of funding, source of funding, management, and
membership. Regression also includes the following control variables that are not reported below: growth, change in terms of trade,
real interest rates, inflation, M2/reserves, depreciation, past credit growth, and gdp per capita. Standard errors are given in
parentheses. Source: Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache, 2000.

Explicit Coverage
Limit

.019***
(.006)

Funding

.454**
(.203)

Official Mgmt.

.800**
(.419)
.617
(1.163)
.297
(.881)

Joint Mgmt.
Private Mgmt.
Moral Hazard
Index
No. of Crises
No. of Obs.
% correct
% crisis correct
Model Chi Sq.
AIC

.161**
(.074)
34
827
78
71
47.03***
257

40
898
75
68
52.30***
295

** and *** indicate significance at levels of 5 and 1 percent respectively.

37

39
869
75
64
50.32***
292

40
898
78
65
52.06***
295

