                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE NBER PATENT CITATIONS DATA FILE:
                    LESSONS, INSIGHTS AND METHODOLOGICAL TOOLS


                                              Bronwyn H. Hall
                                               Adam B. Jaffe
                                             Manuel Trajtenberg


                                            Working Paper 8498
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w8498


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2001


This paper pulls together material from multiple research projects spanning approximately a decade, and hence
it would be impossible to thank everyone who contributed to it. Still, our co-authors Rebecca Henderson and
Michael Fogarty, and research assistants Meg Fernando, Abi Rubin, Guy Michaels and Michael Katz deserve
special thanks. Above all, this paper – indeed much of the patent-related research of the past two decades – could
never have come to pass without the inspiration, support and criticism of our mentor Zvi Griliches. Financial
support was provided by the National Science Foundation via Grants SBR 9320973 and SBR-9413099. Additional
support came from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, via a grant to the NBER Industrial Technology and
Productivity Program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.



© 2001 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Adam B. Jaffe and Manuel Trajtenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools
Bronwyn H. Hall, Adam B. Jaffe and Manuel Trajtenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 8498
October 2001
JEL No. O3



                                              ABSTRACT


         This paper describes the database on U.S. patents that we have developed over the past decade,
with the goal of making it widely accessible for research. We present main trends in U. S. patenting over
the last 30 years, including a variety of original measures constructed with citation data, such as backward
and forward citation lags, indices of “originality” and “generality”, self-citations, etc. Many of these
measures exhibit interesting differences across the six main technological categories that we have
developed (comprising Computers and Communications, Drugs and Medical, Electrical and Electronics,
Chemical, Mechanical and Others), differences that call for further research. To stimulate such research,
the entire database—about 3 million patents and 16 million citations—is now available on the NBER
website. We discuss key issues that arise in the use of patent citations data, and suggest ways of
addressing them. In particular, significant changes over time in the rate of patenting and in the number
of citations made, as well as the inevitable truncation of the data, make it very hard to use the raw number
of citations received by different patents directly in a meaningful way. To remedy this problem we suggest
two alternative approaches: the fixed-effects approach involves scaling citations by the average citation
count for a group of patents to which the patent of interest belongs; the quasi-structural approach attempts
to distinguish the multiple effects on citation rates via econometric estimation.



Bronwyn H. Hall                                                   Adam B. Jaffe
Department of Economics                                           MS 021, Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley                              Brandeis University
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                           Waltham, MA 02454-9110
and NBER                                                          and NBER
bhhall@berkeley.edu                                               ajaffe@brandeis.edu

Manuel Trajtenberg
Eitan Berglass School of Economics
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv 69978
Israel
and NBER
manuel@ccsg.tau.ac.il
                                    I. Introduction
       The goal of this paper is to describe the data base on U. S. patents that we have
developed over the past decade, so as to make it widely accessible for research. In so
doing we discuss key issues that arise in the use of patent citations data, and suggest ways
of addressing them. We also present some of the main trends in patenting over the last 30
years, including a variety of original measures constructed with citation data, such as
indices of “originality” and “generality”, self-citations, backward and forward citation
lags, etc. Many of these measures exhibit interesting differences across the six main
technological categories that we have developed (comprising Computers and
Communications, Drugs and Medical, Electrical and Electronics, Chemical, Mechanical
and Others).


       Broadly speaking, the data comprise detailed information on almost 3 million U.
S. patents granted between January 1963 and December 1999, all citations made to these
patents between 1975 and 1999 (over 16 million), and a reasonably broad match of
patents to Compustat (the data set of all firms traded in the U. S. stock market). As it
stands now, the data file is fully functional, and can be used with relative ease with
standard software such as SAS or Access. We hope that the availability of patent data in
this format will encourage researchers to use these data extensively, thus making patent
data a staple of research in economics.


       This represents the culmination of a long-term research and data-creation effort
that involved a wide range of researchers (primarily the present authors, Rebecca
Henderson, and Michael Fogarty), institutions (the NBER, REI at Case-Western, Tel-
Aviv University), programmers (Meg Fernando, Abi Rubin, and Adi Raz), research
assistants (notably Guy Michaels and Michael Katz), and financial resources (primarily
from various NSF grants). Hopefully, the contribution of these data to present and future
research in economics will justify the magnitude of the investment made.




                                             3
        Patents have long been recognized as a very rich and potentially fruitful source of
data for the study of innovation and technical change. Indeed, there are numerous
advantages to the use of patent data:
    •   Each patent contains highly detailed information on the innovation itself, the
    technological area to which it belongs, the inventors (e.g. their geographical location),
    the assignee, etc. Moreover, patents have very wide coverage (in terms of fields, types
    of inventors, etc.), and in the course of the last three decades U. S. patents
    increasingly reflect not only inventive activity in the U. S. itself, but also around the
    world.1
    •   There are a very large number of patents, each of which constitutes a highly
    detailed observation: the “stock” of patents is currently in excess of 6 million, and the
    flow is of over 150,000 patents per year (as of 1999-2000). Thus the wealth of data
    potentially available for research is huge.
    •   Patents have been granted in the U. S. continuously since the late 18th century.
    The current numbering and reporting system dates to the 1870s, meaning that there
    are (in principle) over 100 years of consistently reported data.
    •   In contrast to other types of economic information, the data contained in patents
    are supplied entirely on a voluntary basis, and the incentives to do so are plain and
    clear. After all, the whole idea of patents is that they constitute a “package deal,”
    namely, the grant of temporary monopoly rights in exchange for disclosure.
    •   Patent data include citations to previous patents and to the scientific literature.
    These citations open up the possibility of tracing multiple linkages between
    inventions, inventors, scientists, firms, locations, etc. In particular, patent citations
    allow one to study spillovers, and to create indicators of the "importance" of
    individual patents, thus introducing a way of capturing the enormous heterogeneity in
    the “value” of patents.


        There are also serious limitations to the use of patent data, the most glaring being
the fact that not all inventions are patented. First, not all inventions meet the patentability

1
  The percentage of U. S. patents awarded to foreign inventors has risen from about 20% in the early
sixties, to about 45% in the late1990s.


                                                     4
criteria set by the USPTO (the invention has to be novel, non-trivial, and has to have
commercial application). Second, the inventor has to make a strategic decision to patent,
as opposed to rely on secrecy or other means of appropriability. Unfortunately, we have
very little idea of the extent to which patents are representative of the wider universe of
inventions, since there is no systematic data about inventions that are not patented. This is
an important, wide-open area for future research. Another problem that used to be a
serious hindrance stemmed from the fact that the patent file was not entirely
computerized. Furthermore, until not long ago it was extremely difficult to handle those
“chunks” that were computerized, because of the very large size of the data. In fact, the
whole feasibility of this data construction project was called into question (certainly at the
beginning of this endeavor, in the early 1990s), in view of these problems. However,
rapid progress in computer technology has virtually eliminated these difficulties, so much
so that at present the whole data reside in personal computers, and can be analyzed with
the aid of standard PC software.


       The idea of using patent data in a large scale for economic research goes back at
least to Schmookler (1966), followed by Scherer (1982), and Griliches (1984).2 The work
of Schmookler involved assigning patent counts to industries (by creating a concordance
between patent subclasses and SICs), whereas Griliches’ research program at the NBER
entailed matching patents to Compustat firms. In both cases the only data item used, aside
from the match itself, was the timing of the patent (i.e. the grant or application year), such
that in the end the patent data available for research consisted of patent counts by
industries or firms, by year. Of course, it is the linking out of such data that made it
valuable, since it could then be related to the wealth of information available on the
industries/firms themselves. The project that Scherer undertook involved classifying a
sample of 15,000 patents into industry of origin and industries of use, by the textual
examination of each patent. The result was a detailed technology flow matrix, that again
could be linked to other, external data, such as R&D expenditures on the one hand, and
productivity growth on the other hand.




                                              5
         One of the major drawbacks of these and related research programs, extremely
valuable as they had been, was that they relied exclusively on simple patent counts as
indicators of some sort of innovative output. However, it has long been known that
innovations vary enormously in their technological and economic “importance”,
“significance” or “value”, and moreover, that the distribution of such “values” is
extremely skewed. The line of research initiated by Schankerman and Pakes (1986) using
patent renewal data clearly revealed these features of the patent data (see also Pakes and
Simpson, 1991). Thus, simple patent counts were seriously and inherently limited in the
extent to which they could faithfully capture and summarize the underlying heterogeneity
(see Griliches, Hall and Pakes, 1987). A further (related) drawback was of course that
these projects did not make use of any of the other data items contained in the patents
themselves, and could not do so, given the stringent limitations on data availability at the
time.


         Keenly aware of the need to overcome these limitations on the one hand, and of
the intriguing possibilities held by patent citations on the other hand, we realized that a
major data construction effort was called for. Encouraged by the novel finding that
citations appear to be correlated with the value of innovations (Trajtenberg, 1990), we
undertook work aimed primarily at demonstrating the potential usefulness of citations for
a variety of purposes: as indicators of spillovers (Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson, 1993,
Caballero and Jaffe, 1993), and as ingredients in the construction of measures for other
features of innovations, such as “originality” and “generality” (Trajtenberg, Jaffe and
Henderson, 1997). We used for each of these projects samples of patent data that were
acquired and constructed with a single, specific purpose in mind. As the data
requirements grew, however, we came to the conclusion that it was extremely inefficient
if not impossible to carry out a serious research agenda on such a piece-wise basis.




2
 This is by no means a survey of patent-related work, rather we just note the key data-focused research
projects that put forward distinctive methodologies, and had a significant impact on further research. For a
survey of research using patent data, see Griliches (1990).


                                                      6
         In particular, the “inversion” problem that arises when using citations received
called for an all-out solution. The inversion problem refers to the fact that the original
data on citations come in the form of citations made (i.e. each patent lists references to
previous patents), whereas for many of the uses (certainly for assessing the importance of
patents) one needs data on citations received. The trouble is that in order to obtain the
citations received by any one patent granted in year t, one needs to search the references
made by all patents granted after year t. Thus, any study using citations received,
however small the sample of patents is, requires in fact access to the whole citations data,
in a way that permits efficient search and extraction of citations. The latter means in fact
being able to “invert” the citations data, sorting it not by the patent number of the citing
patent, but by the patent number of the cited patent. This inherent indivisibility led us to
aim for a comprehensive data construction effort.3

         The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the data in detail, and
presents summary statistics (primarily via charts) for each of the main variables. Since
these statistics are computed on the basis of the whole data, the intention is both to
provide benchmark figures that may be referred to in future research, as well as to
highlight trends and stylized facts that call for further study. Section III discusses the
problems that arise with the use of citation data, because of truncation and other changes
over time in the citation process. We outline two ways of dealing with these issues, a
“fixed-effects” approach, and a structural-econometric one.



                                    II. Description of the Data

II.1 Scope, Contents and Sources of the Data
         The main data set extends from January 1, 1963 through December 30, 1999 (37
years), and includes all the utility patents granted during that period, totaling 2,923,922



3
  It is interesting to note that in the early 1990s this enterprise seemed rather far-fetched, given the state
(and costs) of computer technology at the time: the patent data as provided then by the Patent Office
occupied about 60 magnetic tapes, and the inversion procedure (of millions of citations) would have
necessitated computer resources beyond our reach. However, both computers and data availability
improved along the way fast enough to make this project feasible.


                                                        7
patents; 4 we shall refer to this data set as PAT63_99. This file includes two main sets of
variables, those that came from the Patent Office (“original” variables), and those that we
created from them (“constructed” variables). The citations file, CITE75_99, includes all
citations made by patents granted in 1975-1999, totaling 16,522,438 citations. In
addition, we have detailed data on inventors, assignees, etc. The patent data themselves
were procured from the Patent Office, except for the citations from patents granted in
1999, which come from MicroPatent. The PAT63_99 file occupies less than 500 MB (in
Access or in SAS), the CITE75_99 about 260 MB. The contents of these files are as
follows:


      1. PAT63_99
(i) Original Variables:5
     1.   Patent number
     2.   Grant year
     3.   Grant date6
     4.   Application year (starting in 1967)
     5.   Country of first inventor
     6.   State of first inventor (if U. S.)
     7.   Assignee identifier, if the patent was assigned (starting in 1969)
     8.   Assignee type (i.e., individual, corporate, or government; foreign or domestic)
     9.   Main U.S. patent class
    10.   Number of claims (starting in 1975)

(ii) Constructed variables:
    1.    Technological category
    2.    Technological sub-category
    3.    Number of citations made
    4.    Number of citations received
    5.    Percent of citations made by this patent to patents granted since 19637
    6.    Measure of “generality”
4
  In addition to utility patents, there are three other minor patent categories: Design, Reissue, and Plant
patents. The overwhelming majority are utility patents: in 1999 the number of utility patents granted
reached 153,493, versus just 14,732 for Design patents, 448 Reissue, and 421 Plant. Our data do not
include these other categories.
5
  We also have the patent subclass, and the SICs that the Patent Office matched to each patent. However,
we have not used these data so far, and they are not included in the PAT63_99 file.
6
  Number of weeks elapsed since January 1, 1960.
7
  That is, for each patent we compute the following ratio: number of citations made to patents granted since
1963 divided by the total number of citations made. The point is that older citations are not in our data, and
hence for purposes such as computing the measure of originality, the actual computation is done only on
the basis of the post-63 citations. However, one needs to know to what extent such calculations are partial.


                                                      8
    7.    Measure of “originality”
    8.    Mean forward citation lag
    9.    Mean backwards citations lag
    10.   Percentage of self-citations made –upper and lower bounds


      2. CITE75_99
      1. Citing patent number
      2. Cited patent number


      3. The “Inventors” file
      This file contains the full names and addresses of each of the multiple inventors listed
      in each patent (most patents have indeed multiple inventors, the average being over 2
      per patent). Both the names of the inventors and their geographical locations offer a
      very rich resource for research that has yet to be fully exploited.


      4. The “Coname” file
      1. Assignee identifier (numerical code, as it appears in PAT63_99)
      2. Full assignee name


      5. The Compustat match file (see II.11 below)


II.2 Dating of Patents, and the Application – Grant Lag
          Each patent document includes the date when the inventor filed for the patent (the
application date), and the date when the patent was granted. Our data contains the grant
date and the grant year of all patents in the file (i.e., of all utility patents granted since
1963) and the application year for patents granted since 1967.8 Clearly, the actual timing
of the patented inventions is closer to the application date than to the (subsequent) grant
date. This is so because inventors have a strong incentive to apply for a patent as soon as
possible following the completion of the innovation, whereas the grant date depends upon
the review process at the Patent Office, which takes on average about 2 years, with a

8
  Actually the grant year can be retrieved from the patent numbers, since these are given sequentially along
time. Moreover, the Patent Office publishes a table indicating the first and last patent number of each grant
year.


                                                      9
significant variance (see Table 1). Indeed, the mode of operation of the Patent Office
underwent significant changes in the past decades, thereby introducing a great deal of
randomness (that have nothing to do with the actual timing of the inventions) into any
patent time series dated by grant year.


         Thus, and whenever possible, the application date should be used as the relevant
time placer for patents.9 On the other hand one has to be mindful in that case of the
truncation problem: as the time series move closer to the last date in the data set,10 patent
data timed according to the application date will increasingly suffer from missing
observations consisting of patents filed in recent years that have not yet been granted.
Table 1 shows the distribution of application-grant lags for selected sub-periods, as well
as the mean lag and its standard deviation.11 Overall the lags have shortened significantly,
from an average of 2.4 years in the late 1960s to 1.8 years in the early 1990s, at the same
time as the number of patents examined (and granted) more than doubled. Notice
however that the trend was not monotonic: during the early 1980s the lags in fact
lengthened, but shortened again in the second half of the 1980s and early 1990s. Notice
also that the percentage granted 2 years after filing is about 85% (for recent cohorts), and
after 3 years about 95%. Thus, it is advisable to take at least a 3-year “safety lag” when
dating patents according to application year, and/or to control for truncation, for example
by including dummies for years.


II.3 Number of Patents
         Figure 1 shows the annual number of granted patents by application year, and
Figure 2 the number of patents by grant year. The extent of the truncation problem can be
clearly seen in Figure 1, for the years 1996-99: the sharp drop in the series is just an
artifact reflecting the fact that the data include patents granted up to the end of 1999, and
hence for the years just before that we only observe those patent applications that were

9
  The series for the patent variables that we present below are indeed mostly by application year, and
include data up to 1997: given that we have patents granted only up to December 1999, there are too few
applications for 1998 and 1999.
10
   For our data this date is December 1999.
11
   The figures presented there may still suffer slightly from truncation: there probably are patents applied
for in 1990-92 that still were not granted by 12/1999.


                                                      10
granted relatively fast, but not all those other patents that will be granted afterwards. The
series in Figure 1 are smoother than those in Figure 2, reflecting the changing length of
the examination process at the Patent Office, which causes the series dated by granting
date to vary from year to year in a rather haphazard way.


       Figure 1 shows that the total number of successful patent applications remained
roughly constant up to 1983, oscillating around 65,000 annually, and then took off
dramatically, reaching almost 140,000 in the mid 1990’s. In terms of patents granted, the
single most pronounced changed occurred between 1997 and 1998, when the number of
patents granted increased by almost 1/3 (from 112K to 148K). In terms of composition,
the number of patents granted to U. S. inventors actually declined up to 1983, but such
decline was almost exactly compensated by the increase in the number of patents granted
to foreigners. Despite these differences for the pre-1983 period, the acceleration that
started in 1983 applies both to U. S. and to foreign inventors (see Kortum and Lerner,
1998). Note in Figure 2 that the turning point there (i.e. according to grant year) would
appear to have occurred in 1979, but that just reflects the application-grant lag (and
changes in that respect) and not a “real” phenomenon.


II.4 Types of Assignees
       The USPTO classifies patents according to the type of assignees, into the
following seven categories (the figures are the percentages of each of these categories in
our data):
1 – Unassigned                                                               18.4%
Assigned to:
2 – U. S. non-government organizations (mostly corporations)                 47.2%
3 – Non-U. S., non-government organizations (mostly corporations)            31.2%
4 – U. S. individuals                                                        0.8%
5 – Non-U. S. individuals                                                    0.3%
6 – The U. S. Federal Government                                             1.7%
7 – Non-U. S. Governments                                                    0.4%




                                             11
         “Unassigned” patents are those for which the inventors have not yet granted the
rights to the invention to a legal entity such as a corporation, university or government
agency, or to other individuals. These patents were thus still owned by the original
inventors at the time of patenting, and they may or may have not transferred their patent
rights at a later time (we do not have data on transfers done after the grant date). By far
the vast majority of patents (78.4%) are assigned to corporations,12 and another 18.4% are
unassigned. Of the remaining ones, 2.1% are assigned to government agencies, and 1.1%
to individuals. This later category is thus unimportant, and for practical purposes can be
regarded as part of the “unassigned” category. As Figure 3 shows, the percentage of
corporate patents for U. S. inventions increased slightly over the period from 72% to
77%, whereas for foreign patents the increase was much steeper, from 78% in 1965 to
90% in 1997. The increase in the share of corporate inventions reflects the long-term
raising dominance of corporations as the locus of innovation, and the concomitant
relative decline of individual inventors.


II.5 Technological Fields
         The USPTO has developed over the years a highly elaborate classification system
for the technologies to which the patented inventions belong, consisting of about 400
main (3-digit) patent classes,13 and over 120,000 patent subclasses. This system is being
updated continuously, reflecting the rapid changes in the technologies themselves, with
new patent classes being added and others being reclassified and discarded.14 Each patent
is assigned to an “original” classification (class and subclass), and to any number of
subsidiary classes and subclasses. For the vast majority of uses one is likely to resort only
to the original, 3-digit patent class, and hence we include only it in the PAT63_99 file.


         Furthermore, even 400 classes are far too many for most applications (such as
serving as controls in regressions), and hence we have developed a higher-level

12
   The category refers as said to “non-government organizations”, which consists overwhelmingly of
business entities (i.e. corporations), but includes also universities.
13
   There were 417 classes in the 1999 classification, which is the one we use.
14
   From time to time the Patent Office reassigns patents retroactively to patent classes according to the most
recent patent classification system. Therefore, one has to be careful when using jointly data files created at
different times, or when adding recent patents to older sets.


                                                     12
classification, by which the 400 classes are aggregated into 36 two-digit technological
sub-categories, and these in turn are further aggregated into 6 main categories: Chemical
(excluding Drugs); Computers and Communications (C&C); Drugs and Medical (D&M);
Electrical and Electronics (E&E); Mechanical; and Others (see Appendix 1). Of course,
there is always an element of arbitrariness in devising an aggregation system and in
assigning the patent classes into the various technological categories, and there is no
guarantee that the resulting classification is “right”, or adequate for most uses. For
example, we found that within the category Drugs and Medical there is a high degree of
heterogeneity between sub-categories in some of the dimensions explored: the sub-
category Drugs (no. 31) exhibits a much higher percentage of self-citations than the
others, and Biotechnology (no. 32) scores significantly higher in terms of generality and
originality. Thus, we suggest that while convenient, the present classification should be
used with great care, and reexamined critically for specific applications.


       Figure 4 shows the number of patents in each of the six technological categories
over time by application year, Figure 5 expresses these numbers as shares of total patents.
The changes are quite dramatic: the three traditional fields (Chemical, Mechanical and
Others) have experienced a steady decline over the past 3 decades, from about 25% to
less than 20% each. The big winner has been Computers and Communications, which
rose steeply from 5% in the 1960s to 20% in the late 1990s, and also Drugs and Medical,
which went from 2% to over 10%. The only stable field is Electrical and Electronics,
holding steady at 16-18%. All told the 3 traditional fields dropped from 76% of the total
in 1965 to 54% in 1997 by application year. (Their share of 1999 grants was just 51%.)
This clearly reflects the much-heralded “technological revolution” of our times,
associated with the rise of Information Technologies on the one hand, and the growing
importance of Health Care Technologies on the other hand.


       Figure 4 reveals yet another aspect of these changes: The absolute number of
patents in the traditional fields (Chemical, Mechanical and Others) declined slightly up to
1983 (certainly during the late seventies), and then increased by 20-30%. By contrast, the
emerging fields of Computers and Communications and Drugs and Medical increased



                                             13
throughout the whole period, with a marked acceleration after 1983. All told, the absolute
number of patents in C&C experienced a 5-fold increase since 1983, and similarly for
those in D&M. This makes clear both the extent to which there was a turning point in the
early 1980s (across the board), and the dramatic changes in the rates of growth of
innovations in emerging versus traditional technologies. Comparing patents of U. S.
versus non-U. S. inventors, the only significant difference is that the field of D&M grew
significantly faster in the U. S.: by the mid 1990s the share of D&M for U. S. inventors
was 12%, versus 8% for non-U. S..


II.6 Citations Made and Received
         A key data item in the patent document is “References Cited – U. S. Patent
Documents” (hereafter we refer to these just as “citations”). Patent citations serve an
important legal function, since they delimit the scope of the property rights awarded by
the patent. Thus, if patent B cites patent A, it implies that patent A represents a piece of
previously existing knowledge upon which patent B builds, and over which B cannot
have a claim. The applicant has a legal duty to disclose any knowledge of the “prior art,”
but the decision regarding which patents to cite ultimately rests with the patent examiner,
who is supposed to be an expert in the area and hence to be able to identify relevant prior
art that the applicant misses or conceals. The presumption is thus that citations are
informative of links between patented innovations. First, citations made may constitute a
“paper trail” for spillovers, i.e. the fact that patent B cites patent A may be indicative of
knowledge flowing from A to B; second, citations received may be telling of the
“importance” of the cited patent.15 The following quote provides support for the latter
presumption:


     “..the examiner searches the…patent file. His purpose is to identify any prior
     disclosures of technology… which might be similar to the claimed invention and
     limit the scope of patent protection...or which, generally, reveal the state of the
     technology to which the invention is directed. If such documents are found...they
     are “cited”... if a single document is cited in numerous patents, the technology
     revealed in that document is apparently involved in many developmental efforts.

15
  See Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Fogarty (2000) for evidence from a survey of inventors on the role of citations
in both senses.


                                                    14
     Thus, the number of times a patent document is cited may be a measure of its
     technological significance.” (OTAF, 1976, p. 167)


        Beyond that, one can construct citations-based measures that may capture other
aspects of the patented innovations, such as “originality”, “generality”, “science-based”,
etc. (see Trajtenberg, Jaffe and Henderson, 1997). We discuss below some of these
measures.


        Our data include citations made starting with grant year 1975, and to the best of
our knowledge there are no computerized citations data prior to that.16 Figure 6 shows the
mean number of citations made and received over time. Notice the steep rise in the
number of citations made: from an average of about 5 citations per patent in 1975, to over
10 by the late 1990s.17 This increase is partly due to the fact that the patent file at the
USPTO was computerized during the 1980s, and hence patent examiners were able to
find potential references much more easily.18 Beyond that, we cannot tell the extent to
which some of the rise may be “real” as opposed to being purely an artifact that just
reflects changing practices at the USPTO. Thus, one has to be very careful with the time
dimension of citations, and use appropriate controls for citing years.


        The decline in the number of citations received in recent years as shown in Figure
6 is a result of truncation: patents applied for in say 1993 can receive citations in our data
just from patents granted up to 1999, but in fact they will be cited by patents in
subsequent years as well, only that we do not yet observe them. Obviously, for older
patents truncation is less of an issue; in general, the extent to which truncation is a
problem depends on the distribution of citation lags, which we examine below. Notice


16
   Citations were made before 1975, and may have resided within the PTO in some computerized form.
However, we have not been able to establish when precisely the current citation practices started at the
USPTO, and moreover, no publicly available electronic data of which we are aware contains pre-1975
(grant year) citations.
17
   The decrease in the mean number of citations made after 1995 in the series plotted by application year is
somewhat puzzling, in view of the fact that the series keeps rising when plotted by grant year. The
divergence may be due to the fact that patent applications that make fewer citations are less “complex” and
hence are granted relatively quickly.
18
   Another reason may be the steep rise in the number of patents granted since 1983, which means that there
are many more patents to cite.


                                                    15
that patents applied for prior to 1975 also suffer from truncation, but in a different way: a
1970 patent will have all the citations received from patents granted since 1975, but none
of the citations from patents granted in 1970-74. Truncation thus reinforces the need to
use appropriate controls for the timing of citations, beyond the aforementioned problem
of the rising number of citations made.


        Figure 7 shows the number of citations made by technological categories, and
Figure 8 does the same for citations received. Clearly, patents belonging to different
technological categories diverge far more in terms of citations received than in terms of
citations made. In general, the traditional technological fields cite more and are cited less,
whereas the emerging fields of C&C and D&M are cited much more but are in between
in terms of citations made. Thus, the category Others displays the highest number of
citations made, Electrical and Electronics the lowest, Computers and Communications
makes as many citations as Chemicals, whereas Drugs and Medical went from making
the lowest number of citations to making the second highest.


        On the receiving side, the distinction between traditional and advanced fields is
clear-cut, and the differences are very large. Thus, C&C received up to 12 citations per
patent (twice as many as Mechanical), D&M about 10, E&E over 7, whereas the
traditional fields received just about 6. Once again, we do not know whether the
differences in citations made reflect a “real” phenomenon (e.g. fields citing less are truly
more self-reliant, and perhaps more “original”), or rather different citation practices that
are somehow artifactual. On the other hand the differences in citations received are more
likely to be “real”, since it is hard to believe that there are widespread practices that
systematically discriminate between patents by technological fields when making
citations.


II.7 Citation Lags
        There are two ways to look at citation lags, backwards and forward. The
backward lags focus on the time difference between the application or grant year of the
citing patent, and that of the cited patents. For patents granted since 1975 we have the



                                             16
complete list of citations made, we know their timing, and therefore we can compute for
them the entire distribution of backward citation lags. When we look at citations received
and hence at forward lags the situation is very different, because of truncation: for patents
granted in 1975 the citations lags may be at most of 24 years, and for more recent patents
the distribution of lags is obviously truncated even earlier.


         Figure 9 shows the frequencies of backward citation lags up to 50 years back, and
separately the remaining tail for lags higher than 50; Figure 10 shows the cumulative
distribution up to 50 years back.19 The striking fact that emerges is that citations go back
very far into the past (some even over a hundred years!), and that to a significant extent
patents seem to draw from old technological predecessors. Thus, 50% of citations are
made to patents at least 10 years older than the citing patent, 25% to patents 20 years
older or more, and 5% of citations refer to patents that are at least 50 years older than the
citing one! Reversing the perspective, if this distribution and the number of patents
granted were to remain stable over the long haul, patents granted in year 2,000 will
receive just half of their citations by 2,010, 75% by 2,020, and even by 2,050 they will
still be receiving some. Of course, we know very little about the stability of the lag
distribution (strictly speaking it is impossible to ascertain it), but there is some indication
that the lags have been shortening lately, as evidenced by the following figures for
various cohorts of citing patents:




19
  These distributions are computed by taking each citation to be an observation, rather than by taking the
average lag for each patent. The backward lags are computed from the grant year of the citing patent to the
grant year of the cited patent: we do not have the application year for patents granted prior to 1967, and
hence could not compute the lags from application to application years. For the forward lags we do have the
application year for both citing and cited patents (starting with the 1975 cited patents), and hence they are
computed from application year to application year.


                                                     17
                                            Mean Backward Lag (in years)20
                       Cohort                by citations          by citing patents
                       1975-77                   15.22                    14.30
                       1983-85                   16.44                    15.22
                       1989-91                   15.96                    14.52
                       1997-99                   14.08                    12.66


Thus, starting in the early 1980s the backward citation lag has shortened significantly (by
over 2 years). As discussed further below, however, this trend could simply be due to the
fact that the rate of patenting has accelerated since then, meaning that the “target”
population to cite is, on average, younger than it used to be.


         Turning now to forward citation lags, Figure 11 shows the frequency distribution
of lags for patents from selected application years. An interesting feature of these
distributions is that they are quite flat, particularly those for the earlier years. This is
simply the result of the steep rise both in the number of citations made per patent and in
the number of patents granted (and hence citing). Take the distribution for 1975 patents:
after the first 3 – 4 years, and as time advances, these patents should have been getting
fewer citations. In fact though, the number of citations that the 1975 patents received did
not fall, because the number of citations made by later patents kept rising (and among
others they were citing the 1975 patents), and the number of citing patents kept growing.
These trends compensated for the fact that the 1975 were getting older and hence
becoming less likely to be cited. Of course, as the distribution approaches the maximum
lag possible (of 24 years for the 1975 patents), the number of citations has to fall because
of truncation.


         Another feature of interest is that it took over 10 years for the 1975 patents to
receive 50% of their (forward) citations. Thus, even with truncation it is clear that the
citation process is indeed a lengthy one, however one looks at it. It is therefore imperative

20
  The mean lag “by citation” is computed by taking the lag of each citation to be an observation and
computing the mean for all of the citations; the mean lag “by citing patent” means that we first compute the



                                                    18
to take quite a wide time window in order to get significant coverage of forward citations.
This does not imply that citation analysis has to be confined to old patents, but that one
needs to carefully control for timing in using citations.


II.8 “Self” Citations
         One of the interesting issues in this context is whose patents are cited, and in
particular, to what extent they cite previous inventions patented by the same assignee (we
refer to these as “self citations”), rather than patents of other, unrelated assignees. This
has important implications, inter alia, for the study of spillovers: presumably citations to
patents that belong to the same assignee represent transfers of knowledge that are mostly
internalized, whereas citations to patents of “others” are closer to the pure notion of
(diffused) spillovers.


         We compute the percentage of self-citations made as follows: for each patent that
has an assignee code we count the number of citations that it made to (previous) patents
that have the same assignee code, and we divide the count by the total number of citations
that it made.21 This is in fact a lower bound, because the assignee code variable starts
only in 1969, and hence for citations to patents granted earlier we cannot establish
whether they are self-citations or not.22 We also compute an upper bound, dividing the
count of self-citations by the number of citations that have an assignee code, rather than
by the total number of citations.23


         The mean percentage of self-citations made is 11% for the lower bound, and
13.6% for the upper bound. However, there are wide differences across technological

mean lag for each citing patent, and then take the mean for all citing patents.
21
   We exclude from the computation citing patents that are unassigned (about 25% of patents), since by
definition there is no “match” possible to any other assignee of the cited patents.
22
   There is a further reason for this to be a lower bound: the assignee code is not “consolidated”, that is, the
same firm may appear in different patent documents under various, slightly different names, one assignee
may be a subsidiary of the other, etc. Thus, if for example we were to compute the percentage of self-
citations using the Compustat CUSIPs (after the match) rather than the assignee codes, we would surely
find higher figures.
23
   This is presumably an upper bound because we know that self-citations occur earlier on average than
citations to unrelated assignees; given that patents with missing assignee codes are relatively old (i.e.




                                                       19
fields, as shown in Figure 12 (computed for the lower bound). The fact that the
percentages are much higher in Chemical and in Drugs and Medical corresponds well
with what we know about these fields: innovation is concentrated there in very large
firms, and hence the likelihood that they will cite internally is higher.24 Others and
Mechanical are at the other extreme: in those fields innovation is much more widely
spread among highly heterogeneous assignees (in terms of size, types of products, etc.),
and hence self-citations are on average less likely.


         Self-citations occur much more rapidly than citations to other patents: for the
cohort of patents granted in 1997-99, the overall mean backward citation lag was of 14.1
years, and the median of 9 years. For self-citations the mean was of just 6.5 years, and the
median 5 years. These differences are part of a more general phenomenon: citations to
and from patents that are “closer” in terms of geography, technology, or institutional
belonging occur earlier than citations to and from patents that are further removed along
those dimensions (see Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 1993).


         Figure 13 examines how the fraction of self-citations made has varied over time.
There was a gradual increase over the decade of the 1970s. After 1980 there are some
movements up and down but no clear trend. This may reflect some kind of increase in
competition in invention in the last two decades, but that is pure conjecture at this point.
More detailed examination of these variations in self-citation rates might provide
valuable insights into the cumulative and competitive aspects of dynamic innovation.


         Just as we have looked at the fraction of self-citations made; we can also examine
the fraction of the citations received by a given patent that come from the same assignee.
Self-citations received are, however, potentially distorted by the truncation of our data
series, interacting with the phenomena that self-citations come sooner. That is, because
they come sooner, self-citations are less affected by truncation than non-self-citations,


granted prior to 1969), citations to them would be less likely to be self-citations. However, the issue raised
in the previous footnote still remains open, and hence this is not an upper bound in that sense.
24
   There is a huge difference between “Drugs” and “Medical” in this respect: the percentage of self-citations
in Drugs is about 20%, that in the remaining D&M sub-categories just 8%.


                                                     20
causing the calculated percentage of self-citations received for recent cohorts to be biased
upward. This is seen clearly in Figure 14, which is analogous to Figure 13 but calculated
on the basis of percent of self-citations received. It shows the same slight upward trend
in the 1970s, followed by a leveling off, and then a rapidly rising rate as we approach the
truncation of the data in the 1990s.


II.9 Measures of “Generality” and “Originality”
         A wide variety of citations-based measures can be defined and computed in order
to examine different aspects of the patented innovations and their links to other
innovations. We have computed and integrated into the data two such measures,
“Generality” and “Originality,” as suggested in Trajtenberg, Jaffe and Henderson, 1997:25


                                       Generalityi = 1 − ∑ j sij2 ,
                                                               ni




where sij denotes the percentage of citations received by patent i that belong to patent
class j, out of ni patent classes (note that the sum is the Herfindahl concentration index).
Thus, if a patent is cited by subsequent patents that belong to a wide range of fields the
measure will be high, whereas if most citations are concentrated in a few fields it will be
low (close to zero). Thinking of forward citations as indicative of the impact of a patent, a
high generality score suggests that the patent presumably had a widespread impact, in
that it influenced subsequent innovations in a variety of fields (hence the “generality”
label). “Originality” is defined the same way, except that it refers to citations made. Thus,
if a patent cites previous patents that belong to a narrow set of technologies the originality
score will be low, whereas citing patents in a wide range of fields would render a high
score.26




25
   Note that these measures depend of course upon the patent classification system: a finer classification
would render higher measures, and conversely for a coarser system.
26
   As indicated earlier, we included in the data a variable indicating the % of citations made by each patent
to patents granted since 1963, which in the present context means the percentage of cited patents that have a
patent class. Since “originality” was computed on the basis of these patents only (rather than on the total
number of citations made), this is an indicator of the extent to which the computation is accurate.


                                                     21
         These measures tend to be positively correlated with the number of citations made
(for originality) or received (for generality): highly cited patents will tend to have higher
generality scores, and likewise patents that make lots of citations would display on
average higher originality. In effect, where there are more citations, there is a built-in
tendency to cover more patent classes. How one thinks about this tendency is to some
extent a matter of interpretation. To some degree, the tendency of highly cited patents to
also have a more general impact is presumably real. It can, however, lead to potentially
misleading inferences, particularly when comparing patents or groups of patents that have
different numbers of citations because they come from different cohorts and are therefore
subject to differing degrees of truncation. If one views the observed distribution of
citations across patent classes as a draw from an underlying multinomial distribution,
then it can be shown that the observed concentration is biased upward (and hence the
generality and originality measures are biased downward), due to the integer nature of the
observed data. In effect, it is likely that many of the classes in which we observe zero
citations do have some non-zero expected rate of citation. The resulting bias will be
particularly large when the total number of citations is small. Appendix 2 (due to
Bronwyn Hall) shows how to calculate the magnitude of the bias, and hence bias-adjusted
measures, under fairly simple assumptions about the structure of the process.


         Figure 15 shows the averages over time for both generality and originality. The
steep decline in generality at the end of the period is almost surely due to truncation,
which reduces the number of observed citations; the adjustment described in the previous
paragraph mitigates but does not eliminate this decline. The decline remaining after
adjustment may be due to the tendency of citations that are “nearer” in technology space
to come sooner, so that even after adjusting for the number of citations, generality is
biased downward when based only on “fast” citations.27 Figures 16 and 17 present these
measures over time by technological fields. The traditional fields Mechanical and Others
are at the bottom in terms of generality, whereas Computers and Communications is at

27
  The slight decline in the mean originality during 1996-97 may also be due to truncation, in the sense that
the number of citations made may be indicative of the “complexity” of the patent, and hence patents that
are granted relatively fast probably make fewer citations; since originality is correlated with number of




                                                     22
the top, with Chemical and Electrical and Electronics in between. Surprisingly perhaps,
Drugs and Medical is also at the bottom, both in terms of generality and of originality.
However, a closer look reveals that the sub-category of Biotechnology stands much
higher than the rest of D&M both in generality and originality, and hence that the
aggregation in this case may be misleading in terms of these measures. Also somewhat
surprisingly, Chemical (that we regard as a traditional field) stands high in both measures,
being second to C&C in generality, and even higher than C&C in terms of originality.


         The fact that Computers and Communications scores highest in terms of
generality fits well the notion that this field may be playing the role of a “General
Purpose Technology” (see Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995), and its high originality
score reinforces the view that it is breaking traditional molds even within the realm of
innovation. Likewise, the low scores of Mechanical and Others correspond to
expectations, in terms of the low innovativeness and restricted impact of those fields. In
that sense, this constitutes a sort of “validation” of the measures themselves. At the same
time, we should be aware of the fact that both originality and generality depend to a large
extent upon the patent classification system, and hence there is an inherent element of
arbitrariness in them. Thus, a “finer” classification within a field, in terms of number of
3-digit patent classes available, will likely result ceteris paribus in higher originality and
generality measures, and one may justly regard that just as an artifact of the classification
system (that may be the case for example with Chemicals). In terms of field averages,
there is the further issue of degree of heterogeneity within fields, as for example with
Drugs and Medical. Further exploration of these issues, and the possible role played by
the calculation bias in them, is a fruitful area for future research.


II.10 Number of Claims
         A further item in our data is “number of claims”, as it appears in the front page of
each patent. The claims specify in detail the “components”, or building blocks of the
patented invention, and hence their number may be indicative of the “scope” or “width”


citations made, and for those years we have only those patents that were granted relatively quickly (by
application year), we would observe indeed a decline in originality for recent years.


                                                    23
of the invention (see for example Lanjouw and Schankerman, 1999). The average number
of claims made has risen substantially over time, from 9.3 in 1974 to 14.7 in 1996. Figure
18 shows the averages by technological fields over time: traditional fields make fewer
claims than advanced fields, with Chemical crossing from high to low in the 1990s. The
differences are very substantial: the average for Computer and Communications (the top
field) in 1995 was 16.8, the average for Others (the lowest) just 13.7.


II.11 Match to Compustat
        In order to take full advantage of the wealth of information contained in patent
data, one needs to be able to link patents to outside data of various sorts – otherwise the
analysis would be self-contained, with all the limitations that implies. Thus for example
the information on the location of inventors (state/city/counties for U. S. inventors,
country/city for foreign ones) allows one to place each patent in geography space, and
hence link out with location-specific data. Similarly for data items such as technological
field, time, and institutional belonging.


        One of the potentially most fruitful linkages is through the identity of the
assignee: if one could relate each patent to the corporation that owns it, and bring
together data about the corporations and about the patents, the scope of analysis would be
greatly expanded. This is indeed what Zvi Griliches envisioned in setting up the NBER
R&D, patents, and productivity project in the early 1980s (see Griliches, 1984). At that
time though the only data item available about patents was patent counts by assignees,
which were then attached to Compustat. Linking out our data allows one to use all the
patent data fields, not just their count.


        As already mentioned, about 80% of patents are assigned to non-government
organizations, which are in fact mostly corporations, and our data contains both the name
of the assignee, and an assignee code. The trouble is that there are about 150,000 such
names, and their corresponding code is internal to the patent system, with no outside
linkages. We undertook to match these assignee names to the names of corporations as
they appear in Compustat, which comprises all firms traded in the U. S. stock market



                                             24
(about 36,000 of them). This was one of the most difficult and time-consuming tasks of
the entire data construction project.


        Figure 19 shows the percentage of patents matched, out of the total number of
assigned patents. Not surprisingly, the percentage of foreign patents matched is very
small, given that the overwhelming majority of foreign assignees are not traded in the U.
S. stock market and hence do not appear in Compustat. For U. S. patents, though, the
percentage is quite high up to the early 1980s, hovering around 70%. The steep decline
from then on probably reflects both the fact that the match was done for the 1989
Compustat file, and the rapidly changing composition of patents. Indeed, and as
mentioned above, the technological composition of patents has changed quite drastically
since the mid-1980s, with traditional fields declining to less than 50% of all patents. It is
quite likely that these changes have been accompanied by a large turnover in the
composition of assignees, with many of the new entrants not yet traded by 1989, the year
of the match.



                         III. “Benchmarking” of Citation Data
III.1 Overview
        Although the previous section have demonstrated intriguing trends and contrasts
visible in data on patent citations, it must be acknowledged that there is no natural scale
or value measurement associated with citations data. Standing by itself, the fact that a
given patent has received 10 or 100 citations does not tell you whether that patent is
“highly” cited. Intrinsically, information on patent citations is meaningful only when used
comparatively. That is, the evaluation of the patent intensity of an invention, an inventor,
an institution, or any other group of patents, can only be made with reference to some
“benchmark” citation intensity.


        The determination of the appropriate benchmark is complicated by several
phenomena that are inherent to the patent citations data. First, as already mentioned, the

28
 Bronwyn Hall was the main driving force behind the matching process, and it is only thanks to her
monumental efforts that this task was accomplished.


                                                   25
number of citations received by any given patent is truncated in time because we only
know about the citations received so far. More importantly, patents of different ages are
subject to differing degrees of truncation. For example, it is not obvious whether a 1990
patent that received 5 citations by 1999 should be thought of as more or less highly cited
than a 1985 patent that received 10 citations by 1999. Second, differences in Patent
Office practices across time or across technological areas may produce differences in
citation intensities that are unrelated to the true impact for which we use citations as a
proxy. As shown above, the average patent issued in 1999 made over twice as many
citations as the average patent issued in 1975 (10.7 versus 4.7 citations). At first blush,
this would seem to imply something about the meaning or value of a given number of
citations.


        The problem created by the increase in the number of citations made per patent is
exacerbated by the fact that the number of patents issued has also been rising steeply
since 1983. Even if each patent issued made the same number of citations as before, the
increase in the universe of citing patents would increase the total number of citations
made. The combination of more patents making more citations suggests a kind of citation
“inflation” that may mean that later citations are less significant than earlier ones. As a
result, if we compare the citations received by a 1994 patent 5 years forward (i.e. up to
1999) with those received by a 1975 patent up to 1980, we cannot be sure that these totals
are comparable. Thus even such “fixed-window” comparisons—which do not suffer
from truncation bias—may be hard to make.


        In addition to varying over time, the number of citations made per patent varies by
technological field (See Figure 7). Thus, one might suspect that a given number of
citations received from patents in Computers and Communications (which typically make
fewer citations than those in other fields) is indicative of a larger impact than the same
number of citations received from other fields. On the other hand, differences in citations
received per patent (across time, fields, etc.) could be indicative of “real” differences in
technological impact (see Figure 8).




                                            26
        The way in which we treat any of these systematic differences in citation
intensities when developing appropriate benchmarks for analyzing citation data will
depend on maintained hypotheses as to which of them are to be regarded as “real” and
which as “artifacts.” For example, we might believe that the increase in the rate of
patenting represents a real increase in the rate of invention, so that its contribution to
changes in the number of citations received by patents is part of the real technological
impact of the cited patents. At the same time, we might believe that the increase in the
number of citations made per patent is a pure artifact of changes in patent examination
practices, so that the best measure of “real” technological impact would be citation
intensity “purged” of any differences due to the changing citation propensity. If so, we
would want to control for the latter, but not make any adjustment for changes in the rate
of patenting. Or we may be agnostic, and try to infer the nature of these effects by
constructing citation-based impact measures with and without first purging the citations
data of these effects, and then examining which measures are more highly correlated with
non-patent indicators of technological or economic impact.


        This discussion assumes implicitly that it is possible to identify and quantify the
changes in citation intensity that are associated with the different effects. But this is
actually harder than it may seem. Consider, for example, the increase in the average
number of citations made per patent. It might seem that if each patent is making twice as
many citations, that means each citation is “worth” half as much. But since the stock of
patents available to be cited has been growing at a rapid (and accelerating) rate, this is not
clear. Since there are so many potentially cited patents “competing” for the citations, you
might think that getting one means as much as it did before, not withstanding the increase
in the flow of citations.


        To begin to think systematically about this set of issues, consider the following
stylized facts that hold in our data: (i) the average number of citations received by patents
in their first 5 years has been rising over time; (ii) the average number of citations made
per patent has been rising over time (see Figure 6); and (iii) the observed citation-lag
distributions for older cohorts have fatter “tails” than those of more recent cohorts (see



                                             27
Figure 11). Considering the first fact in isolation, one might conclude either that more
recent cohorts are more “fertile,” or that the citation-lag distribution has shifted to the left
(citations are coming sooner than they used to.) Considering the second fact in isolation,
one might conclude that there has been an artifactual change in the propensity to make
citations.29 The last fact, taken by itself, seems to suggest that the citation-lag distribution
has shifted to the right. Without further assumptions one cannot tell apart which of these
competing scenarios is “correct”, and hence one cannot make any statistical adjustments
to the citations data, including adjustments for truncation of lifetime citations.


         In this section we discuss two generic approaches to these problems. The first,
which we call the fixed-effects approach, involves scaling citation counts by dividing
them by the average citation count for a group of patents to which the patent of interest
belongs.30 This approach treats a patent that received say 11 citations and belongs to a
group in which the average patent received 10 citations, as equivalent to a patent that
received 22 citations, but happens to belong to a group in which the average was 20.
Likewise, such a patent would be regarded as inferior to a patent receiving just 3 citations
but for which the group average was only 1. The advantage of this approach is that it does
not require one to make any assumptions about the underlying processes that may be
driving differences in citation intensities across groups. The disadvantage is that,
precisely because no structure is assumed, it does not distinguish between differences that
are “real” and those that are likely to be artifactual.


         The second or “quasi-structural” approach attempts to distinguish the multiple
effects on citation rates via econometric estimation.31 Once the different effects have
thereby been quantified, the researcher has the option to adjust the raw citation counts to
remove one or more of the estimated effects. If the assumptions inherent in the
econometric estimation are correct, this approach permits the extraction of a stronger
signal from the noisy citation data than the non-structural, fixed-effects approach.

29
   Another, more subtle interpretation could be that the rising propensity to cite is itself merely a reflection
that more recent cohorts have been more fertile.
30
   Empirical analyses based on this approach include Henderson, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 1998, and Jaffe and
Lerner, 2001.



                                                      28
III.2 The “fixed-effects” approach
         The fixed-effects approach assumes that all sources of systematic variation over
time in citation intensities are artifacts that should be removed before comparing the
citation intensity of patents from different cohorts. That is, we “re-scale” all citation
intensities, and express them as ratios to the mean citation intensity for patents in the
same cohort.32 If we want to compare a 1990 patent with 2 citations to a 1985 patent with
4 citations, we divide each by the average number of citations received by other patents
in the cohort. This rescaling purges the data of effects due to truncation, effects due to
any systematic changes over time in the propensity to cite, and effects due to changes in
the number of patents making citations. Unfortunately, it also purges the data of any
systematic movements over time in the importance or impact of patent cohorts. It is
possible that the typical 1985 patent has more citations than the typical 1990 patent
(partly) because it is indeed more “fertile”. Conversely, it could be that the 1990 patent is
in fact “better” than the 1985 patent, once the effects of truncation are removed. Under
the fixed-effects approach we do not attempt to separate “real” differences among cohorts
from those due to truncation and propensity to cite effects, so any “real” effects that may
be there are lost.


         An issue arises as to how to treat technological fields in applying the fixed-effects
correction. As with any fixed-effect approach, one can “take out” year effects, field
effects, and/or year-field interaction effects.33 As discussed above, there are systematic
differences across fields in the frequency of citations made and received. If one believes
that such effects are “real,” then it is not appropriate to remove them when rescaling. To
the extent that they are artifacts of, for example, the disciplinary training of patent


31
   An example of analysis based on this approach is Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2001.
32
   Henderson, Jaffe and Trajtenberg examined the citation intensity of university patents by comparing it to
the citation intensity of corporate patents from the same year. Since most patents are corporate patents, this
is similar in effect to comparing the university patents to the overall mean.
33
   An obvious question to ask is why we propose to rescale the citations data rather than simply including
the corresponding fixed-effect in whatever regression or other statistical analysis we are going to use the
citations in. The reason is that such analyses typically have as a unit of observation entities that in any
given year hold patents from many different cohorts. Hence the rescaling described here does not
correspond to a simple fixed effects regression.


                                                     29
examiners in different fields, one may want to remove them. Further, the empirical lag
distribution of citations vary by technological field, which means that the extent of
truncation of a patent of given vintage depends on its technological field.


         Tables 2 shows the average number of citations received by patents of each cohort
(Table 2a according to application year and 2b by grant year) in each technological field,
and the overall means. In order to remove all year, field and year-field effects, one can
take the number of citations received by a given patent and divide by the corresponding
year-field mean. Alternatively, to remove only pure year effects, one can divide by the
yearly means (calculated without regard to field). Finally, one can envision the removal
of year effects and year-field interaction effects but not the main field effect. This can be
accomplished by dividing the entries in Table 2 by the overall mean for each
technological category (bottom row). Each cell in the resulting matrix is then the year-
field mean relative to the overall mean for the field. If actual citation counts are then
divided by the appropriate entry from this adjusted matrix, overall differences in mean
intensities across fields are not removed. This permits the correction for truncation to
vary by field, while allowing the overall average differences in citation intensity by fields
to remain in the rescaled data.34


         To summarize, the fixed-effects rescaling aims to increase the signal-to-noise
ratio in the data and allow comparability of citation counts over time by removing from
the data variance components that are associated with truncation and also with possibly
artifactual aspects of the citations generation process. Unfortunately, there is no way to
do so without also removing variance components that might be real. The only way to
tune this more finely is to put more structure on the problem, with a model that, under
additional assumptions, allows separate identification of different sources of variation.



34
   Note that we have calculated these rescaling factors by the technological field of the cited patent. One
could imagine constructing similar factors by technological field of the citing patent. Indeed, one might
believe that variations by field of the citing patent are more likely to be pure artifacts than variations by
field of the cited patent. As a practical matter, rescaling by the field of the citing patent is computationally
much more difficult. The rescaling factors that we propose can be applied directly to the total citations




                                                       30
III.3 The “quasi-structural” approach
         If the citation-lag distribution, the fertility of different patent cohorts, and the
propensity to cite have all been varying over time, there is no general way to identify
separately the contribution of each of these to variations in observed citation rates. The
fixed-effects approach accepts this reality and simply removes variance components that
are likely to be contaminated to some degree. To go any further one must impose
additional structure, and in particular one must commit to some identifying assumptions.
The assumptions that we make here are as follows:
    •    Proportionality: the shape of the lag distribution over time is independent of the
    total number of citations received, and hence more highly cited patents are more
    highly cited at all lags.

    •    Stationarity: the lag distribution does not change over time, i.e., does not depend
    on the cohort (application or grant year) of the cited patent.

         These assumptions accomplish two objectives. First, stationarity means that we
can estimate a time-invariant citation-lag distribution, which tells us the fraction of
lifetime citations that are received during any specified time interval in the life of the
patent. With proportionality, the observed citation total at a point in time for any patent
can then be corrected for truncation, simply by “scaling up” the observed citation total by
dividing it by the fraction of the lifetime citations that are predicted to occur during the
lag interval that was actually observed. Second, these assumptions allow us to estimate
changes in the propensity to cite over time in a way that controls for the citation lag
distribution, as well as for changes in the “fertility” of the cited cohorts (at least to some
extent). In principle, this allows a researcher who believes that the “citing year” effects
are artifactual but “cited” year effects are real to remove the former but not the latter. In
contrast, the fixed-effects approach implicitly takes out both.


         Of course, we cannot know whether these identifying assumptions are really
valid. As to proportionality, we found some (still weak) supporting evidence in the fact


received by a given patent. Rescaling factors tied to the field of the citing patent would have to be applied
individually to each citation rather than simply to each cited patent.


                                                      31
that there is virtually zero correlation between the average forward citation lag per patent,
and the number of citations received.35 That is, the average citation lag for patents with
few citations is virtually identically to the mean lag for patents that receive lots of
citations. Stationarity is a more complex issue, since the observed citation-lag distribution
could shift over time for different reasons, and without making other identifying
assumptions it is difficult to test this in data while other things are also changing over
time.


         To implement this approach, let Pks be total patents observed in technological
field k in year s. Let Ckst be the total number of citations to patents in year s and
technology field k, coming from patents in year t. The ratio Ckst/Pks is then the average
number of citations received by each s-k patent from the aggregate of all patents in year t.
Consistent with our proportionality assumption, we model this citation frequency as a
multiplicative function of cited year (s) effects, citing-year (t) effects, field (k) effects,
and citation lag effects. Denoting the citation lag (t-s) as L, we can write this as:


                                  Ckst/Pks=α0’ αs’ αt’ αk’ exp[fk(L)]
or, equivalently,
                                  log[Ckst/Pks]=α0 + αt + αk + fk(L)


where αj=log(αj’), and fk(L) indicates some function, perhaps varying by technological
field, that describes the shape of the citation-lag distribution. It could be a parametric
function such as the double exponential used by Caballero and Jaffe (1993) and Jaffe and
Trajtenberg (1999), or it could be different proportions estimated for each lag. We impose
the constraint that the summation of exp[fk(L)] over L (L=1...35) is unity. We also
normalize αt=1 = αk=1 = 0.36




35
 The correlation coefficient is of 0.03 for all patents, and of 0.015 for patents with 5 citations or more.
 Note that since L=t-s, all of the αs and αt may not be identified, depending on the functional form of fk(L).
36

We discuss this further below.


                                                     32
           This equation can be estimated by OLS, at least for some forms of fk(L), or by
non-linear methods, as in Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1999). The α parameters can be
interpreted as the proportional difference in citation intensity for a given year or field
relative to the base group. These parameters can therefore be used directly to adjust or
normalize observed citations for these effects, if desired. The estimated fk(L) can be used
to adjust patent totals for differential truncation across cohorts.


           Implementation of this approach is illustrated in Table 3, which updates through
1999 estimates originally presented in Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001). In this model,
fk(L) is given by:


                                            fk(L)=exp(-β1kL)(1-exp(-β2k))


where the parameter β1k captures the depreciation or obsolescence of knowledge and β2k
captures its diffusion.37 Because this function is non-linear, it is possible to identify
distinct αs and αt effects, at least in principle. In practice, we found that estimation was
difficult with a full set of unconstrained cited year and citing year effects. Because we
believe that the true “fertility” of invention changes only slowly, we grouped the cited
years and estimated separate αs coefficients for five-year intervals. The αt effects are
allowed to vary every year.


           The estimates in the first column constrain the diffusion parameter β2 to be the
same across different fields k, while allowing the obsolescence parameter β1 to vary. The
second column reverses this, holding obsolescence constant but allowing diffusion to
vary. The column labeled “Full Model” allows both of these parameters to vary across
fields. Although allowing the βcoefficients to vary does not have a large effect on the
overall fit, it does affect somewhat the estimated shape of the lag distributions; this can
be seen in summary form in the variations in the simulated modal citation lags shown in
the bottom of the table. We will focus herein on the Full Model results in the last column


37
     For a motivation of this parameterization, see Caballero and Jaffe, 1993.


                                                       33
         The results show that the citing year effects are indeed significant.38 After
controlling for the effects of the lag distribution, the number of patents available to be
cited, and cited year fertility, the number of citations made roughly tripled between 1975
and 1995. Note that this is the combination of effects due to the increased number of
citing patents and the increased rate of citations made per patent. The part that is due to
the increased rate of citations made per patent, because it has been purged of other
effects, can be thought of as a measure of changes in the “pure” propensity to make
citations. To focus on this, Table 4 takes the series of increasing citing year effects and
decomposes it between the rise in the number of citing patents, and the pure propensity to
cite effect. We see in Column 2 that the number of citing patents by application year
peaks in 1995 in our data at about twice the number in 1975.39 Column 3 is just the αt
coefficients from Table 3. Column 4 divides this series by the index of the number of
potentially citing patents by application year (Column 2), thus removing the effect due to
the rising number of citing patents. We find that the pure propensity to cite was also
rising until 1995, accounting for about a 50% increase in citations made.


         In looking at totals of citations made, one could similarly divide the number made
by the entry in the table that corresponds to the application year of the patent(s) of
interest.


         It is interesting to compare this estimated “pure” propensity to cite effect with the
“raw” change in the average number of citations made by each patent.                              The latter
increased by about 100% between 1975 and 1995 (from about 5 to about 10). Our
estimates say that roughly half of this increase was due to rising “pure” propensity to cite,
and the other half was due to the fact that there were many more patents out there
available to be cited.



38
  There is less variation in the cited year effects, and no clear pattern over time.
39
  This was already seen in Figure 1. To emphasize again, the decline in the application year numbers in
the late 1990s is due to the truncation in the application-year series based on patents granted by the end of




                                                      34
         After 1995, both the number of patents and the estimated overall citing year effect
decline. Indeed, the citing year coefficients from the regression decline faster than the
number of patents, causing the rise in the pure propensity to cite to reverse itself. Now,
this latter effect is not due to truncation. It says that the patents issued in the late 1990s
made fewer citations, after controlling for the size and fertility of the stock of patents
available to be cited, than those before.40 This finding is very consistent with the general
notion that the patent office has been overwhelmed by the dramatic upsurge in patent
applications in the last few years, with patent examiners having less time to review each
application, and, therefore, being less thorough in finding prior art that should be cited.


         The series presented in Columns 3 or 4 of Table 4 can be interpreted as
“deflators” that can be used to purge citation totals of effects due to the rising tide of
citations made. For a given patent or set of patents, one can divide the number of citations
received from each application year by the appropriate entry in the table. Dividing counts
of citations by the deflator in Column 3 removes all citing year effects. Dividing by
Column 4 removes only the effect due to the changing propensity to cite, thus implicitly
treating the effect due to the rising patenting rate as real. Either way, the resulting
deflated totals of citations received can be interpreted as “real 1975 citations,” in the
same way that nominal dollar amounts divided by a base year 1975 price index are
interpreted as real 1975 dollars.41


         If one were interested in “deflating” the number of citations made by a given
patent or set of patents, one does not need to worry about effects due to the rising number
of patents. But one might be interested in removing the pure propensity to cite effect.
This could be accomplished by dividing the number of observed citations made by the
entry in Column 4 corresponding to the application year of the patent(s) of interest.



1999. Once the rest of the applications from the late 1990s are processed, we will no doubt see a continued
increase in successful applications per year.
40
   This effect is even visible in the raw averages of citations made per patent, which also turn downward in
the late 1990s after the earlier increases already noted.




                                                    35
          Analogous “deflators” derived from Table 3 can be used across technology fields,
if one believes that the average difference in citation rates across technology fields is an
artifact of field practices rather than a real difference across fields in knowledge flows.
One can simply “deflate” citation totals by dividing by the αk coefficients for the different
fields. This would have the interpretation of converting citation totals into equivalent
numbers of citations for the “Other” technology field (the base group, whose α-
coefficient is normalized to unity). We have not employed such adjustments in our work,
because we believe that field effects are likely to contain a significant real component.
But this is a topic for further research. If field effects are real, then deflating citation
totals by field effects ought to decrease the signal to noise ratio in citations data,
implying that the correlation of citations with other indicators of technology impact (e.g.
market value) ought to be reduced by deflation. If the opposite is true, it would suggest
that much of the variance in the citation intensity across fields is artifactual.


          The estimates in Table 3 can also be used to correct the citation totals of any
given patent for truncation. As shown in Figure 20, the estimates for β1 and β2 can be
used to construct the citation-lag distribution by field (normalized to unity over 35 years),
after removing cited and citing year effects. The contrast between Figure 20 and Figure
11 illustrates the dramatic impact of the citing and cited year effects on the shape of the
citation-lag distributions. The variations across field are also quite apparent. Citations in
Computers and Communications come the fastest, followed by Electronics. Drugs and
Medical and “Other” are the slowest, with Chemicals and Mechanical falling in the
middle. This has some effect on corrections for truncation. The estimates imply, for
example, that if we have citation data truncated at 5 years after the initial application, we
are seeing about 33% of the “lifetime” (actually, of the first 35 years) citation total for an
average C&C patent, but only 22% of the “lifetime” citations for a Drug and Medical
patent.




41
   Because is “purged” of truncation effects, the deflator in Column 4 applies (in principle) to citation totals
no matter how derived. Column 3, however, reflects the truncation by application year in our data, and so
is appropriate only for citation totals derived from within this dataset.


                                                      36
       The yearly fractions underlying Figure 20 are presented in cumulative form in
Table 5. These can be used directly to adjust citation totals, based on the observed
interval, whether the truncated or unobserved portion is at the end, at the beginning (cited
patents applied for before 1975), or both. For example, for a patent applied for in 1973,
we observe only years 2 through 25 of the citation lag distribution (1975-1999). If this
were a Chemical patent, we see from Table 5 that for the typical Chemical patent, 87% of
the estimated or predicted “lifetime” citations occur in this interval (.906 - .037), so we
would divide the observed total by 0.87 to yield the truncation-adjusted total.


       Finally, under the proportionality assumption that we have made, all corrections
or adjustments are purely multiplicative. This makes it possible, in principle, to correct
or adjust for any combination of effects. If, for example, one wants totals corrected for
pure propensity-to-cite effects and for truncation, one would divide the number of
citations received from each year by column 4 of Table 4, and then take the resulting total
for each patent and normalize using Table 5. If one also wanted to remove technology
field effects, one could then divide by the estimated αk reported in the last column of
Table 3. Of course, none of these adjustments should be taken as gospel or applied
mechanically; we present them to illustrate the approach and encourage further research
on the best ways to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio in these data.




                                    IV. Conclusion
       It has been a major theme of the NBER since its inception that good economic
research depends on the generation of appropriate and reliable economic data. It is
generally agreed that the 21st century economy is one in which knowledge—particularly
the technological knowledge that forms the foundation for industrial innovation—is an
extremely important economic commodity. The inherently abstract nature of knowledge
makes this a significant measurement challenge. We believe that patents and patent
citation data offer tremendous potential for giving empirical content to theorizing about
the role of knowledge in the modern economy. We hope that by constructing the NBER



                                            37
Patent Citations Data File, demonstrating some of the uses to which it can be put, and
making it available to other researchers, we can provide a broader and deeper
measurement base on which to build the economics of technological change.




                                         38
                                      References


Bresnahan, T. and M. Trajtenberg, "General Purpose Technologies - Engines of
Growth?,” Journal of Econometrics, January 1995, 65(1), pp. 83-108.

Caballero, R. and A. Jaffe, "How High are the Giants' Shoulders: An Empirical
Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic
Growth," in O. Blanchard and S. Fischer, eds., National Bureau of Economic Research
Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 8, MIT Press, 1993

Griliches, Zvi, “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators,” Journal of Economic Literature
92: 630-653, 1990.

Griliches, Zvi, (ed.) R&D, Patents, and Productivity, NBER Conference Proceedings.
University of Chicago Press, 1984

Griliches, Z., Hall, B.H. and A. Pakes, "The Value of Patents as Indicators of Inventive
Activity," in P. Dasgupta and P. Stoneman, eds., Economic Policy and Technological
Performance, Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1987, 97-124.

Hall, B.H., Jaffe, A. and M. Trajtenberg, “Market Value and Patent Citations: A First
Look,” University of California, Berkeley, Dept. of Economics Working Paper No.
XXXX, August 2001.

Henderson, R., A. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg, “Universities as a Source of Commercial
Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965-1988,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 80: 119-127, 1998.

Jaffe, A., and J. Lerner, “Reinventing Public R&D: Patent Policy and the
Commercialization of National Laboratory Technologies,” Rand Journal of Economics
32, No. 1, pp 167-198 (Spring 2001)

Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M. and M. Fogarty, “Knowledge Spillovers and Patent Citations:
Evidence from A Survey of Inventors”. American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, May 2000, pp. 215-218.

Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M. and R. Henderson, "Geographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
1993, pp. 577-598.

Jaffe, A., and M. Trajtenberg, “International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from Patent
Citations,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 1999, 8, pp. 105-136.




                                           39
Kortum, S. and J. Lerner, "Stronger Protection or Technological Revolution: What is
Behind the Recent Surge in Patenting?" Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 48 (June 1998) 247-304. Abridged version reprinted as “What is Behind the
Recent Surge in Patenting?” in Research Policy 28 (January 1999) 1-22.

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Schankerman, “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation
with Multiple Indicators,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
7345, 1999.

Pakes, Ariel and Margaret Simpson, “The Analysis of Patent Renewal Data,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomic Annual, 1991, pp. 331- 401.

Schankerman, M. and A. Pakes, “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European
Countries During the Post-1950 Period,” Economic Journal, Vol. 96, No. 384, December
1986, pp. 1052-1077.

Scherer, F.M. “Inter-Industry Technology Flows and Productivity Growth,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 64, November 1982.

Schmookler, J. Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1966.

Trajtenberg, M. "A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
Innovations," The Rand Journal of Economics, Spring 1990, 21(1), 172-187.

Trajtenberg, M., Jaffe, A. and R. Henderson, "University versus Corporate Patents: A
Window on the Basicness of Invention," Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
1997, 5 (1), pp. 19-50.




                                         40
                                             Appendix 1
                   Classification of Patent Classes into
              Technological Categories and Sub-Categories42
Cat. Category Name Sub-Cat. Sub-Category Name          Patent Classes
Code                             Code
     1      Chemical              11       Agriculture, Food, Textiles   8, 19, 71, 127, 442, 504
                                  12       Coating                       106,118, 401, 427
                                  13       Gas                           48, 55, 95, 96
                                  14       Organic Compounds             534, 536, 540, 544, 546, 548,
                                                                         549, 552, 554, 556, 558, 560,
                                                                         562, 564, 568, 570
                                   15      Resins                        520, 521, 522, 523, 524, 525,
                                                                         526, 527, 528, 530
                                   19      Miscellaneous-chemical        23, 34, 44, 102, 117, 149, 156,
                                                                         159, 162, 196, 201, 202, 203,
                                                                         204, 205, 208, 210, 216, 222,
                                                                         252, 260, 261, 349, 366, 416,
                                                                         422, 423, 430, 436, 494, 501,
                                                                         502, 510, 512, 516, 518, 585,
                                                                         588

     2    Computers &              21      Communications                178, 333, 340, 342, 343, 358,
                                                                         367, 370, 375, 379, 385, 455
         Communications                    Computer Hardware &           341, 380, 382, 395, 700, 701,
                                   22
                                           Software                      702, 704, 705, 706, 707, 708,
                                                                         709, 710, 712, 713, 714
                                   23      Computer Peripherals          345, 347
                                   24      Information Storage           360, 365, 369, 711

     3       Drugs &               31      Drugs                         424, 514
             Medical               32      Surgery & Medical             128, 600, 601, 602, 604, 606,
                                           Instruments                   607
                                   33      Biotechnology                 435, 800
                                   39      Miscellaneous-Drug&Med        351, 433, 623

     4     Electrical &            41      Electrical Devices            174, 200, 327, 329, 330, 331,
                                                                         332, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338,
            Electronic                                                   392, 439
                                   42      Electrical Lighting           313, 314, 315, 362, 372, 445
                                   43      Measuring & Testing           73, 324, 356, 374
                                   44      Nuclear & X-rays              250, 376, 378
                                   45      Power Systems                 60, 136, 290, 310, 318, 320,
                                                                         322, 323, 361, 363, 388, 429
                                   46      Semiconductor Devices         257, 326, 438, 505
                                   49      Miscellaneous-Elec.           191, 218, 219, 307, 346, 348,
                                                                         377, 381, 386



42
  Based on the Patent Classification System as of 12/31/1999. The list of patent classes as of that date
includes 8 additional new classes that are not to be found in the data: 532, 901, 902, 930, 968, 976, 984, and
987.


                                                     41
                              Appendix 1 - Continued

Cat. Category Name Sub-Cat. Sub-Category Name             Patent Classes
Code                Code
 5    Mechanical      51    Materials Processing. & 65, 82, 83, 125, 141, 142, 144,
                                  Handling                 173, 209, 221, 225, 226, 234,
                                                           241, 242, 264, 271, 407, 408,
                                                           409, 414, 425, 451, 493
                            52    Metal Working            29, 72, 75, 76, 140, 147, 148,
                                                           163, 164, 228, 266, 270, 413,
                                                           419, 420
                            53    Motors, Engines & Parts 91, 92, 123, 185, 188, 192, 251,
                                                           303, 415, 417, 418, 464, 474,
                                                           475, 476, 477
                            54    Optics                   352, 353, 355, 359, 396, 399
                            55    Transportation           104, 105, 114, 152, 180, 187,
                                                           213, 238, 244, 246, 258, 280,
                                                           293, 295, 296, 298, 301, 305,
                                                           410, 440
                            59    Miscellaneous-Mechanical 7, 16, 42, 49, 51, 74, 81, 86, 89,
                                                           100, 124, 157, 184, 193, 194,
                                                           198, 212, 227, 235, 239, 254,
                                                           267, 291, 294, 384, 400, 402,
                                                           406, 411, 453, 454, 470, 482,
                                                           483, 492, 508

  6        Others           61    Agriculture, Husbandry,     43, 47, 56, 99, 111, 119, 131,
                                  Food                        426, 449, 452, 460
                            62    Amusement Devices           273, 446, 463, 472, 473
                            63    Apparel & Textile           2, 12, 24, 26, 28, 36, 38, 57, 66,
                                                              68, 69, 79, 87, 112, 139, 223,
                                                              450
                            64    Earth Working & Wells       37, 166, 171, 172, 175, 299,
                                                              405, 507
                            65    Furniture, House Fixtures   4, 5, 30, 70, 132, 182, 211, 256,
                                                              297, 312
                            66    Heating                     110, 122, 126, 165, 237, 373,
                                                              431, 432
                            67    Pipes & Joints              138, 277, 285, 403
                            68    Receptacles                 53, 206, 215, 217, 220, 224,
                                                              229, 232, 383
                            69    Miscellaneous-Others        1, 14, 15, 27, 33, 40, 52, 54, 59,
                                                              62, 63, 84, 101, 108, 109, 116,
                                                              134, 135, 137, 150, 160, 168,
                                                              169, 177, 181, 186, 190, 199,
                                                              231, 236, 245, 248, 249, 269,
                                                              276, 278, 279, 281, 283, 289,
                                                              292, 300, 368, 404, 412, 428,
                                                              434, 441, 462, 503




                                             42
                                      Appendix 2
               A Note on the Bias in Herfindahl-type Measures
                            Based on Count Data
                                   by Bronwyn H. Hall

1. Introduction
        Measures based on citations obtained by patents in individual patent classes or
held by individual firms often suffer from bias due to the count nature of the underlying
data. The source of the bias is the fact that cells with small numbers of expected citations
have a non-zero probability that no citations will actually be observed. When this
happens, the cell is removed from the analysis, implying that measures of diversification
will be biased downward and measures of concentration will be biased upwards. In the
cases considered in the text, patent generality or originality measures take the form of
diversification measures and will therefore be biased downward when the total number of
citations to or from the patent are small. If the bias is not corrected for, patents with few
forward or backward citations will be more likely to be considered less “general” or
“original” than those with many.

       This appendix suggests a method for correcting the bias that is valid under a set of
simple but fairly general assumptions. The two key assumptions are the following:

1.     Either we treat the total number of citations (or patents) on which the measure is
       based as given (that is, we condition on them) or the number is large enough
       relative to the individual cell counts so that it can be treated as non-random.
2.     The probability that a given citation or patent falls in a cell is independent of the
       probability that it falls in another cell. That is, there is no causal connection
       between the deviation of the observed outcome from the expected outcome in a
       particular cell and what happens in another cell (other than the adding up
       constraint). We can therefore describe the probability distribution over a set of
       cells of multinomial probabilities.

Given these assumptions, we are able to compute a simple correction for the bias that
depends only on the total number of counts in the measure. This correction is large when
the number of counts is small and quickly converges to zero as the number of counts
increases.

        Mathematically, the statement of the problem is the following: Suppose a
researcher uses a Herfindahl-type measure to describe the concentration of patents or
cites across patent classes, patent holders, or some other set. Here we use patents as an
example, but all the same arguments apply to citation counts. For a set of N patents
falling into J classes, with Nj patents in each class (Nj ≥ 0, j=1,…,J), the sample
Herfindahl index (HHI) is defined by the following expression:

                                              J      Nj
                                      HHI = ∑ (           )2
                                              j =1   N



                                             43
         However, the population Herfindahl is given by

                                                        J
                                                   η = ∑ λ2j
                                                        j =1


where the λjs are the multinomial probabilities that the N patents will be classified in
each of the J classes. Under reasonable assumptions,

                                                  N j 
                                                 E  = λ j
                                                  N 

Unfortunately, this does NOT imply that

                                                E[HHI]= η

because of nonlinearity. In fact, in general the measured HHI will be biased upward when
N is small, due to Jensen’s inequality and the properties of the count distribution.

2. Computing and adjusting for the bias
       Assume a multinomial distribution with parameters (λj, j=1,…,J) for the {Nj};
then the expectation for each N 2j is the following (Johnson and Kotz, Discrete
Distributions):

                                               [ ]
                                              E N 2j = Nλ j + N ( N − 1)λ2j

Conditional on the total number of patents, N, this implies the following relation between
the estimated and true Herfindahl measure:43


                   J Nj       
                                     2
                                          J E ( N 2j ) J Nλ j + N ( N − 1)λ2j 1 N − 1 J
   E[ HHI | N ] E  ∑ 
               =                       =∑           =∑                     = +      ∑λj =
                                                                                         2

                   j =1 N              j =1 N                             N  N j =1
                                                   2                2
                                                       j =1     N
                      1 N −1
                  =     +    η
                      N   N

Note that as N ↑ ∞, E[ HHI | N ] → η , as we would expect. The bias in this estimator is



43
   Conditioning on N is innocuous unless the process that generates the total number of draws (patents or
citations) is related to the particular set of multinomial parameters with which we are working. For
example, the procedure outlined here may not be precisely valid if “general” patents (patents whose cites
are widely distributed across patent classes) are also highly cited patents. I am grateful to Tom Rothenberg
for a discussion of this point.


                                                       44
                                              1−η
                                          E[ HHI | N ] − η =
                                               N
The bias declines at a rate N as the number of counts grows and as concentration
increases. Both results are intuitive.44

         Under the assumptions given in the introduction, it is straightforward to correct
for this bias. Consider the following estimator for the Herfindahl:

                                                     N ⋅ HHI − 1
                                              ηˆ =
                                                        N −1

For a given N, and under the assumption that the underlying process is multinomial with
parameters λj, j=1,…,J, this estimator is an unbiased estimator of η:

                                       N ⋅ E[ HHI | N ] − 1 1 + ( N − 1)η − 1
                        E[ηˆ | N ] =                       =                  =η
                                              N −1                N −1

3. The generality index
   For many problems, the measure used is one minus the Herfindahl rather than the
Herfindahl itself. In particular, we define “generality” as

                                                                        2
                                                        J  N ij   
                                             Gi = 1 − ∑          
                                                      j =1 N i     

where Ni denotes the number of forward citations to a patent, and Nij is the number
received from patents in class j, and use a similar formula to measure “originality” based
on the distributions of citations made. Patents with a high value of Gi are cited across a
broad range of patent classes.

         This measure is also a biased estimate of the true measure γi=1- ηi:




44
  It is also true that standard error estimates obtained in the conventional way will be biased, but it is also
possible to compute the exact relationship between the standard error estimated from biased measures and
that estimated for the unbiased measures. The standard error of the estimated mean of the Herfindahl will
be biased downward by (N-1)/N. This is large if N is small and does not depend on the estimated
Herfindahl. An unbiased estimator for the variance of the mean Herfindahl over a set of M observations is
the following:
                                                 1 M N k ⋅Var ( HHI k )
                                                        2
                                   Var (ηˆ ) =     ∑
                                                 M k =1 ( N k − 1) 2

where HHIk is the kth biased estimate of the Herfindahl. Of course, if one uses the unbiased estimator to
form the mean, one does not need to perform this correction in addition.


                                                       45
                                   J  N ij     
                                                    2
                                                               1 + ( N i − 1)ηi  N −1
             E[Gi | N i ] = 1 − E  ∑           N i  = 1 −                  = i   γi
                                   j =1 N i                      Ni          Ni

The bias is the following:

                                                                γi
                                       E[Gi | N i ] − γ i = −
                                                                Ni

Again, the absolute size of the bias declines as the sample size increases and as generality
decreases. The generality index will be biased downward in general and this effect is
larger for small N. Appendix Figure 1 plots the bias versus the index for three values of N
(3, 10, and 100). Clearly the magnitude is largest when N is small or generality is high.

Once again, one can form an unbiased estimator of γi:

                                                     Ni
                                            γˆi =          Gi
                                                    Ni − 1

        The same arguments as the previous apply to standard error estimates of the
generality index. The true standard errors will be N/(N-1) larger than the estimated
standard errors. When the number of cites to a patent is small, generality will be
underestimated and it will be more likely that significant differences among generalities
of different patents will be found. But as we have indicated, correcting for the bias is
straightforward.


4. Additional Reference
Johnson, Norman L., and Samuel Kotz. 1969. Discrete Distributions. New York: John
Wiley and Sons.




                                                     46
                                      Table 1
        Application-Grant Lag Distribution by 3-Year Sub-periods


                                      Application Years

          1967-69   1970-72 1973-75 1976-79 1980-82 1983-85 1986-89 1990-92
  Lag                        (i) Distribution of Lags (in %)
(years)
    0       0.4       0.1      1.0        1.0     0.2      1.0      1.8    2.6
    1      11.3      19.9     40.1       32.5    18.0     26.6     40.4   40.4
    2      48.7      59.8     48.2       51.0    51.1     49.4     43.6   42.0
    3      32.0      16.2      8.0       11.9    24.1     16.7     10.6   11.1
    4       5.6       2.4      1.5        2.0     4.0      3.7      2.5    2.3
    5       1.0       0.9      0.6        0.8     1.2      1.5      0.7    0.7
    6       0.4       0.3      0.2        0.4     0.7      0.7      0.2    0.4
   7+       0.5       0.3      0.3        0.3     0.7      0.4      0.2    0.4
 Total     100.0     100.0    100.0     100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0   100.0

           (ii) Mean and Standard Deviation of the Lag, in Years

Mean        2.39     2.08      1.74      1.88    2.25     2.05    1.76    1.76
 s.d.       1.02     0.93      0.91      0.93    1.02     1.02    0.90    0.95




                                        47
                           Table 2a
Citations Received by Application Year and Technological Category

App.   Chemical Computers Drugs & Elect. & Mechanical Others All
Year            & Comm. Medical Electronics
1967     4.35      4.30     7.27    3.80     3.87      4.52 4.24
1968     4.72      4.68     7.70    4.20     4.17      4.76 4.57
1969     5.00      5.80     7.84    4.66     4.50      5.03 4.94
1970     5.55      6.56     8.37    5.40     4.85      5.44 5.46
1971     5.90      7.55     8.82    5.82     5.22      5.78 5.87
1972     6.10      8.02     9.77    6.29     5.58      6.02 6.22
1973     6.39      8.70     9.64    6.73     5.70      6.26 6.50
1974     6.42      9.34    10.58    6.80     5.91      6.54 6.74
1975     6.58     10.06     8.90    7.12     5.90      6.61 6.85
1976     6.71     10.40     9.32    7.20     5.94      6.52 6.93
1977     6.69     10.63     9.26    7.30     5.79      6.39 6.89
1978     6.57     10.62     9.20    7.11     5.80      6.28 6.82
1979     6.59     10.96     9.63    7.32     5.79      6.23 6.92
1980     6.70     11.55     9.75    7.31     5.84      6.10 7.04
1981     6.62     12.06     9.99    7.15     5.80      6.10 7.10
1982     6.49     11.77    10.04    7.22     5.82      6.18 7.11
1983     6.77     11.96    10.30    7.40     5.70      6.17 7.24
1984     6.66     12.21    10.13    7.40     5.80      6.21 7.25
1985     6.56     11.82    10.64    7.15     5.74      6.12 7.19
1986     6.32     12.01    10.44    7.23     5.66      5.99 7.14
1987     6.05     11.42     9.95    6.94     5.34      5.65 6.84
1988     5.44     11.06     9.10    6.69     5.09      5.21 6.45
1989     4.93     10.63     8.26    6.24     4.78      4.80 6.03
1990     4.39      9.75     7.59    5.73     4.38      4.35 5.53
1991     3.82      8.29     6.79    5.40     3.89      3.91 4.98
1992     3.34      7.04     5.45    4.55     3.38      3.31 4.26
1993     2.59      5.62     3.77    3.66     2.67      2.62 3.35
1994     1.71      3.96     2.18    2.60     1.87      1.81 2.34
1995     0.93      2.08     0.95    1.49     1.10      1.03 1.28
1996     0.40      0.75     0.41    0.60     0.49      0.44 0.53
1997     0.11      0.18     0.10    0.16     0.14      0.13 0.14
 All     4.62      6.44     5.99    4.75     4.17      4.46




                               48
                           Table 2b
  Citations Received by Grant Year and Technological Category

Grant Chemical Computers Drugs & Elec. & Mechanical Others      All
Year           & Comm. Medical Electronics
1963    2.86      1.98     4.89   2.21     2.77      3.36    2.90
1964    3.08      1.99     5.35   2.30     2.93      3.43    3.01
1965    3.47      2.20     5.75   2.44     3.08      3.67    3.20
1966    3.63      2.47     5.21   2.72     3.24      3.90    3.40
1967    3.71      2.92     6.40   2.89     3.39      4.07    3.61
1968    3.85      3.25     6.57   3.24     3.62      4.23    3.82
1969    4.11      3.19     6.95   3.51     3.78      4.42    4.02
1970    4.41      3.93     7.72   3.82     4.07      4.73    4.35
1971    4.85      5.20     8.71   4.59     4.41      4.93    4.83
1972    5.41      6.74     8.03   5.42     4.85      5.45    5.45
1973    5.81      7.27     8.56   5.89     5.20      5.73    5.82
1974    5.92      8.03     9.27   6.40     5.51      6.06    6.16
1975    6.17      8.65    10.20   6.78     5.80      6.40    6.54
1976    6.44      9.25     9.59   6.82     5.97      6.58    6.73
1977    6.57     10.10     9.10   7.23     5.95      6.73    6.92
1978    6.75     10.64     8.56   7.27     5.87      6.57    6.91
1979    6.76     10.11     9.27   7.32     5.90      6.42    6.92
1980    6.46     10.62     9.30   7.17     5.75      6.24    6.81
1981    6.77     10.86     9.15   7.28     5.85      6.22    6.90
1982    6.63     11.28    10.02   7.21     5.91      6.26    7.05
1983    6.72     11.56    10.14   7.26     5.96      6.24    7.10
1984    6.72     12.66    10.14   7.24     5.70      6.13    7.08
1985    6.72     11.91    10.09   7.40     5.71      6.18    7.11
1986    6.67     11.75    10.91   7.27     5.80      6.07    7.17
1987    6.59     12.07    11.46   7.38     5.80      6.08    7.33
1988    6.27     11.81    10.40   7.12     5.63      6.00    7.09
1989    5.82     11.18     9.69   6.79     5.20      5.37    6.67
1990    5.33     11.18     9.20   6.63     4.97      4.97    6.34
1991    4.84     10.26     8.64   6.14     4.58      4.66    5.87
1992    4.43     10.06     7.83   5.69     4.24      4.23    5.48
1993    3.73      9.17     6.52   5.23     3.72      3.69    4.90
1994    3.17      7.92     5.47   4.37     3.13      3.08    4.22
1995    2.37      6.05     3.85   3.50     2.50      2.40    3.30
1996    1.61      4.43     2.40   2.47     1.74      1.63    2.34
1997    0.85      2.45     1.09   1.40     0.99      0.90    1.28
1998    0.32      0.87     0.33   0.51     0.39      0.34    0.48
1999    0.03      0.06     0.02   0.05     0.03      0.03    0.04
 All    4.62      6.44     5.99   4.75     4.17      4.46




                               49
                Table 3: Estimation of Citation Probabilities

                           Constant Diffusion     Constant           Full
                                                Obsolescence       Model
                            Coef.      S.E.     Coef.    S.E.   Coef.     S.E.
Tech Field Effects (base=other)
Chemicals exc. Drugs        1.004     0.026     0.867   0.020   0.526    0.030
Computers & Comm.           2.281     0.058     1.451   0.033   1.495    0.094
Drugs & Medical             1.295     0.035     1.818   0.051   0.724    0.042
Electrical & Electronics    1.374     0.035     0.896   0.021   0.678    0.038
Mechanical                  0.937     0.026     0.742   0.019   0.444    0.025
Citing Year Effects (base=1975)
                     1976 0.742       0.036     0.812   0.038   0.871    0.040
                     1977 0.764       0.037     0.828   0.038   0.878    0.039
                     1978 0.839       0.041     0.900   0.041   0.943    0.041
                     1979 0.905       0.044     0.962   0.043   0.997    0.042
                     1980 0.956       0.045     1.008   0.044   1.034    0.041
                     1981 0.967       0.048     1.010   0.047   1.026    0.043
                     1982 1.022       0.052     1.059   0.050   1.064    0.045
                     1983 1.010       0.055     1.037   0.051   1.030    0.045
                     1984 1.110       0.061     1.130   0.056   1.111    0.048
                     1985 1.230       0.070     1.243   0.063   1.209    0.053
                     1986 1.360       0.080     1.362   0.071   1.312    0.059
                     1987 1.545       0.094     1.530   0.083   1.459    0.069
                     1988 1.728       0.111     1.692   0.097   1.600    0.079
                     1989 1.855       0.123     1.800   0.106   1.684    0.085
                     1990 1.931       0.132     1.856   0.112   1.724    0.090
                     1991 2.018       0.143     1.919   0.120   1.769    0.096
                     1992 2.256       0.165     2.119   0.137   1.940    0.109
                     1993 2.551       0.195     2.365   0.159   2.151    0.127
                     1994 3.053       0.241     2.799   0.197   2.529    0.155
                     1995 3.947       0.321     3.583   0.261   3.218    0.205
                     1996 3.382       0.284     3.033   0.227   2.709    0.180
                     1997 2.816       0.246     2.495   0.193   2.217    0.152
                     1998 0.701       0.069     0.612   0.054   0.542    0.044
                     1999 0.030       0.003     0.026   0.002   0.023    0.002
Cited Year Effects (base=1963-64)
                 1965-69    0.635     0.018     0.710   0.022   0.814    0.021
                 1970-74    0.637     0.018     0.741   0.022   0.886    0.029
                 1975-79    0.602     0.022     0.724   0.027   0.911    0.038



                                        50
                 1980-84 0.555       0.027            0.700        0.033    0.926        0.049
                 1985-89 0.511       0.032            0.686        0.040    0.937        0.062
                 1990-94 0.433       0.033            0.624        0.046    0.866        0.068
                 1995-99 0.287       0.029            0.434        0.041    0.604        0.063
Beta1: Obsolescence by Technology Field
Chemicals exc. Drugs       1.007              0.020                         0.689        0.025
Computers & Comm.          1.297              0.026                         1.099        0.034
Drugs & Medical            0.760              0.018                         0.503        0.024
Electrical & Electronics   1.235              0.025                         0.850        0.027
Mechanical                 1.040              0.022                         0.653        0.025
Beta1 (Base=Other)         0.102              0.003   0.104        0.004    0.111        0.003
Beta2: Diffusion by Technology Field
Chemicals exc. Drugs                                  1.639        0.105    3.404        0.362
Computers & Comm.                                     2.358        0.156    2.200        0.203
Drugs & Medical                                       0.783        0.048    2.919        0.287
Electrical & Electronics                              2.615        0.188    3.815        0.390
Mechanical                                            2.091        0.144    4.572        0.527
Beta2 (Base=Other)             0.436          0.016   0.225        0.012    0.162        0.011

R-squared                            0.950                  0.941                 0.956
Standard error of                   0.0595                 0.0653                0.0561
regression

Simulated Modal Lag
Chemicals exc. Drugs                   3.81                 4.10                  3.82
Computers & Comm.                      3.35                 3.41                  3.83
Drugs & Medical                        4.34                 5.62                  4.75
Electrical & Electronics               3.43                 3.22                  3.27
Mechanical                             3.74                 3.63                  3.26
Other                                  3.82                 5.11                  5.55

Note: The dependent variable is citations (by citing year, cited year, cited field) divided
by potentially citable patents (by cited year and cited field). Cited years run from 1963-
99 and citing years from 1975-99, for a total of 3,600 observations
[6*(12*25+(24*25)/2)].




                                                51
                            Table 4
          Potential “Deflators” for Citing Patent Totals


                 (1)         (2)               (3)          (4)
Application     Total      Index of       Citing Year      Pure
  Year         Patents   Patent Total     Coefficient  Propensity to
                          (1975=1)      (from Table 3) Cite Effect
                                                         [(3)/(2)]
   1975         65888       1.000            1.000         1.000
   1976         65804       0.999            0.871         0.872
   1977         65978       1.001            0.878         0.877
   1978         65601       0.996            0.943         0.947
   1979         65726       0.998            0.997         0.999
   1980         66491       1.009            1.034         1.025
   1981         63910       0.970            1.026         1.058
   1982         65009       0.987            1.064         1.078
   1983         61563       0.934            1.030         1.103
   1984         67071       1.018            1.111         1.091
   1985         71442       1.084            1.209         1.115
   1986         75088       1.140            1.312         1.151
   1987         81458       1.236            1.459         1.180
   1988         90134       1.368            1.600         1.170
   1989         96077       1.458            1.684         1.155
   1990         99254       1.506            1.724         1.145
   1991        100016       1.518            1.769         1.165
   1992        103307       1.568            1.940         1.237
   1993        106848       1.622            2.151         1.326
   1994        120380       1.827            2.529         1.384
   1995        137661       2.089            3.218         1.540
   1996        131450       1.995            2.709         1.358
   1997        114881       1.744            2.217         1.271
   1998         33780       0.513            0.542         1.057




                               52
                               Table 5
       Simulated Cumulative Lag Distributions by Technology Field

Lag   Chem. exc.   Comp &    Drugs &    Electrical & Mechanical   Other
        Drugs       Comm     Medical     Electronic
 1      0.037       0.045     0.026        0.048       0.043      0.026
 2      0.091       0.112     0.067        0.115       0.101      0.069
 3      0.152       0.188     0.114        0.187       0.164      0.123
 4      0.214       0.266     0.165        0.259       0.226      0.182
 5      0.275       0.342     0.216        0.327       0.285      0.244
 6      0.333       0.413     0.265        0.390       0.341      0.306
 7      0.387       0.479     0.314        0.448       0.393      0.366
 8      0.438       0.538     0.360        0.502       0.442      0.424
 9      0.485       0.592     0.404        0.550       0.487      0.479
10      0.529       0.640     0.446        0.594       0.530      0.530
11      0.569       0.683     0.486        0.635       0.569      0.578
12      0.607       0.721     0.524        0.671       0.606      0.622
13      0.642       0.755     0.560        0.705       0.640      0.662
14      0.674       0.785     0.593        0.735       0.671      0.699
15      0.704       0.812     0.625        0.763       0.701      0.732
16      0.732       0.835     0.656        0.788       0.728      0.763
17      0.758       0.856     0.684        0.811       0.753      0.790
18      0.782       0.875     0.711        0.832       0.777      0.815
19      0.804       0.891     0.737        0.851       0.799      0.837
20      0.824       0.906     0.761        0.868       0.820      0.858
21      0.843       0.919     0.784        0.884       0.839      0.876
22      0.861       0.930     0.806        0.898       0.856      0.892
23      0.877       0.940     0.826        0.911       0.873      0.907
24      0.892       0.949     0.845        0.923       0.888      0.920
25      0.906       0.957     0.864        0.934       0.902      0.932
26      0.919       0.964     0.881        0.943       0.916      0.942
27      0.931       0.970     0.897        0.952       0.928      0.952
28      0.942       0.976     0.913        0.960       0.939      0.961
29      0.952       0.981     0.928        0.968       0.950      0.968
30      0.962       0.985     0.941        0.975       0.960      0.975
31      0.971       0.989     0.954        0.981       0.969      0.981
32      0.979       0.992     0.967        0.986       0.978      0.987
33      0.987       0.995     0.978        0.991       0.986      0.992
34      0.994       0.998     0.990        0.996       0.993      0.996
35      1.000       1.000     1.000        1.000       1.000      1.000




                                   53
                                                     Figure 1
                                       Number of Patents by Application Year

                    160,000


                    140,000


                    120,000
                                                                          Total
Number of Patents




                    100,000


                     80,000
                                                                               US

                     60,000


                     40,000                                                    Non_US


                     20,000


                         0
                         1965   1970      1975      1980       1985     1990        1995
                                                   Application Year
                                                  Figure 2
                                       Number of Patents by Grant Year
                    180,000


                    160,000


                    140,000


                    120,000
Number of Patents




                                                                            Total

                    100,000


                     80,000
                                                                                    US
                     60,000


                     40,000                                              Non_US


                     20,000


                         0
                         1963   1968   1973     1978      1983    1988   1993            1998
                                                   Grant Year
                                                               Figure 3
                                              Share of Patents Assigned to Corporations

                             100%

                             90%                                                   Non US


                             80%
Share of Corporate Patents




                             70%
                                                                                          US

                             60%

                             50%

                             40%

                             30%

                             20%

                             10%

                              0%
                                1965   1970         1975        1980        1985       1990    1995
                                                             Application Year
                                                         Figure 4
                                   Distribution of Patents by Technological Categories
                                                    (absolute numbers)
                    30,000


                                Chemical        Cmp&Cmm           Drgs&Med
                    25,000
                                Elec            Mech              Others

                    20,000
Number of Patents




                    15,000



                    10,000



                     5,000



                        0
                         1965    1970       1975        1980            1985    1990     1995
                                                     Application Year
                                            Figure 5
                 Distribution of Patents by Technological Categories - Shares

        30%



        25%



        20%
Share




        15%



        10%



        5%
                                     Chemical              Cmp&Cmm          Drgs&Med
                                     Elec                  Mech             Others
        0%
          1965    1970        1975          1980           1985      1990            1995
                                        Application Year
                                                      Figure 6
                                         Mean Citations Made and Received
                                         by Application Year and Grant Year
                 12



                 10                                          Citations Made by App. Year



                  8      Citations Received by App. Year
Mean Citations




                  6


                                            Citations Made by Grant Year
                  4



                  2



                  0
                  1967        1972         1977            1982         1987        1992   1997
                                                     Application Year
                                               Figure 7
                            Mean Citations Made by Technological Categories

                 14


                 12      Chemical        Cmp&Cmm              Drgs&Med
                         Elec            Mech                 Others

                 10
Mean Citations




                  8


                  6


                  4


                  2


                  0
                  1975          1980         1985               1990          1995
                                           Application Year
                                                Figure 8
                          Mean Citations Received by Technological Categories

                 14


                 12


                 10
Mean Citations




                  8


                  6


                  4

                         Chemical          Cmp&Cmm             Drgs&Med
                  2
                         Elec              Mech                Others

                  0
                  1965   1970       1975       1980        1985         1990    1995
                                            Application Year
                                                            Figure 9
                                            Distribution of Backward Citation Lags
                           8


                           7
                                                                                      Lags > 50 years
                                                                0.3
                           6
Percent of all Citations




                                                                0.2
                           5


                           4                                    0.1


                           3                                      0
                                                                      51   61    71   81   91 101 111 121 131 141 151

                           2


                           1


                           0
                               0   5   10    15       20        25              30          35        40        45      50
                                                           Lag (in years)
                                                              Figure 10
                               Cumulative Distribution of Backward Citation Lags (up to 50 years back)

                     100

                      90

                      80

                      70
Cumulitive Percent




                      60

                      50

                      40

                      30

                      20

                      10

                       0
                           0        5      10     15      20        25          30   35   40    45       50
                                                               Lag (in years)
                                                    Figure 11
                                      Distribution of Forward Citation Lags
                                   Selected Cohorts: 1975, 1980, 1985 and 1990
                       30%



                       25%



                       20%
Percent of Citations




                                 1990

                       15%

                                                      1985

                       10%
                                                                          1980
                                                                                      1975
                       5%



                       0%
                             0          5          10                15          20
                                                    Lag (in years)
                                                                                Figure 12
                                                              Self-Citations Made by Technological Category

                                             18%


                                             16%
Self-Citations as Percent of all Citations




                                                                                                  US     Non US
                                             14%


                                             12%


                                             10%


                                             8%


                                             6%


                                             4%


                                             2%


                                             0%
                                                   Chemical    Drgs&Med    Cmp&Cmm         Elec        Mech       Others
                                                                      Figure 13
                                      Self Citation as a Percentage of Total Citations Made by Application Year

                                18%


                                16%
                                                                              Upper Bound
                                14%
Mean Self-Citation Percentage




                                12%
                                                                                            Lower Bound
                                10%


                                8%


                                6%


                                4%


                                2%


                                0%
                                  1969           1974        1979         1984          1989         1994         1999
                                                                     Application Year
                                                                        Figure 14
                                      Self Citation as a Percentage of Total Citations Received by Application Year

                                40%


                                35%


                                30%
Mean Self-Citation Percentage




                                25%


                                20%


                                15%


                                10%


                                5%


                                0%
                                  1969             1974         1979          1984          1989         1994
                                                                       Application Year
                                                     Figure 15
                                        Measures of Generality and Originality
                                                  Yearly Averages
                 0.6



                 0.5



                 0.4
Value of Index




                 0.3



                 0.2


                          Generality                  Adjusted Generality
                 0.1
                          Originality                 Adjusted Originality

                 0.0
                   1975          1980                1985                    1990   1995

                                                   Application Year
                                               Figure 16
                                 Generality by Technological Category
                                            Yearly Averages
             0.50

             0.45

             0.40

             0.35

             0.30
Generality




             0.25

             0.20

             0.15

                      Chemical             Cmp&Cmm            Drgs&Med
             0.10

                      Elec                 Mech               Others
             0.05

             0.00
               1975          1980                 1985             1990   1995
                                           Application Year
                                          Figure 17
                           Originality by Technological Category
                                       Yearly Averages
              0.50


              0.45


              0.40
Originality




              0.35


              0.30


              0.25

                        Chemical            Cmp&Cmm                Drgs&Med
              0.20
                        Elec                Mech                   Others
              0.15
                 1975   1980            1985              1990                1995
                                      Applications Year
                                                  Figure 18
                                   Claims Made by Technological Categories
                                              Yearly Averages
                18

                17      Chemical            Cmp&Cmm                   Drgs&Med

                16      Elec                Mech                      Others

                15
No. of Claims




                14

                13

                12

                11

                10

                 9

                 8
                 1974          1979             1984                   1989      1994
                                                   Application Year
                                                   Figure 19
                                 Percentage of Patents Matched to Compustat
                                          (out of assigned patents)

                     80%


                     70%
                                                                            US Patents
                     60%
Percent of Matches




                     50%

                                                       All Patents
                     40%


                     30%


                     20%


                     10%      Non-US Patents


                     0%
                       1969    1974        1979      1984            1989        1994    1999
                                                  Grant Year
                                                                             Figure 20
                                                            Simulated Citation Lag Distributions by Field


                                     0.09

                                     0.08                             Chem                   Comp & comm          Drugs & med

                                                                      Elec & electron        Mech                 Other
Fraction of 35-Year Citation Total




                                     0.07

                                     0.06

                                     0.05

                                     0.04

                                     0.03

                                     0.02

                                     0.01

                                     0.00
                                            0   2   4   6    8   10   12   14    16     18   20   22   24   26   28   30   32   34
                                                                                Citation Lag
                                                      Appendix Figure 1
                                    Bias of the Generality Index Based on Patent Citations
                 0.00


                 -0.05


                 -0.10
Estimated Bias




                 -0.15


                 -0.20

                                              3 Citations
                 -0.25
                                              10 Citations

                                              100 Citations
                 -0.30


                 -0.35
                      0.00   0.10     0.20     0.30         0.40    0.50       0.60        0.70   0.80   0.90   1.00
                                                      True Value of the Generality Index
