                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            COMMERCIALIZING KNOWLEDGE: UNIVERSITY SCIENCE,
       KNOWLEDGE CAPTURE, AND FIRM PERFORMANCE IN BIOTECHNOLOGY


                                                 Lynne G. Zucker
                                                 Michael R. Darby
                                                 Jeff S. Armstrong


                                              Working Paper 8499
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w8499


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         October 2001



This research has been supported by grants from the University of California's Industry-University Cooperative Research
Program, the University of California Systemwide Biotechnology Research and Education Program, the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation through the NBER Research Program on Industrial Technology and Productivity, and the National Science
Foundation (SES 9012925). We also appreciate very useful comments from Scott Shane, Scott Stern, and other
participants in the Conference on Technology Transfer and University Entrepreneurship, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, December 7-9, 2000. We are also indebted to a remarkably talented team of post-doctoral
fellows and research assistants who have built the Zucker-Darby relational database over the last decade, and especially
to Dr. David Waguespack who prepared the series on all publishing between firms and the top 112 research universities
for biotechnology firms based on ISI data. This paper is a part of the NBER's research program in Productivity.The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Lynne G. Zucker, Michael R. Darby and Jeff S. Armstrong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Commercializing Knowledge: University Science, Knowledge Capture,
and Firm Performance in Biotechnology
Lynne G. Zucker, Michael R. Darby and Jeff S. Armstrong
NBER Working Paper No. 8499
October 2001
JEL No. O31, L14, L65, O32



                                               ABSTRACT


         Commercializing knowledge involves transfer from discovering scientists to those who will
develop it commercially. New codes and formulae describing discoveries develop slowly - with little
incentive if value is low and many competing opportunities if high. Hence new knowledge remains
naturally excludable and appropriable. Team production allows more knowledge capture of tacit,
complex discoveries by firm scientists. A robust indicator of a firm's tacit knowledge capture (and strong
predictor of its success) is the number of research articles written jointly by firm scientists and
discovering, "star" scientists, nearly all working at top universities. An operationally attractive
generalization of our star measure - collaborative research articles between firm scientists and top research
university scientists - replicates the impact on firm success. In panel analyses, publications by firm
scientists with stars and/or top-112 university scientists increase the number and citation rate for firm
patents. Further, star articles increase these rates significantly more than other top-112 university
scientists' articles. Cross-sectional analyses of products and employment show a similar pattern of
positive effects on firms' success of collaborations with stars or top university scientists, but estimates of
differential effects are non-robust due to multicollinearity. Venture capital funding has significant, usually
positive effects on firm success.


Lynne G. Zucker                                   Michael R. Darby
Professor of Sociology &                          Cordner Professor of Money & Financial Markets
Director, Center for International Science,       Anderson Graduate School of Management
Technology, and Cultural Policy, SPPSR            University of California, Los Angeles
University of California, Los Angeles             Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551                        and NBER
and NBER                                          darby@ucla.edu
zucker@ucla.edu

Jeff S. Armstrong
Economist
Analysis Group/Economics
The Chrysler Building
405 Lexington Avenue, 47th Floor
New York, NY 10174
jarmstrong@analysisgroup.com
                 Commercializing Knowledge: University Science,
             Knowledge Capture, and Firm Performance in Biotechnology
                  by Lynne G. Zucker, Michael R. Darby, and Jeff S. Armstrong


1. Introduction

       Our research program over the past ten years has focused on the use of basic science

knowledge in commercial firms and the impact of that knowledge on firm performance. In our

earlier research, we have found substantial consistent evidence that top academic science,

specifically the star scientists who make most of the defining discoveries, provides intellectual

human capital that defines the technology of the firm—at least following scientific

breakthroughs. Though there are likely to be considerable spillover effects when knowledge is

created or employed (Jaffe 1986;1989), and perhaps also an important symbolic and legitimating

function of high quality science for commercial activity (Stephan and Everhart 1998), our

empirical work identifies the main and robust empirical effects due to real scientific labor

contributions of star scientists to performance of the firm.

       To “detect” stars and quantify their labor contributions to firms, we identified 327 “star”

bio-scientists worldwide based on their publications of genetic-sequence discovery articles up to

early 1990 before gene-sequencing machines were in widespread use.             Stars were those

cumulatively reporting more than 40 genetic-sequence discoveries or on 20 or more articles

reporting any genetic-sequence discoveries in GenBank (1990).         We identified every “star”

article on which the star, or (more frequently) a co-author, was affiliated with a firm. The

numbers of these articles was our measure of the depth of star involvement in the firm.

   Before turning to new results reported in this paper, a brief summary of our prior results will

be useful for readers not already familiar with our work:



                                                  1
   •   Location of top, “star” scientists predicts location of firm entry into new technologies

       (both new and existing firms), shown for the U.S. and Japan in biotechnology (Zucker,

       Darby, and Brewer 1998, Darby and Zucker 2001) and replicated for the semiconductor

       industry in the U.S. (Torero, Darby, and Zucker 2001).

   •   Ties that involve actual work at the science bench between star scientists (mostly

       academics) and firm scientists consistently have a significant positive effect on a wide

       range of firm performance measures in biotechnology (Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong

       1998; Zucker and Darby 2001) and in semiconductors for number and quality of patents

       (Torero 1998). Ties to stars also shorten the time to IPO (firms are younger) and increase

       the amount of IPO proceeds (Darby, Zucker, and Welch 2001).

   •   As the quality of an academic star bio-scientist increases and his/her research becomes

       more relevant to commercialization, the probability increases that the scientist conducts

       joint research or moves to a firm. As expected scientific returns increase – measured by

       citations to other local star scientists working with firms – the probability that the next

       star will begin working with a firm also increases (Zucker, Darby, and Torero 2001).

       Quality is also positively related to working with firms in Japan, but only number of

       articles predicts significantly with this smaller sample (Zucker, Darby, and Torero 2000).



       Our findings on the importance of basic university science to successful

commercialization of important scientific discoveries are confirmed in other research, especially

the importance of intellectual human capital (Di Gregorio and Shane 2000). Faculty are a key

resource in creating and transferring early, discovery research via commercial entrepreneurial

behavior (Yarkin 2000).     Jensen and Thursby (2001) confirm that active, self-interested




                                                2
participation of discovering professors is an essential condition for successful commercial

licensing of university inventions. Thursby and Thursby (2000) find that the sharp increase in

university-industry technology transfer has not resulted so much from a shift in the nature of

faculty research as from an increased willingness of faculty and administrators to license and

increased interest on the part of firms.

       In this paper, we continue our research program on the economic value of knowledge,

especially tacit knowledge at the time of commercially relevant scientific breakthroughs. We

compare the real effects on the performance of biotech firms of two overlapping groups of

academic scientists who collaborate with firm scientists: the stars who made significantly more

genetic sequence discoveries, and all relevant scientists (including the bulk of the stars)

employed at one of the top 112 U.S. research universities ranked by federal research funding.

Our overall results again support the strong effects of academic science on the success of firms.

Both science measures have strong positive independent effects on most performance measures.

The patent panels show that the labor effort of the stars has a significant incremental impact on

firm performance above and beyond the effects of all scientists from top research universities

working with the firm. In cross-section estimates, we find significant positive effects from either

star or top-112 faculty linkages but efforts to enter both sets of variables in the same regressions

are confounded by multicollinearity. We conclude that affordable bibliometric measures are

good but not perfect substitutes for the costly-to-construct star measures.

       The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we develop our theoretical approach to:

(a) the sources and implications of the information advantage – common to most scientific

breakthrough knowledge – held by the discovering scientists, (b) the difficulties inherent to the

transfer of tacit knowledge that lead to joint research, and (c) the amount of knowledge capture




                                                 3
necessary for firm to offset sunk commercial development costs. In Section 3 we sketch the

history of scientific development and rise of the biotech industry, focusing on the ties between

academic science and commercial firms. Since data are the plural of anecdote, we present

qualitative evidence of the importance of ties to star scientists for the performance of the most

successful firms. In Section 4 we briefly review the variables and their sources and then present

and discuss the empirical results. We estimate poisson regressions (and linear-least squares for

employment) that explain the performance of a panel of biotech firms for patents and citation-

weighted patents, and cross-sections for products in development, on the market, and

employment. In these regressions, we systematically test the predictive power of science (stars

and top-112 university scientists tied to the firm via co-authoring of scientific research, as well as

all local academic scientific publishing by stars), venture capital, and other firm characteristics

such as use of the dominant technology (rDNA or genetic engineering). In Section 5 we offer

our conclusions. Detail on the data set and supplementary analyses are compiled in a separate

appendix which is cross-referenced below and available from the authors on request.




                                                  4
2. The Real Effects of Knowledge Capture

       Academic to industry technology transfers may be rare, but we believe they can still

account for the bulk of technological progress. These are not pure “transfers,” but necessarily

knowledge captures to the degree necessary to offset sunk development, marketing, and other

costs invested in moving a discovery into a commercial innovation. Many fundamental industry

transformations or technological breakthroughs can be traced to specific advances in science.

While the industries experiencing technological discontinuity are a distinct minority in our

economy, we argue that a distinct minority of firms within this distinct minority of industries

account for a large part of the aggregate technological progress conventionally measured in

productivity studies (Harberger 1998, Darby and Zucker 2002).



Knowledge and the Market for Information

       Our argument starts from the classic Stigler (1961) observation that information is a

valuable and costly resource and that individuals are thus motivated to adopt strategies such as

search that weighs the expected costs and benefits of acquiring information. For example, if

individuals’ search involves unique goods, then costs of search are sufficiently high that

transactions are commonly localized as a device for identifying potential buyers and sellers.

Stigler pointed out that medieval markets were an example of actual localization; advertising is

an example of a “virtually” localized market.

       We argue that another mechanism of “virtual” localization is a profession, or more

commonly, a sub-specialty within a profession.1 Here, the buyers and sellers of knowledge,

including new or “breakthrough” discoveries, are brought together in a highly balkanized market

in which the participants share a reasonably similar endowed knowledge base that makes the new




                                                5
knowledge potentially understandable and useable. The size and geographic distribution of that

knowledge base determines the extent of initial demand for the new knowledge.               For the

purposes of our argument here, information and knowledge are equivalent.



From Tacit to Codified Knowledge

        New information tends to be produced in tacit form, increasing in tacitness as a function

of distance from prior knowledge (hence, especially breakthrough knowledge), and requires

resources to codify. Tacit knowledge tends to be highly personal, initially known only by one

person (or a small team of discovering scientists) and is difficult to transfer to others (Polyani

1962 and Schutz 1962).

        As knowledge increases in complexity, the probability increases that deviation from

“textbook” description of action will be required (Nelson 1959 and Nelson and Winter 1982). For

example, internal bleeding during surgery requires decisions about whether and how to deviate

from the textbook that cannot be fully prescribed in advance. This kind of complexity leads to

knowledge remaining tacit longer, perhaps remaining an “active task” that changes its nature in

response to contingencies in contrast to an “inert task” such as a secretary typing a letter written

by his/her boss (Scott et al. 1967).

        Knowledge becomes shared (inter-subjective) to the extent that codes or formulas are

borrowed from pre-existing knowledge and/or are newly created.               Relevance to earlier

knowledge allows borrowing of codes, mathematical expressions and relations, and even

machines that “embody” those codes/math. Such knowledge is cumulative and can be easily

understood and transferred, relying on references to the well-understood prior scientific

literature.




                                                 6
        But new knowledge that cannot be readily grafted on to old is likely to offer more

opportunities.   Opportunity can shift incentives – increasing them along a continuum from

incremental change to breakthrough discoveries (Klevorick et al. 1995). Increased incentives to

enter arise from these greater opportunities.

        Discovering scientists become important in technology transfer when a new discovery

has both high commercial value and a combination of scarcity and tacitness that defines natural

excludability, the degree to which there is a barrier to the flow of the valuable knowledge from

the discoverers to other scientists. Tacit, complex knowledge provides partial natural protection

of information, both separately and jointly with more formal property rights. Those with the

most information about breakthrough discoveries are the scientists actually making them, so

there is initial natural scarcity. To the extent that the knowledge is both scarce and tacit, it

constitutes intellectual human capital retained by the discovering scientists and therefore they

become the main resource around which firms are built or transformed (Zucker, Darby, and

Brewer 1998, Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong 1998). Hence, tacit knowledge can be viewed as at

least partially rivalrous and excludable information and thus “appropriable” as long as it remains

difficult (or impossible) to learn it.

        As tacit knowledge becomes increasingly codified—or translated into “recipe

knowledge” as Schutz (1962) terms it – tacitness decreases and knowledge transfer is easier. But

significant barriers stand in the way of codification. Relevance between old and new knowledge

can be difficult to determine (Schutz 1970), increasing the demand for social construction of new

codes, formulae, and machines. The greater the discontinuity, the more difficult it is to anchor in

prior systems of knowledge.




                                                7
       Until there is a reliable indicator of the value of the new knowledge, the size of the

market for codification is unlikely to be large enough to cover the cost of developing the new

codes. Paradoxically, once the value is known:

   •   If the value is low relative to alternative uses of scientific talent, then there are few

       incentives to codify it.

   •   If it is high, those few scientists who hold the new knowledge will have to weigh returns

       to codification against returns to time invested in scientific research, a tradeoff that pits

       knowledge transfer against knowledge creation.

           o Hence, the average scientific discovery is never codified, and valuable discoveries

               experience a significant codification lag that tends to increase with their value.



Knowledge Capture via Team Production

       Knowledge that is cumulative builds on an existing set of words and symbols, and hence

involves less or no barrier to communication: Listening to a lecture or reading a text can suffice.

But tacit knowledge often requires that one of those already holding that knowledge work with

the novices to teach them in a hands-on process. For example, 81% of the new authors enter

GenBank by writing with old authors, and new authors write exclusively with new authors a

significant 36 percent less than “old,” experienced authors write exclusively with other “old”

authors after excluding all sole authored papers (Zucker, Darby and Torero 2001). Transfer may

be very effective – there are well-documented effects of cumulative experience on performance

improvement (Pisano et. al 2001) – but it is slow and requires the active participation of the

holder of the tacit knowledge.




                                                 8
        Discovering scientists are      typically willing to transfer knowledge primarily in the

context of their on-going laboratory work. At the extreme, when tacitness is high, it is their

collaborators on their research team who are the recipients of this knowledge; others are

excluded through lack of access. Thus, the initial cost of entry is high. But entry cost tends to

decline over time, and the probability of an error in the initial discovery also declines as others

replicate it, thus reducing risk to the new entering scientist.2

        This restricted process of transfer will more often than “normal science” lead to sufficient

knowledge capture to justify the cost of commercial development by a firm. Knowledge capture

explains why tacit knowledge tends to be highly localized: it will be concentrated geographically

around where the discoveries are made (or where the discoverers move). As shown in Figure 1,

there is considerable concentration of patented inventions, as well as human therapies and

vaccines in development and on the market. Just two states, California and Massachusetts with

14% of the U.S. population, have a disproportionate share especially of U.S. products in

development (49%) and on the market (58%). Patenting is somewhat less concentrated; since

patenting is both an input and an output of the innovation process, this may suggest a lessening

of geographic concentration, perhaps as the discoveries mature and are codified. Generally

patents provide a useful incentive to the codification of knowledge, but in the case of patented

cell lines a novel technique – deposit in an approved depositary to be publicly available upon

patent expiration – acknowledged the difficulty in codifying exactly how the new organisms

could be created.

        Understanding the role of scientific teams in tacit knowledge transfer extends the

arguments for team production:        (a) Team organization makes routine the transfer of tacit

knowledge from the discoverer to other team members, and if team members cross




                                                   9
organizational boundaries then tacit knowledge is efficiently transferred – in the present case,

most interestingly from university discovering scientists to firm scientists (Zucker, Darby and

Armstrong 1998).      (b) Through team organization, more productive cooperation is often

achieved via specialization than possible through the linking of individual efforts across

impersonal markets (Demsetz 1995: p. 17).

       The greater the labor effort of the discovering university scientist(s) with teams

containing firm scientists, the greater the amount of tacit knowledge transfer. In bench level

collaboration, you can actually see how the science is done.         As tacit knowledge transfer

increases from the discovering scientists, the success of the firm also increases. Thus, managers

of high tech firms have incentives to hire the top-discovering scientists if their discoveries have

commercial value. Discovering scientists also have incentives to found a new firm. In sharp

contrast, in industries where “normal science” reigns, hiring of below average, acceptably

competent scientists at a low wage is the typical practice (Kornhauser 1962). Obviously, each

can be a market-value-maximizing strategy for the firms facing different knowledge frontiers.




                                                10
3. Scientists’ Leadership and Industry Success: Commercializing Knowledge

       Biotechnology is a preeminent example of an industry undergoing very rapid growth

associated with radical technological change initiated in academe and based on basic science

breakthroughs. The key attributes can be summarized concisely:

          •   Breakthrough discovery: Professors Stanley Cohen (Stanford) and Herbert Boyer

              (University of California-San Francisco) reported the basic technique for

              recombinant DNA, also known as rDNA, genetic engineering, or gene splicing

              (Cohen, Chang, Boyer, and Helling 1973).

          •   University scientists: We identified star bio-scientists based on genetic sequence

              discoveries reported in GenBank (1990), an on-line reference file, and in this

              paper introduce bio-scientists identified in ISI’s electronic file of research articles

              written by at least one author located at one of the top-112 U.S. research

              universities.3 Star articles are (nearly) a subset of top-112 articles (U.S. stars not

              in a top-112 university and conference papers – less than 1% of the total star

              articles – are not included in the ISI article files.)

          •   Links/collaborations with firms: Articles that are co-authored by firm employees

              and top scientists, including “stars” and the top-112 university scientists indicate

              the intensity of involvement with the firm’s research effort.4         Most of these

              scientists “wear two hats,” one as professor at a university and one as a leader or

              lab head at a firm; confirmed through interviews at universities and firms on both

              coasts.




                                                  11
Firm Success and Knowledge Capture

       The degree to which an open scientific literature can produce such strong apparent

“knowledge capture” effects on firm success rests on: (a) Characteristics of tacit, complex

knowledge that lead to natural excludability; and (b) Selection by firms of discoveries for which

the degree of knowledge capture is likely to offset sunk costs incurred in making the scientific

discovery a commercial innovation.

       To provide some intuition for our regression results, we first briefly review examples of

the prominent positions that top academic scientists are given in the most successful biotech

firms, identify their co-publishing with the firm, and finally explore the impact that top

scientists’ co-publications with firm scientists have on success.



Top 10 Biotech Firms

       Individual scientists are often highlighted in an IPO prospectus.5       These scientists

typically achieved prominence in both their university and private sector appointments.

Examples of distinguished academics from the top-112 universities6 that were appointed to

corporate officer positions in one of the top 10 biotechnology firms (as of 1994) include: (a)

Herbert Boyer to the position of Vice President and Director of Genentech Inc;7 (b) Edward

Penhoet, former faculty member of the Biochemistry Department at UC-Berkeley and co-

founder of Chiron, to the position of President, CEO, and Director of Chiron; (c) Walter Gilbert,

the American Cancer Society Professor of Molecular Biology at Harvard University and 1980

Noble prize winner, to several of Biogen’s boards, with Phillip Sharp, Professor of Biology at

MIT, and Daniel Wang, Professor of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at MIT, on its

Scientific Board; (d) Two founders of Genetics Institute were university faculty, who also were




                                                 12
executive officers and directors of the company, as well as members of its Scientific Advisory

Board; and (e) Amgen included on its Scientific Board prominent university professors from

UCLA, CalTech, and Stanford, all members of the National Academy of Sciences.

       Table 1 shows that 40 percent of these top-10 biotech companies reported at least one star

on their team when going public, while 70 percent had linked articles (star co-publishing with at

least one firm employee). Not surprisingly, because of the much broader coverage of both

scientists and universities, these top-10 biotech companies reported a higher percentage of top-

112 university scientists: 80 percent reported at least one top-112 scientist on their team when

going public, and 90 percent had core collaborations with one or more of these scientists. The

advantage of the publishing measure is that it weights the amount of involvement of the scientist:

for example, Centocor had only 1/20 as many core collaborative research articles as Genentech.

       IPOs listed many former or current university professors as company founders, officers,

directors or key members of scientific advisory boards (see Appendix Table A1). Almost every

scientist holding a top management position had done so since the company’s founding. These

scientists were not brought in as part of the preparation for the IPO to merely “signal” the firm’s

success, contrary to a suggestion in Stephan and Everhart (1998).



Is Success in the Stars?

       Certainly, scientists in high-ranking positions in these now public firms provide scientific

control and are important for firm success. However, the majority of firms in our sample do not

go public before the end of our time period. In any case, we are interested in the actual work that

top scientists do that is joint with the firm. We measure this joint work by the cumulative

number of collaborative articles.




                                                13
        Using the total number of joint articles, drawing on both of our science measures, we can

take a preliminary look at our findings by graphing the mean values of the cumulative number of

tied articles: for the stars, articles that involve a star scientist and a firm scientist (where the star

can also be an employee of the firm) and for scientists at the top-112 universities, articles that

involve joint work by at least one university and one firm scientist. These values are shown in

Figure 2a. The differences are particularly striking at the 10+ article level. The mean success by

tied star articles is consistently and markedly higher than for top-112 university scientists across

our major success measures: patents, products in development, and products on the market.).

        Figure 2b presents the comparable data on venture capital funding (data from Venture

Economics). The amount of venture capital funding is less consistent in its effects compared to

tied/linked science results. While increasing cumulative amount of venture financing generally

increases both patents and products in development, the magnitude of differences is small

relative to the tied/linked science effects shown in Figure 2a.



Concentration of Success

        Darby and Zucker (2002) argue that much if not most of technological progress is

accounted for by a relatively few firms operating in a relatively few industries undergoing rapid

change. We will just touch on examples of concentration here:

            •   Industry Success Concentration: Top-decile biotech firms account for accounted

                for 64 percent of the total number of human therapies and vaccines in

                development (485 as of 1991), 43 percent of all patents, and dominated human

                therapies and vaccines on the market (82 percent). See Appendix Figure A1.




                                                   14
•   Geographic Concentration: 64 percent of the total products in development are

    concentrated in the top 5 states (Appendix Table A2); 58 percent of the total

    products on the market are concentrated in those same 5 states (Appendix Table

    A3).




                                  15
4. Empirical Results



The Data

       The Zucker-Darby star-scientists/articles database has been a powerful tool for exploring

the co-evolution of life sciences and biotechnology. However, that methodology involves an

expenditure of resources justifiable only for pioneering academic efforts or sophisticated

financial institutions.   As the ISI databases are increasingly available, the extent to which

electronic bibliometry can substitute for hand coding and specialized technical knowledge is a

question of practical importance to both academic researchers and industry practitioners.

       Here we use the basic tool of co-publishing between academic and firm scientists as a

detector of joint research and (often two-way) university-industry technology transfer. The

Institute of Scientific Information (ISI, 2000) U.S. University Science Indicators database on

CD-ROM has extensive information on all the scientific articles with at least one author at any of

the top-112 U.S. research universities.

       Table 2 defines all the variables used in the empirical estimates and provides summary

sample statistics for each. As in Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (1998), we classify each article

in GenBank of which a star scientist is an author relative to each firm as affiliated with the firm,

as linked to the firm if the star is unaffiliated but writing with the firm’s employees, and

otherwise as untied to the firm. Aggregating over all stars and time for each firm gives the first

six variables in Table 2. The “local” in local untied articles refers to articles by stars affiliated

with universities or research institutes in the firm’s functional economic area (metro area plus

exurbs as defined by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis).




                                                 16
       We attempted to find all articles written by any employee of each of our biotech firms in

the ISI (2000) database; these article also must have at least one top-112 university author to be

included. Among these joint articles, we focus on the “core collaborations” in the four central

biotech fields catalogued by ISI: biochemistry and biophysics; cell and developmental biology;

molecular biology & genetics; and microbiology. To control for variation in quality of the

collaborators, we also collected the number of citations in ISI-indexed journals in the current

plus next four years for each article.

       The firm characteristics and the last five dependent variables were mostly collected from

paper directories and industry studies used by industry participants when looking for suppliers

and customers. This methodology is tedious but is one of the few available for analysis of large

numbers of privately (as well as publicly) held firms. As described in other papers referenced in

Table 2, considerable effort was expended in ensuring that uniform coding procedures were

applied to obtain quantitative variables from text records.

       The primary exception was the venture funding data obtained by licensing the Venture

Economics database and deflating dollar amounts by the GDP deflator. We also had the list of

licensees of the UC-Stanford Cohen-Boyer patent as an alternate indicator of the use of

recombinant DNA technology. We bought our list of biotech patents from CHI Research, Inc.,

in 1997. We ensured that the CHI list included all those on U.S. Department of Commerce,

Patent and Trademark Office (1993) and appropriate others. Counts of citations to date by other

patents were included.




                                                 17
The Estimates

       In a technology-intensive industry like biotechnology, patents are a crucial measure of

success. Patents serve as a measure of output from a firm’s “knowledge production function”

(Griliches 1990). The patent permits knowledge capture by establishing ownership rights to the

invention’s commercial rewards until the patent expiration date and even beyond expiration to

the extent the firm establishes brand recognition. Patenting success also impacts the firm’s

ability to raise public equity capital.8 Because patent acquisition is key to both financial and

non-financial measures of success and citations data are available with which to quality-adjust a

firm’s patents, the patenting success models are a key testing ground for the electronic version of

our star methodology.

       Table 3 reports standard poisson regression estimates for panel data on U.S. patenting by

U.S. biotech firms.     The standard errors are corrected using the procedure of Wooldridge

(1991).9 Models a and e in Table 3 indicate that simple firm characteristics available for both

private and public firms do a good job of explaining patenting. Entrants are generally at a

disadvantage, experience helps, and use of the dominant technology (recombinant DNA or

genetic engineering) is a positive factor for both quantity and quality of patenting. As always

with forward-looking financial variables, the positive effect of the cumulative amount of venture

capital investment may confound real R&D productivity of the investments with forecasting the

effects of other, omitted variables.

       Firms which have many articles with star scientists also tend to have many articles with

top-112 university faculty – indeed nearly all the linked star articles are also included in the top-

112 core collaborations count of joint faculty-firm articles. If one adds either the star variables

used in Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (1998) or core collaborations and their mean citations (a




                                                 18
quality measure) as in models b and c or f and g, we see that either set of indicators improves the

explanatory power of the models. In the current case of patents and patent citations, the fit is a

little better with the new variables than with the star based variables, but we will see below that

just the opposite is true for all products and for human therapeutics and vaccines on the market.

The failure of local untied star articles to enter significantly positively reaffirms our (1998) result

that localized knowledge impacts of universities on industry are associated with market

transactions rather than uncompensated spillovers from the ivory tower. The coefficients on

cumulative venture capital investment are only mildly reduced by inclusion of either (or both) of

the star or top-112 based measures of the firm’s science base. This suggests that venture

capitalists in the 1980s were not much discriminating among biotech firms on the basis of

scientific depth, so that we obtain independent effects on research productivity of both

intellectual and financial capital. The significance of the knowable science-base information

implies that the capital markets were not fully incorporating it in allocating capital.

       Models d and h in Table 3 experiment with adding both sets of science indicators at once.

Since linked star articles are generally included in the top-112 core collaboration counts, the

coefficient on linked articles measures the additional impact of stars on firm research output over

and above that of the “average” joint authorship with a professor from a top-112 university. The

coefficients for all core collaborations and their mean citations as well as this additional star

impact are positive and significant for patents and patent citations. The negative coefficient on

affiliated star scientists in these full regressions appears to reflect the special circumstances of

one or two firms which have the bulk of affiliated articles.

       Unfortunately, the smaller samples for the cross section results in Tables 4, 5, and 6 –

comparable patent cross-sections are in the appendix available on request – seem more




                                                  19
confounded by the near multicollinearity of the science variables observed cumulatively up to

1990:   For the full models d and h, where both the star and top-112 article faculty-firm

coefficients are significant they have opposite signs. We would prefer panel estimates for

products in development and on the market and employment also, but each observation is very

costly to obtain from old paper directories for these predominantly private start-up firms. As

with the patent panels, we get generally significantly positive coefficients for linked and

affiliated star articles (models b and f in Tables 4, 5, 6) or for top-112 core collaboration articles

and their mean citations. Employment is the one dependent variable without many zeroes; so in

Table 6 we estimate the log of 1994 employment in accord with Gibrat’s Law (Sutton, 1997).

        In summary, the empirical work strongly supports the central message that university-

firm technology transfer for breakthrough discoveries generally involves detectable joint

research between top professors and firms which they own or are compensated by. We have

shown that our electronic bibliometry provides good but imperfect substitutes for the more costly

to obtain and difficult to operationalize star measures. In particular, in large samples where we

can obtain separable impacts, star linkages appear to have a significantly larger effect on firm

research productivity than the average article written jointly by top research university professors

and firm employees.




                                                 20
5. Conclusions

       Breakthrough discoveries in gene splicing set off a revolution in bioscience and created

the biotechnology industry. These discoveries set the stage, then, for increased opportunity and

increased incentives to enter. But significant natural barriers to the communication of new

knowledge often exist.     New knowledge tends to be developed in tacit form and requires

resources to codify. New codes and formula to describe discoveries develop slowly—with

insufficient incentives if value is low and too many competing opportunities if the value is high.

Hence new knowledge tends to remain uncodified, difficult to obtain except through hands-on

learning at the lab bench, and hence naturally excludable and appropriable. Our basic argument

is that knowledge close to breakthrough discoveries needs to be transformed into words, codes

and/or formula before it can be easily transferred.

       Difficulties inherent to the transfer of tacit knowledge lead to joint research: Team

production allows more knowledge capture of tacit, complex discoveries by firm scientists. A

robust detector of tacit knowledge capture by the firm (and strong predictor of firm success) is

the number of research articles written jointly by scientists working at a firm and the discovering,

“star” scientists, nearly all working at top universities.     For firms to commercialize new

discoveries, there must be sufficient knowledge capture by the firm to offset sunk commercial

development costs.

       We find the results reported in Zucker, Darby and Armstrong (1998) to be replicated to a

major extent in the whole U.S.       The principle finding in our earlier paper, covering only

California firms, was that research collaborations between firm scientists and university star

scientists (the ties) had a robust significant positive effect on firm performance. The local pool

of bioscience knowledge generated by nearby but non-collaborating scientists had no positive




                                                 21
effect, providing further evidence for embodied technology transfer through markets rather than

“knowledge spillovers.” But this paper is not simply a replication and scale-up.

       In this paper we add a generalized form of our star measure: the collaborative research

articles between firm scientists and top U.S. university scientists. In panel analyses, firms whose

scientists collaborate with stars and/or top 112 U.S. university scientists have more patents and

more highly cited patents. Further, star articles have an incremental positive effect above top-

112 university scientists’ articles on the number and quality of patents. Our cross-sectional

analyses of products and employment show a generally similar pattern of positive effects on

firms’ success of collaborations with stars or top university scientists, but the incremental effects

are less systematic. This non-robustness appears to be due to multicollinearity. As predicted,

untied star articles are either non-significant or oscillate between significant positive and

negative effects. Venture capital funding amounts were always significant, and usually positive.

       The overall importance of ties, compared to lack of significance or instability of untied

star effects, suggests that working jointly at the lab bench is a crucial transfer mechanism when

knowledge has an important or large tacit component. Further, our findings suggest that, as we

predicted, tacit knowledge is embodied in individual, discovering scientists.             Telephone

interviews conducted by Jeff Armstrong of university star scientists revealed their relationships

with firms were governed by tight contractual arrangements, academic scientists typically being

“vertically integrated” into the firm in the sense of receiving equity compensation and being

bound by exclusivity agreements. This evidence that star scientists were either fully employed

by firms or were governed in their relationships with firms by explicit contracts supported our

conclusion that firm success was not the result of a general knowledge “spillover” from

universities to firms but due to star scientists taking charge of their discoveries.




                                                  22
References

Bioscan. 1989-1998. Volumes 3-12.

Cohen, S., A. Chang, H. Boyer, R. Helling. 1973. Construction of biologically functional bacterial

       plasmids in vitro. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 70(11) 3240-3244.

Darby, M. R., L. G. Zucker. 2001. Change or die: the adoption of biotechnology in the Japanese

       and U.S. pharmaceutical industries. Research on Technological Innovation, Management,

       and Policy 7 85-125.

Darby, M. R., L. G. Zucker. 2002. Growing by leaps and inches: creative destruction and the

       Crusonia plant. Econ. Inq. 40 in press.

Darby, M. R., L. G. Zucker, I. I. Welch. 2001. Going public when you can in biotechnology.

       working paper, UCLA Anderson School, April.

Demsetz, H. 1995. Agency and nonagency explanations of the firm's organization. The

       Economics of the Business Firm: Seven Critical Commentaries, Cambridge University

       Press, Cambridge, U.K.

Di Gregorio, D., S. Shane. 2000. Why do some universities generate more start-ups than others?

       working paper, University of New Mexico and University of Maryland, November.

GenBank. 1990. Release 65.0, machine readable database. IntelliGentics, Inc., Palo Alto, CA.

Griliches, Z. 1990. Patent statistics as economic indicators: a survey. J. Econ. Lit. 28(4) 1661-1707.

Harberger, A. C. 1998. A vision of the growth process. Amer. Econ. Rev. 88(1) 1-32.

Institute of Scientific Information (ISI). 2000. U.S. University Science Indicators. machine-

       readable database on CD-ROM. Institute of Scientific Information, Philadelphia, PA.

Jaffe, A. B. 1986. Technological opportunity and spillovers of R & D: evidence from firms’ patents,

       profits, and market value,” Amer. Econ. Rev. 76(5) 984-1001.




                                                  23
Jaffe, A. B. 1989. Real effects of academic research. Amer. Econ. Rev. 79(5) 957-970.

Jensen, R., M. Thursby. 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale: the tale of university licensing.

       Amer. Econ. Rev. 91(1) 240-259.

Klevorick, A. K., R. C. Levin, R. R. Nelson, S. G. Winter. 1995. On the sources and significance

       of interindustry differences in technological opportunities. Res. Policy. 24(2) 185-205.

Kornhauser, W. 1962. Scientists in Industry: Conflict and Accommodation. University of

       California Press, Berkeley, CA.

Lee, K. B., Jr., G. S. Burrill. 1995. Biotech 95: Reform, Restructure, Renewal. Ernst & Young, San

       Francisco, CA.

Nelson, R. R. 1959. The economics of invention: a survey of the literature. J. Bus. 32(2) 101-127.

Nelson, R. R., S. G. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Harvard

       University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Pisano, G. P., R. M. J. Bohmer, A. C. Edmondson. 2001. Organizational differences in rates of

       learning: evidence from the adoption of minimally invasive cardiac surgery,"

       Management Sci. 47(6) 752-768.

Polanyi, M. 1974. Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy. University of

       Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Schutz, A. 1962. On multiple realities. Collected Papers 1 207-259. Martinus Nijhoff, The

       Hague, The Netherlands.

Schutz, A. 1970. Reflections on the Problem of Relevance. Yale University Press, New Haven,

       CN.

Scott, W. R., S. M. Dornbusch, B. C. Busching, J. D. Laing. 1967. Organizational evaluation and

       authority. Admin. Sci. Quart. 12 93-117.




                                                 24
Stephan, P. E., S. S. Everhart. 1998. The changing rewards to science: the case of biotechnology.

       Small Bus. Econ. 10(2) 141-151.

Stigler, G. J. 1961. The economics of information J. Polit. Econ. 69(3) 213-225.

Sutton, J. 1997. Gibrat’s legacy. J. Econ. Lit. 35(1) 40-59.

Thursby, J. G., Marie Thursby. 2000. Who is selling the ivory tower? sources of growth in

       university    licensing.   Conference     on    Technology   Transfer       and   University

       Entrepreneurship, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.

Torero, M. 1998. Analyzing the spillover mechanism on the semiconductor industry in the

       silicon valley and route 128. Essays on Diffusion of Technical Change, unpublished

       Ph.D. dissertation, UCLA Economics Department.

Torero, M., M. R. Darby, L. G. Zucker. 2001. The importance of intellectual human capital in

       the birth of the semiconductor industry. working paper, UCLA Anderson School,

       January.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Patent and Trademark Office. 1993. Patent Technology Set:

       Genetic Engineering. machine readable data base on CD-ROM. U.S. Department of

       Commerce, Office of Information Systems, Washington, DC.

Wooldridge, J. M. 1991. On the application of robust, regression-based diagnostics to models of

       conditional means and conditional variances. J. Econometrics 47 5-46.

Yarkin, C. 2000. Assessing the role of the University of California in the state’s biotechnology

       economy. The Economic and Social Dynamics of Biotechnology. Kluwer Academic

       Publishers, Boston, MA.




                                                 25
Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby. 2001. Capturing technological opportunity via Japan's star scientists:

       evidence from Japanese firms' biotech patents and products. J. Technology Transfer.

       26(1/2) 37-58.

Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, J. S. Armstrong. 1998. Geographically localized knowledge: spillovers

       or markets?” Econ. Inq. 36(1) 65-86.

Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, M. B. Brewer. 1998. Intellectual human capital and the birth of U.S.

       biotechnology enterprises. Amer. Econ. Rev. 88(1) 290-306.

Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, M. Torero. 2000. Determinants of embodied technology transfer

       from stars to firms, working paper, UCLA Anderson School.

Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, M. Torero. 2001. Labor mobility from academe to commerce. J.

       Labor Econ. 20 in press.




                                               26
Footnotes

1
    Most commonly, there are multiple virtually localized markets organized around competing

perspectives or models employed within the sub-specialty. There is also geographic localization

within the professions, with advantages to universities or cities with a “critical mass” of

scientists who can interact. Thus, UCSF with its critical mass of molecular biologists and related

sciences, and nearby strong universities, was “ripe” for a breakthrough.
2
    Note that when multiple teams are racing for a “ripe” discovery and publish their results almost

simultaneously, we have much more rapid confirmation/validation of the discovery which

promotes faster learning by others. Gina Durante, graduate student at the Anderson School at

UCLA, suggested this point.
3
    The top 112 universities are defined in terms of rank order on Federal research funding

received. The top 112 are defined by the Institute for Scientific Information and the data were

purchased from them.
4
    In 1994, Jeff Armstrong conducted a telephone survey of randomly selected linked stars in

California and found that most possess a significant equity or founding interest in the firm.
5
    The prospectuses were obtained from Thomson Financial Services. The ten companies in the

table were the top biotechnology firms in 1994 as reported by Lee and Burrill (1995, p.16).
6
    Due to human subjects’ restrictions, we cannot reveal the identity of the star scientists. The

following scientists may or may not be included in our list of U.S. stars.
7
    It is interesting that Genentech—with the largest number of star scientists of any firm—

appeared to avoid mentioning stars on its prospectus resume unless the star had a formal

corporate position. The one leading scientist who was listed on the prospectus was Dr. Boyer,




                                                  27
who made it a policy never to publish a genetic-sequence discovery article as or with a

Genentech employee.
8
    See Darby, Zucker and Welch (2001).
9
    The significance of key variables in these regressions is generally not sensitive to the

Wooldridge correction, but to achieve an estimate of the variance-covariance matrix that is not

restricted by first-moment parameter estimates, we apply the Wooldrige method as we did in the

California study.    An alternative would be to implement a binomial specification, but as

explained in Wooldridge (1991), this procedure may bias both first and second moment

estimates, whereas the Poisson process potentially biases only the second moment parameters.




                                              28
Table 1           The Ten Most Highly Valued Biotechnology Firms in 1994: Leading
                  Academic Scientists Appear on Their IPO Prospectus and as Joint Authors

Companya                    IPO Date                    Star Scientists            Top-112 University Professors


                                               Listed on the         Linked        Listed on the         Core
                                               Prospectusb           Articles      Prospectusb      Collaborations


Genentech, Inc.           October 1980                                    ✔              ✔                 ✔


Centocor, Inc.            June 1982                 ✔                     ✔              ✔                 ✔


Chiron Corporation        August 1983               ✔                     ✔              ✔                 ✔


Biogen N.V.               March 1983                ✔                     ✔              ✔                 ✔


Amgen, Inc.               June 1983                 ✔                     ✔              ✔                 ✔


Immunex Corp.             July 1983                                       ✔              ✔                 ✔


ALZA Corp.c               December 1985


Genzyme Corp.d            June 1986                                                      ✔                 ✔


Genetics Institute,       May 1986                                        ✔              ✔                 ✔
Inc.

IDEXX Laboratories,       June 1991                                                                        ✔
Inc.

Notes:
a
  Top 10 biotechnology firms in terms of market value as identified in Lee and Burrill’s (1995) ninth annual industry
report for Ernst & Young.
b
  Listed on the IPO prospectus as an executive, director, or member of the company’s scientific advisory board.
c
  ALZA Corp. was founded in 1968 before genetic engineering and has successfully pursued a specialized niche
R&D strategy by concentrating on developing sophisticated drug delivery systems rather than drug discovery.
d
  Genzyme Corp. had an extensive long-term contractual relationship with BioInformation Associates (BIA). BIA
was owned by a group of eight academic scientists: George Whitesides at Harvard and seven MIT professors:
Charles Cooney (also appointed as a Genzyme Director), Harvey Lodish, Chokyun Rha, William Roush, Anthony
Sinskey, Graham Walker, and Christopher Walsh.




                                                         29
Table 2          Definitions and Sample Statistics for Variables
Variables                      Definitions                                     Mean    S.D.    Min    Max       N
Independent Variables
Cumulative Star Authorships    Articles to date written by a star scientist:
of:
  Local untied articles          not firm-affiliated/not linked to this firm   120.0   125.3    0     387      3152
  Affiliated articles            affiliated with this firm                     0.40    6.25     0     139      3152
  All linked articles            not firm-affiliated/with this firm’s emp.     0.19    1.39     0     20       3152
Star Authorships of:           Articles to 1990 written by star scientist:
  Local untied articles          not firm-affiliated/not linked to this firm   164.5   149.5    0     382      342
  Affiliated articles            affiliated with this firm                      0.50   7.596    0     139      342
  All linked articles            not firm-affiliated/with this firm’s emp.     0.281   1.732    0     20       342
Cumulative Top-112             For articles to date with any author(s) at
University Authorships:        an ISI-defined top-112 university:
  All core collaborations       number with this firm’s employee(s)            1.57    10.36    0     271      3152
  Citations to articles         mean citations in 5 years to above             5.45    18.24    0     254      3152
Top-112 University             For articles through 1990 with any au-
Authorships:                   thor(s) at an ISI-defined top-112 univ.:
  All core collaborations       number with any this firm’s employees          5.918   26.27    0     337      342
  Citations to articles         mean citations in 5 years to above             10.23   24.87    0     225      342
Firm Characteristics:
NBF indicator                  1 if entrant firm; otherwise 0                  0.746   0.436    0      1       342
Years in biotech               Year + 1 - year firm began using biotech        7.216   3.117    1     14        342
Recombinant DNA indicator      1 if firm uses recomb. DNA; otherwise 0         0.479   0.500    0      1        342
Cumulative venture capital     Amount of venture capital received by           24.26   65.65    0    899.5     3152
funding                        this firm to date in 100,000s of 1984 $s
Cumulative venture capital     Amount of venture capital received by           42.92   94.49    0    899.5     342
funding as of 1990             this firm to 1990 in 100,000s of 1984 $s
Dependent Variables
Cumulative patents granted     Number of biotech patents applied for to        0.97    4.56     0      96      3152
                               date and assigned at issue to this firm
Cumulative patents granted     No. of biotech patents applied for by end       2.652   9.337    0     120      342
as of 1991                     of 1991 and assigned at issue to this firm
Cumulative citation-weighted   Number of citations received up to year         8.881   41.69    0     820      3152
patents granted                1997 to biotech patents applied for to date
                               and assigned at issue to this firm
Cumulative citation-weighted   No. of citations received up to year 1997       19.68   70.63    0     820      342
patents granted as of 1991     to biotech patents applied for through
                               1991 and assigned at issue to this firm
Total products in              Count of Total Products in Development          1.895   3.231    0      22      342
development                    in 1990 Bioscan
Total human therapies and      Count of Human Therapies & Vaccines in          1.418   3.031    0      22      342
vaccines in development        Development in 1990 Bioscan
Total products on the market   Count of Total Products on the Market in        3.781   5.326    0      37      342
                               1990 Bioscan
Total human therapies and      Count of Human Therapies & Vaccines             0.547   1.591    0      13      342
vaccines on the market         on the Market in 1990 Bioscan
Total employees as of 1994     Employment reported in 1994 Bioscan             926.2   7983     1    110,400   233
Panel variables (N = 3152) have observations by firm and year; others are observed only once per firm.
Detailed definitions and sources in text and data appendices in NBER Working Papers 4653, 4949, and 6360 (draft
versions of Zucker, Darby, and Brewer 1998, Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong 1998, and Zucker and Darby 2001).




                                                         30
Table 3 Panel Estimates for Patenting-Success Models for All U.S. Firms and Years 1976-1991

 Dependent Variables                             Cumulative Patents Granted                      Cumulative Citation-weighted Patents Granted
 (across)                                            (to current year)                                         (to current year)
 Explanatory Variables
 (down)                              Model a         Model b         Model c       Model d        Model e         Model f      Model g      Model h
 Constant                           -2.6793***      -2.2509***      -2.1731***    -2.1444***     -0.6679***     -0.0767***    -0.0643***   -0.0285***
                                     (0.0358)        (0.0350)        (0.0297)      (0.0343)       (0.0046)       (0.0039)      (0.0035)     (0.0037)
 Cumulative Star Authorships
 of:
    Local untied articles                              0.0001                        0.0000                     -0.0001***                 -0.0002***
                                                      (0.0001)                      (0.0001)                     (0.00001)                  (0.00001)
   Affiliated articles                               0.0037***                    -0.0092***                     0.0049***                 -0.0006***
                                                      (0.0002)                      (0.0007)                     (0.00004)                   (0.0001)
   All linked articles                               0.0872***                     0.0237***                     0.0904***                  0.0510***
                                                      (0.0016)                      (0.0027)                      (0.0004)                   (0.0005)
 Cumulative Top-112
 University Authorships:
   All core collaborations                                          0.0058***      0.0099***                                   0.0058***   0.0039***
                                                                     (0.0002)       (0.0005)                                   (0.00003)    (0.0001)
   Citations to articles                                            0.0092***      0.0084***                                   0.0093***   0.0079***
                                                                     (0.0002)       (0.0002)                                   (0.00004)   (0.00003)
 Firm Characteristics:
   NBF indicator                    -0.7808***      -0.8849***      -0.9267***    -0.9357***     -0.9654***     -1.1240***    -1.1703***   -1.1735***
                                      (0.0242)        (0.0253)        (0.0245)      (0.0245)       (0.0028)       (0.0032)      (0.0031)     (0.0031)
   Years in biotech                  0.3265***       0.2829***       0.2762***     0.2713***      0.3364***      0.2806***     0.2777***    0.2760***
                                      (0.0027)        (0.0021)        (0.0023)      (0.0021)       (0.0003)       (0.0003)      (0.0003)     (0.0003)
   Recombinant DNA indicator         1.4487***       1.2301***       1.1701***     1.1305***      1.5961***      1.3463***     1.2812***    1.2657***
                                      (0.0185)        (0.0217)        (0.0213)      (0.0219)       (0.0025)       (0.0029)      (0.0028)     (0.0029)
 Cumulative venture capital          0.0034***       0.0030***       0.0025***     0.0028***      0.0049***      0.0047***     0.0045***    0.0047***
 funding as of 1990                   (0.0001)        (0.0001)        (0.0001)      (0.0001)       (0.0000)       (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)
 Log-likelihood                       -5117.46        -4838.21        -4770.46      -4738.38      -38692.04      -35381.40     -35093.21   -34870.10
 Restricted log-likelihood            -8228.78        -8228.78        -8228.78      -8228.78      -73148.71      -73148.71     -73148.71    -73148.71
 Sample size                            3,152           3,152           3,152         3,152          3,152          3,152         3,152        3,152

Notes:       All models were estimated as a Poisson process with standard errors (in parentheses) corrected following Wooldridge (1991).
             Significance Levels: * # 0.05, ** # 0.01, *** # 0.001




                                                                      31
Table 4 Estimates for Products-in-Development Models for All U.S. Firms

 Dependent Variables                                  Total Products                                   Total Human Therapies and Vaccines
 (across)                                        in Development as of 1990                                   in Development as of 1990
 Explanatory Variables
 (down)                              Model a         Model b         Model c       Model d        Model e         Model f      Model g      Model h
 Constant                           -0.9294***      -0.6682***      -0.5976***    -0.5148***     -1.4714***     -1.2688***    -1.0479***   -1.0725***
                                     (0.0782)        (0.0757)        (0.0772)      (0.0778)       (0.0898)       (0.0839)      (0.0877)     (0.0877)

 Star Authorships of:
   Local untied articles                               0.0003                       0.0003                      0.0013***                   0.0012***
                                                      (0.0001)                     (0.0001)                      (0.0002)                    (0.0002)
   Affiliated articles                               0.0013**                     -0.0315***                    0.0013**                   -0.0375***
                                                      (0.0004)                     (0.0019)                      (0.0004)                    (0.0021)
   All linked articles                               0.0959***                      -0.0177                     0.1006***                  -0.0352***
                                                      (0.0034)                     (0.0072)                      (0.0032)                    (0.0074)
 Top-112 University
 Authorships:
   All core collaborations                                          0.0061***      0.0227***                                   0.0066***   0.0269***
                                                                     (0.0005)       (0.0015)                                    (0.0005)    (0.0015)
   Citations to articles                                            0.0056***      0.0029***                                   0.0075***   0.0037***
                                                                     (0.0006)       (0.0008)                                    (0.0006)    (0.0007)
 Firm Characteristics:
   NBF indicator                    0.2329***        0.2292***      0.2101***      0.1852***     0.2309***      0.2242***      0.1947**    0.1571**
                                     (0.0487)         (0.0531)       (0.0542)       (0.0534)      (0.0538)       (0.0579)       (0.0610)    (0.0603)
   Years in biotech                 0.1108***        0.0742***      0.0720***      0.0585***     0.1255***      0.0771***      0.0763***   0.0581***
                                     (0.0067)         (0.0066)       (0.0068)       (0.0070)      (0.0075)       (0.0074)       (0.0078)    (0.0079)
   Recombinant DNA indicator        0.7369***        0.5549***      0.5189***      0.4218***     0.8829***      0.6164***      0.5991***   0.4449***
                                     (0.0439)         (0.0484)       (0.0474)       (0.0502)      (0.0480)       (0.0533)       (0.0529)    (0.0562)
 Cumulative venture capital         0.0022***        0.0022***      0.0018***      0.0019***     0.0027***      0.0026***      0.0022***   0.0023***
 funding as of 1990                  (0.0001)         (0.0001)       (0.0002)       (0.0002)      (0.0001)       (0.0001)       (0.0002)    (0.0002)
 Log-likelihood                       -834.98          -792.83        -789.10        -765.98       -765.52        -709.36        -709.90     -677.12
 Restricted log-likelihood            -936.40          -936.40        -936.40        -936.40       -872.49        -872.49        -872.49     -872.49
 Sample size                            342              342            342            342           342            342            342         342

Notes:       All models were estimated as a Poisson process with standard errors (in parentheses) corrected following Wooldridge (1991).
             Significance Levels: * # 0.05, ** # 0.01, *** # 0.001




                                                                      32
Table 5 Estimates for Products-on-the-Market Models for All U.S. Firms

 Dependent Variables                                   Total Products                                  Total Human Therapies and Vaccines
 (across)                                         on the Market as of 1990                                   on the Market as of 1990
 Explanatory Variables
 (down)                              Model a          Model b        Model c        Model d       Model e         Model f      Model g      Model h
 Constant                           0.4715***        0.6581***      0.4881***      0.6211***     -1.4588***     -1.0649***    -1.0252***   -1.0201***
                                     (0.0424)         (0.0491)      (0.04298)       (0.0456)      (0.1262)       (0.1252)      (0.1155)     (0.1263)

 Star Authorships of:
   Local untied articles                            -0.0010***                    -0.0011***                      0.0003                     0.0003
                                                      (0.0001)                      (0.0001)                     (0.0002)                   (0.0002)
   Affiliated articles                              -0.0037***                      0.0070*                     0.0083***                  -0.0129**
                                                      (0.0006)                      (0.0029)                     (0.0009)                   (0.0046)
   All linked articles                               0.0630***                     0.0858***                    0.1072***                    0.0329
                                                      (0.0057)                      (0.0114)                     (0.0072)                   (0.0204)
 Top-112 University
 Authorships:
   All core collaborations                                          0.0009***     -0.0070***                                   0.0103***   0.0146***
                                                                     (0.0002)      (0.0021)                                     (0.0005)    (0.0035)
   Citations to articles                                              0.0010       0.0016**                                    0.0045***     0.0019
                                                                     (0.0006)      (0.0006)                                     (0.0011)    (0.0013)
 Firm Characteristics:
   NBF indicator                     -0.0855**      -0.0982***       -0.0848**     -0.0854**     -0.3431***     -0.3574***    -0.3515***   -0.3734***
                                      (0.0277)        (0.0286)        (0.0276)      (0.0275)       (0.0795)       (0.0851)      (0.0865)     (0.0856)
   Years in biotech                  0.1189***       0.1145***       0.1166***     0.1178***      0.1087***      0.0600***     0.0594***    0.0539***
                                      (0.0036)        (0.0040)        (0.0038)      (0.0039)       (0.0111)       (0.0102)      (0.0107)     (0.0106)
   Recombinant DNA indicator           0.0544          0.0294          0.0338        0.0447       0.5854***      0.3515***     0.3547***    0.2904***
                                      (0.0232)        (0.0263)        (0.0249)      (0.0254)       (0.0771)       (0.0829)      (0.0845)     (0.0839)
 Cumulative venture capital         -0.0007***      -0.0006***      -0.0007***    -0.0006***      -0.0009**     -0.0019***    -0.0031***   -0.0023***
 funding as of 1990                   (0.0002)        (0.0002)        (0.0002)      (0.0002)       (0.0003)       (0.0004)      (0.0005)     (0.0004)
 Log-likelihood                       -1317.71        -1296.09        -1316.81      -1293.83        -440.58        -418.77       -420.01      -416.54
 Restricted log-likelihood            -1406.43        -1406.43        -1406.43      -1406.43        -456.72        -456.72       -456.72      -456.72
 Sample size                             342             342             342           342            342            342           342          342

Notes:       All models were estimated as a Poisson process with standard errors (in parentheses) corrected following Wooldridge (1991).
             Significance Levels: * # 0.05, ** # 0.01, *** # 0.001




                                                                      33
Table 6      OLS Estimates for 1994 Employment for All Reporting U.S. Firms
             Dependent Variable: Natural Logarithm of Total Employees as of 1994
           Explanatory Variables
           (down)                              Model a         Model b        Model c      Model d
           Constant                            4.416***       4.3516***      4.6815***    4.5195***
                                               (0.3379)        (0.3449)       (0.3338)     (0.3454)

           Star Authorships of:
             Local untied articles                             0.0015*                     0.0014*
                                                               (0.0007)                    (0.0007)
             Affiliated articles                                0.0074                      -0.0236
                                                               (0.0118)                    (0.0191)
             All linked articles                               0.1201*                      -0.0148
                                                               (0.0543)                    (0.0734)
           Top-112 university
           authorships:
             All Core Collaborations                                          0.0179*      0.0315*
                                                                              (0.0070)     (0.0156)
             Citations to articles                                            0.0116*       0.0081
                                                                              (0.0053)     (0.0056)
           Firm characteristics:
             NBF indicator                    -1.2023***      -1.1656***     -1.1666***   -1.1879***
                                                (0.2477)        (0.2424)       (0.2394)     (0.2399)
             Years in biotech                    0.0199          -0.0040        -0.0238      -0.0256
                                                (0.0317)        (0.0317)       (0.0322)     (0.0321)
             Recombinant DNA indicator         0.7636***       0.6452**       0.5631**     0.5453**
                                                (0.0439)        (0.1987)       (0.1994)     (0.1988)
           Cumulative venture capital          0.0062***       0.0058***      0.0053***    0.0052***
           funding as of 1990                   (0.0012)        (0.0011)       (0.0011)     (0.0011)
           Standard Error of Estimate           1.473           1.433           1.421       1.412
           R2 (adjusted)                        0.208           0.250           0.263       0.272
           Sample size                           233             233             233         233

          Notes:       Sample size was reduced because of non-reporting for 109 firms.
                       Standard errors (in parentheses).
                       Significance Levels: * # 0.05, ** # 0.01, *** # 0.001




                                                        34
                                 Figure 1           The Geographic Distribution Biotech Patents
                                                    and New Products as of 1991



                   100%

                                                                                   23%
                   90%
                                                             31%

                   80%
                                      51%

                   70%                                                             19%

                                                             20%
                   60%
                                                                                                  Other states
                                                                                   18%
                   50%                                                                            NY, NJ, MD
                                      12%
                                                             18%                                  Massachusetts
                   40%
                                                                                                  California




Percent of Total
                                      11%
                   30%
                                                                                   40%
                   20%                                       31%
                                      26%
                   10%

                    0%
                          Biotech Patents Granted   Human Therapies &    Human Therapies &
                                                       Vaccines in      Vaccines on the Market
                                                      Development




                                                                   35
                               Figure 2a                                     Biotech Firms Are More Successful if Tied to Star Scientists
                                                                             or if Linked to Top-Research-University Faculty




                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                            Mean Success by
                                               Mean Values for Innovation
                                                                                                                                                            Tied Star Articles
                                                                            25

                                                                            20                                                                                                                                                     Mean Success by
                                                      Measures

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Linked Top-112
                                                                            15                                                                                                                                                     Articles

                                                                            10

                                                                                 5

                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                     Biotech Patents Affiliated




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rtic
                                                                                                                  Products in Development
                                                                                                                  Affiliated or Linked Stars




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1-1               les
                                                                                                                                               Affiliated or Linked Stars

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0A
                                                                                                                                               Products on the Market
                                                                                          or Linked Stars




                                                                                                                                                                            Biotech Patents Linked                                                                        rtic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0A                 les



                                                                                                                                                                                                     Products in Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rtic




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Linked Top-112 Faculty
                                                                                                                                                                               Top-112 Faculty                                                                       les




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Linked Top-112 Faculty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Products on the Market




                                                                            Figure 2b Biotech Firms Are More Successful if
                                                                                      Funded by Venture Capitalists


                                      30
Mean Values for Innovation Measures




                                      25



                                      20



                                      15



                                      10



                                       5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Above Median Funding

                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Below Median Funding

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        No Funding
                                                     Biotech
                                                     Patents                                     Products in
                                                                                                Development                                                                 Products on
                                                                                                                                                                            the Market




                                                                                                                                                                                              36
Appendix – Supplementary Analyses


         The tables and figure in this appendix provide supplementary analyses to those in the main text

and some additional detail on data used in the empirical analysis. The depth of involvement of top

academic scientists in the best biotech firms indicated in Table 1 is corroborated in Appendix Tables A1.

Appendix Tables A2 and A3 provide totals by states of the firms in the sample and the 1991 counts of total

products, human therapeutics, vaccines, diagnostics, and agricultural products in development and on the

market, respectively. Figure A1 shows how concentrated research activity is in the top decile biotech

firms.

         Appendix Table A4 lists exactly which universities make the ISI’s top-112 list based on amount of

federal research funding received.

         Appendix Table A5 reports the results of running the patent analysis as a cross-section without

exploiting the timing aspect of the data. The ability to have both star and top-112 science base indicators

in the regression simultaneously appears to be a feature of the fuller analysis and not of the patents per

se.




                                                    37
Appendix Table A1                   Leading Academic Scientists Held Key Positions in the Top-10
                                    Biotechnology Firms in 1994

                                                 Number of Tied                   Number of Top-Ten
Position                                         Star Scientistsa                 University Scientistsb

Founder/co-founder                                       1                                   6


President and CEO                                        0                                   2


Vice-President                                           0                                   6


Directorc                                                2                                  12


Scientific Advisory Board Memberd                        2                                  24


Notes:
a
  Equals the number of tied star scientists holding the position indicated by the row label. The column total may
   exceed the number of scientists since scientists could hold multiple positions within the firm.
b
  Equals the number of top-112 university scientists holding the position indicated by the row label. The column
   total may exceed the number of scientists since scientists could hold multiple positions within the firm.
c
  One tied star scientist was listed as the Board Chair and another was listed as Board Secretary.
d
  One of the top-112 university scientists was listed as the Scientific Advisory Board Chair.




                                                         38
Appendix Table A2       Products in Development by State as of 1991: Total Products,
                        Human Therapeutics, Vaccines, Diagnostics and Agricultural

                     Total     Thera-                                           Firms in
          State     Products   peutics   Vaccines   Diagnostics Agriculture     Sample
 California           175       136           12        14            4            96
 Massachusetts        101        81           6          4            6            39
 Maryland              18        9            0          5            3            16
 New Jersey            73        57           1          6            0            27
 New York              46        28           3         12            1            24
 Others               235       133           19        42            7           140


 Total                648       444           41        83            21          342


 Source: Bioscan.




Appendix Table A3       Products on the Market by Key State as of 1991: Total Products,
                        Human Therapeutics, Vaccines, Diagnostics and Agricultural

                     Total     Thera-                                           Firms in
          State     Products   peutics   Vaccines   Diagnostics   Agriculture   Sample
 California            381       73           1         119           19           96
 Massachusetts         148       33           1         73             6           39
 Maryland              56         6           0         17             1           16
 New Jersey            60        14           0         11             1           27
 New York              104       16           0         59             0           24
 Others                235       37           6         122           24           140
 Total                1,296      179          8         401           51           342

 Source: Bioscan.




                                         39
 Appendix Table A4             List of Top-112 Universities as Defined by the Institute of Scientific Information

   ARIZONA STATE UNIV              NEW MEXICO STATE UNIV          UNIV CALIF SAN FRANCISCO       UNIV NEW MEXICO
   BAYLOR COLL MED                 NEW YORK UNIV                  UNIV CALIF SANTA BARBARA       UNIV OREGON
   BOSTON UNIV                     NORTHWESTERN UNIV              UNIV CALIF SANTA CRUZ          UNIV PENN
   BRANDEIS UNIV                   OHIO STATE UNIV                UNIV CHICAGO                   UNIV PITTSBURGH
   BROWN UNIV                      OREGON HLTH SCI UNIV           UNIV CINCINNATI                UNIV ROCHESTER
   CALTECH                         OREGON STATE UNIV              UNIV COLORADO                  UNIV SO CALIF
   CARNEGIE MELLON UNIV            PENN STATE UNIV                UNIV CONNECTICUT               UNIV TENNESSEE
   CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIV       PRINCETON UNIV                 UNIV DELAWARE                  UNIV TEXAS AUSTIN
   COLORADO STATE UNIV             PURDUE UNIV                    UNIV FLORIDA                   UNIV TEXAS DALLAS
   COLUMBIA UNIV                   RICE UNIV                      UNIV GEORGIA                   UNIV TEXAS HOUSTON
   CORNELL UNIV                    ROCKEFELLER UNIV               UNIV HAWAII                    UNIV TEXAS SAN ANTONIO HLTH SCI CTR
   CUNY                            RUTGERS STATE UNIV             UNIV ILLINOIS CHICAGO          UNIV UTAH
   DARTMOUTH COLL                  STANFORD UNIV                  UNIV ILLINOIS URBANA           UNIV VERMONT
   DUKE UNIV                       SUNY BUFFALO                   UNIV IOWA                      UNIV VIRGINIA
   EMORY UNIV                      SUNY STONY BROOK               UNIV KANSAS                    UNIV WASHINGTON
   FLORIDA STATE UNIV              SYRACUSE UNIV                  UNIV KENTUCKY                  UNIV WISCONSIN MADISON
   GEORGETOWN UNIV                 TEXAS A&M UNIV                 UNIV MARYLAND BALTIMORE        UTAH STATE UNIV
   GEORGIA INST TECHNOL            TUFTS UNIV                     UNIV MARYLAND COLLEGE PARK     VANDERBILT UNIV
   HARVARD UNIV                    TULANE UNIV                    UNIV MASS AMHERST              VIRGINIA COMMONWEALTH UNIV
   INDIANA UNIV                    UNIV ALABAMA                   UNIV MASS WORCESTER            VIRGINIA POLYTECH INST
   IOWA STATE UNIV                 UNIV ALASKA                    UNIV MASSACHUSETTS             W VIRGINIA UNIV
   JOHNS HOPKINS UNIV              UNIV ARIZONA                   UNIV MIAMI                     WAKE FOREST UNIV
   LEHIGH UNIV                     UNIV CALIF BERKELEY            UNIV MICHIGAN                  WASHINGTON STATE UNIV
   LOUISIANA STATE UNIV            UNIV CALIF DAVIS               UNIV MINNESOTA                 WASHINGTON UNIV
   LOYOLA UNIV                     UNIV CALIF IRVINE              UNIV MISSOURI                  WAYNE STATE UNIV
   MICHIGAN STATE UNIV             UNIV CALIF LOS ANGELES         UNIV N CAROLINA CHAPEL HILL    WOODS HOLE OCEANOG INST
   MIT                             UNIV CALIF RIVERSIDE           UNIV NEBRASKA                  YALE UNIV
   N CAROLINA STATE UNIV           UNIV CALIF SAN DIEGO           UNIV NEW HAMPSHIRE             YESHIVA UNIV


Source: Institute of Scientific Information, U.S. University Science Indicators, machine-readable database on CD-ROM, Philadelphia:
Institute of Scientific Information, 2000. [Although the data base aims at the top 100 research universities, the stopping rule appears
to include the 13 universities tied for 100th place in their covered list of 112 universities.]




                                                                  40
Appendix Table A5               Estimates for Patenting-Success Models for All U.S. Firms

 Dependent Variables (across)      I.        Cumulative Patents Granted                          Cumulative Citation-weighted Patents Granted
                                                                                                                       as of 1991
                                                           as of 1991

 Explanatory Variables (down)        Model a         Model b         Model c       Model d        Model e        Model f        Model g     Model h
 Constant                           -1.7164***      -0.9774***      -0.9703***    -0.7919***     -0.2199***     0.6326***      0.7030***   0.8275***
                                     (0.0470)        (0.0521)        (0.0426)      (0.0549)       (0.0071)       (0.0070)       (0.0061)    (0.0074)

 Star Authorships of:
   Local untied articles                            -0.0005***                     -0.0003**                    -0.003***                  0.00004**
                                                      (0.0001)                      (0.0001)                     (0.0000)                   (0.0000)
   Affiliated articles                               0.0054***                    -0.0368***                    0.0047***                  -0.0427***
                                                      (0.0002)                      (0.0006)                     (0.0000)                   (0.0010)
   All linked articles                               0.0966***                    -0.0401***                    0.1017***                  -0.0397***
                                                      (0.0011)                      (0.0020)                     (0.0002)                   (0.0003)
 Top-112 University
 Authorships:
   All core collaborations                                          0.0072***      0.0292***                                   0.0074***    0.0329***
                                                                     (0.0001)       (0.0004)                                    (0.0000)     (0.0001)
   Citations to articles                                            0.0051***      0.0009***                                   0.0038***   -0.0034***
                                                                     (0.0002)       (0.0002)                                    (0.0000)     (0.0000)
 Firm Characteristics:
   NBF indicator                    -0.7086***      -0.8054***      -0.8284***    -0.8798***     -0.7682***     -0.8968***    -0.9272***   -0.9936***
                                      (0.0243)        (0.0282)        (0.0272)      (0.0279)       (0.0030)       (0.0036)      (0.0037)     (0.0037)
   Years in biotech                  0.2512***       0.1870***       0.1804***     0.1667***      0.2968***      0.2213***     0.2128***    0.2009***
                                      (0.0034)        (0.0029)        (0.0030)      (0.0033)       (0.0005)       (0.0004)      (0.0005)     (0.0005)
   Recombinant DNA indicator         1.5273***       1.2971***       1.2214***     1.1059***      1.5785***      1.3091***     1.2506***    1.1288***
                                      (0.0172)        (0.0219)        (0.0207)      (0.0229)       (0.0025)       (0.0032)      (0.0031)     (0.0036)
 Cumulative venture capital          0.0030***       0.0027***       0.0022***     0.0025***      0.0039***      0.0037***     0.0033***    0.0036***
 funding as of 1990                    (0.000)        (0.0000)        (0.0001)      (0.0000)       (0.0000)       (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)
 Log-likelihood                       -1353.51        -1247.53        -1229.45      -1180.16       -8880.99       -7964.87      -7877.83     -7394.32
 Restricted log-likelihood            -1860.13        -1860.13        -1860.13      -1860.13      -13775.47      -13775.47     -13775.47    -13775.47
 Sample size                             342             342             342           342            342            342           342          342

Notes:       All models were estimated as a Poisson process with standard errors (in parentheses) corrected following Wooldridge (1991).
             Significance Levels: * # 0.05, ** # 0.01, *** # 0.001




                                                                        41
                                Figure A1      Top-Decile Biotech Firms Accounted for a Disproportionately
                                               Large Fraction of Total Innovation through 1991


                                                     Top-Decile Firms    All Other Firms

                                1200



                                1000



                                800           625 (57%)



                                600



                                400                                          176 (36%)

                                              470 (43%)




Counts of Innovation Measures
                                              Top-Decile                                          34 (18%)
                                200                                          309 (64%)
                                                Firms
                                                                             Top-Decile
                                                                               Firms             153 (82%)
                                                                                                 Top-Decile
                                  0                                                                Firms

                                       Biotech Patents Granted     Human Therapies &        Human Therapies &
                                                                 Vaccines in Development   Vaccines on the Market



                                                                        42
