                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DOES PEER ABILITY AFFECT STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT?


                                               Eric A. Hanushek
                                                 John F. Kain
                                              Jacob M. Markman
                                               Steven G. Rivkin


                                             Working Paper 8502
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w8502


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        October 2001




We benefited from comments by William Brock, Steven Durlauf, Caroline Hoxby, and participants of the
Brookings Conference on Empirics of Social Interactions (January 2000). Support for this work has been
provided by the Spencer Foundation, the Mellon Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the Packard
Humanities Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman and Steven G. Rivkin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Peer Ability Affect Student Achievement?
Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman and Steven G. Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 8502
October 2001
JEL No. I2, H4



                                              ABSTRACT


        Empirical analysis of peer effects on student achievement has been open to question because of
the difficulties of separating peer effects from other confounding influences. While most econometric
attention has been directed at issues of simultaneous determination of peer interactions, we argue that
issues of omitted and mismeasured variables are likely to be more important. We control for the most
important determinants of achievement that will confound peer estimates by removing student and
school-by-grade fixed effects in addition to observable family and school characteristics. The analysis also
addresses the reciprocal nature of peer interactions and the interpretation of estimates based upon models
using past achievement as the measure of peer group quality. The results indicate that peer achievement
has a positive effect on achievement growth. Moreover, students throughout the school test score
distribution appear to benefit from higher achieving schoolmates. On the other hand, the variance in
achievement appears to have no systematic effect.




Eric A. Hanushek                                                  John F. Kain
Hoover Institution                                                Green Center for the Study of
Stanford University                                               Science and Society
Stanford, CA 94305-6010                                           University of Texas at Dallas
and NBER                                                          P.O. Box 830688
hanushek@hoover.stanford.edu                                      Richardson, TX 75083-0688

Jacob M. Markman                                                  Steven G. Rivkin
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
Amherst College                                                   Amherst College
Amherst, MA 01002                                                 Amherst, MA 01002
               Does the Ability of Peers Affect Student Achievement?
          by Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman, and Steven G. Rivkin


        The peer group composition of schools is undeniably important in the minds of parents as

well as policy makers at the local, state, and federal level. Residential location decisions of

families, various state and federal laws, and court interpretations of school district policies

frequently have an implicit if not explicit peer group component. There have nonetheless been

relatively few direct investigations of the impact of peer groups on student performance and what

evidence exists has been open to widely varying interpretations. This paper pursues a unique

identification strategy based on small perturbations in cohort composition to extract the causal

impacts of peer group characteristics on achievement.

        Peer group effects have played a prominent role in a number of policy debates including

ability tracking, anti-poverty programs in both rural areas and urban ghettos, and school

desegregation. In addition, opposition to the growing demand for expanded school choice or the

provision of education vouchers often focuses on the importance of peers and potential for greater

economic and social isolation of disadvantaged students. At the same time advocates of choice

often tout its potential for reducing the impact of neighborhood economic and racial segregation.

        The role of peers also has entered increasingly into theoretical analyses of school choice.

Starting from the observation that many people express concern about other students, a variety of

analyses (e.g., Benabou (1993, 1996), Caucutt (forthcoming), de Bartolome (1990), and Epple

and Romano (1998)) have examined the equilibrium properties of choice and peer group effects

on student achievement.

        This attention to peer effects has taken place largely in the absence of compelling

empirical evidence on the impact of peer group characteristics on a variety of academic, social,

and labor market outcomes. As Brock and Durlauf (forthcoming), Manski (1993) and Moffitt

(2001) point out, the empirical analysis of peer influences has been inhibited by both conceptual

and data problems -- problems that raise serious questions about interpretation of the existing
studies, even those that use more sophisticated econometric techniques including instrumental

variables. These critiques, in part precipitated by parallel analyses of neighborhood poverty (e.g.

Mayer and Jencks (1989), O'Regan and Quigley (1999), Rosenbaum and Popkin (1991)), point to

a number of potentially severe empirical problems that are at least partially present in the recent

set of randomized housing experiments aimed at understanding neighborhood effects (e.g.,

Rosenbaum (1995); Katz, Kling, and Liebman (2001); Ludwig, Duncan, and Hirschfield (2001)).1

           This paper makes use of a unique matched panel data set on students and schools to

identify the impacts of specific peer group characteristics on academic achievement. It directly

confronts the central specification issues that impinge on our ability to estimate the achievement

effects of peer group composition. These include the confounding influences of unobserved or

badly measured student, family, and school factors and of the reciprocal nature of peer group

interactions.

            The basic strategy involves the successive elimination of the components of individual

student achievement growth that are most likely to confuse family and school influences with

peer group effects. While controls for observable characteristics are used, the ability to control

for fixed individual, school, and school-by-grade effects on test score gains permits the clearest

identification of peer effects. Ultimately, we identify these effects by considering the impact of

small differences in peer group characteristics for successive cohorts of students in a given

school.2 This panel data approach is robust to most of the commonly cited estimation dangers.

           One problem not addressed by the fixed effects framework is the reciprocal nature of peer

interactions that likely introduces simultaneous equations bias when contemporaneous peer

behavior is proxied by current average achievement. In the fixed effects framework,

specifications based on lagged peer achievement eliminate the problem of simultaneous equations

bias and capture the systematic predetermined aspects of peer interactions. However, this

1
    For a review and critique of these studies, see Moffitt (2001).




                                                      -- 1 --
approach also ignores the impact of current peer behavior not captured by lagged achievement

and may therefore lead to an underestimate of peer influences. This issue is addressed at length in

Section III below.



         Our basic estimation of elementary school achievement growth indicates that the

achievement level of peers has a positive effect on achievement that is roughly constant across

quartiles of the school achievement distribution. In contrast, the variance in achievement appears

to have no systematic influence.

         Despite the fixed effects methodology, important limitations remain in terms of both data

structure and the available measures of peers and outcomes. The role of peers can be complex.

Influences may come from friends or role models, or peer group composition may alter the nature

of instruction in the classroom. We do not have information at the classroom level or about

friends but instead rely on aggregations of students within the same school and grade. We also

have limited information on attributes of peers, though we do include measures for the three most

commonly expressed peer characteristics: achievement, race, and socio-economic status. Finally,

due to limited outcome measures available for elementary school students, all empirical work

examines academic achievement. Many of the policy discussions and parental concerns focus on

other outcomes including teen pregnancy, drug use, high school attrition, attitudes toward

minorities, and employment but to name a few.


I. Conceptual Issues in the Estimation of Peer Group Effects

         The identification of specific social interaction effects is a daunting task. Not only must

the analysis address the endogenous choice of neighborhoods and schools, but it must also

separate peer influences from the effects of other school characteristics and account for the fact


2
 This methodology is similar to that used by Hoxby (2000) in the estimation of class size and racial
composition effects for students in Connecticut.


                                                   -- 2 --
that student and peer achievement are determined simultaneously. In this section we outline an

empirical framework with which to examine peer influences, following closely the work of Brock

and Durlauf (forthcoming) and Moffitt (2001) with special emphasis on the educational context.

        Attempts to estimate peer effects on educational achievement directly have been

relatively limited. Hanushek (1972, 1992) finds no peer achievement effects, while Henderson,

Mieszkowski, and Sauvageau (1976), Summers and Wolfe (1977) and Zimmer and Toma (2000)

report positive influences of higher achieving peers at least for some students. Consideration of

ability tracking in schools likewise has yielded mixed results, even though policy has presumed

that tracking is generally bad for achievement (e.g., see Oakes (1992); Argys, Rees, and Brewer

(1996). The evidence on achievement effects of racial composition has been much more

voluminous, although the results are no easier to summarize or interpret (cf. Armor (1995)).

        In general there has been limited attention given to the mechanisms through which peers

affect outcomes. The most common perspective is that peers, like families, are sources of

motivation, aspirations, and direct interactions in learning. Moreover, peers may affect the

classroom process – aiding learning through questions and answers, contributing to the pace of

instruction, or hindering learning through disruptive behavior à la Lazear (forthcoming).

        Most analysis has focused on the identification of the “reduced form” relationship

between outcomes and specific measures of peer group quality, typically ignoring the precise

structure of the underlying causal relationship. An outcome measure is regressed on peer group

characteristics that are usually constructed as school aggregates of family background variables or

achievement. These measures are readily available and, if they adequately capture the influences

of families, would seem appropriate for peers. While we follow in that tradition, it is important to

note that ambiguities about the correct measurement of family backgrounds exist, and these

naturally transfer to the measurement of peer influences.3


3
 The empirical analysis of family background has generally relied just on readily available measures of
socio-economic status of families to proxy for the learning environment in the home without much


                                                  -- 3 --
           The attention to the full causal structure in the case of peers reflects the fact that peer

composition is a product of both parental choices of neighborhood and school and school policy

makers’ decisions on attendance rules and classroom placement of students. One important

theme, that follows the interpretation of Moffitt (2001) and motivates our work here, is that

existing peer results are very sensitive to the measurement and specification of various influences

on achievement. A central aspect of our modeling is the replication of alternative specifications

within a consistent database so that elements of the previous inconsistency of findings can be

disentangled.

           The key issue in the identification of peer group effects on achievement is the separation

of the effects of peers from other confounding influences. Two potential problems have pervaded

the peer literature. First, measures of peer attributes may be good proxies for omitted or

mismeasured factors that affect individual achievement, leading to biased results that quite

generally exaggerate the importance of peers. Second, because of the simultaneous nature of peer

interactions – a student both affects her peers and is affected by peers – separating the causal

impacts is extraordinarily difficult, at least in the most general form. The formal theoretical

literature has concentrated most attention on the later issue, while we believe the former is much

more important in the practical estimation of peer effects in schools. This section begins with a

general model of educational achievement and then develops these two aspects of estimating peer

effects.

A general model of achievement

           In its abstract form, we begin with the commonly held view that today’s achievement is

influenced not just by current family, school, and peer interactions but also by those of the past

that establish the base for any current learning. Following Brock and Durlauf (forthcoming) and


attention to the details of the structure. This lack of attention to detail partially reflects the fact that little
consideration is given to policies directed at changing the characteristics of families, so the details of the
causal structure have been less important. When considered directly, however, analyses have largely




                                                        -- 4 --
Manski (1993), we separate peer influences into endogenous (behavioral) effects and exogenous

or predetermined (contextual) effects. The first category refers to the contemporaneous and

reciprocal influences of peer achievement on schoolmates, reflecting the fact that the achievement

of peers is governed by similar achievement relationships. The second category includes

measures of peers that are unaffected by current behavior, such as socio-economic status or race.

We follow past convention and represent the endogenous peer variable as A (− i ) gs (average peer

achievement in a grade) and the predetermined peer variables as P (− i ) gs (where the subscript (-i)

means that these variables represent the average values computed over all students in the school

and grade other than student i).4 Equation (1) describes achievement (A) for student i in grade G

and in school s,



(1)

               A iGs = X iGs β G + S Gs δ G + P( − i )Gs λG + A ( − i )Gs γ G
                       14444444244444443
                                             current inputs
                          G −1             G −1                G −1          G −1
                        + ∑ X igs β g + ∑ S gs δ g + ∑ P( − i ) gs λ g + ∑ A ( − i ) gs γ g + eigs
                          g =1          g =1         g =1                =1
                          1   44444        44442         44444g4            4443
                                                    cumulative past inputs




where X and S are vectors of family background and school variables, respectively. Because it is

useful for developing the estimation issues, this representation separates current and past

influences.5




questioned whether such things as family income or parental education are the driving forces (e.g., Mayer
(1997) on family income or Behrman and Rosenzweig (2001) on mother’s education).
4
  For expositional purposes, we write this model as having a single endogenous peer measure. The analysis
is easily generalized, and the general results are unchanged by adding other contemporaneous achievement
measures.
5
  Even though we present achievement just in terms of school experiences, leaving out preschool
experiences is done solely for expositional ease. Given the estimation strategy, it has no effect on the
results.


                                                              -- 5 --
The importance of measurement in peer effect estimation

         In reality, researchers virtually never possess the entire history of the relevant inputs.

Consequently specifications based on equation (1) are rarely if ever directly estimated. The most

common alternative, lacking historical information, bases estimation solely on measures of the

current values of X, S, P ( − i ) , and A ( − i ) . But, estimation of specifications of this form offers little

hope of providing consistent estimates of the peer parameters (λ and γ). The main issue – one

that is not specific to peer effect estimation – is that current characteristics will generally be

correlated with unobserved past determinants of achievement, introducing the standard problem

of omitted variables bias.

         In peer estimation, ignoring history has a stronger impact. Because members of peer

groups tend to have similar experiences over time through systematic neighborhood and school

choice, many omitted historical factors will be common to the peer group. Perhaps even more

relevant, many left out or poorly measured contemporaneous inputs will also tend to be common

to the group. Common past and current omitted factors that affect both individual i’s

achievement and peer achievement will induce a correlation of contemporaneous peer factors and

the individual error term (e), making peer effects appear important even when they have no true

impact, i.e., even when λ and γ are identically zero.6

         Such problems have been widely discussed within the general achievement literature.

For example, in discussions of the interpretations of peer influences contained in the 1966

Coleman Report (Coleman et al. (1966)), the possible interactions of model misspecification and

peer group measurement entered into early critiques (Hanushek and Kain (1972), Smith (1972)).

In other words, the nature and measurement of peer group factors implies that common model

misspecification is particularly damaging to inferences about the importance of peers.



6
 See Brock and Durlauf (forthcoming), Manski (1993), or Moffitt (2001) for a formal development of the
general cases of issues raised in this section.


                                                    -- 6 --
        An approach to the general problem of estimating achievement relationships, which we

follow below, begins by taking the first difference of equation (1). The value added specification

reduces the data requirements to the inputs relevant for grade G, since all of the historical

influences on the current achievement level drop out, as in equation (2):

                                                                           c
                                             c
                                          ∆AiGs      c
                                                = X iGs β + S Gs
                                                              c
                                                                 δ + P ( −i )Gs λ + A(c−i ) Gsγ + υ iGs
                                                                                                    c
                                                                                                          (2)



         c
where ∆AiGs is the achievement gain (difference between current grade and previous grade test

scores) for student i in grade G in school s in cohort c.7 Student achievement growth is related to

the contemporaneous inputs (which are the flows of these factors over the observed time period),

and the generic problems of omitted historical variables are circumvented.

        Even with the value added form, consideration of peer influences complicates the

estimation of achievement models. The problems of poorly measured individual school and

background factors (either because of omitted or error-prone measures) have the same extra

impact in the value added models because of the “strong proxy” nature of peer measures. One

important and relevant example is systematic but unmeasured elements of teacher quality. As a

simple illustration, assume that the error term in equation (2) omits an aspect of teacher quality

( κ G ) that, while uncorrelated with XG and the measured school aspects of SG, is common to the

achievement of peers. Even in the case where current peer achievement is irrelevant (i.e., γ=0),

the estimation of the effects of A ( − i ) will yield an estimator of peer effects, γˆ , with upward bias




7
 An alternative estimation approach is to add a measure of prior achievement to the right hand side. This
approach does not constrain the parameter on prior achievement to be one but does add other complications
with estimation (see Hanushek (1979), Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2001)). The identification of separate
cohorts at this point facilitates development of the subsequent estimation strategy.


                                                 -- 7 --
that systematically makes peers look more important. The magnitude of the bias is directly

related to the importance of the omitted factor in determining achievement.8

           In part to circumvent such problems of mismeasured current inputs commonly affecting

all peers, a number of studies have simply dropped A ( − i ) from the specification and included its

lagged value in its place. Unfortunately, by itself this introduces a series of statistical and

interpretative problems (depending on the precise nature of the underlying behavior). For

example, the lagged average achievement score is likely to remain correlated with the error term

because of the serial correlation in unobserved teacher, school and individual factors. Thus, the

simultaneous equations and omitted variables biases in estimating peer effects, while altered in

form, are not eliminated. Additionally, the substitution of lagged achievement introduces another

type of bias that we discuss in detail below.

           Our primary strategy for dealing with these general issues begins by extracting fixed

components of individuals and schools to deal not only with the most significant omitted

variables problems but also the key elements of neighborhood and school selectivity. Importantly,

the substitution of lagged values of peer achievement in place of the current value within such a

fixed effects framework is not subject to the problems of simultaneous equations and omitted

variables biases, because the fixed effects eliminate the systematic family and school influences

that are correlated over time.

           From the starting point of equation (2), equation (3) decomposes the error, υ, into a series

of components that highlights those factors most likely to contaminate the peer estimates.




8
    Consider in this simple example that a common omitted factor,   κ G , enters linearly into the achievement
of i and of all peers with a coefficient of β. The bias simplifies to   β 2 var(κ G ) / var( A( −i )G ) .
Intuitively, because the common omitted factor appears both in i’s achievement and that of peers, a positive
bias on peer achievement is introduced.
          Moffitt (2001) discusses a variety of possible sources of such errors including a discussion of
measurement error problems.


                                                    -- 8 --
                               υ iGs
                                  c
                                     = ω i + ω s + ω Gs + τ Gc + θ Gs
                                                                   c
                                                                      + ε iGs
                                                                           c
                                                                                                      (3)



The first three terms capture time invariant individual (ωi), school (ωs), and school-by-grade

effects on achievement (ωGs); the fourth factor ( τ Gc ) captures cohort by year differences in the

testing regime; the fifth component ( θ Gs
                                        c
                                           ) captures school-by-grade effects that vary from cohort

to cohort, most notably the quality of teaching; and the final factor (ε) is a random error capturing

individual shocks that vary over time.

        Our approach makes use of matched panel data to remove explicitly the first four

components: fixed individual, school, school-by-grade, and cohort by grade effects. Notice how

these fixed effects account for the primary systematic but unobserved differences in students and

schools. The student fixed effects (in the gains formulation of equation 2) account for all student

and family factors that do not vary over the period of achievement observation and that affect the

rate of learning – including ability differences, family child rearing practices, general material

inputs, consistent motivational influences, and parental attitudes towards schools and peers. This

approach thus directly deals with many of the most difficult issues of potential bias in the peer

estimates arising from omitted and mismeasured individual and family factors.

        Next consider any fixed differences in schools that are not perfectly correlated with the

student fixed effects or included covariates (S and X). While these are typically correlated with

peer group composition through school and neighborhood choice, they are accounted for by

school fixed effects. Finally, even systematic within school changes in achievement gains across

grades can be accounted for through the use of school-by-grade fixed effects.

        The importance of the multiple cohorts should not be underestimated. For example,

consider the possibility that achievement for students in some schools tends to decline as the

students age due to factors other than peer achievement (e.g., adolescence may be more disruptive

for economically disadvantaged students). If only fixed individual and school effects were


                                                -- 9 --
removed (as is possible with panel data for a single cohort) in the estimation, the resulting

positive peer effect estimate would suggest that students were responding to peers when in fact

other factors had introduced a spurious relationship between the achievement gains of all students

in a school. On the other hand, if fixed student and school-by-grade effects are removed – as is

possible with data for multiple cohorts, such systematic changes in specific schools cannot drive

the results.

        The estimation of peer effects along with the fixed individual and school-by-grade effects

intuitively relies on perturbations in the pattern of peers across grades and cohorts; i.e., the

estimates are identified by small within school and grade differences in peer group characteristics

between cohorts. Such differences emanate from two sources: mobility into or out of the school

and, less importantly, changes in student circumstances (e.g. income or achievement). The large

annual mobility of students, averaging greater than 20 percent per year in the Texas public

schools, accounts for much of the differences across grades and cohorts.9

        One significant concern of course is the possibility that the observed changes in peers

simply act as proxies for other changes in family or school inputs. Whether our estimation

strategy can generate consistent estimates hinges upon whether the two time-varying components

of the error terms (θ and ε in equation 3) are orthogonal to the included peer variables. Three

possibilities seem most important. First, the small observed changes in peer circumstances may

be related to changes in family conditions that could bias the estimates. An increase or decrease

in peer average income or achievement may result from similar changes in own family income

that precipitate a school transfer and exert a direct effect on outcomes. Alternatively, shifts in

local labor market conditions may cause changes in both own family and peer group average

income, making it difficult to disentangle the influences of peers and family. Second, changes in

9
 Individual cohorts will differ through random factors such as age patterns of children within a given
school district. The estimation, however, relies on both changes across grades for a given cohort and
differences among cohorts. Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2001) describe and analyze student mobility.




                                                 -- 10 --
school characteristics may affect both own achievement and that of peers. For example, the

funding and availability of compensatory education programs is linked to school average income,

possibly building in a correlation between peer average income and programmatic effects. Or

teacher differences in a specific grade may vary with peer characteristics. Finally, school

selection by other families may be driven by attributes of the school, and the effects of such

attributes may be confused with peer effects. Consider a school that is becoming dysfunctional,

say because of an ineffective principal, and finds that all of its upper income families flee over

time. In such a case, achievement of the remaining students could fall along with the incomes of

peers, erroneously suggesting that peer income affects achievement even when there is no such

relationship.

        The severity of these potential problems depends in part on the ability to control for

changes in families and schools. In this analysis (described below) we include time varying

measures of family income, school characteristics, compensatory program status, and overall

school transfer behavior. Perhaps more important given the controls for student and school-by-

grade fixed effects, the potential severity also depends upon the speed with which families

relocate in response to school conditions. The concern is simply that families adjust to changes in

school quality (including peer composition) and thereby might induce bias through equilibrium

selection behavior. But, because residential moving is a costly process that undoubtedly includes

some slow adjustment, movement due to parental selectivity of schools is almost certainly much

slower than the movement of peer characteristics found in exogenous year-to-year variations. The

assumption that families also react slowly (i.e., not in the current year) to specific variations in

teacher quality seems natural, implying that there is no reason to believe that the choice behavior

of parents to current changes in teachers leads to any presumption about correlation of peer

factors and annual variations in teacher quality. It seems plausible that differences captured by


The overall mobility rates cited also exclude any school changes related to natural movements from
elementary to middle schools, even though such moves will generally affect school peers.


                                                 -- 11 --
school or school-by-grade quality provide the prime motivation for any family selection of

schools. Any remaining variations in annual teacher quality, even if large, must be orthogonal to

the school-by-grade estimates of quality. Particularly because the average family has more than

one child, mobility reactions to current shocks to teacher quality are likely to be minimal.

        In sum, the choice of neighborhood and school will tend to bias upward the estimated

effect of peer achievement unless an exogenous source of variation in peer achievement can be

identified. Our estimation strategy, which relies on small changes over time and grades in peer

characteristics, will provide consistent estimates of the underlying peer parameters unless

systematic changes in the contemporaneous innovations to achievement (θ and ε) are correlated

with the predetermined peer effects. Given the available measures of year-to-year changes in

family and school characteristics and the structure of the data allowing for the removal of student

and school-by-grade fixed effects, such correlations are likely to be of a very low order of

importance.

The reflection problem

        Before completing this discussion, an additional issue of peer influences must be

introduced. The most vexing estimation problem, formulated in detail by Manski (1993), is the

possible simultaneous determination of achievement for all classmates, with high achievement by

one student directly improving the achievement of classmates and vice versa. This possibility,

which has also received the most theoretical attention, is captured in equation (2) by the inclusion

of A (− i )G , the average achievement of peers. If the achievement of each peer is also governed by

equation (2), we would have A (− i )G directly related to AiGs through individual i’s influence on

the others in the class. As Moffitt (2001) shows, this situation can be thought of as a standard

simultaneous equations problem, where the induced correlation of A (− i )G and υ iG leads to

inconsistent estimation of the peer effect parameter. The reflection problem (in the terminology

of Manski (1993)) presents a conundrum, because it is extremely difficult to identify the separate


                                              -- 12 --
structural peer parameters (λ and γ) of equation 2 through standard exclusion restrictions.10

Without imposing functional form restrictions, one needs to find aggregate peer factors that do

not have an individual analog in the achievement relationship, something that is difficult given

the underlying conceptual basis that portrays peers as essentially extended families. Nor does

randomization help, because current behavior of the individual and peers will still be important.

        The estimation and interpretation issue in this framework is whether the

contemporaneous behavior of peers is important or whether any peer relationship is essentially

captured by the underlying characteristics including prior achievement. Understanding the

dimensions of this issue requires more detailed consideration of the peer components in equation

2. At the outset, it is important to note that the standard terminology in the reflection problem –

distinguishing between behavioral and contextual factors – can be confusing in the case of peers

and achievement. Similar to measures of family background, the predetermined measures of

peers such as aggregate parental education levels or racial composition of classmates are in part

proxies for attitudes, behavioral patterns, and learning related activities that systematically enter

into the behavior and learning of each student.

        Of course the endogenous peer component represented here by current aggregate

achievement is distinguished from the other factors mainly because of the reciprocal nature of the

determination of peer achievement. It is “behavioral” in the sense that each student’s actions

directly affect the rest of the class. It is this issue of simultaneity that severely complicates the

estimation of γ, not the fact that exogenous characteristics are unrelated to peer group behavior.

        Our estimation concentrates on models that employ lagged peer achievement instead of

the contemporaneous value. Interpretation of estimation built on lagged peer achievement




10
  Necessary conditions for identification can be found in Brock and Durlauf (forthcoming). An alternative
estimation approach that relies on randomization of peers helps with problems of common omitted factors
and the estimation of reduced form relationships but still leaves the basic simultaneous equations problem
(see Moffitt 2001 and the estimation in Sacerdote (2001)).


                                                 -- 13 --
depends on the relationship between lagged and current behavior.11 If lagged achievement

captures all of the relevant variation in current peer behavior (i.e. there are no year to year shocks

in current behavior), there is no bias. Of course in the fixed effects framework there would be no

need to substitute for current peer achievement if this were the case. More realistically, lagged

peer achievement is likely to be an imperfect proxy for the current value. If the difference

between current and lagged measures of peer achievement is random (e.g. the probably of a

family shock in grade G such as divorce is randomly distributed), the estimated effect of peer

achievement will generally be biased toward zero in a normal proxy variable effect. Even if the

current innovation to peer behavior is correlated with lagged peer achievement, under most

conceivable circumstances the estimated effect will still be downward biased. Therefore the

estimated effect of lagged achievement should provide a lower bound estimate of γ, and we find

little reason to believe, at least based on past estimation and descriptions of classroom behavior

and interactions, that the changes in individual behavior in a particular grade are especially

important when compared to the underlying systematic differences captured by lagged

achievement.




II. The UTD Texas Schools Project Microdata

        The cornerstone of this research is the analysis of a unique matched panel data set of

school operations constructed by the UTD Texas Schools Project, a project conceived of and

directed by John Kain. The data track the universe of three successive cohorts of Texas public

elementary students as they progress through school, beginning with students who attended third

grade in 1992. For each cohort there are over 200,000 students in over 3,000 public schools.


11
  The more customary interpretation of equation 2 as a structural representation of achievement would lead
to the estimation based on predetermined peer achievement be viewed as a reduced form relationship. We
avoid this because we think of   A ( −i ) as itself a proxy for the current behavioral interactions that are
important.


                                                     -- 14 --
Unlike many data sets that sample only small numbers from each school, these data enable us to

create quite accurate measures of peer group characteristics.



Sample Characteristics

        We use data for grades three through six for the three successive cohorts. Only Black,

Hispanic, and White students are included; the relatively few Asians are excluded in order to

simplify the models.

        The student data contain a limited number of student, family, and program characteristics

including race, ethnicity, gender and eligibility for a free or reduced price lunch (the measure of

economic disadvantage) and compensatory education services, but the panel feature can be

exploited to account implicitly for time invariant individual effects on achievement gains.

Importantly, students who switch schools can be followed as long as they remain in a Texas

public school.

        Beginning in 1993, the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) was administered

each spring to eligible students enrolled in grades three through eight. The criteria referenced

tests evaluate student mastery of grade-specific subject matter. Unique IDs link the student

records with the test data. This paper presents results for mathematics, although the results are

qualitatively quite similar for reading achievement. Consistent with the findings of our previous

work on Texas, schools appear to exert a much larger impact on math than reading in grades four

through six (see Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (forthcoming) and Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain

(2001)). Each math test contains approximately 50 questions. Because the number of questions

and average percent right varies across time and grades, we transform all test results into

standardized scores with a mean of zero and variance equal to one. The regression results are

robust to a number of transformations including the raw percentage correct. In order to avoid




                                              -- 15 --
complications associated with classification as limited English proficient (LEP) or disabled, all

LEP and special education students are dropped from the analysis.12

         Importantly, the student database can be linked to information on teachers and schools

through the school IDs. The school data contain detailed information on individual teachers

including grade and subject taught, class size, years of experience, and student population served.

While individual student-teacher matches are not possible, students and teachers can be uniquely

related to a grade on each campus. Each student is assigned the school average class size and the

distribution of teacher experience for teachers in regular classrooms for the appropriate grade and

school year.



Family Background and School Variables

         The fixed effects capture all stable student, family and grade specific school effects on

achievement growth. Time varying student and family factors (X) include indicator variables

identifying eligibility for a free or reduced price lunch, school transfer, and participation in the

Federal Title 1 compensatory education program for low income children. The vector of time

varying teacher characteristics (S) includes average class size, percent of teachers with zero years

of experience, and percent of teachers with one year of experience. (The relevant set of teacher

variables is based on prior work on a generalized achievement model in Rivkin, Hanushek, and

Kain (2001)).

         The final important issue is the construction of the peer group characteristics. Variables

are calculated from information on schoolmates by grade (own information is excluded from the

calculations). Proportion Black, proportion Hispanic, and proportion eligible for a free or reduced

price lunch use current information. Their construction is straightforward, though proportion

12
  Our analysis of special education Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (forthcoming) suggests that a higher
proportion of special education students in a grade raises the achievement of regular education students.
This finding is, however, impervious to the mix of mainstreamed and pull out instruction and leads us to




                                                  -- 16 --
eligible for a reduced price lunch is likely to be a noisy measure of peer economic

circumstances.13

         As previously discussed, the construction of measures of peer achievement is much more

problematic. We concentrate entirely on predetermined measures of achievement in order to

capture the effects of pre-existing differences in the level of human capital that may influence

peers through social interactions. By measuring peer achievement with peer test scores from two

grades earlier we avoid building in a mechanical peer correlation.14 We explicitly consider both

the mean and standard deviation of peer achievement and always exclude a student’s own

achievement from the calculations.

         The inability to assign students to classrooms also means that peer group characteristics

are computed by grade rather than by classroom. While such aggregation reduces problems

introduced by the nonrandom division of students into classes, it also eliminates all within grade

and year variation in peer group characteristics and the possibility of examining the effects of

ability tracking. As a consequence, the coefficient on the variance of peer achievement does not

present a straightforward interpretation, because the schoolwide variance of peer achievement is

not simply the average variance of achievement in classrooms as is the case with the level of peer

achievement and percentage eligible for a reduced price lunch. Additional assumptions

concerning changes over time in the division of students into classes are required in order to draw

causal inferences from this coefficient.




believe that it is not peer group composition per se but potentially aspects of classroom management and/or
fiscal effects from added special education funding.
13
    The division of students into two family income categories misses substantial within category variation.
In addition, student cooperation is required to be classified and students may become more reluctant as they
age, though the school-by-grade fixed effects should address this problem. Unfortunately, there is no
additional information on family income, so that this often-used variable is the sole indicator of economic
circumstances.
14
   The problem with achievement in the previous grade (G-1) is that the dependent variable is the test score
gain. A particularly good teacher who substantially increases achievement in grade G-1 might reduce the
expected gains in grade G, given that the grade G-1 test score provides the baseline with which to measure



                                                  -- 17 --
III. The Effects of Peers

        Baseline level and value added specifications and more complicated fixed effects models

generate a series of estimated peer group effects. Table 1 reports results from levels and value

added specifications that do not remove either student or school fixed effects. These preliminary

specifications are similar to the bulk of existing work and provide a baseline from which to

compare the fixed effect estimates. Table 2 reports results from student, school, and school-by-

grade fixed effects specifications that attempt to account for the endogeneity of the choices made

by families and schools.15 Using the full fixed effect model, Table 3 reports results from

specifications that permit peer group effects to vary by a student’s ranking in the school test score

distribution. Specifically, separate peer group effects are estimated for each of the four quartiles

of the school test score distribution (based on scores in third grade). Variable means and standard

deviations are reported in Appendix Table A1.

        All specifications include a number of variables whose coefficients are not reported in

addition to average achievement, the variance in achievement and proportion eligible for a

subsidized lunch. These include percent black and percent Hispanic along with interaction terms

between black and percent black and Hispanic and percent Hispanic in order to permit the effects

to differ by student race and ethnicity, dummy variables for reduced price lunch eligibility, school

transfer, and Title 1 program eligibility, and cohort by grade by year indicators.



Baseline Models.

        Table 1 presents basic models of the level and growth of achievement. Odd number

columns exclude and even number columns include school characteristics. Because the estimates



grade G achievement gains. School specific nonrandom measurement error in the grade G-1 score may also
be negatively correlated with grade G gains.
15
   We do not report estimates from specifications in which only subsets of the peer characteristics were
included. These estimates were quite similar to those for specifications that included all peer
characteristics.


                                                -- 18 --
are quite insensitive to their inclusion, the remaining tables report only specifications that include

the school variables. All specifications in Table 1 include indicator variables for race and

ethnicity (which is subsumed in the individual fixed effects in subsequent tables).

         Not surprisingly, there is a very strong positive relationship between math achievement

level and the average achievement of peers in the levels specifications (col. 1 and 2). However,

this relationship disappears or is reversed for the value added specifications that examine growth

in achievement (col. 3 and 4). As discussed, coefficients from the levels specifications almost

certainly confound peer effects with omitted family characteristics. Though achievement growth

models substantially reduce the problem of omitted variables, these specifications may also be

subject to contamination from a number of sources.16

         In contrast to the levels specifications, the value added estimates conform to prior

expectations for the income variable. A higher proportion of schoolmates eligible for reduced

price lunches significantly reduces achievement gains. Finally, achievement gains are not

negatively related to the standard deviation of student achievement as might be expected if

heterogeneity reduces the effectiveness of classroom instruction. The negative relationship

observed in the levels specifications disappears once value added models are introduced.



Fixed Effect Estimates

         Neither the simple value added nor levels specifications in Table 1 provide defensible

estimates of peer group effects. Both are contaminated by problems of omitted variables bias that

no doubt contribute to the unexpected directions of various peer effects. In this section we exploit

the power of the stacked panel data sets to isolate the independent effects of peers. Coefficients

16
  One possible explanation for the negative value added estimates is related to the test score instrument
used in Texas. The test does a poor job of capturing gains in knowledge at the upper end of the distribution.
To the extent that lower achieving students are catching up to others in Texas in terms of basic skills and
the average peer achievement variable is a proxy for initial achievement level, the estimate of the average
peer achievement effect would be subject to the type of negative bias observed in Table 1. While our




                                                  -- 19 --
from five specifications are reported. The first controls for student fixed effects (in achievement

growth), the second controls for both student and school fixed effects, the third controls for

student and school-by-grade fixed effects, the fourth restricts the sample to those in the same

campus in both years (essentially removing a student specific school fixed effect), and the fifth

restricts the sample to campus switchers. In our opinion, it is the variation in peer group variables

that remains after controlling for both student and school-by-grade fixed effects that offers the

most convincing identification of the true effects of peers on mathematics achievement.

         Table 2 demonstrates that the overall estimates are quite sensitive to the error

specification. Student fixed effects produce quite different estimates than the simple value added

models in Table 1, and the addition of school fixed effects leads to further changes for most

variables.

         Consider the pattern of estimates for the (lagged) peer average math score variable.

Column 1 shows that the removal of student fixed effects leads to a highly significant coefficient

of 0.17 that is only slightly reduced by the additional controls for school and school-by-grade

fixed effects. Controlling for school differences by restricting the sample to only nonmovers

produces a somewhat higher estimate of 0.24 (column 4).17 The larger effect for nonmovers is

consistent with peer influences that are stronger for students who have been in the group for a

longer period.

         The difference between the school-by-grade fixed effect estimates and those for

nonmovers may also reflect an artifact of the variable construction.18 Despite the fact that own

test score is excluded from the calculation of peer average achievement, a potential problem

remains. With the fixed effects methodology the removal of the school-by-grade mean uses own



continuing work is investigating the possibilities of nonlinearities, the results below on quintiles of the
distribution do not suggest any simple explanation of this type.
17
   The separate estimates are restricted to students who remain in the same campus for both 5th and 6th
grade, where the removal of individual fixed effects also removes an individual specific school fixed effect
that is not contaminated by own prior score.
18
   We thank an anonymous referee for pointing out this possibility.


                                                  -- 20 --
test score as a part of the calculation (own achievement score contributes to schoolmates’ peer

average score).19 Because differences between cohorts far exceed the within cohort differences

that result from the omission of each student’s score from her peer group calculation and because

own score enters with a two year lag, however, we do not believe that this mechanical result

could be entirely responsible for the differences in estimates.20

         The range of 0.15 to 0.24 produced by the full sample school-by-grade and nonmover

specifications provides the best estimate of the actual peer test score effect, though this should

probably be considered a lower bound. The lagged test scores, even constructed from

information for all schoolmates, provide a noisy measure of current peer achievement because

some students undergo substantial changes as they progress through school.21

         Though peer average achievement exerts a significant effect on achievement, there is

little or no evidence in any of the specifications that changes in the heterogeneity of students

affects the rate of achievement growth. This finding suggests that ability grouping per se may

have minimal effects on average achievement. Note, however, that we have information only on

variance for the grade as a whole and not variance within classes. If schools alter their ability

grouping policies in response to cohort differences in achievement variance, the aggregate

measure of variance will not capture classroom differences across cohorts, and the estimates will

not be informative.

         Finally, the estimates in Table 2 do not support the view that lower income peers harm

achievement. Because percent eligible for a free or reduced price lunch is a very noisy measure of

peer income, this result is not that surprising. Moreover, the fact that the variable confounds

19
   This is of course fundamentally different from including the contemporaneous outcome measure in the
peer group calculation (which would clearly raise the reflection issue).
20
   The nonmover estimates are generated from a specification that does not remove school-by-grade fixed
effects, though the similarity of the school and school-by-grade fixed effect estimates in columns 2 and 3
suggests that this is unlikely to introduce a serious problem.
21
   One other possibility that we explore is that students are more heavily influenced by own race/ethnic
peers, possibly due to segregation of social interactions within schools. However, the estimates (not
reported) do not support this hypothesis. Rather the uniformly smaller (though still highly significant)



                                                  -- 21 --
actual income differences with differences in school efforts to classify children as disadvantaged

introduces additional complications, perhaps contributing to the positive coefficient on percent

low income in all specifications.

         A potential problem with the fixed effects approach is that the removal of all between

school variation reduces the ratio of signal to noise by leaving too little actual variation in peer

group characteristics. Appendix Table A2 reports the residual variances of the peer group

variables following the removal of student and school or school-by-grade fixed effects. In the

case of the achievement variable, slightly less than ten percent of the original variance remains,

meaning that a one standard deviation change in the residual roughly equals .1 standard

deviations of the original test score distribution. This is far from the tip or edge of the

distribution, and the pattern of estimates do not support a simple measurement error explanation.

A similar reduction in variance occurs for the standard deviation of test score and the percentage

receiving a subsidized lunch.22

         The strong conclusion that comes from this analysis is that the achievement of peers has a

strong and direct influence on learning. While the exact causal mechanism remains ambiguous –

because we cannot rule out the importance of current peer behavior as opposed to simple skill

differences – the estimates provide clear evidence of peer effects.



Differences by Quartile

         The results in Table 2 reveal significant effects of peer average achievement for all

students, but peer influences may affect some students more than others depending on their initial

position in the school achievement distribution. To examine this possibility, we interacted all peer


estimates suggest that the use of only own demographic group schoolmates in the construction of the peer
characteristics introduces measurement error.
22
   Though variation in percent eligible for a subsidized lunch emanates from both changes in the student
body and changes in classification as students age, it is student mobility that accounts for the bulk of the
variance. In fact calculations of variance (not reported) showed that fixing student eligibility at the fourth
grade response leads to virtually no change in the residual variances.



                                                    -- 22 --
group variables with indicators for the student’s position in each school’s achievement

distribution based on test score in third grade.23 The coefficients in Table 3 are generated from a

single regression.

           The results reveal little variation by school achievement quartile with the exception that

students in the top quartile may be somewhat less responsive to peer achievement.24 There is no

support for the belief that students further below the median are differentially affected than others

closer to the center of the distribution. Finally, preliminary work (not shown) found no evidence

of nonlinearities from specifications that ignored a student’s position in the test score distribution

but included quadratic terms for all peer characteristics.


IV. Conclusions

           The difficulties of isolating school and peer group effects have been well documented.

We have attempted to overcome problems of omitted variables and simultaneous equations biases

through the use of a fixed effects framework and lagged measures of peer achievement. The

results strongly support the view that standard specifications are subject to biases, as the

sequential introduction of student, school, and school-by-grade fixed effects led to substantial

changes in the magnitude and often the direction of peer effect estimates. We believe that the

variation in peer group characteristics that remains after controlling for student and school-by-

grade fixed effects in the rate of achievement growth and a number of time varying student,

family, and school characteristics provides a valid source of identification for the estimation of

peer group effects.

           The results themselves provide little evidence that average income or the heterogeneity of

peers in terms of variation in achievement levels affect growth in mathematics achievement.

These results should be qualified by the fact that proportion eligible for a reduced price lunch is a


23
     Third grade test score was used to avoid a direct link with the dependent variable.



                                                     -- 23 --
noisy measure of income and by the fact we use grade rather than classroom level data. While it

is possible that schools may act to counter adverse effects of heterogeneity, the year-to-year

changes used in the fixed effects models suggest that given the structure of schools, an increase in

the variance of achievement does not have a significant negative effect on math learning.

         Perhaps the most important finding is that peer average achievement has a highly

significant affect on learning across the test score distribution. A 0.1 standard deviation increase

in peer average achievement leads to a roughly 0.02 increase in achievement. Given that a one

standard deviation change in peer average achievement is 0.35 of a standard deviation of the

student test score distribution and that the use of lagged test score introduces error into the

measure of peer achievement, the point estimate suggests that differences in peer characteristics

have a substantial effect on the distribution of achievement when cumulated over the entire

school career.

         One important drawback of the analysis is the exclusion of current peer behavior that is

uncorrelated with past peer achievement. If innovations to behavior form an important avenue

through which peers affect outcomes, the inability to capture such behavior might lead to a

serious underestimation of peer influences. Unfortunately, the identification of current behavioral

effects presents serious obstacles in concept as well as practice.

However, the well-documented persistence of a student’s performance over time suggests that

systematic differences among students account for much more of the variation in peer group

quality than student variations from year-to-year.

         In terms of public policy, the fact that the effects are similar across the test score

distribution suggests that a reallocation of students will have little impact on the overall state or

school average. Rather it will affect only the distribution of achievement across schools; winners

from having more able peers are balanced by losers with less able peers. The findings also imply


24
  An alternative explanation for the lower estimate for students in the top quartile is that ceiling effects in
the test attenuate the estimates for these students.


                                                    -- 24 --
that there will be additional external benefits to improving student performance through special

programs, tutoring, etc.. While such benefits are likely to be small in comparison to the main

effect for the student receiving any treatment, it is clear that student outcomes are intertwined in

important ways. Finally, much more must be learned about the effects of peers on other social

and economic outcomes, and classroom level data are needed to learn more about the impact of

ability grouping.




                                               -- 25 --
Table 1. Estimated Effects of Peer Group Characteristics on
Mathematics Achievement Level and Achievement Gains
(absolute value of Huber-White adjusted t statistics in parentheses)


                                           Level                                         Gain
                           Without school         With school          Without school            With school
                           characteristics       characteristics       characteristics          characteristics

 average math score in           0.42                 0.42                  -0.07                    -0.07
       grade g-2               (22.73)              (22.91)                (6.12)                   (6.18)

 standard deviation of           -0.07                -0.06                 0.08                     0.09
  scores in grade g-2           (1.67)               (1.35)                (3.36)                   (3.64)

Proportion eligible for          0.16                 0.13                  -0.08                    -0.10
 reduced price lunch            (4.82)               (3.67)                (4.78)                   (5.24)

      sample size                        526,546                                    1,028,162


Note: All specifications include percent black and percent Hispanic, interactions of percent black and
percent Hispanic with own race, dummy variables for reduce price lunch eligibility, school transfer, Title 1
program eligibility, gender, black, Hispanic and cohort-by-grade by year indicators.
Table 2. Estimated Effects of Peer Group Characteristics on
Mathematics Test Score Gains, Controlling for Student, School, or
School-by-grade Fixed Effects (absolute value of Huber-White adjusted t statistics in
parentheses)




                                                                School-by-
                                                   School fixed grade fixed
                                                     effects      effects          Stayers       Movers

      proportion eligible for           0.18           0.12           0.10          0.19           0.16
       Reduced price lunch             (3.33)         (1.74)         (1.82)        (1.38)         (2.73)

      average math score in             0.17           0.16           0.15          0.24           0.14
            grade g-2                  (7.42)         (6.21)         (6.03)        (6.26)         (5.20)

      Standard deviation of             0.06           0.05           0.02          0.12           0.05
       scores in grade g-2             (1.26)         (1.08)         (0.53)        (1.72)         (0.88)

           sample size               1,028,162      1,028,162      1,028,162      299,730        728,432




Note: All specification also include individual fixed effects, percent black and percent Hispanic,
interactions of percent black and percent Hispanic with own race, dummy variables for reduce price lunch
eligibility, school transfer, Title 1 program eligibility, and cohort-by-grade-by-year indicators, and average
class size, proportion of teachers with zero years of experience and proportion of teachers with one year of
experience. Stayers are students who do not change school between 5th and 6th grade, while movers are
those who do.
Table 3. Estimated Effects of Peer Group Characteristics on
Mathematics Test Score Gains by Quartile of Each School’s Test
Score Distribution, Controlling for Student and School-by-grade
Fixed Effects (absolute value of Huber-White adjusted t statistics in parentheses)




                                             Bottom           Second             Third          Top
                                             Quartile         Quartile          Quartile       Quartile

    Proportion eligible for                    0.10             0.11                 0.09        -0.03
     reduced price lunch                      (1.44)           (1.91)               (1.73)      (0.62)

    average math score in                      0.12             0.12                 0.12        0.08
          grade g-2                           (4.85)           (5.20)               (5.64)      (3.48)

     standard deviation of                     -0.10            -0.05                -0.01       0.01
      scores in grade g-2                     (2.82)           (1.50)               (0.45)      (0.42)

         Sample size                                                    1,028,162

Note: The specification also includes individual and school by grade fixed effects, percent black and
percent Hispanic, interactions of percent black and percent Hispanic with own race, dummy variables for
reduce price lunch eligibility, school transfer, Title 1 program eligibility, and cohort-by-grade-by-year
indicators, and average class size, proportion of teachers with zero years of experience and proportion of
teachers with one year of experience.
 Table A1. Variable Means and Standard Deviations


                          mean      standard deviation
Test Score Gain           0.03             0.63
Peer Characteristics
proportion eligible for   0.44            0.26
reduced price lunch
average math score in     0.04            0.35
grade g-2
standard deviation of     0.91            0.13
scores in grade g-2
Table A2. Residual Variance of Peer Characteristics Following
Removal of Fixed Effects


                                   Fixed Effects Removed
                                                           student &
                                               student &   school by
                            none   student       school      grade

  proportion eligible for   0.07   0.0038        0.0030     0.0029
   reduced price lunch

  average math score in     0.12   0.0179        0.0137     0.0114
        grade g-2

  standard deviation of     0.02   0.0035        0.0028     0.0024
   scores in grade g-2

    proportion black        0.04   0.0017        0.0014     0.0014
    proportion black        0.09   0.0061        0.0049     0.0048
       for Blacks

   proportion Hispanic      0.09   0.0023        0.0018     0.0018
   proportion Hispanic      0.10   0.0031        0.0026     0.0026
      for Hispanics
References

     Argys, Laura M., Daniel I. Rees, and Dominic J. Brewer. 1996. Detracking America's
     Schools: Equity at zero cost? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 15 (Fall):623-
     645.

     Armor, David J. 1995. Forced justice: School desegregation and the law. New York:
     Oxford University Press.

     Behrman, Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2001. Does increasing women's schooling
     raise the schooling of the next generation? American Economic Review 91 (June).

     Benabou, Roland. 1993. Workings of a city: Location, education, and production.
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 434 (August):619-652.

     ———. 1996. Heterogeneity, stratification, and growth: Macroeconomic implications of
     community structure and school finance. American Economic Review 86 (June):584-609.

     Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf. forthcoming. Interactions-based models. In
     Handbook of Econometrics.

     Caucutt, Elizabeth M. forthcoming. Educational policy when there are peer group effects
     -- size matters. International Economic Review.

     Coleman, James S., Ernest Q. Campbell, Carol J. Hobson, James McPartland, Alexander
     M. Mood, Frederic D. Weinfeld, and Robert L. York. 1966. Equality of educational
     opportunity. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

     de Bartolome, Charles A. M. 1990. Equilibrium and inefficiency in a community model
     with peer group effects. Journal of Political Economy 98 (February):110-133.

     Epple, Dennis, and Richard E. Romano. 1998. Competition between private and public
     schools, vouchers, and peer-group effects. American Economic Review 88 (March):33-
     62.

     Hanushek, Eric A. 1972. Education and race: an analysis of the educational production
     process. Cambridge, MA: Health-Lexington.

     ———. 1979. Conceptual and empirical issues in the estimation of educational
     production functions. Journal of Human Resources 14 (Summer):351-388.

     ———. 1992. The trade-off between child quantity and quality. Journal of Political
     Economy 100 (February):84-117.

     Hanushek, Eric A., and John F. Kain. 1972. On the value of `equality of educational
     opportunity' as a guide to public policy. In On equality of educational opportunity, edited
     by F. Mosteller and D. P. Moynihan. New York: Random House.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2001. Disruption versus Tiebout
improvement: The costs and benefits of switching schools.

———. forthcoming. Inferring program effects for specialized populations: Does special
education raise achievement for students with disabilities. Review of Economics and
Statistics.

Henderson, Vernon, Peter Mieszkowski, and Yvon Sauvageau. 1976. Peer group effects
and educational production functions. Ottawa, Canada: Economic Council of Canada.
Hoxby, Caroline Minter. 2000. The effects of class size on student achievement: New
evidence from population variation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115
(November):1239-1285.

Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2001. Moving to
Opportunity in Boston: Early results of a randomized mobility experiment. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116 (May):607-654.

Lazear, Edward. forthcoming. Educational production. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, and Paul Hirschfield. 2001. Urban poverty and juvenile
crime: Evidence from a randomized housing-mobility experiment. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116 (May):655-679.

Manski, Charles F. 1993. Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection
problem. Review of Economic Studies 60 (July):531-542.

Mayer, Susan E. 1997. What money can't buy: Family income and children's life chances.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Mayer, Susan E., and Christopher Jencks. 1989. Growing Up in Poor Neighborhoods:
How Much Does It Matter? Science 243 (March 17):1441-1445.

Moffitt, Robert A. 2001. Policy interventions, low-level equilibria, and social
interactions. In Social dynamics, edited by S. Durlauf and P. Young. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Oakes, Jeannie. 1992. Can tracking research inform practice? Technical, normative, and
political considerations. Educational Researcher 21:12-21.

O'Regan, Katherine M., and John M. Quigley. 1999. Accessibility and economic
opportunity. In Essays in transportation economics, edited by C. Winston, J. A. Gomez-
Ibanez and W. Tye. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2001. Teachers, schools, and
academic achievement. Working Paper No. 6691, National Bureau of Economic
Research (revised)

Rosenbaum, James E. 1995. Changing the geography of opportunity by expanding
residential choice: Lessons from the Gautreaux Program. Housing Policy Debate 6:231-
269.
Rosenbaum, James E., and Susan J. Popkin. 1991. Employment and earnings of low-
income Blacks who move to middle-class suburbs. In The urban underclass, edited by C.
Jencks and P. E. Peterson. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. Peer effects with random assignment: Results for Dartmouth
roommates. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (May):681-704.

Smith, Marshall. 1972. Equality of educational opportunity: the basic findings
reconsidered. In On equality of educational opportunity, edited by F. Mosteller and D. P.
Moynihan. New York: Random House.

Summers, Anita, and Barbara Wolfe. 1977. Do schools make a difference? American
Economic Review 67 (September).

Zimmer, Ron W., and Eugenia F. Toma. 2000. Peer effects in private and public schools
across countries. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19 (Winter):75-92.
