                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    REPATRIATION TAXES AND DIVIDEND DISTORTIONS


                                                Mihir A. Desai
                                                C. Fritz Foley
                                              James R. Hines Jr.


                                            Working Paper 8507
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w8507


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2001




The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that
maintained legal confidentiality requirements. We thank Ned Howenstine, Ray Mataloni, and Bill Zeile at BEA
for guidance, and Rosanne Altshuler, Naomi Feldman, and Kevin Hassett for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
Financial support from the International Tax Policy Forum, the Lois and Bruce Zenkel Research Fund at the
University of Michigan, and the Division of Research at Harvard Business School is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research or the Department of Commerce.


© 2001 by Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Repatriation Taxes and Dividend Distortions
Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 8507
October 2001
JEL No. F23, G35, H25, H87



                                              ABSTRACT


        This paper analyzes the effect of repatriation taxes on dividend payments by the foreign affiliates
of American multinational firms. The United States taxes the foreign incomes of American companies,
grants credits for any foreign income taxes paid, and defers any taxes due on the unrepatriated earnings
for those affiliates that are separately incorporated abroad. This system thereby imposes repatriation taxes
that vary inversely with foreign tax rates and that differ across organizational forms. As a consequence,
it is possible to measure the effect of repatriation taxes by comparing the behavior of foreign subsidiaries
that are subject to different tax rates and by comparing the behavior of foreign incorporated and
unincorporated affiliates. Evidence from a large panel of foreign affiliates of U.S. firms from 1982 to
1997 indicates that one percent lower repatriation tax rates are associated with one percent higher
dividends. This implies that repatriation taxes reduce aggregate dividend payouts by 12.8 percent, and,
in the process, generate annual efficiency losses equal to 2.5 percent of dividends. These effects would
disappear if the United States were to exempt foreign income from taxation.




Mihir A. Desai                       C. Fritz Foley                        James R. Hines Jr.
Harvard Business School              Harvard Business School               University of Michigan
Morgan 363                           Morgan 228b                           Business School
Soldiers Field                       Soldiers Field                        701 Tappan Street
Boston, MA 02163                     Boston, MA 02163                      Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER                             cfoley@hbs.edu                        jrhines@umich.edu
mdesai@hbs.edu
1.         Introduction.


           The U.S. system of taxing foreign income attracts a great deal of attention both from

taxpayers and from reformers who feel that superior alternatives are available. Reform

advocates point to the system’s complexity, the burden it imposes on American companies, and

the inefficient incentives it creates.1 These considerations are often taken to imply that the

alternative of territorial taxation, in which income earned abroad by American multinational

companies would not be subject to U.S. taxation, would improve efficiency and thereby enhance

the competitive positions of American firms in the world marketplace. Since American firms

would then no longer pay taxes to the United States on income received from foreign affiliates, it

follows that they would be free to arrange their financial and other affairs in ways that advance

objectives other than avoiding repatriation taxes.


           This paper analyzes the likely impact of territorial taxation on dividend repatriations from

foreign affiliates. Under current U.S. law, American firms owe taxes to the United States on all of

their worldwide incomes, though they are entitled to claim credits against these tax liabilities for

foreign income taxes paid. In addition, the income of separately-incorporated foreign subsidiaries,

in contrast to that of unincorporated branch affiliates, is untaxed until repatriated as dividends.

Since foreign tax credits attenuate, but often do not eliminate, U.S. tax liabilities on foreign

income, it follows that the payment of a dividend from a foreign subsidiary to its American parent

company frequently generates a tax obligation that might otherwise be deferred or potentially

avoided altogether. The adoption of a territorial system would remove the incentive to delay

paying dividends in order to avoid U.S. taxation.

1
    Hufbauer (1992) is a classic example.
        Evaluating the impact of adopting territorial income taxation entails extrapolating from

observed behavior, inasmuch as the United States does not currently tax income on a territorial

basis. American-owned affiliates in foreign countries are taxed at different rates by foreign

governments, thereby inducing variation in the rates at which the United States taxes dividend

repatriation, since the tax rate generally equals the difference between the U.S. tax rate and the

foreign tax rate. Hence a comparison of the dividend repatriation behavior of otherwise-similar

affiliates located in countries with differing tax rates and with different organizational forms

provides evidence of the impact of repatriation taxes on proclivities to pay dividends.


        This study analyzes the behavior of a large panel of U.S.-owned affiliates over the 1982-

1997 period, using annual affiliate-level information reported to the Bureau of Economic Analysis

(BEA) of the U.S. Department of Commerce. Three aspects of this study distinguish it from earlier

studies of dividend repatriations that analyze data reported on U.S. tax forms (and that are available

only for incorporated affiliates in certain even-numbered years). The first is that it is possible to

specify the dividend payout equation as a Lintner process, in which lagged dividends influence

current year dividends, since the BEA data are collected every year. Second, the BEA data can be

used to compare the dividend behavior of U.S.-owned incorporated affiliates to that of U.S.-owned

foreign branches, which is enlightening since dividend remittances from foreign branches do not

trigger U.S. tax liabilities. Third, patterns revealed in the BEA data can be compared to those

appearing in the tax return data, thereby offering a check of the extent to which reporting biases,

accounting conventions, and other sources of measurement variation may be responsible for results

obtained by analyzing tax information.


        The evidence indicates that dividend remittances from incorporated foreign affiliates are

sensitive to the associated tax costs. Ten percent higher repatriation taxes are associated with 10


                                                                                                     2
percent lower dividends. Remittances from foreign branches do not trigger repatriation taxes, and

do not exhibit the same country patterns as do remittances from incorporated foreign affiliates.

The Lintner specification of the dividend process fits observed behavior very well, with lagged

dividends exerting large and statistically significant effects on current dividends, even in

specifications that include parent fixed effects. The results imply that U.S. adoption of a territorial

system of taxation would increase aggregate dividend payouts by 12.8 percent, the effects of

course varying sharply between affiliates in different tax situations.


         Repatriation taxes reduce economic efficiency by creating stronger incentives to remit

dividends from some foreign affiliates than they do from others. This loss of economic efficiency

has the distributional and incentive effects of an extra tax imposed on American multinational

firms – effects that would disappear if the United States were to adopt territorial taxation.2 Base

case estimates imply that the annual efficiency loss associated with dividend repatriation taxes

equals 2.5 percent of dividends. While sizable by itself, such a figure represents only a fraction of

the total welfare gains from moving to territorial taxation given the other distortions associated

with the current system.


         Section two of the paper reviews the economic theory of dividend remittances, paying

special attention to the tax costs associated with dividend receipts from foreign sources. Section

two also surveys existing evidence of the impact of repatriation taxes on propensities to pay

dividends from foreign subsidiaries and introduces the Lintner framework for analyzing the

influence of repatriation taxes on dividend policy. Section three describes the available

information on the behavior of the foreign affiliates of American multinational firms, and analyzes

2
 It is possible for even a territorial tax system indirectly to discourage dividend repatriations if the system allocates
expense or income items between domestic and foreign sources based on formulas that include repatriated



                                                                                                                    3
the tax environments in which they operate. Section four presents the results of estimating the

impact of repatriation taxes on repatriation behavior. Section five uses the results obtained from

the dividend regressions to analyze the potential welfare gains from moving to a territorial tax

system. Section six is the conclusion.


2.       Tax Motivations for Dividend Remittances


         Dividend payments from an incorporated subsidiary abroad to its American parent may

give rise to tax liabilities within the United States. Accordingly, these potential tax liabilities

may figure importantly in the determination of dividend policy for American multinationals. In

order to understand these concerns, a description of some of the relevant features of the U.S. tax

treatment of American multinational firms follows. Several other concerns, such as the ability to

monitor managers overseas and internal capital budgeting, also might influence dividend policy

within firms, and are considered separately in Desai, Foley and Hines (2001).


2.1.     The Taxation of U.S. Multinationals3


         Almost all countries tax income generated by economic activity that takes place within

their borders. In addition, many countries—including the United States—tax the foreign

incomes of their residents. In order to prevent double taxation of the foreign income of

Americans, U.S. law permits taxpayers to claim foreign tax credits for income taxes (and related

taxes) paid to foreign governments.4 These foreign tax credits are used to offset U.S. tax



dividends. Altshuler and Grubert (2001) consider a related example of a territorial tax system that indirectly
discourages foreign investment.
3
  Portions of this description are excerpted from Hines (1991, 1999a).
4
  The United States is not alone in taxing the worldwide income of its residents while permitting them to claim foreign
tax credits. Other countries with such systems include Greece, Italy, Japan, Norway, and the United Kingdom. Under
U.S. law, taxpayers may claim foreign tax credits for taxes paid by foreign firms of which they own at least 10 percent,
and only those taxes that qualify as income taxes are creditable.


                                                                                                                  4
liabilities that would otherwise be due on foreign-source income. The U.S. corporate tax rate is

currently 35 percent, so an American corporation that earns $100 in a foreign country with a 10

percent tax rate pays taxes of $10 to the foreign government and $25 to the U.S. government,

since its U.S. corporate tax liability of $35 (35 percent of $100) is reduced to $25 by the foreign

tax credit of $10.


         Americans are permitted to defer U.S. tax liabilities on certain unrepatriated foreign

profits until they receive such profits in the form of dividends.5 This deferral is available only on

the active business profits of American-owned foreign affiliates that are separately incorporated

as subsidiaries in foreign countries. The profits of unincorporated foreign businesses, such as

those of American-owned branches in other countries, are taxed immediately by the United

States. Interest, rent, and royalty income received from foreign countries also represents foreign-

source income on which U.S. tax obligations cannot be deferred.


         U.S. tax law contains provisions designed to prevent American firms from delaying the

repatriation of lightly-taxed foreign earnings. These tax provisions apply to controlled foreign

corporations, which are foreign corporations owned at least 50 percent by American individuals

or corporations who hold stakes of at least 10 percent each. Under the Subpart F provisions of

U.S. law, the passive income of controlled foreign corporations is “deemed distributed,” and

therefore immediately taxable by the United States, even if not repatriated as dividend payments

to American parent firms.6


5
  Deferral of home-country taxation of the unrepatriated profits of foreign subsidiaries is a common feature of systems
that tax foreign incomes. Other countries that permit this kind of deferral include Canada, Denmark, France, Germany,
Japan, Norway, Pakistan, and the United Kingdom.
6
  Subpart F income consists of income from passive investments (such as interest and dividends received from
investments in securities), foreign base company income (that arises from using a foreign affiliate as a conduit for
certain types of international transactions), income that is invested in United States property, money used offshore to
insure risks in the United States, and money used to pay bribes to foreign government officials. American firms


                                                                                                                 5
         Because the foreign tax credit is intended to alleviate international double taxation, and

not to reduce U.S. tax liabilities on profits earned within the United States, the foreign tax credit

is limited to U.S. tax liability on foreign-source income. For example, an American firm with

$200 of foreign income that faces an U.S. tax rate of 35 percent has a foreign tax credit limit of

$70 (35 percent of $200). If the firm pays foreign income taxes of less than $70, then the firm

would be entitled to claim foreign tax credits for all of its foreign taxes paid. If, however, the

firm pays $90 of foreign taxes, then it would be permitted to claim no more than $70 of foreign

tax credits.


         Taxpayers whose foreign tax payments exceed the foreign tax credit limit are said to have

“excess foreign tax credits;” the excess foreign tax credits represent the portion of their foreign

tax payments that exceed the U.S. tax liabilities generated by their foreign incomes. Taxpayers

whose foreign tax payments are smaller than their foreign tax credit limits are said to be in

“excess limit” or to have “deficit foreign tax credits.” American law permits taxpayers to use

excess foreign tax credits in one year to reduce their U.S. tax obligations on foreign source

income in either of the two previous years or in any of the following five years.7


         In practice, the calculation of the foreign tax credit limit entails certain additional

complications, notable among which is that total worldwide foreign income is used to calculate

the foreign tax credit limit. This method of calculating the foreign tax credit limit is known as


with foreign subsidiaries that earn profits through most types of active business operations, and that subsequently
reinvest those profits in active lines of business, are not subject to the Subpart F rules, and are therefore able to defer
U.S. tax liability on their foreign profits until they choose to remit dividends at a later date.
7
  Foreign tax credits are not adjusted for inflation, so are generally the most valuable if claimed as soon as possible.
Barring unusual circumstances, firms apply their foreign tax credits against future years only when unable to apply
them against either of the previous two years.
          Firms paying the corporate alternative minimum tax (AMT) are subject to the same rules, with the added
restriction that the combination of net operating loss deductions and foreign tax credits cannot reduce AMT liabilities




                                                                                                                     6
“worldwide averaging.” A taxpayer has excess foreign tax credits if the sum of worldwide

foreign income tax payments exceeds this limit. The combination of worldwide averaging and

selective repatriation of dividends from subsidiaries located in countries with differing tax rates

implies that the average foreign tax rate used to calculate the foreign tax credit limit need not

equal the average foreign tax rate faced by a firm’s foreign affiliates.8 The ability of

multinational firms to adjust the amount of foreign income received in non-dividend forms (such

as interest and royalties) contributes to their control over whether or not they have excess foreign

tax credits.


         For firms with deficit foreign tax credits, dividend remittances from foreign subsidiaries

to their American parents generate U.S. tax liabilities that are functions of differences between

foreign tax rates and the U.S. corporate tax rate. Generally speaking, firms owe U.S. taxes based

on the difference between the applicable foreign tax rate and the U.S. rate; if the U.S. tax rate

exceeds the foreign tax rate, then the effective repatriation tax equals the difference between the

two.9 If, instead, the foreign tax rate exceeds the U.S. tax rate, then dividends trigger no

additional U.S. tax liability, and taxpayers can apply any difference against U.S. tax liabilities on

other foreign income. Dividend remittances from unincorporated foreign branches do not have


by more than 90 percent. It is noteworthy that, since the AMT rate is only 20 percent, firms subject to the AMT are
considerably more likely to have excess foreign tax credits than are firms that pay the regular corporate tax.
8
  Average foreign income tax rates paid by foreign affiliates reflect investment decisions as well as transfer pricing
practices that affect the location of reported taxable income. There is ample evidence, surveyed by Hines (1999a),
that both types of decisions are sensitive to their tax implications.
9
  Foreign governments may also impose withholding taxes on dividend payments. Withholding taxes do not change
the repatriation tax liabilities of firms with deficit foreign tax credits, since they necessitate payments to foreign
governments for which such American parents are eligible to claim immediate offsetting foreign tax credits. For
firms with excess foreign tax credits, withholding taxes represent net tax liabilities, but since withholding taxes have
permanent characteristics (rates very seldom change), they cannot be avoided and therefore are unlikely to influence
repatriation patterns. An appropriate treatment of withholding taxes in a repatriation equation requires an
understanding of the time-varying nature of parent and affiliate tax situations, which is beyond the scope of this
paper; as a result, the empirical work omits consideration of withholding taxes. This may not be an important
omission, since these withholding taxes are typically imposed at very low rates. The BEA benchmark data indicate




                                                                                                                  7
any U.S. tax consequences (since U.S. taxes are due on branch profits whether or not dividends

are paid), and therefore provide a useful control group against which to measure the impact of

repatriation taxes for incorporated foreign subsidiaries. Dividend payments from foreign

subsidiaries whose parent companies have excess foreign tax credits that would otherwise go

unused also generate no U.S. tax liabilities. Since in practice it is difficult to identify such parent

companies, and since foreign tax credit situations are endogenous to repatriation behavior and to

other behavior that is jointly determined with repatriations, the empirical work that follows does

not attempt to adjust repatriation taxes for parent foreign tax credit situations. As a result, the

estimates measure the average responsiveness of the whole sample, including the behavior of any

affiliates whose parents have chronic excess foreign tax credits.


2.2.     Implications for Dividend Remittances


         The potential tax liability due upon dividend repatriation need not influence the dividend

policies of American multinationals. Applying the “new view” or “trapped equity” view of

dividend taxation as elaborated by King (1977), Auerbach (1979), and Bradford (1981) in the

case of purely domestic companies, Hartman (1985) demonstrates that repatriation taxes

represent unavoidable costs faced by mature subsidiaries that finance their investments out of

retained earnings. If the repatriation tax rate is constant over time, then dividend payout policies

that maximize the present discounted value of pre-tax flows from foreign subsidiaries also

maximize after-repatriation-tax receipts by their parents. Conversely, transitory changes in the

repatriation tax rate, including changes in the excess or deficit foreign tax credit status of parents,

will affect dividend behavior and firm valuation. As a result, some empirical studies emphasize


that, in 1994, majority-owned nonbank affiliates of nonbank U.S. parents paid a total of $1.075 billion in
withholding taxes on $37.989 billion of dividends, for an average tax rate of 2.8 percent.


                                                                                                             8
the distinction between temporary and permanent changes in repatriation taxes and the associated

effects of those changes on dividend payouts.


       Hines and Hubbard (1990) analyze a cross-section of U.S. multinationals using tax return

data from 1984 in an effort determine the sensitivity of multinational dividends to tax costs. In

their sample, Hines and Hubbard note that large aggregate payouts are the result of selective and

infrequent dividend payments by affiliates. Using this cross-section of data, they conclude that a

one percent decrease in the repatriation tax is associated with a four percent increase in dividend

payout rates.10 The evidence provided in Hines and Hubbard suggests that tax considerations are

very important determinants of the timing of dividend repatriations.


       The cross-section used by Hines and Hubbard makes it impossible to distinguish the

effects of transitory and permanent changes in repatriation taxes. Altshuler, Newlon and

Randolph (1995) attempt to identify permanent and transitory tax costs by creating an

unbalanced panel of subsidiaries using tax returns from 1980, 1982, 1984 and 1986. Permanent

repatriation tax costs for subsidiaries are constructed from a first-stage regression that uses as

explanatory variables statutory withholding tax rates and average tax rates of other subsidiaries

in the same country. Altshuler, Newlon and Randolph find, as predicted by Hartman (1985), that

transitory tax costs influence dividend payments while permanent tax costs do not. The effort to

disentangle the permanent and temporary tax costs of dividends is limited, however, by the very

small number of annual observations for each firm.


       Grubert (1998) and Grubert and Mutti (2001) report that dividends are sensitive to tax

costs in their analyses of cross-sections of tax returns for 1990 and 1992, respectively. Hines




                                                                                                 9
(1994, 1995) and Grubert (1998) offer evidence that the use of alternatives to dividends, such as

interest and royalty payments, likewise respond to the tax costs associated with repatriation.

Grubert (1998) presents somewhat anomalous results suggesting that levels of retained earnings

are insensitive to tax costs. This evidence is consistent with the sensitivity of dividends to

repatriation taxes under Grubert’s interpretation that repatriation taxes do not affect net

investment by subsidiaries, since firms can substitute alternatives to dividends in order to

repatriate income to parents.11


        The complexity of the existing system of taxing American multinationals has prompted

renewed interest in the adoption of a system of territorial taxation characterized by the exemption

from taxation of dividends received from foreign affiliates. Evaluation of a potential transition

to dividend exemption, as envisioned by Grubert and Mutti (2001) for example, requires

estimating the revenue consequences of such a change, the responses of multinational firms to

changed investment incentives, and the efficiency costs of the existing system. Grubert and

Mutti (2001), along with Grubert (2001a), suggest that U.S. government revenue would actually

increase under a territorial tax regime, as current revenues are minimal and the revenue

consequences of changed expense allocation under dividend exemption would more than offset

any losses. Regarding investment incentives, Grubert and Mutti (2001) and Altshulter and

Grubert (2001) project a limited change in the investment patterns of multinationals under

dividend exemption given the low repatriation taxes currently paid by U.S. multinationals

investing in low-tax countries. The analysis that follows complements these efforts by

employing a Lintner framework to estimate the efficiency consequences of the current system of

10
  Dividend payout rates are calculated as dividends over assets. In the Hines and Hubbard sample, only 16 percent
of subsidiaries with parents filing returns report paying dividends. Altshuler and Newlon (1993) find similar
patterns in a related sample with a slightly reduced elasticity of dividends to tax costs.



                                                                                                           10
repatriation taxation and the likely response of dividend policies to moving to a territorial tax

regime.


2.3.    The Lintner Analysis of Dividend Policy


        In order to estimate the impact of repatriation taxes on intrafirm dividends, it is useful to

begin with a framework that incorporates the variety of tax and non-tax factors that influence

dividend policy. Lintner (1956) provides such an analytic framework for the determinants of

dividends paid by domestic firms to their common shareholders. Using interviews and case

studies, Lintner hypothesizes that firms construct targets based on current earnings, and that they

adjust their actual dividends gradually to targets over time.12 Letting target dividends be linear

functions of earnings, Dit* = µ + k it Eit , in which Dit* is target dividends, µ is a constant term, Eit

is after-tax earnings, kit is a possibly time-varying desired rate of payout from marginal earnings,

the subscript i indexes firms and the subscript t indexes time, this relationship can be

summarized in an estimating equation as:


(1)                         (            )
                 ∆Dit = α Dit* − Dit −1 + ε it .


In equation (1), ∆Dit is the change in firm i’s dividends between t-1 and t, α is an adjustment

parameter, and ε it is an error term. Substituting for the definition of target dividends and

combining terms yields:


(2)              Dit = αµ + αk it Eit + (1 − α )Dit + ε it .


11
   See also the evidence reported by Altshuler and Grubert (forthcoming), who examine methods used by foreign
subsidiaries to defer repatriation taxes.
12
   While the model developed in Lintner (1956) was based on case studies of dividend policy, the accompanying
empirical work employed aggregate time-series data for the U.S. economy. Beginning with Fama and Babiak



                                                                                                          11
Equation (2) suggests that if firms pay their target dividends every period, then the coefficient

on lagged dividends will equal zero as the adjustment parameter is unity. If, however, annual

adjustment is only partial, then lagged dividends will enter the payout equation with a positive

coefficient, and target payout ratios can be inferred from the estimated constant term and the

coefficients on lagged dividends and current earnings.13


         This framework can usefully be extended to the relationship between foreign affiliates

and their American parents in order to isolate the importance of repatriation taxes in influencing

dividend payments. As developed in Desai, Foley and Hines (2001), the Lintner equation

represented in (2) corresponds to a manager setting a target affiliate payout rate from marginal

earnings, kit, in response to the tax cost associated with paying out earnings. Actual dividend

payments reflect partial adjustment (governed by the parameter α ) to that target rate in response

to a variety of non-tax concerns. For example, managers might reduce target payout rates in

response to higher repatriation taxes and adjust their ratios based on non-tax factors – such as

monitoring or liquidity concerns – that dictate how dividends are used within a firm.


         Since target payout rates reflect tax penalties associated with paying dividends, variations

in repatriation taxes can be used to estimate the responsiveness of dividends to repatriation taxes

in the Lintner framework. In particular, variations arising from organizational form – dividends

from incorporated affiliates trigger a repatriation tax while dividends from branches do not – and

from local country tax rates can be employed to estimate the behavioral response to such taxes.

The analysis below estimates Lintner equations separately by organizational form, interacting



(1968), several studies have implemented Lintner models with firm-level data to understand the determinants of
dividend policy.
13
   Estimating variants of equation (2) without constant terms (as in Desai, Foley, and Hines, 2001) produces results
that are very similar to those obtained by estimating (2) with constants.


                                                                                                              12
local tax rates with current earnings in order to assess the responsiveness of payout rates to

repatriation taxes.


3.         Data and Descriptive Statistics


           The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Annual Survey of U.S. Direct Investment

Abroad from 1982 through 1997 provides data on the financial and operating characteristics of

U.S. firms operating abroad. These surveys require respondents to file detailed financial and

operating items for each foreign affiliate and provide information on the value of transactions

between U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates. The International Investment and Trade in

Services Survey Act governs the collection of the data and the Act ensures that “use of an

individual company’s data for tax, investigative, or regulatory purposes is prohibited.” Willful

noncompliance with the Act can result in penalties of up to $10,000 or a prison term of one year.

As a result of these assurances and penalties, BEA believes that coverage is close to complete

and levels of accuracy are high.14


           U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the direct or indirect ownership or control by

a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an incorporated foreign

business enterprise or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated foreign business enterprise. A

U.S. multinational entity (MNE) is the combination of a single U.S. legal entity that has made

the direct investment, called the U.S. parent, and at least one foreign business enterprise, called

the foreign affiliate. In order to be considered as a legitimate foreign affiliate, the foreign

business enterprise should be paying foreign income taxes, have a substantial physical presence

abroad, have separate financial records, and should take title to the goods it sells and receive


14
     Mataloni (1995) provides a detailed description of the BEA data.


                                                                                                  13
revenue from sales. In order to determine ownership stakes in the presence of indirect

ownership, BEA determines the percentage of parent ownership at each link in the ownership

chain and then multiplies these percentages to compute the parent’s total effective ownership.


       BEA collects sufficient information to link affiliate level data through time to create a

panel. By checking the status of all affiliates that filed forms in the previous year and are

expected to fall within reporting requirements, BEA identifies which enterprises leave the

sample. By monitoring news services for information on mergers, acquisitions, and other

activities of U.S. companies, BEA identifies which new enterprises should be included in the

sample. To check the integrity of reported data, BEA accountants confirm that information

satisfies certain integrity checks. For example, BEA checks whether the owner’s equity at time t

is roughly equal to the owners’ equity at time t-1 plus any retained earnings, plus additional paid-

in-capital, plus unrealized gains and losses, and plus any translation adjustments that account for

changes in the value of foreign currencies that are not picked up in net income calculations.


       The foreign affiliate survey forms that US MNEs are required to complete vary

depending on the year, the size of the affiliate, and the U.S. parent’s percentage of ownership of

the affiliate. The most extensive data are available for 1982, 1989, and 1994, when BEA

conducted Benchmark Surveys. In these years, all affiliates with sales, assets, or net income in

excess of $3 million in absolute value, and their parents, were required to file reports. In non-

benchmark years between 1982 and 1997, exemption levels were higher. From 1983-1988, all

affiliates with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income less than $10 million were

exempt, and this cutoff increased to $15 million from 1990-1993 and $20 million from 1995-




                                                                                                14
1997. While the BEA does estimate data in order to arrive at universe totals, the following

analysis excludes estimated data.15


         To classify the industrial activities of parents and affiliates, BEA assigns each domestic

and foreign entity to an international surveys industry (ISI) classification code that is based on

the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) scheme. A typical ISI code roughly covers the same

scope of activities as a three-digit SIC code. The classification of foreign affiliate data tends to

be precise because parents can consolidate foreign affiliate operations for BEA reporting only if

they are in the same country and the same three-digit ISI industry or if they are integral parts of

the same business operation. Since the internal financial policies of firms primarily engaged in

financial services is likely to differ substantially from that of other firms, all affiliates of

multinationals that have a parent in financial services and all affiliates in such industries are

excluded.16


         Figure 1 illustrates the changing organizational forms of the foreign affiliates of

American multinationals from 1982 to 1997. Figure 1 illustrates the growing importance of

majority-owned incorporated affiliates relative to both minority-owned incorporated affiliates

and branch affiliates over the period. Over the period from 1982 to 1997, majority-owned

incorporated affiliates grew from 71.5 percent to 86.3 percent of the universe, while minority-




15
   BEA uses reported data to estimate universe totals when surveys cover only larger affiliates or when only certain
affiliates provide information on particular survey forms. Estimated data is unlikely to have a significant impact on
the BEA’s published data at the industry or country level as data based on actual reports exceed 90% of the
estimated totals of assets and sales in each of the years between 1982 and 1997. To avoid working with estimated
data, only affiliates required to provide all the information associated with a particular analysis are considered.
16
   Specifically, all affiliates primarily operating in, or with parents that are classified as primarily operating in, ISI
codes 600 through 679 are excluded. This includes affiliates classified as holding companies.


                                                                                                                   15
owned incorporated affiliates declined from 15.3 to 8.8 percent,17 and branch affiliates declined

from 11.4 to 4.4 percent of the universe.


         Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the panel data employed in the empirical work

that follows. For both majority-owned incorporated affiliates and for branches, this table first

reports information on the number of affiliates in the sample and the frequency and size of

payout ratios for the years 1985, 1990, and 1995. As seen in Figure 1, the number of majority-

owned incorporated affiliates increases over the sample period while the number of branches

decreases. As a result of changes in reporting requirements, the number of affiliates reporting

dividends declines substantially in 1994.18 The percent of affiliates paying a positive dividend is

around 30% over the entire sample, and the prevalence of payers is higher among incorporated

than unicorporated affiliates in 1985 and 1990. Payout ratios of incorporated affiliates also

appear to be slightly lower than payout ratios of branches.19 Table 1 also displays summary

statistics for the entire 1982-1997 panel for incorporated affiliates and branches. Incorporated

affiliates tend to be larger than branches, as measured by mean and median assets.


17
   Desai and Hines (1999) offer evidence that the declining share of minority-owned incorporated affiliates is at least
in part attributable to U.S. tax law changes.
18
   The sample of foreign affiliates reporting dividends varies from year to year. In the non-benchmark years before
1994, all surveyed majority-owned incorporated affiliates and branches report dividends. In the non-benchmark
years after 1994, BEA introduced a long and short form for majority owned affiliates, and only those surveyed
affiliates that filed the long form, or those with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income in excess of $50
million, reported divided information. The details of reporting requirements are more complicated in benchmark
years. In 1982, all surveyed affiliates report total dividend payments. In 1989, all surveyed affiliates report
dividends paid directly to the U.S. parent. This figure is converted to total dividends simply by dividing it by the
fraction of an affiliate owned by its parent – under the realistic assumption that dividends are distributed pro rata to
all owners. In 1994, all surveyed affiliates with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income greater than $50
million report total dividends and all other surveyed affiliates report dividends paid directly to the U.S. parent. For
these smaller affiliates, total dividends are again calculated by dividing parent dividends by the parent’s ownership
fraction. Some affiliates are owned indirectly by their parent companies through chains of foreign subsidiaries;
since parents receive dividends only indirectly from such foreign affiliates, it is impossible to calculate total
dividends from distributions to parents. The sample excludes observations of such affiliates in 1989, and those
small affiliates for which total dividend information is not available in 1994.
19
   The survey forms specifically distinguish between net income and remittances for incorporated and
unincorporated affiliates. In particular, the forms classify dividends paid by unincorporated affiliates as the “amount
of current- and prior-period net income remitted to owners.”


                                                                                                                16
        Analysis of the responsiveness of affiliates to varying tax costs requires an estimate of the

relevant tax rate facing an affiliate. Table 2 provides weighted means and standard deviations by

year for the “country” tax rates and “affiliate” tax rates that are employed in the regression

analysis described in section 4. Both measures are computed using the sample of affiliate

observations with positive net income. Tax rates are first constructed for each affiliate in every

year as the ratio of foreign income taxes paid to the sum of foreign income taxes and net income.

The country tax rate measure represents the median of these affiliate tax rates for all American

affiliates operating within a country.20 The means and standard deviations of those medians,

weighted by affiliate after-tax net income for affiliates with positive net income, are presented in

the first two columns of Table 2. Regressions using these country tax rates as independent

variables base their findings on cross-country variation that obscures intra-country variation in

tax rates. The alternative affiliate tax rates, annual weighted means of which are reported in

column 3 of Table 2, capture the intra-country variation in tax rates; this measure is simply the

tax rate calculated above by affiliate after trimming tax rates at 0 and 100 percent.21

Unsurprisingly, the standard deviation of affiliate tax rates over the sample period is 20.9

percent, or nearly twice the standard deviation of country tax rates. The decline in affiliate tax

rates presented in Table 2 corresponds to the decline in average foreign tax rates documented in

Grubert (2001b).


4.      Results


        This section presents the results of estimating dividend payout equations on subsets of the

1982-1997 panel described in section 3. Separate equations are estimated for incorporated and

20
  Country tax rates are trimmed to lie between 0 and 100 percent, which requires adjustments to 112 of the 131,358
affiliate-year observations.



                                                                                                            17
unincorporated affiliates. Distinguishing by organizational form offers a check of whether any

observed sensitivity of dividend payout ratios to repatriation taxes (as captured by foreign tax

rates) among incorporated affiliates also appears for unincorporated affiliates.22 If sensitivity to

taxes were present across both organizational forms, the results might be interpreted as reflecting

something other than tax incentives. The data are fit to Lintner specifications and are estimated

both by OLS and Tobit procedures, the latter motivated by the relatively small fraction (roughly

30 percent) of the sample paying nonzero dividends. Fixed effects for American parent

companies are included in some specifications in an effort to control for the effect of unobserved

parent characteristics that may be correlated with affiliate tax rates. Since the Lintner framework

requires information on dividends and lagged dividends, the regression analysis only uses

observations of affiliates that also report data for the previous year. As a result, all affiliates that

report data only once, and all observations of affiliates reporting for the first time, are excluded.23


         The estimation results consistently indicate that higher repatriation taxes reduce target

payout ratios. Table 3 presents the results of estimating Lintner equations on the sample of

separately-incorporated foreign affiliates, using country tax rates as proxies for the relevant

creditable taxes available upon repatriation. Column 2 reports coefficients from a simple OLS

21
   Out of 95,779 observations on tax rates, 4,723 negative tax rates are trimmed at 0% and 890 tax rates above 100%
are trimmed to 100%.
22
   This exercise takes an affiliate’s organizational form to be independent of its repatriation policy. Multinational
firms choose whether to make their affiliates foreign branches or foreign subsidiaries; to the extent that these choices
are dictated by anticipated future repatriation rates, then a comparison of repatriation rates between affiliates with
different organizational forms will overstate the impact of tax rate differences. Other characteristics differ between
branches and subsidiaries that could be correlated with tax rates and repatriation proclivities. Branch affiliates are
concentrated in certain industries, including petroleum, wholesale trade, and services, though not entirely; in the
1997 sample, 26.4 percent of branch affiliates were in non-petroleum manufacturing, compared with 52.1 percent of
incorporated affiliates. While the geographic distributions of branches and subsidiaries was not identical, the
median foreign tax rate paid by branch affiliates in 1997 was 30.4 percent, compared to 31.1 percent for
incorporated affiliates. Based on this information there is no strong reason to suspect that a comparison of the
repatriation patterns of branches and subsidiaries would encounter difficulties due to spurious correlation with local
tax rates.




                                                                                                                18
specification. In order to calculate target steady-state payout ratios in the Lintner framework, it

is necessary to sum the estimated coefficient on net income and the ratio of the constant term to

net earnings; this sum is then divided by one minus the estimated coefficient on lagged

dividends. Using the sample mean income of $6,296 thousand, the estimated constant term of

273, the 0.33 coefficient on net income, and the 0.26 coefficient on lagged dividends together

imply that incorporated affiliates with mean income in zero-tax locations set target payout ratios

of 0.51 [0.51=(0.04+0.33)/(1-0.26)]. The 0.27 coefficient on the interaction of Country-Tax

Rates and net income implies that incorporated affiliates in locations with 30 percent tax rates

instead set target payout ratios of 0.62 [0.62=(0.04+0.33+0.27*0.3)/(1-0.26)]. The 0.26

coefficient on lagged dividends implies an adjustment parameter of 0.74. As with the firms

studied by Lintner, incorporated affiliates partially adjust their dividends to targeted payouts.


         The results are robust to alternative specifications explored in the regressions reported in

columns 3 – 6.24 Columns 3 and 4 report regressions that add fixed effects that are specific to

parent companies and that therefore remain unchanged across time and between affiliates

belonging to the same parent group. Inclusion of these fixed effects does not substantially

change the estimated coefficients on lagged dividend payments, net income, and net income

interacted with tax rates. Columns 5 and 6 report coefficients estimated with a Tobit procedure


23
   In order to ensure the robustness of the results, the sample excludes affiliates in top 0.5 percent and bottom 0.5
percent of net income each year in each regression.
24
   The results are likewise robust to alternative specifications not reported in Tables 3-6. The regression equation
specification takes responses to repatriation taxes to be the same every year. Since the time-varying nature of
variables such as the U.S. tax rate influences the fraction of American firms with excess foreign tax credits, it
follows that responsiveness to repatriation taxes are likely to differ over time, in which case the regression estimates
represent something like sample averages. As a check of the importance of time variation, the regressions reported
in Table 5 were re-run adding interactions between the affiliate tax rate and income variable and a dummy variable
for the post-1986 period. Despite a greater fraction of firms with excess foreign tax credits after the 1986 U.S. tax
reduction, only one of these regressions offers any evidence of reduced sensitivity of dividends to repatriation taxes
in the post-1986 period. Estimated coefficients from that (Tobit) specification imply that higher repatriation taxes in
the post-1986 period continue to reduce dividend payouts, though the implied coefficient is 0.71 instead of the 0.75
reported in column 5 of Table 5.


                                                                                                                 19
that controls for the nonnormality of the residuals induced by the fact that dividend payments

cannot be negative. The estimated Tobit coefficients are generally larger than their OLS

counterparts. The estimated coefficients in column 6 suggest that the difference in steady-state

desired dividend payout ratios for incorporated affiliates in zero-tax locations and those in 30

percent tax rate locations is 0.23 [0.23=(0.52*0.3)/(1-.32)].


       Table 4 presents estimated coefficients from the same specifications but for the sample of

unincorporated affiliates. Before considering the differential impact of taxes on the dividend

behavior of incorporated and unincorporated affiliates, it is instructive to compare estimated

coefficients from the basic Lintner specifications in columns 1, 3, and 5 of Table 3, with their

counterparts reported in columns 1, 3, and 5 of Table 4. The results are very similar across the

incorporated and unincorporated subsamples. The estimated target payout ratios of incorporated

affiliates in column 1 of Table 3 is 0.63 [0.63=(0.05+0.41)/(1-0.27)] while this estimated ratio

for branches in column 1 of Table 4 is 0.75 [0.75=(0.06+0.45)/(1-0.33)]. The estimated

adjustment parameters for incorporated and unincorporated affiliates are 0.73 and 0.67

respectively. Of course, examining the data at this level of aggregation across tax rate

environments masks the heterogeneity related to differences in the tax treatments of incorporated

and branch affiliates.


       Since American taxpayers owe U.S. taxes on the foreign incomes of unincorporated

affiliates, whether or not that income is repatriated, it follows that host-country tax rates should

have no effect on dividend payment rates to the extent that these tax rates capture the impact of

repatriation taxes. The coefficient estimates reported in Table 4 confirm the absence of a

significant effect of host country tax rates on the dividend payout ratio of unincorporated foreign

affiliates. The 0.13 coefficient on the interaction of country tax rates and net income, reported in


                                                                                                20
column 2 of Table 4, is not statistically significant and is much smaller than its counterpart

reported in column 2 of Table 3. Similar results appear in the fixed effects regressions reported

in column 4. Even in the Tobit specification reported in column 6 of Table 4 the estimated

coefficient on the interaction of country tax rates and net income remains small and insignificant.

The 0.12 coefficient on country tax rates interacted with net income, reported in column 6 of

Table 4, is particularly small compared with the estimated 0.52 coefficient on the same

interaction in the incorporated affiliate regression reported in column 6 of Table 3. This result

suggests that country tax rates have little if any impact on payout ratios of unincorporated

affiliates while they do affect payout ratios of incorporated affiliates.


        Tables 5 and 6 report the results of regressions that parallel those reported in Tables 3 and

4, but that employ different methods for estimating the relevant tax costs associated with

repatriation. Instead of the country tax rate measures used in the regressions reported in Tables 3

and 4, the regressions reported in Tables 5 and 6 employ the affiliate tax rates described in

section 3. In Tables 5 and 6, either the affiliate tax rate is simply substituted for the country tax

rate or the country tax rate is used as an instrument for the affiliate tax rate. Use of these tax

rates reduces the sample size from 77,766 observations to 60,477 observations for incorporated

affiliates, since the affiliate tax rate is defined only for affiliates reporting positive net incomes.


        The results reported in column 1 of Table 5 are similar to those reported in column 2 of

Table 3, with one difference: the estimated coefficient on the interaction of the tax rate and net

income is much larger in the regression reported in Table 5. The coefficient on this interaction is

0.56 in the regression reported in Table 5 that uses the affiliate tax rate, while the same

coefficient is 0.27 in the equivalent regression reported in Table 3 using country median tax

rates. Estimated coefficients on net income without tax rate interactions are 0.33 both in Table 3


                                                                                                   21
and in Table 5, while estimated coefficients on lagged dividends are 0.26 in Table 3 and 0.23 in

Table 5.


         The different results stemming from the use of country and affiliate tax rates are

consistent with two alternative explanations. If different affiliates in the same country face

distinct effective income tax rates then using country tax rates as a proxy for the tax rates

affiliates face would be a source of measurement error. Measurement error would explain why

the coefficient on the interaction of country tax rates and net income is lower than the coefficient

on the interaction of affiliate tax rates and net income. While this explanation favors the use of

affiliate tax rates, sensitivities measured from affiliate tax rates might instead reflect a particular

behavioral relationship. If affiliates target fixed values of dividends then payout ratios would

mechanically appear high when an affiliate faces a high tax rate since that affiliate would then

have to pay out a larger fraction of net income. Use of the country tax rate to instrument for the

affiliate tax rate overcomes the limitations of using either of the tax rates on its own. This

procedure captures within-country heterogeneity in affiliate tax rates but reduces the impact of

behavioral mechanics associated with fixed payout targets. These concerns recommend the use

of country-tax rates as instruments for affiliate tax rates, as performed in the regressions reported

in columns 2, 4, and 6 of Table 5.25


         Use of country tax rates as instruments for affiliate tax rates reduces the estimated

coefficient on the interaction of tax rates and net income from 0.56 to 0.47, but this coefficient


25
   The first stage equation, in which net income interacted with affiliate tax rates is regressed on net income
interacted with country tax rates (as well as other independent variables), exhibits an excellent fit. In the first stage
regression for incorporated affiliates, the coefficient on the net income-country tax rate variable is 0.69 with a t-
statistic of 18, and the first stage F-statistic (3, 60,477) is 606, which is significant at any desired confidence level.
In the first stage regression for branch affiliates, the coefficient on the net income-country tax rate variable is 0.89
with a t-statistic of 14, and the first stage F-statistic (3, 4,598) is 63, which is significant at any desired confidence
level.


                                                                                                                    22
remains large compared to its counterpart in Table 3. The introduction of parent fixed effects in

the regressions reported in columns 3 and 4 has very little impact on the estimated coefficients

other than those on the net income and tax rate interactions, which fall slightly (e.g., from 0.47 in

column 2 to 0.43 in column 4). The results of the Tobit equation reported in column 5 of Table

5, in which uninstrumented affiliate tax rates are interacted with net income, differ somewhat

from the results of the equivalent regression reported in column 6 of Table 3. While the net

income and lagged dividend coefficients are moderately smaller in the Table 5 Tobit regression

than they are in its Table 3 counterpart, the most important difference appears in the effect of the

interaction of tax rates and affiliate income. The estimated 0.75 coefficient on this variable

reported in column 5 of Table 5 is significantly larger than the 0.52 coefficient reported in

column 6 of Table 3. Column 6 of Table 5 reports the results of instrumenting for affiliate tax

rates in the Tobit specification;26 these results are very similar to those appearing in column 5.


        Table 6 reports the results of conducting the analysis presented in Table 5 on the

unincorporated affiliate subsample. Construction of the affiliate tax rate variable reduces the

sample size from the 6,373 observations reported in Table 4 to 4,602 observations. Despite this

smaller sample, a comparison of the results reported in Tables 5 and 6 indicates that payout

ratios of unincorporated affiliates exhibit significantly less sensitivity to local tax rates relative to

payout ratios of incorporated affiliates.


        Column 1 of Table 6 reports results of the simple OLS specification of the branch payout

equation that interacts affiliate- and year-specific tax rates with net income. Although

incorporated and unicorporated affiliates exhibit similar adjustment parameters, their estimated

26
  The instrumental variables Tobit estimation is based on a technique detailed by Newey (1987). The analysis uses
bootstrap methods to estimate standard errors. The number of bootstrap repetitions was selected using a procedure



                                                                                                           23
payout ratios vary with tax rates in distinct ways. Moving from a zero-tax location to a 30

percent tax rate location increases an incorporated affiliate’s target payout ratio from 0.30

[0.30=(0.33-0.10)/(1-0.23)] to 0.52 [0.52=(0.33-0.10+0.56*0.3)/(1-0.23)], but the change for a

branch affiliate is only from 0.37 [0.37=(0.43-0.16)/(1-0.26)] to 0.51 [0.51=(0.43-

0.16+0.36*0.3)/(1-0.26)]. While the use of uninstrumented affiliate tax rates produces results in

which tax interaction terms have positive and significant coefficients for unincorporated

affiliates, instrumenting for affiliate tax rates with country tax rates (to address the problems

discussed above) removes this result. The estimated coefficient on the interaction of the tax rate

and net income falls to 0.16 in the regression reported in column 2 of Table 6, and does not differ

significantly from zero. This 0.16 coefficient is significantly smaller than the 0.47 coefficient on

the same variable in the incorporated affiliate regression reported in column 2 of Table 5.


        Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 present results of specifications that add parent fixed effects

to the same regressions reported in columns 1 and 2. The results are generally similar to those

appearing in columns 1 and 2, though the estimated coefficient on the net income and tax rate

interaction falls still further to 0.12 in the instrumental variables regression reported in column 4.

Column 5 of Table 6 reports the results of a Tobit specification of the dividend payout equation

that interacts uninstrumented affiliate tax rates with net income. The 0.43 estimated coefficient

on this interaction is positive and differs significantly from zero, though it is also significantly

smaller than the 0.75 estimated coefficient for incorporated affiliates reported in column 5 of

Table 5. Column 6 of Table 6 reports the instrumental variables Tobit results, in which all other

coefficients are similar to those in column 5, but the estimated effect of the interaction of net

income and tax rates is much smaller (0.13) and does not differ significantly from zero.


recommended by Andrews and Buchinsky (2000). Their procedure yields a number of repetitions such that the


                                                                                                       24
           Comparison of the behavior of incorporated and unincorporated affiliates, together with

the evidence obtained by estimating the behavior of the sample of incorporated affiliates,

consistently indicates that higher repatriation taxes are associated with reduced payout ratios.

With the exception of the use of uninstrumented affiliate tax rates, the results indicate that

incorporated affiliates are sensitive to repatriation taxes in a way that unincorporated affiliates

are not.


           Taking the estimated effect of the interactions of tax rates and net income for

incorporated affiliates as reported in column 2 of Table 5, one percent tax rate differences are

associated with 0.61 [0.61=0.47/(1-0.23)] percent differences in payout ratios. Since the ratio of

mean dividend payments to mean net income for incorporated affiliates equals 0.61, this

corresponds to a 1.0 percent difference in total dividend payments. This estimated effect exceeds

the estimated tax rate sensitivities reported by Mutti (1981), Hines and Hubbard (1990),

Altshuler and Newlon (1993), and Altshuler, Newlon, and Randolph (1995), all of whom analyze

tax return data.27 A lower bound on the estimated tax rate effect is available by subtracting the

estimated 0.16 coefficient on the interaction of tax rates and net income for branches (as reported

in column 2 of Table 6), thereby yielding that one percent tax rate differences are associated with

0.40 [0.40=0.31/(1-0.23)] percent differences in payout ratios, or 0.66 percent differences in total

dividend payments.


5.         Welfare Consequences of Repatriation Taxes


           These findings carry several implications for the debate on the transition to an exemption

system. Given that dividend payments by foreign affiliates appear to be highly sensitive to


percentage deviation from using an infinite number of bootstraps is less than 10 percent with probability 0.95.



                                                                                                              25
repatriation taxes, the adoption of a territorial tax regime would be associated with liberated

financial flows between parent companies and their foreign subsidiaries. Part of the efficiency

cost of the current foreign tax credit and deferral system can be imputed from dividend

repatriation distortions in this system. In particular, it is possible to estimate the deadweight loss

associated with repatriation-based taxation of foreign income from the degree to which firms

change their payout ratios in response to the presence of repatriation taxes.


           In order to estimate the effect of a transition to an exemption regime it is necessary to

calculate the likely impact of removing repatriation taxes on the mean level and distribution of

dividend payments from foreign affiliates. Table 2 reports that the average foreign tax rate

facing American affiliates in 1997 was 21.1 percent; the weighted mean tax rate facing the

subsample of separately-incorporated foreign subsidiaries was 22.2 percent, and its standard

deviation was 18.6 percent. The U.S. federal income tax rate that year was 35 percent.

Repatriation taxes would have no effect on repatriations whenever the timing and magnitude of

dividend payments from foreign subsidiaries does not influence the present value of total tax

liabilities. As a practical matter, this occurs in situations when foreign tax rates equal the U.S.

tax rate, treaties reduce cross-border withholding taxes to zero, and the recognition of additional

foreign income for U.S. tax purposes does not increase tax liabilities through income and

expense allocations. Taking the last two considerations roughly to net each other out, it follows

that foreign tax rates of 35 percent would remove incentives to adjust dividend payments in

anticipation of associated domestic tax liabilities. Since the average foreign tax rate for foreign

subsidiaries was 22.2 percent in 1997, this change corresponds to a 12.8 percent higher foreign

tax rate, which in turn is associated with 12.8 percent greater dividend payments from foreign

27
     The results reported by Grubert (1998), based on an analysis of tax return data, could imply a greater sensitivity of



                                                                                                                   26
subsidiaries. The econometric estimates imply that home country exemption of foreign income

would increase annual dividend flows from foreign affiliates by this amount, roughly 12.8

percent.


         The average effect of repatriation taxation conceals a great deal of variation between

affiliates, since the tax system simultaneously encourages some affiliates to distribute much

greater dividends than they would in the absence of tax incentives, while discouraging others

from paying dividends. Much of the inefficiency associated with repatriation taxes stems from

this variation, which is masked in the aggregate figures.


         In order to estimate the efficiency costs associated with repatriation taxes it is helpful to

consider the simple Harberger triangle associated with the distortions introduced by home-

country taxation of repatriated income.28 Letting β denote the impact of repatriation taxation on

proclivity to pay dividends out of net income, it follows that the effect of repatriation taxation on

payments of dividends from affiliate i is: βy i (τ i − τ US ), in which yi is the after-foreign-tax

income of affiliate i, τ i is the tax rate it faces in the foreign country, and τ US is the home country

tax rate. The efficiency cost of this distortion equals ½ times the product of this induced

dividend flow and the tax wedge.29 Aggregating this figure for all affiliates yields the following

expression for the total inefficiency:


dividends to repatriation taxes, but differences in method and description make such a comparison infeasible.
28
   Hines (1999b) and Auerbach and Hines (2001) review the application of Harberger triangles to calculate the
magnitudes of inefficiencies due to taxation.
29
   A critical aspect of this welfare calculation is that tax distortions be properly measured. To the extent that
dividends respond to transitory and not permanent tax rate differences, as argued by Hartman (1985) and Altshuler,
Newlon, and Randolph (1995), then the tax rate differences on which the estimates reported in Tables 3-6 are based
reflect the impact of transitory tax rate differences. The relevant tax wedge for the welfare calculation then is the
anticipated difference between transitory and permanent tax rates, or, to express the same idea a different way, the
difference between the present value of the cost of paying a dividend this year and the cost of paying a dividend next
year. Unless the anticipated cost of paying future dividends is zero – either because firm conditions are expected to
change, or the policy environment is expected to change – then the relevant tax wedge for paying dividends this year


                                                                                                               27
                                                    ∑ y [(τ                                             ]
                                             β
                                             2
                     1 n                              n
                  Ω = ∑ βy i (τ i − τ US ) =                        − τ ) + 2τ i (τ − τ US ) + τ US −τ 2 ,
                                                                        2                        2
(3)                                                         i   i
                     2 i =1                  2       i =1




in which Ω is the measure of the loss of economic efficiency, and τ is any constant.


         Equation (3) can be evaluated most conveniently by setting τ equal to the mean tax rate

facing foreign affiliates, weighted by their after-tax incomes. The magnitude of Ω in 1997 can

be calculated by taking τ US to equal 0.35 (its 1997 value), using the estimated value of 0.61 for

β , and using 0.222 and 0.035 for the mean and variance of the tax rates facing foreign

subsidiaries in 1997. This calculation yields that the total inefficiency in repatriation patterns

due to repatriation taxes equals 1.55 percent of the net income of foreign subsidiaries. The

inefficiency associated with dividend repatriation taxes (expressed as a fraction of subsidiary net

income) has not changed markedly over time, since the same calculation using 1984 values

(including a statutory U.S. tax rate of 46 percent) produces a Harberger triangle equal to 2.0

percent of net income. To put the 1997 number in perspective, it corresponds to 2.5

[2.5=1.55/0.61] percent of total dividends.


         This Harberger triangle figure – 2.5 percent of dividends – represents the efficiency loss

due to the incentives created by repatriation taxes. This loss in efficiency occasioned by

repatriation taxes equals approximately 15.2 percent of the home-country tax revenue generated

by repatriation taxes, since, at an average home country tax rate of 35 percent and an average

foreign tax rate of 22.2 percent, firms pay home country taxes equal to 16.5 percent of




will be less than the measured wedge that ignores future costs. Consequently, the welfare calculations that follow
produce upper bounds on actual welfare costs.


                                                                                                              28
dividends.30 The total burden of repatriation taxes equals the sum of the efficiency cost, 2.5

percent of dividends, and the tax obligation, 16.5 percent of dividends, for a total of 19.0 percent.

It is noteworthy that these estimates correspond to inefficiencies in dividend policies conditional

on investment; since repatriation taxes also affect investment patterns, corporate finance, and a

host of other decisions, the associated inefficiency, and ultimate burden, is greater still.31


6.       Conclusion

         This paper demonstrates that the repatriation taxes imposed by current U.S. tax rules

reduce the volume and efficiency of financial flows between affiliates and their American

parents. Evidence from a large continuous panel of foreign affiliates of American firms indicates

that yearly dividend payouts are determined by gradual adjustment to desired long-run dividends

conditional on earnings. Highly taxed foreign affiliates have higher desired payout rates than do

more lightly taxed subsidiaries, reflecting the lower repatriation taxes associated with receiving

dividends from heavily taxed affiliates. Unincorporated foreign affiliates, from whom receipt of

dividends does not trigger repatriation taxes, do not exhibit the same large and significant

association between tax rates and dividend payout ratios. Comparison of tax sensitivities across

organizational forms implies that U.S. repatriation taxes reduce aggregate dividend repatriations

by 12.8 percent annually. The annual efficiency loss associated with tax-motivated dividend

repatriation behavior equals 2.5 percent of dividends.

         This paper employs the Lintner dividend model, initially developed to understand

corporate dividend payments to common shareholders, to analyze dividend payouts from foreign

30
  The tax due upon repatriating a dollar of dividends equals the difference between the U.S. and foreign tax rates,
                                                                                                   τ −τ *
grossed up in order to reflect the underlying foreign income out of which the dividend is paid, or: US        , in
                                                                                                    (1 − τ *)
which τUS is the U.S. tax rate and τ * is the foreign tax rate.



                                                                                                               29
affiliates to their parents. This model has not previously been used to explain payments between

foreign affiliates and their parent companies, due in part to the lack of continuous annual data,

and in part to an assumption that the same control and other non-tax issues that motivate

dividend payments to common shareholders are unimportant in the case of dividend payments

from foreign affiliates. The ability of the Lintner framework to describe the pattern of affiliate-

parent dividends suggests that non-tax motivations also guide the dividend policies of foreign

affiliates. As is more fully explored in Desai, Foley and Hines (2001), the evidence of partial

adjustment in the formulation of dividend policy and the explicitly tax-penalized behavior of

many affiliates suggests that internal monitoring problems may contribute significantly to the

formulation of dividend policies governing payments from affiliates to parents. These non-tax

motives for dividend policy within the firm illuminate the determinants of dividend policy more

generally, and are likely to persist under proposed alternative tax systems such as an exemption

regime.




31
     See Hines (1999c) for a general welfare analysis of the impact of repatriation taxes.




                                                                                              30
                                          References

Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert, “Where Will They Go if We Go Territorial? Dividend
       Exemption and the Location Decisions of U.S. Multinational Corporations,” Working
       paper, Rutgers University, 2001.

Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert, “Repatriation Taxes, Repatriation Strategies, and
       Multinational Financial Policy,” Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Altshuler, Rosanne and T. Scott Newlon, “The Effects of U.S. Tax Policy on the Income
       Repatriation Patterns of U.S. Multinational Corporations,” in Alberto Giovannini, R.
       Glenn Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod, eds., Studies in International Taxation (Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, 1993), 77-115.

Altshuler, Rosanne, T. Scott Newlon and William C. Randolph, “Do Repatriation Taxes Matter?
       Evidence from the Tax Returns of U.S. Multinationals,” in Martin Feldstein, James R.
       Hines Jr., and R. Glenn Hubbard, eds., The Effects of Taxation on Multinational
       Corporations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 253-272.

Andrews, Donald W.K. and Moshe Buchinsky, “A Three-step Method for Choosing the Number
      of Bootstrap Repetitions,” Econometrica, January 2000, 68 (1), 23-51.

Auerbach, Alan J., “Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, August 1979, 93 (3), 433-446.

Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr., “Taxation and Economic Efficiency,” NBER
      Working Paper No. 8181, March 2001.

Bradford, David F., “The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate Distributions,”
       Journal of Public Economics, February 1981, 15 (1), 1-22.

Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr., “‘Basket’ Cases: Tax Incentives and International Joint
       Venture Participation by American Multinational Firms,” Journal of Public Economics,
       March 1999, 71 (3), 379-402.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr., “Dividend Policy within the Firm,”
       working paper, Harvard University, 2001.

Fama, Eugene F. and Harvey Babiak, “Dividend Policy: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of the
      American Statistical Association, December 1968, 63 (324), 1132-1161.

Grubert, Harry, “Taxes and the Division of Foreign Operating Income Among Royalties,
       Interest, Dividends and Retained Earnings,” Journal of Public Economics, May 1998, 68
       (2), 269-290.

Grubert, Harry, “Dividend Exemption and Tax Revenue,” working paper, U.S. Department of
       the Treasury, 2001a.
Grubert, Harry, “Tax Planning by Companies and Tax Competition by Governments: Is There
       Evidence of Changes in Behavior?” in James R. Hines Jr., ed. International Taxation and
       Multinational Activity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001b), 113-139.

Grubert, Harry and John Mutti, Taxing International Business Income: Dividend Exemption
       versus the Current System (Washington D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 2001).

Hartman, David G., “Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment,” Journal of Public Economics,
      February 1985, 26 (1), 107-121.

Hines, James R., Jr., “The Flight Paths of Migratory Corporations,” Journal of Accounting,
       Auditing, and Finance, Fall 1991, 6 (4), 447-479.

Hines, James R., Jr., “Credit and Deferral as International Investment Incentives.” Journal of
       Public Economics, October 1994, 55 (2), 323-347.

Hines, James R., Jr., “Taxes, Technology Transfer, and the R&D Activities of Multinational
       Firms,” in Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines Jr., and R. Glenn Hubbard, eds. The Effects
       of Taxation on Multinational Corporations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       1995), 225-248.

Hines, James R., Jr., “Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International Taxation,” National
       Tax Journal, June 1999a, 52 (2), 305-322.

Hines, James R., Jr., “Three Sides of Harberger Triangles,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       Spring 1999b, 13 (2), 167-188.

Hines, James R., Jr., “The Case against Deferral: A Deferential Reconsideration,” National Tax
       Journal, September 1999c, 52 (3), 385-404.

Hines, James R., Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard, “Coming Home to America: Dividend Repatriations
       by U.S. Multinationals,” in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod, eds., Taxation in the Global
       Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 161-200.

Hufbauer, Gary C., U.S. Taxation of International Income: Blueprint for Reform (Washington
      D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 1992).

King, Mervyn A., Public Policy and the Corporation (London: Chapman and Hall, 1977).

Lintner, John, “Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends, Retained Earnings,
       and Taxes,” American Economic Review, May 1956, 46 (2), 97-113.

Mataloni, Raymond, “A Guide to BEA Statistics on U.S. Multinational Companies,” Survey of
      Current Business, March 1995, 75 (3), 38-53.
Mutti, John, “Tax Incentives and Repatriation Decisions of U.S. Multinational Corporations,”
        National Tax Journal, June 1981, 34 (2), 241-248.

Newey, Whitney K., “Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with
      Endogenous Explanatory Variables,” Journal of Econometrics, November 1987, 36 (3),
      231-250.
                    Figure 1: The Changing Organizational Form of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1982-1997


 100%


  90%


  80%


  70%


  60%


  50%


  40%


  30%


  20%


  10%


    0%
             1982       1983        1984       1985       1986        1987       1988       1989        1990       1991       1992        1993       1994       1995        1996       1997

                              Majority Owned Incorporated Subsidiaries                 Minority Owned Subsidiaries             Branches        Other Organizational Forms

Note: The figure presents the share of affiliates of U.S. Parents operating as majority owned incorporated subsidiaries, minority owned incorporated subsidiaries, branches and as other
organizational forms from 1982 to 1997.
                                                                 Table 1
                              Descriptive Statistics for the Panel of Multinational Affiliates


Majority-Owned Incorporated Subsidiaries
Cross Sectional Data                                                                     1985                   1990                  1995

Number of entities                                                                     5,343                  7,168                 7,389
Number of entities reporting dividends                                                 5,343                  7,168                 4,263
Number of associated parent organizations                                                823                  1,154                   765
% of affiliates reporting positive dividends                                           35.9%                  29.7%                 29.0%
Median ratio of dividends to net income for payers                                     67.7%                  72.3%                 72.2%

                                                                                                                                 Standard
1982-1997 Panel Summary Statistics                                                      Mean                 Median             Deviation

Assets                                                                               99,785                  31,611              294,484
Net income                                                                            6,296                   1,573               21,380
Dividends                                                                             3,821                     -                 20,189
Interaction of country tax rate and net income                                        1,926                     469                6,847
Interaction of affiliate tax rate and net income                                      2,357                     588                7,099




Branch Affiliates
Cross Sectional Data                                                                     1985                   1990                  1995

Number of entities                                                                       676                     409                  359
Number of entities reporting dividends                                                   676                     409                  172
Number of associated parent organizations                                                 72                      49                   31
% of affiliates reporting positive dividends                                          27.4%                   20.0%                 30.2%
Median ratio of dividends to net income for payers                                    91.3%                   94.5%                 83.1%

                                                                                                                                 Standard
1982-1997 Panel Summary Statistics                                                      Mean                 Median             Deviation

Assets                                                                               79,499                  22,817              187,654
Net income                                                                            6,629                   1,132               28,312
Dividends                                                                             5,014                     -                 26,540
Interaction of country tax rate and net income                                        1,890                     256                9,680
Interaction of affiliate tax rate and net income                                      3,270                     398               12,297
Note: The top panel provides cross sectional data for 1985, 1990 and 1995 and panel summary statistics for incorporated affiliates. The
bottom panel provides cross sectional data for 1985, 1990 and 1995 and panel summary statistics for unincorporated branch affiliates. All
dollar figures are in thousands.
                                                          Table 2
                                          Foreign Tax Rates, 1982-1997


                                          Country Tax Rates                                    Affiliate Tax Rates

                                                       Standard                                             Standard
     Year                             Mean             Deviation                            Mean            Deviation

          1982                        38.6%              12.7%                             37.9%               22.0%

          1983                        34.1%              14.1%                             34.0%               24.3%

          1984                        35.5%              11.9%                             35.2%               23.9%

          1985                        34.1%              15.3%                             33.7%               24.3%

          1986                        34.5%              14.1%                             29.9%               21.5%

          1987                        34.4%              14.0%                             28.5%               21.4%

          1988                        34.0%              13.1%                             27.4%               20.2%

          1989                        34.0%              12.2%                             28.9%               19.3%

          1990                        31.8%              13.7%                             25.3%               21.7%

          1991                        31.8%              12.6%                             23.7%               19.7%

          1992                        30.6%              12.5%                             24.0%               19.9%

          1993                        29.4%              11.6%                             21.7%               20.1%

          1994                        28.2%              11.2%                             22.0%               18.7%

          1995                        28.2%              12.3%                             22.6%               19.0%

          1996                        28.6%              13.2%                             22.2%               19.1%

          1997                        27.8%              12.5%                             21.1%               18.5%

  1982-1997                           31.3%              13.2%                             25.7%               20.9%


Note: Tax rate calculations are based on all affiliates reporting foreign income taxes paid and positive net income. The
affiliate tax rate is the ratio of foreign income taxes paid to the sum of net income and foreign income taxes paid for a
particular affiliate in a particular year. The country tax rate is the median of this ratio among all affiliates in a particular
country during a particular year. Tax rates are trimmed at 0 and 100%. Means and standard deviations are weighted by after-
tax affiliate income.
                                                                                   Table 3
                              Lintner Dividend Specifications for Incorporated Affiliates, Country-Median Tax Rates

                                    Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Majority-Owned Incorporated Affiliates


                                                  (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)                    (5)                    (6)

Constant                                           298.4515              273.2120                350.0693              327.2801          -23,283.7300           -23,308.5600
                                                   (97.1920)             (98.1784)             (106.3705)            (107.6823)           (1241.0240)            (1242.4130)


Net Income of Affiliate                               0.4107                 0.3334                 0.4113                0.3435                 0.5967                 0.4499
                                                    (0.0220)               (0.0401)               (0.0227)              (0.0422)               (0.0301)               (0.0445)


Lagged Dividend Payments                              0.2673                 0.2638                 0.2515                0.2490                 0.3251                 0.3177
                                                    (0.0297)               (0.0293)               (0.0295)              (0.0292)               (0.0359)               (0.0352)


Interaction of Country-Tax Rate                                              0.2725                                       0.2382                                        0.5196
and Net Income                                                             (0.1217)                                     (0.1286)                                      (0.1292)



Parent Fixed Effects?                                     No                     No                    Yes                   Yes                     No                     No
Tobit or OLS?                                            OLS                    OLS                    OLS                   OLS                   Tobit                  Tobit

R-Squared                                               0.3610                 0.3625                 0.3705                0.3716
Log-Likelihood                                                                                                                                 -324,776              -324,681
Sigma                                                                                                                                            29,535                29,466
No. Obs                                                 77,766                 77,766                 77,666                77,666               77,666                77,666



Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned incorporated affiliates. "Net Income of Affiliate" is the after-
foreign tax net income of the affiliate in the same year. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. "Interaction
of Country Tax Rate and Net Income" is the product of the country tax rate, as defined in the text, and "Net Income of Affiliate." Columns 1 and 2 present OLS specifications
without fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4 present OLS specifications with parent fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 present Tobit specifications. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are presented in parentheses.
                                                                                   Table 4
                                       Lintner Dividend Specifications for Branches, Country-Median Tax Rates

                                                  Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Branch Affiliates


                                                  (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)                   (6)

Constant                                           396.2181               397.0999               472.9865               480.6146          -28,637.4900          -28,615.9100
                                                 (260.3451)             (256.5044)             (299.3231)             (299.5311)           (2971.3050)           (2974.9200)


Net Income of Affiliate                               0.4461                 0.4108                 0.4528                 0.4238                0.6519                 0.6170
                                                    (0.0645)               (0.0978)               (0.0656)               (0.1055)              (0.0772)               (0.1071)


Lagged Dividend Payments                              0.3282                 0.3272                 0.3041                 0.3037                0.3461                 0.3449
                                                    (0.0927)               (0.0927)               (0.0940)               (0.0939)              (0.1050)               (0.1052)


Interaction of Country-Tax Rate                                              0.1257                                        0.0991                                       0.1247
and Net Income                                                             (0.2434)                                      (0.2709)                                     (0.2311)



Parent Fixed Effects?                                     No                     No                    Yes                    Yes                     No                    No
Tobit or OLS?                                            OLS                    OLS                    OLS                    OLS                   Tobit                 Tobit

R-Squared                                               0.5482                 0.5489                 0.5650                 0.5654
Log-Likelihood                                                                                                                                   -24,547               -24,546
Sigma                                                                                                                                             33,547                33,522
No. Obs                                                  6,373                  6,373                  6,373                  6,373                6,373                 6,373



Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by unincorporated branch affiliates. "Net Income of Affiliate" is the after-foreign
tax net income of the affiliate in the same year. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. "Interaction of
Country Tax Rate and Net Income" is the product of the country tax rate, as defined in the text, and "Net Income of Affiliate." Columns 1 and 2 present OLS specifications
without fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4 present OLS specifications with parent fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 present Tobit specifications. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are presented in parentheses.
                                                                                     Table 5
                                      Lintner Dividend Specifications for Incorporated Affiliates, Affiliate Tax Rates

                                      Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Majority-Owned Incorporated Affiliates


                                                      (1)                   (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)                   (6)

Constant                                              -607.0329             -581.9756              -609.1335              -572.7080          -20,351.0100           -20,323.7500
                                                     (154.6309)            (165.0086)             (175.9349)             (190.1521)          (1,126.0550)             (1070.787)


Net Income of Affiliate                                   0.3286                0.3473                 0.3398                 0.3638                 0.3973                0.4143
                                                        (0.0294)              (0.0413)               (0.0312)               (0.0444)               (0.0333)              (0.0437)


Lagged Dividend Payments                                  0.2250                0.2306                 0.2094                 0.2161                 0.2851                0.2910
                                                        (0.0296)              (0.0308)               (0.0293)               (0.0305)               (0.0356)              (0.0370)


Interaction of Affiliate-Tax Rate                         0.5635                 0.4690                0.5479                 0.4260                 0.7519                0.6644
and Net Income                                          (0.0903)               (0.1787)              (0.0949)               (0.1957)               (0.0991)              (0.1841)


Parent Fixed Effects?                                         No                    No                    Yes                    Yes                     No                    No
Tobit or OLS?                                                OLS                   OLS                    OLS                    OLS                   Tobit                 Tobit
IV with Country Tax Rates?                                    No                   Yes                     No                    Yes                     No                   Yes

R-Squared                                                   0.3907                                       0.4011
Log-Likelihood                                                                                                                                    -299,995               -300,025
Sigma                                                                                                                                               29,316                 29,310
No. Obs                                                     60,477                60,477                 60,477                 60,477              60,477                 60,477


Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned incorporated affiliates. "Net Income of Affiliate" is the after-
foreign tax net income of the affiliate in the same year. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. "Interaction of
Affiliate Tax Rate and Net Income" is the product of the affiliate tax rate, as defined in the text, and "Net Income of Affiliate." Columns 1 and 2 present OLS specifications
without fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4 present OLS specifications with parent fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 presentTobit specifications. Tobit IV estimates are obtained using
the procedure recommended by Newey (1987). In columns 1 through 5, heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses. In column 6, bootstrapped
standard errors are presented in parentheses. The number of bootstrap repetitions is chosen following Andrews and Buchinsky (2000) so that the percentage deviation in standard
error estimates from using an infinite number of bootstraps is less than 10% with probability 0.95.
                                                                                      Table 6
                                               Lintner Dividend Specifications for Branches, Affiliate Tax Rates

                                                     Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Branch Affiliates

                                                       (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)                    (5)                    (6)

Constant                                             -1,036.1550           -1,028.5280              -983.8666              -995.0818          -24,297.9700           -24,222.1900
                                                      (453.2230)            (457.8351)             (554.3380)             (565.0190)          (2,476.2230)             (2485.687)


Net Income of Affiliate                                   0.4294                  0.4768                 0.4403                0.5017                 0.4891                 0.5586
                                                       (0.08719)                (0.1004)               (0.0940)              (0.1183)               (0.0987)               (0.1088)


Lagged Dividend Payments                                   0.2566                 0.2726                 0.2322                0.2482                 0.3268                 0.3511
                                                         (0.0921)               (0.0966)               (0.0943)              (0.0990)               (0.1082)               (0.1180)


Interaction of Affiliate-Tax Rate                          0.3633                 0.1624                 0.3595                0.1157                 0.4257                 0.1265
and Net Income                                           (0.1585)               (0.2679)               (0.1760)              (0.3364)               (0.1716)               (0.2610)


Parent Fixed Effects?                                          No                     No                    Yes                   Yes                     No                     No
Tobit or OLS?                                                 OLS                    OLS                    OLS                   OLS                   Tobit                  Tobit
IV with Country Tax Rates?                                     No                    Yes                     No                   Yes                     No                    Yes

R-Squared                                                    0.5695                                        0.5885
Log-Likelihood                                                                                                                                       -22,778                -22,779
Sigma                                                                                                                                                 34,260                 34,125
No. Obs                                                       4,602                 4,602                   4,602                4,602                 4,602                  4,602


Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned incorporated affiliates. "Net Income of Affiliate" is the after-foreign
tax net income of the affiliate in the same year. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. "Interaction of Affiliate
Tax Rate and Net Income" is the product of the affiliate tax rate, as defined in the text, and "Net Income of Affiliate." Columns 1 and 2 present OLS specifications without fixed
effects. Columns 3 and 4 present OLS specifications with parent fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 presentTobit specifications. Tobit IV estimates are obtained using the procedure
recommended by Newey (1987). In columns 1 through 5, heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses. In column 6, bootstrapped standard errors are
presented in parentheses. The number of bootstrap repetitions is chosen following Andrews and Buchinsky (2000) so that the percentage deviation in standard error estimates from
using an infinite number of bootstraps is less than 10% with probability 0.95.
