                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                THE DEMAND FOR VARIETY:
                           A HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTION PERSPECTIVE


                                              Reuben Gronau
                                            Daniel S. Hamermesh


                                            Working Paper 8509
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w8509


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        October 2001




We thank Rachel Friedberg, Chris Taber, Jim Walker, Yoram Weiss and participants in seminars at several
universities, the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the NBER for helpful comments. We are indebted to the Australian
Bureau of Statistics for providing their data, the Central Bureau of Statistics for the Israeli data, the Steinmetz
Archive for the Dutch data, Lennart Flood for the Swedish data, the Inter-university Consortium for Political and
Social Research for the U.S. data, and the Statistisches Bundesamt for the German data. Shane Carbonneau, Abe
Dunn, Alex Gershkov and Elaine Zimmerman provided excellent research assistance. Research support was
provided by the National Science Foundation under Grant SES-9904699 and by the Binational Science
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Reuben Gronau and Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Demand for Variety: A Household Production Perspective
Reuben Gronau and Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 8509
October 2001
JEL No. J22, D12



                                              ABSTRACT


        Product diversity pervades every modern marketplace, and economists have devoted substantial
attention to firms’ decisions about the supply of variety. This study looks at the consumer’s side by
discussing the demand for variety. Using the framework of the home-production model, we trace
differences in demand to differences in the opportunity costs of various activities. The cost differences
are associated with investments in human capital; and the resulting differences in schooling attainment
produce differences in time costs that in turn alter the kinds and variety of activities in which household
members engage. Using time-budget surveys from Australia, Israel, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United
States and West Germany from between 1985 and 1994, we find substantial differences among
households in the extent of variety in the nonwork activities that they produce. More educated individuals
generate more variety, engaging in both additional activities and the same ones as the less educated, with
most of the effect of education on the variety of nonroutine activities. There is more variety on weekends;
women engage in more different activities than men; young children add to variety in household
consumption/production, especially among women; and income effects are clearly positive.




Reuben Gronau                                                     Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
Hebrew University                                                 University of Texas
Jerusalem, Israel                                                 Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER                                                          and NBER
msreuben@mscc.huji.ac.il                                          hamermes@eco.utexas.edu
               Variety is the mother of enjoyment. Benjamin Disraeli, Vivian Grey

I. Introduction and Motivation

        Product diversity is a salient feature of every modern marketplace. It is therefore

unsurprising that it has played an increasingly important role in economic theory. With the work

of Cournot it became the cornerstone of the analysis of oligopolistic competition, market structure

and market power. It has since expanded into the theory of international trade to become an

important element in the explanation of trade patterns. The emphasis in the literature, however,

has in general been on supply factors—on firms’ behavior (Chamberlin, 1933) and the optimal

diversity of supply, with consumer demand for variety taken as given.

        Borrowing a page from Hotelling, it is assumed that the distribution of consumers’ tastes

in product space is given (uniform along a straight line in Dixit and Stiglitz 1977, circular in

Salop, 1977). The implicit assumption is that this distribution reflects the diversity of preferences

(i.e., different tastes) and is unaffected by economic factors, essentially ruling out the effect of the

standard economic variables, prices and income, as important sources of variation in consumer

demand.1

        This neglect is not surprising. To analyze product variety one has to define the nature of

the product, a definition most economists tend to shy away from. Measurement creates additional

problems. The measure of product variety depends crucially on the level of data aggregation: The

greater the level of aggregation, the smaller the observed variety. The degree of detail in the data

(consumption and production surveys) depends often on the cost of data collection. An observed

increase in product variety over time can therefore at least partly reflect increased resources

devoted to data collection. This forces the researcher to infer the factors affecting variety from

differences in behavior among various socioeconomic groups in cross-section surveys.


1
 Perhaps the only exception is Jackson (1984) who analyzed the effect of income on variety. More
important, in the now quite large literature on home production (summarized by Gronau, 1986 and 1997),
none has analyzed the variety of activities.
        This is the path that we take here. The novelty lies not so much in the formal model but

rather in the framework used to analyze the demand for variety and in the breadth of evidence

that we offer. Instead of studying the demand for goods, we analyze the underlying demand for

activities, where each activity is “produced” à la Becker (1965) using goods and time.

        Incorporating the time constraint into the analysis produces two departures from previous

research. Whereas the budget constraint on goods is a “soft” one that allows households with

higher income to indulge their tastes for variety without having to forego the consumption of

additional quantities of goods, the time constraint is rigid: Rich and poor, high-wage and low-

wage, all face the same time constraint—twenty-four hours every day. Increased variety in time

use must come at the expense of the time spent on each activity. The time constraint binds even

more tightly where diversity of consumption activities is concerned, since consumption time and

material resources are often negatively correlated (because of the time spent working).

        The other fundamental difference relates to price. In a world of linear pricing diversity

carries no cost. Nonlinear pricing schemes are relatively rare, and it is only natural that the few

researchers who have studied the demand for product diversity have ignored the price effect. One

cannot, however, ignore setup costs where time is involved. Switching among activities involves

time, and the amount of time “wasted” in this endeavor (for example, transport time) is far from

negligible. Setup costs must, therefore, be incorporated in the analysis of variety.

        In our empirical analyses we use six bodies of data, time use studies from: Australia

1992, Israel 1991/92, the Netherlands 1990, Sweden 1993-94, the United States 1985, and West

Germany 1991/92. The analysis of variety confronts the researcher with problems unfamiliar in

other contexts.     Most statistical surveys measure economic activity (e.g., production,

consumption, trade) over relatively long time spans (a month, quarter or year). They focus

primarily on the total amounts of the activities that are undertaken over these long periods, and

only secondarily on their dispersion over shorter time intervals. Research using time budgets has

to console itself with much shorter time spans. Difficulties in data collection (e.g., recall



                                                 2
problems) limit the observation period of time-use surveys to one to seven days, and variety in

the number of activities increases with the length of time the subject is observed. This makes the

measure of variety very sensitive to the time span reported. Even a week may be too short to

capture the full extent of variation in consumption activity.

        When the period covered by the survey is less than a week (e.g., all but the Dutch surveys

used here) the researcher is confronted by another problem—that of periodicity. Market work is a

major determinant of the time available for consumption activities. The constraint on

consumption time shifts between workdays and weekends, resulting in changes in the number and

nature of activities over the week. Temporal variation in the demand for variety is thus an

additional topic of this research.

        The study opens with a theoretical discussion of the demand for variety in a home-

production context. The analysis is followed by a description of the six data sets that we use, and

then moves to a brief discussion of the amounts of time allocated among different types of

activities. Most of the discussion of the empirical results deals with aspects of the demand for

variety, including its determinants, impacts on durations of activities, roles of routine and

nonroutine activities, and differences between variety on weekdays and weekends.

II. A Model of Variety in Household Production

        Standard consumption theory pays little attention to the question of variety. The

representative consumer maximizes the utility function

(1)     U = U(X1,…,Xn)

subject to a budget constraint

         n
(2)      ∑ piXi = I ,
        i =1


where Xi, pi and I denote the quantity of goods and their prices, and money income. The number

of goods available is arbitrary. The optimization rule states that the optimum market basket

consists of the goods satisfying the condition



                                                 3
(3)      ui/pi = uj/pj = λ                 i,j = 1,…,m ,

where ui = ∂U/∂Xi is the marginal utility of good i, λ (the Lagrangian multiplier) is the marginal

utility of resources, and the goods are arbitrarily indexed to group them into the first m goods,

which are consumed, and the n-m remaining goods, which are not. These latter satisfy the

condition

(4)       pi < p i ,                               i = m+1,…,n ,

where p i is the reservation price, i.e., the maximum price the household is ready to pay for this

good p i = u i (0) / λ .

         In this model product diversity can be explained either in terms of the dispersion of

preferences (forsaking the assumption of a representative consumer) or by differences in incomes.

Changes in income are associated with changes in marginal utility λ, so that diminishing marginal

utility results in the expansion of the spectrum of goods consumed (m) as income increases.

When the consumer confronts a nonlinear price system that includes setup costs (e.g., the access

costs of maintaining a telephone or transportation costs to the location where the good is to be

consumed), the household consumes the good only if the consumer surplus it derives exceeds the

setup costs ci, i.e., if:

                 pi
  (5)     (1 / λ) ∫ u i dX i (p) ≥ c i .
                 pi


         The theory of household production creates the scope for a much richer explanation. In

this scheme (Becker, 1965) the subject of utility is not the good but the activity (Z), which in turn

is produced by combining goods and time (T) according to

(6)      Zi = fi(Xi, Ti) .

Maximization of the utility function U = U(Z1,…,Zn) is subject to two constraints: the budget

constraint (3), and the time constraint




                                                  4
          n
(7)      ∑ Ti = T ,
         i =1



where T denotes consumption time, and income I consists of wages and nonlabor sources of

income. I = wL+V, where w denotes the wage rate, L labor time inputs, and V nonlabor income.

When the household is free to choose its labor time inputs (L), income (and the budget constraint)

become an endogenous part of the model, and the household faces one ultimate constraint—the

total time constraint (T0):

(8)      T + L = T0 .

        Optimization leads to the choice of producing/consuming those m activities that satisfy

the condition

(9)     ui /πi = λ , i = 1,…,m ,

where ui =∂U/∂Zi is the marginal utility of activity i, λ is the marginal utility of “effective time”

[T0 + (V/w)], and πi denotes the marginal time cost of producing activity i. The marginal cost of

the activity consists of two parts: The market time required to secure purchased inputs, and the

home time required to produce the activity. The full price is then

(10)    πi = (pi /w) xi + ti ,

where xi = ∂Xi/∂Zi and ti = ∂Ti /∂Zi are the marginal goods and time inputs. The diversity of

activities depends on the number of activities satisfying the condition

(11)    π i > π i , i = 1,…,m,

where π i is the reservation price ui(0)/λ .

        In this model the diversity of activities undertaken arises not merely from the dispersion

of preferences and incomes, but also from the dispersion of prices. Whereas the standard model

assumes that all households face the same set of product prices pi , this assumption does not hold




                                                 5
for the set of activity prices πi . Differences in investments in human capital lead to differences

in activity prices and affect the variety of activities undertaken.

        Here an increase in nonlabor income V increases the “effective-time” constraint and has

the traditional income effect on variety. Assuming V = 0, a wage increase has a pure price effect.

It lowers the market-time component (pixi/w) and changes relative prices in favor of goods-

intensive activities. The time released from time-intensive activities may allow the expansion of

the activity set and the incorporation of additional goods-intensive activities. An increase in the

wage rate in a model where labor supply is exogenous increases the “shadow price” of time and

will have a similar effect.

        Schooling is associated with increased productivity in the market. It has been argued

(Michael, 1973) that it also contributes to productivity at home. If more educated people are more

adept at planning, coordinating and streamlining their tasks, then marginal time inputs ti will

decline with schooling. Schooling will, therefore, be negatively correlated with shadow prices πi

                                                          2
and will increase the variety of activities undertaken.

        Nonlinear pricing schemes are relatively rare where the prices of goods are concerned.

They are ubiquitous in the world of activity prices. The switch from one activity to the next

involves setup costs, either in the form of “unused” time intervals (i.e., “rest” or “waiting”) or in

the form of transport time (walking or other travel). With the introduction of setup costs (both

monetary and time) an equation like (11) in π i and πi determines the consumer-producer’s

decision whether to undertake activity i. These setup costs are usually relatively time-intensive

and will therefore tend to increase the cost of the activity to people with a high price of time,

causing the wage effect on variety to be more negative. Schooling, on the other hand, will help in

coordinating the flow of activities and allow more educated individuals to conserve on “wasted”

2
 Schooling may increase the variety of goods consumed independent of any effect on the variety of
activities undertaken if more educated people are better suited to undertake complex production processes
(processes that involve a large number of products). The issue is whether the impact of schooling on
household production technology is neutral or not.



                                                   6
setup time. In this case of nonlinear pricing an activity will be undertaken only if the consumer

surplus generated by starting the activity exceeds the setup costs—and schooling should lower

setup costs for all activities.

III. Time-Budgets in Six Countries

         Time-budget surveys in the United States go back at least to Sorokin and Berger (1939).

They are relatively scarce worldwide, perhaps because their limited administrative uses reduce

funding opportunities for them. Such data are based on daily diaries, but always have to rely on

the respondents recollecting at least 24 hours, which limits the length of period covered by the

surveys. As a result most time-budget samples are relatively small (not much more than 10,000

respondents) and cover relatively short time periods (up to a week). Given these data constraints

and the large variability in survey methods, we adopt a research strategy based on width rather

than depth. In the absence of large samples for one country we use the available smaller ones

covering six different countries. While this choice is dictated by the small sample sizes available

within any one country, this data constraint provides the opportunity to examine the robustness of

most of the results by comparing them under the different definitions of variety imposed by the

surveys’ methods.

         The Australian Time Use Survey of 1992 (ABS, 1993) is the second largest of the data

sets used here. It is a random stratified sample of roughly 7000 individuals on two days each,

with only 1 percent of those who completed a diary on one day failing to provide two days of

diary information. The days on which diaries were kept were typically successive, so that the

hebdomadal distribution of observations is nearly uniform (and the number of weekend days is

thus roughly 40 percent of the number of weekdays). Individuals were asked to list when they

began each new activity, and their responses were then coded into 280 separate categories of

activities. The activities could encompass as few as 5 minutes, with the upper bound on the

length of an activity being the full 24 hours. Moreover, at each point the diary provided space for

the respondent to list up to two other activities in which he or she was engaged. In addition to the



                                                 7
individuals’ time diaries one person in each household responded to an interview survey detailing

the household’s characteristics.

        The Israeli Time Use survey was conducted in November 1991-April 1992 (CBS, 1995).

It covered 3081 Jewish Israelis who reported their activities on 4840 days. The survey is based on

self-recorded diaries (covering about one-quarter of the days) and recall diaries based on

interviews. 1712 people reported only one day, 994 – two days, and the rest three (or even four)

days. The day was divided into fifteen-minute intervals (except for thirty-minute intervals

between 12:30AM and 4AM), and respondents were asked to report the main activity (out of a

list of 87) they were engaged in during each interval. Thus unlike in the Australian data activities

that might be regarded as secondary (e.g., listening to the radio) may suffer from underreporting,

as will may short-duration activities (less than 15 minutes).

        The Dutch Tijdbestedingsonderzoek (NIWI, 1993) is a quinquennnial cross-section time-

budget study that has been conducted since 1970. In our analysis we use the survey conducted in

October 1990, in which 3415 individuals completed usable diaries of their activities. The survey

divided respondents into two roughly equal groups, with individuals in one half-sample

completing diaries for seven consecutive days (Sunday through Saturday) in one week, and the
                                                  3
other half-sample doing so in the second week.            Each individual listed the activity engaged in at

each quarter-hour of the previous day. The range of possible activities encompasses 203 separate

usable categories.4 As in the Israeli sample, no secondary activities are reported.

        The 1993-94 Swedish Time Use Survey (Flood, 1997) contains time diaries completed by

roughly 4000 respondents to a household interview study. Sample respondents were randomly


3
 For half the sample the Sunday included the day when the Netherlands went off summer time. Thus for
those individuals on that day there were 1500 total minutes, a difference for which we account in all the
following empirical work using this sample. The effect on human activity of this temporary relaxation of
the time constraint is analyzed in Hamermesh (2001).
4
 Even this number is the result of combining all newspapers, each of which is listed separately, into one
activity, and doing the same for all magazines.




                                                      8
allocated (non-holiday) days over a twelve-month period, with weekend days accounting for

nearly half the sample days. A total of 72 activities could be listed; and each respondent could

list a secondary activity for any time interval. As in the Australian data, the diaries allowed

respondents to indicate at five-minute intervals that they began a new activity.

        There have been no large-scale national time-use surveys in the United States since 1975-

76 (reported in Juster and Stafford, 1985). Several sociologists led by John Robinson (see

Robinson and Godbey, 1999) have, however, occasionally obtained time diaries from American

respondents; and the Americans’ Use of Time 1985 survey was large enough (nearly 5000

respondents) to provide the kind of variation needed here. Each respondent filled out one

retrospective (day-after) diary of his/her activities, listing activities at no shorter than fifteen-

minute intervals, with only one activity listed per time period. A total of 87 activities was

possible, essentially the same coding as in the Israeli survey. The hebdomadal distribution is

almost uniform.

        The 1991-92 German Zeitbudgeterhebung (Statistiches Bundesamt, 1999) covered both

West and East Germany and was structured quite similarly to the Australian survey. It allowed

for large numbers of possible activities and time units disaggregated to five-minute intervals, as

well as for secondary activities. The sample is slightly larger than the Australian sample, making

this the largest of the six data sets used here. Essentially no one failed to fill out diaries for both

days. Because the survey was undertaken very shortly after the German reunification, we use

only observations from the former West Germany.

        Given the short time spans covered by the surveys, the observations on time allocation

are susceptible to nonrandom variation. The major sources of such variation are institutional

arrangements relating to work schedules. In all the countries except Israel behavior on Saturdays

and Sundays is likely to differ from that on the weekdays Monday through Friday. (In Israel

Saturday is a “free” day and Friday is at most a “short” workday, so that we treat Friday and

Saturday as the weekend there.) Because of these differences we pay some attention to how



                                                  9
behavior differs on weekdays and weekends and use these differences to shed light on the

theoretical discussion.

        Not all the “completed” time diaries are complete for our purposes. In most of the

countries one of the activity categories was something like “no activity coded.” In order to avoid

contaminating the results we discarded any diary-day that included a time interval for which no

activity was coded. In the Swedish study this accounted for 12 percent of all days, but in the

others the losses were tiny. The age distributions of the respondents differ across the samples;

but all the surveys included individuals between ages 18 and 69 inclusive, so that we restrict all

the samples to that age range. Finally, because marital status is likely to be crucial in determining

behavior, and because the samples of unmarried individuals are often quite small, all of our
                                              5
analyses are restricted to married persons.

        Educational systems obviously differ among the five countries, to the point even that

years of schooling are not always comparable across the samples. Accordingly, we rely on the

respondents’ reports of the level of schooling obtained (e.g., in the United States less than high

school, high school, more than high school), dividing each sample into three educational

categories, with the sizes of the low-, middle- and high-education groups varying across the

samples. For each country we inferred the appropriate aggregations from conversations with
                                                         6
people who had gone through the educational system.

        The theoretical model focuses on three key economic variables: resources, prices and

productivity. To separate their effects one needs accurate and detailed data on unearned income,

wage rates and factors contributing to productivity at home. Most researchers using time budgets


5
 In the Swedish data marital status also includes information on whether the individual is a cohabiting
partner. We performed all the analyses in this study on samples of both married and cohabiting partners,
with results that differ little from those presented in the text.
6
 For Israel and the U.S. we relied on our own experiences. We are thankful to Damien Eldridge for
information on Australia, Gerard Pfann for the Netherlands, Anders Klevmarken for Sweden and John
Haisken-De New for West Germany.




                                                  10
are not that fortunate. Time-budget surveys channel most of their effort to the collection of the

time diaries, and relatively little is done to assure the quality of the income and earnings data,

measures that are prone to substantial response errors even in the best of circumstances (Bound et

al, 1994).

        None of the surveys contains direct observations on wage rates. One could impute these

data indirectly from information on personal earnings and market work time in several of the data

sets, but measurement errors and selectivity biases dominate the results. There are no usable

wage or income data in the American sample, and the Dutch data on this are extremely weak. For

Israel we use the variable “family income, personal earnings excluded,” which should provide

estimates of pure income effects. The Australian sample provides good measures of family

income, but the data on personal incomes include both earnings and nonlabor income. We thus

form a measure similar to that for Israel, except this one includes all income accruing to other

household members. The measure may be contaminated, because it excludes the respondent’s

nonlabor income, but it should enable us to exclude own-price effects in the estimates. In the

West German data information on both spouses’ incomes is available, so that we use spouse’s

income to proxy the other income available to the respondent. In the Swedish data we use the

respondent’s gross hourly earnings, so that this market price measure will confound substitution

and income effects (and will, of course, also be characterized by selectivity problems).

        The only other variables used consistently in the regression analyses are measures of the

ages and numbers of children in the married persons’ households. Our general rule is to include

measures of the number of children and indicators of the age of the youngest child. These latter

necessarily differ in definition across the samples; but we can classify them generally as

indicating whether the youngest child is pre-school, pre-teen or a teenager (although in one

country, Australia, youths over age 14 are not included as children in the data set). Where

meaningful additional demographic information is available, it is also included. Thus in the

Israeli data indicators of the presence of health problems are included; and in that and the



                                                11
Australian samples indicators of country of origin and metropolitan residence are available. In

the Australian data we also include information on whether the respondent speaks a foreign

language at home.

         The analysis deals with consumption activities. Work, in the market or at home, usually

involves multi-task activities. These tasks are, however, often dictated by outside factors (i.e., the

employer) and the nature of the job. Moreover, most time-budget studies report home activities

in detail, while market activities are only reported in aggregate terms (i.e., primary job, secondary

job, etc.). The distinction between consumption and work activities is not always easy, especially

where work at home is concerned. Psychic income (i.e., direct utility derived from the activity) is

sometimes an important consideration affecting the decision about how much time to spend on a

household-work activity.       This is particularly true for such borderline cases as child-care

activities.   Recognizing, however, the need to distinguish work from nonwork activities,

throughout this study we define work as including market work, cleaning and cooking at one's

residence, and shopping, with nonwork encompassing all other activities.

         In analyzing time use, as opposed to its diversity, we distinguish among several types of

nonwork activity, including child and family care, personal care and “leisure” activities. Both of

the latter are mainly consumption activities in terms of Becker’s model, but we expect the

variation in time spent in personal care to be smaller than that in leisure. We thus examine the
                                                                                   7
determinants of time spent on each of these three types of nonwork activity.

         For each respondent-day the central concept in this study is the number of different

nonwork activities in which the individual is engaged on that day. We focus on the variety of




7
 The level of disaggregation is clearly limited only by the number of fundamental activities coded from the
diaries (shown in Table 1). Choices in the (sparse) economics literature have varied from seven in
Kooreman and Kapteyn (1987) to three in Biddle and Hamermesh (1990), compared to our five (market
and home work and the three categories of nonwork activity).




                                                    12
nonwork activities and present all results for this set of activities.8 The minimum number of

activities that we observe in the five samples on a diary-day is one, while the maximum possible

is the number of nonwork activities that could be coded (from 40 in Sweden to 202 in Australia).

Even in Australia, however, no respondent reported more than 32 different nonwork activities on

a single day.

         For comparison purposes Table 1 summarizes most of the essential characteristics of the

six samples that underlie this study.9 In addition to the characteristics of the data already

discussed we note the number of possible nonwork activities in each sample. The table illustrates

the diversity of the samples in terms of the numbers of possible activities, the range of days on

which diaries were obtained, and the degree of temporal disaggregation possible in the diaries.

IV. First Impressions

A. The Allocation of Time Among Activities

         Although a substantial sociological literature has generated tabulations of time spent on

different activities (see, e.g., most of the articles in Merz and Ehling, 1999, and the references

therein), with much of the focus on sex differences, there are several reasons for reexamining

such tabulations here. Most studies examine only one country’s data, obviating the chance to

discern general, possibly universal patterns.           Thus we may learn something about general

differences in the allocation of time by sex if we examine time allocation in six countries using

exactly the same methods and definitions. Second, and more important, we cannot understand



8
 For the Israeli and Dutch data, on which we experimented before adding the other four data sets, we
estimated equations describing variety along these other dimensions, both broader and narrower. The
results for the narrower set of categories, leisure activities, including the results on our measures of
schooling, were qualitatively very similar to those reported in the text for the measures of variety in
nonwork activities. For the total of all activities the results were somewhat stronger, mainly because the
additional schooling is associated with more time in market work. Excluding child and family care
activities also does not alter the results qualitatively, nor does excluding transportation activities.
9
 The numbers of observations actually used in the analyses are presented in the tables showing regression
results. These fall far short of the total sample sizes due to the restrictions on age and marital status, and to
missing variables on both the respondents’ characteristics and in the diaries themselves.




                                                       13
the production of variety unless we know the context of time use in which it is produced. The

analysis of time use presented in this subsection is based on Tables 2a and 2b, which list the mean

minutes per day allocated to market work, home work, childcare, personal care and leisure

separately by sex and schooling level for each of our six samples. Each statistic is presented for a

“representative day”—a weighted average of the observations in each cell that reflects the

average allocation of time across weekdays and weekends.

        Consider first the sex differences in time allocation demonstrated by comparing results

between Tables 2a and 2b. The data replicate most of the well-known sex differences, including

greater market work, less home work and less childcare by men. The greater allocation of time in

personal care by women is less well known, but it reproduces findings for the U.S. by Biddle and

Hamermesh (1990) on sleep, by far the largest component of personal care. The bottom row for

each category of individuals shows the total nonwork time (childcare, personal care and leisure).

In all six countries men’s greater market workhours more than compensate for their lesser time

spent in home work, so that total nonwork time is less among men than women. Much less well

known are the differences in leisure time between men and women. In Australia and the United

States the differences in leisure time by sex are essentially zero; but in the other four countries

married men consume more leisure than do married women. The sex differences in leisure time

are opposite those in time spent on personal care, with the total of leisure time and personal care

typically about the same by sex or slightly lower among men.

        Even within these gender differences there are some international differences that are

enlightening. If one examines the sex ratios of time spent on market work, home work and

childcare, Sweden has the greatest degree of equality in all three categories. Swedish women’s

time use is more like that of men than is true of women elsewhere. This similarity is not only in

Swedish women’s well-known (OECD 2000, Table B) attachment to the labor force, but also in

their nonmarket work and childcare. Also striking is the consistently lower consumption of

leisure by Americans—both married men and married women. The data make it clear that



                                                14
Americans’ relatively long market workweeks are not fully offset by reductions in home work,

personal care or childcare. That Germans consume even less leisure is due to their relatively high

reported time spent in home work.

        The effect of schooling on time spent in market work, mainly through its effect on wages

and then on labor supply, is one of the best-established facts in labor economics. It is replicated

here for all countries and both sexes. Among women the positive relation between schooling and

market work is accompanied by a negative relation between home work and schooling. Among

men the home work-schooling relationship is slightly negative or zero, so that the effect of

schooling on total work is less than is indicated by its effect on market work alone. As a result, in

all countries but Germany, and for both sexes, there is a nonnegative schooling—total work

gradient. This means that the total amount of time available for nonwork activities, and thus the

possibility of generating more diversity in nonwork activities, is less among more educated

people in five of the six countries.

        The implied non-positive correlation between nonwork time and schooling is further

borne out by the results of the detailed regression analyses presented in the Appendix (where

even in Germany there is essentially no partial relationship). The estimates also reveal a U-shaped

relationship between nonwork time and age (reflecting the age-market work profile), a negative

effect of preschool children on their fathers’ nonwork time and a positive effect on their mothers’

nonwork time (not reported in the Appendix). The income effects, estimated for Australia, Israel

and West Germany are generally negative but small, corroborating the often incorrectly-signed

impacts produced in the few previous studies that examine these issues using time-budget data

(e.g., Kooreman and Kapteyn, 1987; Biddle and Hamermesh, 1990).

B. Variety of Activities

        Table 3 presents the means and their standard errors of the number of nonwork activities

undertaken on a representative day by the married respondents in our six samples. Remembering

the international differences in the number of possible activities in the surveys, these tables make



                                                 15
it quite clear that, where more activities are possible, more activities are coded as having been

undertaken. Australia, the Netherlands and West Germany, which have at least twice as many

possible nonwork activities as the other countries, show higher mean numbers of activities

performed than do the other countries. Australia, which had the most possible activities, is

highest, while Sweden, which had the fewest possible, is lowest. The international differences,

however, are not huge and are far less than proportional to the differences in the number of

possible activities. Comparing men and women, the most striking difference is that women
                                                      10
engage in more nonwork activities than do men.             Looking at the sources of variety, it is clear

that the gender difference stems from women’s undertaking more child-care related activities.

        One of the central hypotheses of this study is that additional schooling generates greater

household productivity in the form of the ability to produce more variety. Comparing the mean

consumption of variety across schooling level provides an initial look at this hypothesis. For both

sexes we find a general rise in the number of different nonwork activities undertaken as the level

of education rises (even though in most of our data sets better educated people have less time

available in which to undertake nonwork activities). The only exception is for men in Sweden.

Whether because of a causal relation between schooling and efficiency in household production,

or because people with a greater taste for variety that is not captured by their observable

characteristics invest more in human capital, is unclear from these descriptive statistics; but the

existence of this positive simple correlation is abundantly clear from this six-country analysis.

V. Detailed Analysis of the Demand for Variety

        While some interesting patterns are apparent in the means presented in Table 3, it is

unclear whether these are true partial effects. In several of the countries schooling attainment,


10
  In Australia the total number of different activities, including secondary activities, is 9.51 for men and
10.30 for women in Sweden, 8.09 and 8.56, and in West Germany, 10.51 and 11.77. Including reporting of
secondary activities adds almost nothing to our measure of variety in the Australian data, and not a huge
amount even in the Swedish data. (In the Australian data the amount of time in which secondary activities
are coded is only 5 percent of the day among men and 6 percent among women. In the Swedish data the
comparable percentages are 27 and 28, while in West Germany the percentages are 90 and 91 respectively.)



                                                    16
our central focus, is highly negatively correlated with age, confounding its effects with those of

aging. In all but Sweden there is also a significant negative correlation between education and

family size, holding age constant. We thus present regression estimates of the impacts of the

education, age and family structure measures on variety. Throughout this section we list robust

standard errors that account for the multiple observations (diary-days) included for most of the

respondents in all but the American data sets. The sample sizes listed indicate the number of

different individuals included in the regressions. All the estimates are for a representative day.

         The central results of this study are contained in Tables 4a and 4b, which list the

parameter estimates from regressions describing the respondents’ demand for variety (measured

as the number of nonwork activities undertaken). Estimates of the determinants of the number of

nonwork activities are shown only for variables measuring schooling, age and the age and

numbers of children; but each equation also includes indicators of the day of the week (since

there may be differences across the days in the cost of generating variety). Other controls
                                                                    11
(discussed in Section III) are also included where available.

         Additional schooling has a generally positive partial effect on the number of different

activities undertaken each day. This is true for each transition to a higher education group for

both men and women in the Australian, Israeli, Dutch, American and German samples. Only in

Sweden is there no evidence of any impact of additional schooling on the amount of variety

produced.12 Given the generally positive relation between schooling and market work time,


11
  In many cases the vectors of coefficients of the indicators of day of week were statistically significant, but
there was only one regularity in the results across the samples (excluding Israel): In many of the estimates
describing activities more variety was produced on Sunday than on Saturday.
12
  This anomalous result is not due to the correlation of age and educational attainment in the Swedish data.
When the equations are reestimated on subsamples divided at age 45 the same results are found. Similarly,
a different definition of the educational categories that also seemed consistent with the classification of
workers into thirds did not alter this conclusion. It is also probably not due to the relatively high level of
aggregation of activities: Aggregating activities in the American data to match the Swedish definitions as
closely as possible (leaving 39 activities in the American data) did not alter the signs or significance of the
impact of educational attainment on the amount of variety generated. One other possibility is simply that
differences in the impact of education on household productivity are less there than elsewhere. While it is
true that the relationship between educational attainment and literacy scores is flatter in Sweden than in the



                                                      17
finding an effect of schooling on variety is an extremely strong result, as the more educated

generally have less available nonwork time (as shown in Tables 2) in which to undertake more

variety in their nonwork activities.13 Whether this results from the pure relationship between

schooling and efficiency in household production, or from the correlation between schooling and

the price of time, cannot be inferred from these estimates alone.

        One might argue that the results on schooling are an artifact stemming from the ingenuity

of more educated respondents in listing more varied activities in their diaries. We cannot fully

refute this; but if it were true, we would expect to see bigger effects of schooling in those samples

in which more possible nonwork activities might be listed (Australia, the Netherlands and West

Germany). That the marginal effects of moving to a better-educated group are roughly the same

in the Israeli and American samples (where the time diaries provided for many fewer possible

nonwork activities) as in these other three samples suggests the result is not spurious.14

        One might also argue that the requirement that an activity lasts at least 15 (or 5) minutes

for it to be recorded causes us to underestimate the amount of variety consumed. Of course it is

true that extremely short-duration activities are not included in the data. There is no reason,

however, for this lacuna to imply that our measure of variety is severely biased downward, as

many such activities are undertaken for longer periods at other times in a day (e.g., a quick

handwashing and a thorough night-time clean-up, a brief glance at the Weather Channel and a

half-hour sitcom, etc.).      Also, there is no reason for their exclusion to affect reporting

United States, this is also true in the Netherlands and Germany (Devroye and Freeman, 2001). A final
possibility is that, because the Swedish earnings distribution is more compressed than in the other
countries, negative wage effects on variety bias downward the estimated impact of education.
13
  Unsurprisingly, given that the measure of variety increases only slightly in the Australian data when we
include secondary activities, reestimates of the equations in Tables 4 including secondary activities look
almost identical to those presented in the Tables. Even though measured variety increases somewhat in the
Swedish and substantially in the West German data when secondary activities are included, the impact is
almost entirely on the estimated intercepts. The schooling and other estimated parameters change very
little.
14
  Each of the surveys was also extensively pre-tested, in part to ensure that respondents were able to
express their activities consistently. This provides some additional assurance that the questionnaire biases
are small.



                                                    18
differentially by level of education. Indeed, if our theory is correct, the underreporting will be

greater among the more educated, since it will be easier for them to produce the extremely short-

duration activities that are not recorded. Regardless, observing educational effects of roughly the

same sizes in Australia (and West Germany) and the Netherlands, which have similarly large

numbers of possible activities but different minimum possible time intervals, suggests that these

results are not an artifact of constraints on the minimum duration of recordable activities.

        Except for Australian and Dutch women the impact of age on variety is U-shaped,

superficially quite inconsistent with the human capital theory of earnings and with a view that

efficiency increases over much of one’s adult life. A more thorough examination shows that in

most cases the estimates do suggest exactly that kind of increasing effect. In the American,

Israeli and West German samples and among Dutch and Swedish men the amount of variety
                                                                                               15
produced is increasing over the large majority of the range of ages included in the samples.

        Having more children in the household increases the number of activities undertaken,

other things equal, in all of the samples analyzed here. For both sexes the presence of pre-school

children adds substantially to the amount of variety produced, while having pre-teen children

adds to it somewhat. Taken together the results suggest, however, that couples whose youngest

child is a teenager produce less variety than do childless couples. While the impact of pre-school

children on variety holds for both mothers and fathers, its magnitude is far larger among mothers.

Children generally, and pre-school and pre-teen children in particular, clearly add to the variety of

activities produced by the household, with most of the additional variety produced by mothers in

childcare activities.

        The equations presented in Table 4 do not include the measures of income and/or

earnings that are present in the data sets describing four of the six countries we analyze. They

were excluded because we believe that they are much noisier than the other variables in those


15
 Not surprisingly, these estimated impacts and those of schooling are much stronger, especially among
men, if we include the amount of time devoted to market work as an independent variable.



                                                 19
regressions and because they are missing for two countries. Nonetheless, it is worth examining

their impacts on the production of variety, as they are part of what is central in our theoretical

motivation. Table 5 lists the estimated coefficients of regressions like those in Tables 4, with the

equations expanded to include the available income and earnings measures. The first thing to

note in these tables is that our inferences from Tables 4 on the impacts of education and age are

qualitatively unchanged when these monetary measures are added to the estimating equations.

        In the Australian, Israeli and West German data the estimates demonstrate either that

variety is a superior good, or that there are positive cross-wage effects in the demand for variety.

For all three countries and both sexes more variety is purchased by individuals who are in

households whose other members have higher incomes.             The impacts are not very large.

Doubling other income in the Australian samples leads to increases in the number of activities of

only 1 percent; in the Israeli samples variety increases by 3 percent; and in West Germany variety

increases by less than 1 percent among men, but by 4 percent among women.           In the Swedish

data, the only sample for which we can use a measure of hourly earnings, the generally negative

impacts of hourly earnings suggest that substitution effects predominate in the impact of higher

time prices on the demand for variety.

        Another way of considering the relation between education and variety notes that

equation (11) implies that increased efficiency in household production (or additional unearned

income) leads to an expansion at the extensive margin of activities. (A noneconomic prediction

would merely be that education alters people’s tastes, and by expanding their horizons allows

them to undertake more activities that may or may not include those undertaken by less educated

individuals.) We should expect that less educated people will not only engage in fewer activities,

but that their activities will be a subset of those undertaken by individuals with more education.

If it applies perfectly, this “enveloping” property should lead to higher fractions of more educated

people undertaking each activity.




                                                20
        Even if the enveloping hypothesis is correct, sampling variation means that we will never

observe higher fractions of the more educated in all activities. We can examine the hypothesis

for all five countries for which the evidence in Tables 3-5 showed that variety rises with

education for both men and women. The fractions of activities in which the more educated group

participates more than the less educated group are shown in Table 6 for both sexes, for each

country, and for each of the three possible two-way comparisons. In all but two of the thirty

comparisons, the two involving highly-educated Australian women, the fraction in which

representation by the more educated group predominates exceeds the ratio AM/[AL +AM], where

AM is the mean number of activities undertaken by members of the more educated group, and AL

is the mean among the less educated group. The evidence thus suggests that the enveloping

hypothesis is correct: More educated people include the activities of the less educated as a proper

subset of the activities that they undertake.

VI. What Kind of Variety?

A. The Duration of Activities

        The increase in variety with the number of pre-school children and the U-shaped effect of

age (at least in the case of males) do not create any puzzles, since they closely trace the effects

that these variables have on total nonwork time. The impact of schooling cannot be explained in

the same way, since nonwork time is at most unaffected by schooling and in many cases

diminishes as schooling (and market work time) increases.

        The theory predicted that variety will increase with schooling due to two effects: 1)

Increased home productivity allows the more educated to squeeze more activities into the same

amount of time, and higher wages result in relatively lower "time costs" of the more goods-

intensive activities for them; and 2) More educated individuals substitute from time-intensive to

goods-intensive activities. As the wage increases, the lower the elasticity of substitution between

time and goods, the greater the increase in the relative price of time-intensive activities. Sleep is




                                                 21
the most time-intensive activity, and there is very little chance to substitute goods for time in its

production. It is, therefore, the prime candidate for cuts when wages increase (Biddle and

Hamermesh 1990). Partial support for this hypothesis can be found in the observed pervasive

negative relationship between schooling and time spent on personal care (most of which is sleep)

shown in Table 2 (and in the regression results in the Appendix).

        More details are provided by Table 7, which presents the distribution of activities by their

duration (total minutes spent in the activity on a representative day) for men and women, both in

total, and distinguished by educational attainment. The table demonstrates the skewness of the

distribution of activities by duration. About half of the activities (between 45 and 60 percent) last

less than an hour, between 30 and 40 percent last more than an hour but less than 4 hours, and one

activity, almost always sleep, lasts more than 6 hours. The percentage of people who sleep more

than 8 hours on an average day declines with schooling. Similarly, in the 1–4 hour activity group

the number of long activities (2-4 hours) diminishes and the number of short activities (1-2

hours) increases as schooling increases. The time saved allows a 30-40 percent increase in the

number of very short, i.e., less than one hour, activities (with Sweden again the exception).16

B. Routine vs. Nonroutine Activities

        The large fraction of time spent by the less educated on the more time-intensive

activities—sleep, rest and TV watching—that have only a very small (variable) goods

component, is indicative of the presence of slack time. The less educated have enough time at

their disposal, but do not possess the material resources that allow them to diversify their set of

activities. The opposite holds for the more educated—they have already conserved on all the

time-intensive activities, and the major constraint on the diversification of their daily activities is

the time constraint. The only way open to them to diversify their activity set is by diversifying


16
  A more detailed examination indicates that two other time-intensive activities—rest and TV watching—
are (besides sleep) responsible for the release of time that allows the proliferation of short-duration
activities among the more educated.




                                                  22
among days. Thus, if one compares the daily activity sets across days, we should expect a greater

similarity among the less educated than among the more educated.

            To test this hypothesis, we compare activity sets between days in those samples where

people reported two days of activities (i.e., all countries except the Netherlands and the U.S.).

Routine activities are defined in the two-day samples as those activities that were undertaken on

both days, and nonroutine activities are those that were undertaken only on one of the two days.

Let NACTW be the number of different activities in which the respondent engaged over the two

reported days:

(12)        min(NACTi) ≤ NACTW ≤ [ΣNACTi] ,

where NACTi is the number of different activities undertaken on day i. We define the number of

routine activities as:

(13a)       ROUTINE = ΣNACTi – NACTW .

The number of nonroutine activities is:

(13b)       NONROUTINE = NACTW – ROUTINE .17

            Estimates of the mean numbers of routine and nonroutine activities undertaken in each of

the four samples in total and by level of education are shown in Table 8. In all four, and for both

men and women, the number of nonroutine activities undertaken rises with education. Even for

Swedish men, among whom the total number of activities did not generally rise with education,

most of the anomalies appear to be due to unexpected differences in the number of routine

activities. Variety in routine activities increases with education in the Australian and West

German samples, and among Israeli women, but those increases are much less pronounced than

the increases in nonroutine variety.18


17
     Only those Israelis on whom we have exactly two diary-days are included in this analysis.
18
  While the Dutch data are not comparable, we can use them analogously by defining:
                    ROUTINE= {ΣNACTi – NACTW}/6.
Using this definition (for which we thank Roberton Williams), we find that the gradient in routine activities
is flatter with respect to education than that in nonroutine activities. Not only does this result corroborate



                                                       23
         Tables 9 present estimates of the impacts of schooling, age and the number and ages of

children on the demand for variety in both routine and nonroutine nonwork activity. For each

country the first column shows the estimates for variety in routine activities, and the second lists

results for variety in nonroutine activities. The most striking finding, one that is consistent across

all four samples and for both sexes, is that the impact of schooling on variety is mainly on the

production of variety in nonroutine activities. This was true of the means presented in Table 8,

but the results holding other factors constant are even stronger. Indeed, in the Australian, Israeli

and West German data, where the average numbers of routine and nonroutine activities

undertaken differ little, the impacts of higher educational attainment are roughly twice as large on

variety in nonroutine than in routine activity. Among Swedish women the impact of schooling on

routine variety is negative (with coefficients in excess of their standard errors), while the impact

on nonroutine variety is positive, with the higher two education groups producing significantly

more variety than the lowest. Additional schooling is related to greater household productivity;

but it is along the margin of activities that are not routine—for which the possibility of

technological improvement generated by additional education may be greater—that the
                                   19
relationship is most noticeable.

         Detailed regressions focusing on the variability of personal care activities (most of which

are routine) and leisure activities (which have a large nonroutine component) indicate that

increased schooling is associated with an increase in leisure activities but hardly affects the

number of personal care activities. The time conserved in personal care activities (most notably



the evidence in Table 7; it also shows that, when we can examine variety in consumption over a time
interval longer than two days, we still find the same difference in the relationships between education and
routine and nonroutine variety.
19
  The equations were reestimated for Australia, Sweden and West Germany to include secondary activities
in the definitions of routine and nonroutine variety. Unsurprisingly, given the small fraction of times for
which Australians coded secondary activities, the results are nearly identical to those presented in Tables 9.
Even in Sweden and West Germany, however, the impact of education on nonroutine variety remained
greater than on routine variety.




                                                     24
sleep and rest) is used to increase the diversity of nonroutine leisure activities. As with the role of

education in implementing technical change in product markets (see Welch, 1970, and an

avalanche of recent empirical studies), our results are consistent with the view that education

enables individuals to cope better with nonroutine, but has a much smaller impact on routine

activities.20

C. Weekday vs. Weekend Variety

         All of the results presented in Section V and the first part of this Section are based on a

representative day—an amalgam of time diaries from weekdays and weekends. Yet for our

purposes the underlying data are richer than this, since they allow us to examine temporal

variations in variety and how these are affected by differences in human capital. The additional

information provided by regressions here is small, so to save space we present descriptive

statistics only.

         Table 10 shows the means and their standard errors of the number of activities

undertaken. The first number in each pair is for the average weekday, the second for the average

weekend day. Except for Australians of both sexes and for Swedish and West German women

there is more variety in nonwork activities on weekends than on weekdays. To a large extent this

is due to the fact that work (in the market especially) leaves less time for variety on weekdays, as

suggested by the much smaller weekday-weekend differences in variety among women than

among men. The striking fact from this table is that the increase in variety with educational

attainment is present on both weekdays and weekends, and indeed is slightly greater on weekends

than on weekdays. If the schooling-variety gradient were due simply to the correlation between

schooling and the value of market time, the relationship would break down on weekends, when

the schooling-value of time relationship is presumably weaker because market work opportunities

are less. That this breakdown does not occur suggests that the schooling-variety link that we have


20
  Among both men and women, having additional children generates more variety; but in all four countries
substantially more of the extra variety is in the number of nonroutine activities.



                                                  25
demonstrated reflects not only a wage effect on the demand for variety, but also an efficiency

effect as schooling raises people’s ability to overcome setup costs.

        As an additional step we examine the schooling-variety result in more detail by

comparing differences in the gradient between people whose two days of time diaries cover one

weekend day and one weekday and the other respondents, both of whose diaries are on weekend

days or weekdays only. If schooling is productive we should expect to observe a sharper gradient

of variety in nonroutine activities among respondents in the former group, since more educated

people will be better able to take advantage of the absence of constraints on their time on

weekends to generate more different activities. We are thus essentially estimating the double

difference:

(14)    ∆2 = [δNONROUTINE/δEducation]Day-Day,End-End - [δNONROUTINE/δEducation]Day-End ,

in the impact of schooling on variety—comparing across the two diary-days and across the two

categories of respondent. If education affects variety causally, we will observe ∆2 < 0.

        We can reestimate the models in Table 9 describing nonroutine variety only for Australia

and West Germany, as these are the only countries where the sampling procedure generates

enough observations with diaries on both weekends and weekdays.              Using the coefficient

estimates on the indicators of educational attainment, we estimate ∆2 = 1.34 – 2.18 = -0.83, and

∆2 = 0.97 – 1.60 = -0.63 for men in Australia and West Germany respectively. Among women

the estimates are ∆2 = 1.02 – 1.28 = -0.26, ∆2 = 1.09 – 1.26 = -0.17 in the two countries

respectively. For both sexes and both countries the schooling-nonroutine gradient is steeper when

we observe people on whom time constraints differ across the two days sampled. That more

educated workers have more flexibility in their work time, so that a pair of weekdays that might

seem to be equally restrictive is less constraining for them, means that, if anything, the estimates

of ∆2 have a positive bias, so that the true double differences are even more negative.




                                                26
VII.     Conclusions and Implications

         We have constructed a model of household production focusing on variety in the

household members’ undertakings. Driving the model are differences among households in the

ability to overcome the setup costs that occur when time (and perhaps monetary) resources must

be devoted to adding a new activity to the set of activities undertaken in the day or week. We

postulate that those differences are linked to schooling and its positive relationship to the

efficiency of the household’s production technology.       Using time-budget surveys from six

countries we have demonstrated that this is exactly what occurs: Individuals with more education

undertake more different activities in a day. Moreover, these differences stem mostly from the

ability of more educated people to generate a greater variety of those activities, which we call

nonroutine, that are not repeated every day. One can also infer from our model that incomes and

the price of time will affect the amount of variety undertaken. We do observe positive pure

income (or cross-wage) effects in the three countries for which we have data, and for the only

country on which we have wage data there is weak evidence that substitution effects dominate.

         One can interpret the variety-schooling relationship as causal, although the evidence on

the relationship between education and the total variety of activities might by itself also be

construed as reflecting underlying heterogeneity among individuals and households. That we

observe different relationships between education and routine versus nonroutine variety and

similar variety-schooling gradients on weekdays and weekends are harder to explain by

underlying heterogeneity, but reasonable explanations might possibly also be constructed on that

basis.

         Education produces a remarkable variety of benefits, from direct effects on earnings

(Becker, 1964), to externalities that it creates in production and the spillover to economic growth

(e.g., Romer, 1986), to impacts on noneconomic outcomes such as criminal activity and others

(e.g., Grogger, 1998). We have suggested here that education generates yet another welfare-

enhancing outcome—additional variety in the activities in which people engage. We cannot



                                                27
measure the magnitude of the gain in welfare that is generated by the greater diversity in activities

that comes with education.21 All that can be concluded at this point is that there are gains along

this dimension, with the effect of education on variety not small: Except for Sweden the

estimates suggest that each extra year of schooling yields around a 2 percent increase in variety.

        Having demonstrated that there are systematic differences among households in the

production of variety, one wonders how this realization might affect the theory of product

demand. The first thing to do here is to analyze whether greater variety in time use is associated

with greater variety in the kinds of goods used in household production. Even without that

analysis, however, these results suggest that, as its citizens acquire more skills, an economy will

generate a greater demand for variety in the activities that its consumers undertake and will

provide incentives for greater differentiation of the products that its firms offer.             This

development will in turn affect the structure of product markets.




21
  The issue is somewhat similar to that of valuing new goods (see Hausman, 1997), although the welfare
effects of increased variety are generated endogenously rather than by a presumably exogenous product
innovation.



                                                 28
REFERENCES

Australian Bureau of Statistics, Time Use Survey, Australia 1992. Canberra: ABS, 1993.

Gary Becker, Human Capital. New York: Columbia University Press, 1964.

---------------, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75 (September 1965):
          493-517.

Jeff Biddle and Daniel Hamermesh, “Sleep and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Political
        Economy, 98 (October 1990): 922-43.

John Bound, Charles Brown, Greg Duncan and Willard Rodgers, “Evidence on the Validity of
       Cross-sectional and Longitudinal Labor Market Data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 12
       (July 1994): 345-68.

Central Bureau of Statistics, “Time Use In Israel--Time Budget Survey 1991/92,” Special Series
        No. 996. Jerusalem: CBS, 1995.

Edward Chamberlin, The Theory of Monopolistic Competition.        Cambridge, MA:      Harvard
      University Press, 1933.

Dan Devroye and Richard Freeman, “Does Inequality in Skills Explain Inequality of Earnings
      Across Advanced Countries?” Working Paper No. 8140, National Bureau of Economic
      Research, February 2001.

Avinash Dixit and Joseph Stiglitz, “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity,”
       American Economic Review, 67 (June 1977): 297-308.

Lennart Flood, Household Market and Nonmarket Activities (HUS).           Uppsala:    Uppsala
       University, Department of Economics, 1997.

Jeff Grogger, “Market Wages and Youth Crime,” Journal of Labor Economics, 16 (October
       1998): 756-91.

Reuben Gronau, “Home Production—A Survey,” in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds.
       Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986.

---------------------, “The Theory of Home Production—The Past Ten Years,” Journal of Labor
          Economics, 15 (April 1997): 197-205.

Daniel Hamermesh, “Timing, Togetherness and Time Windfalls,” Journal of Population
       Economics, (2001): forthcoming.

Jerry Hausman, “Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,” in Timothy
        F. Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, eds. The Economics of New Goods. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press, 1997.

Laurence Jackson, “Hierarchic Demand and the Engel Curve for Variety,” Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 66 (February 1984): 8-15.




                                             29
F. Thomas Juster and Frank Stafford, Time, Goods and Well-being. Ann Arbor: Institute for
       Social Research, 1985.

Peter Kooreman and Arie Kapteyn, “A Disaggregated Analysis of the Allocation of Time within
       the Household,” 95 Journal of Political Economy, (April 1987): 223-49.

Joachim Merz and Manfred Ehling, eds., Time Use—Research, Data and Policy. Baden-Baden:
       NOMOS Verlagsgesellschaft, 1999.

Robert Michael, “Education in Nonmarket Production,” Journal of Political Economy, 81
       (March/April 1973): 306-27.

Nederlands      Instituut   voor     Wetenschappelijke     Informatiediensten      (NIWI),
       Tijdbestedingsonderzoek 1990. Amsterdam: Steinmetz Archive, 1993.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, OECD Employment Outlook. Paris:
       OECD, 2000.

John Robinson and Geoffrey Godbey, Time for Life: The Surprising Ways Americans Use Their
       Time, 2nd ed. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1999.

Paul Romer, “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 94
       (October 1986): 1002-37.

Steven Salop, “The Noisy Monopolist: Imperfect Information, Price Dispersion and Price
       Discrimination,” Review of Economic Studies, 44 (October 1977): 393-406.

Pitirim Sorokin and Clarence Berger, Time-Budgets of Human Behavior. Cambridge: Harvard
        University Press, 1939.

Statistiches Bundesamt, “Wo Bleibt die Zeit? Die Zeitverwendung der Bevölkerung in
         Deutschland.” Wiesbaden, Germany: Statistiches Bundesamt, 1999.

Finis Welch, “Education in Production,” Journal of Political Economy, 78 (January/February
       1970): 35-59.




                                            30
Table 1. Characteristics of the Six Time-Budget Surveys


Country and Number of         Days per      Number of     Number of    Interval Length
 Year       Observations     Observation    Activities    Nonwork          (minutes)
           (Original sample)                              Activities

Australia       7056            2                280          202             5
1992

Israel          3081            1-4              87           64             15
 1991-92

Netherlands     3415            7                203          129            15
1990

Sweden          4121            2                72           40              5
1993-94

United States   4939            1                87           64             15
1985

West Germany 10799              2                230          128             5
1991-92
Table 2a. Time Allocation of Married Men by Schooling Level (Minutes per Representative Day)


                        Australia1      Israel2 Netherlands3 Sweden4 United                 West
                                                                     States5               Germany6
All
 Market work        329               382          271          322          336          356
 Home work          141                74          123          110          136          135
 Childcare           23                32           23           17           20           26
 Personal care      605               584          627          565          626          621
 Leisure            341               368          400          426          322          301
Total nonwork       969               984          1050         1008         968          948
Low Schooling Third
 Market work        299               242          241          285          285          345
 Home work          143               105          142          110          145          145
 Childcare           20                20           22           13           21           21
 Personal care      625               674          643          584          661          628
 Leisure            355               399          396          448          328          301
Total nonwork       1000              1093         1061         1045         1010         950
Middle Schooling Third
 Market work        343               394          294          330          336          359
 Home work          143               71           118          108          131          127
 Childcare           22                29           20           21           20           29
 Personal care      599               584          622          560          621          621
 Leisure            333               362          391          421          332          304
Total nonwork       954               975          1033         1002         973          954
Top Schooling Third
 Market work        359               409          294          370          354          367
 Home work          136                67          109          112          135          129
 Childcare           35                38           28           19           20           31
 Personal care      578               560          615          541          619          613
 Leisure            332               366          397          397          311          299
Total Nonwork       945               964          1040         957          950          944

NOTE: Here and in Table 2b the total minutes allocated may differ slightly from 1440 due to rounding. In the
Netherlands, however, the totals differ substantially due to the inclusion of the roughly half-sample whose Sunday time-
diary was kept for the 1500-minute day.
1
  Low if secondary or no qualifications; middle if a certificate, diploma or trade qualified; high if a bachelor's degree. The distribution
is: 38 percent, 46 percent and 16 percent.
2
  Low if 0-8 years; middle if 9-12 years; high if 13+ years. The distribution is: 13 percent, 43 percent and 44 percent.
3
  Low if lower general or vocational/technical; middle if middle or high general or vocational/technical; high if academic. The
distribution is: 35 percent, 37 percent and 28 percent.
4
  Low if elementary, intermediate school, or lower vocational; middle if gymnasium or intermediate vocational; high if high vocational
or university. The distribution is: 42 percent, 31 percent and 27 percent.
5
  Low if less than high school; middle if high school; high if beyond high school. The distribution is: 16 percent, 40 percent and 44
percent.
6
  Based on sums of years of schooling and formal training. The distribution is: 41 percent, 23 percent and 36 percent.
Table 2b. Time Allocation of Married Women by Schooling Level (Minutes per Representative Day)

                         Australia1    Israel2 Netherlands3 Sweden4 United   West
                                                                    States5 Germany6

All
 Market work       133                164      87        213      167     122
 Home work         276                229     257        205      254     312
 Childcare          71                 86      69         36       58      69
 Personal care     617                624     650        612      643     647
 Leisure           343                337     381        375      319     289
Total nonwork      1031               1047    1100       1023     1020    1006
Low Schooling Third
 Market work       104                 82      49        187      122     114
 Home work         293                304     294        226      272     325
 Childcare          63                 34      56         18       47      49
 Personal care     628                699     657        624      667     657
 Leisure           352                321     388        384      332     295
Total nonwork      1043               1054    1101       1026     1046    1001
Middle Schooling Third
 Market work       154                138      89        214      172     129
 Home work         263                230     257        187      254     308
 Childcare          82                 91      75         53       57      82
 Personal care     606                630     653        609      640     639
 Leisure           337                351     370        376      316     282
Total nonwork      1025               1072    1098       1038     1013    1003
Top Schooling Third
 Market work       234                213     143        251      175     130
 Home work         219                201     206        194      246     290
 Childcare          91                100     79         40       64      95
 Personal care     587                595     635        595      634     637
 Leisure           308                331     381        360      321     288
Total nonwork      986                1026    1095       995      1019    1020
1
  The distribution is:   58 percent, 33 percent and 9 percent.
2
  The distribution is:   17 percent, 39 percent and 44 percent.
3
  The distribution is:   42 percent, 31 percent and 26 percent.
4
  The distribution is:   29 percent, 23 percent and 48 percent.
5
  The distribution is:   14 percent, 50 percent and 36 percent.
6
  The distribution is:   47 percent, 30 percent and 23 percent.
Table 3. Number of Nonwork Activities of Married Persons on a Representative Day, by Schooling Level*

Schooling Level            Australia       Israel     Netherlands Sweden        United States    West
                                                                                                Germany

                                                          MEN
All Respondents           9.17           7.40         8.94          6.61        7.68          8.68
                          (0.06)         (0.09)       (0.05)        (0.09)      0.10          (0.04)

Low Schooling Third       8.77           7.04         8.44          6.68        7.32          8.13
                          (0.09)         (0.24)       (0.09)        (0.13)      (0.24)        (0.05)

Middle Schooling Third 9.18              7.14         8.99          6.68        7.57          8.71
                       (0.09)            (0.14)       (0.09)        (0.15)      (0.16)        (0.08)

Top Schooling Third       10.11          7.72         9.44          6.41        7.95          9.32
                          (0.17)         (0.13)       (0.10)        (0.18)      (0.16)        (0.06)


                                                       WOMEN
All Respondents           9.90           8.15         10.03  6.91               8.69          9.97
                          (0.07)         (0.09)       (0.05) (0.08)             (0.11)        (0.04)

Low Schooling Third       9.48           6.83         9.56          6.77        7.89          9.31
                          (0.09)         (0.19)       (0.07)        (0.12)      (0.26)        (0.05)

Middle Schooling Third 10.32             8.13         10.12         6.96        8.45          10.23
                       (0.12)            (0.13)       (0.07)        (0.15)      (0.15)        (0.07)

Top Schooling Third       11.10          8.61         10.50         7.05        9.36          11.02
                          (0.23)         (0.13)       (0.09)        (0.17)      (0.19)        (0.09)

NOTE: Standard errors of the means are in parentheses. The educational categories are defined in the notes to Table 2.
Table 4a. Determinants of Married Men’s Demand for Diversity on a Representative Day: Human Capital
Measures and the Influence of Children

                              Australia1      Israel2 Netherlands3          Sweden     United States West Germany
Education:
 Low Schooling Third             -.298         -.345       -.709              .046          -.479      -.506
                                (-2.659)      (-2.45)    (-4.46)             (0.28)          (-2.16)   (-4.72)

    Top Schooling Third          .923          .602        .414              -.231          .459       .622
                                (5.81)        (5.66)      (2.56)            (-1.26)         (2.91)     (5.48)

Age                              -.050        -.080        -.043             -.153           -.115     -.238
                                (-1.48)       (-3.16)    (-0.89)            (-2.78)         (-2.49)    (-6.11)

Age2/100                         .051         .133         .100               .161           .156      .266
                                 (1.42)       (4.13)      (1.91)             (2.85)         (3.07)     (6.69)

No. of Children                  .425         .281         .199               .086           .014      .047
                                (4.05)        (1.84)      (1.70)             (0.73)         (0.13)     (0.62)
Youngest child:
Pre-school:
 Ages 0-1                        -.065        .709
                                (-0.23)       (1.52)
    Ages 0-4 or 5                                          .690               .321           .234      .679
                                                          (3.05)             (0.84)          (0.73)    (3.16)
    Ages 2-4 or 5                .491         .508
                                (1.72)        (1.47)
Pre-teen and/or teen:
 Ages 5-9                        -.058
                                (-0.19)
    Ages 5 or 6-17                                                                            .034     .433
                                                                                             (0.13)    (2.51)
    Ages 6-12, 13 or 14                        .066        -.018             .010
                                              (0.23)      (-0.09)           (0.03)
    Ages 10-14                   -.026
                                (-0.12)
Teen:
 Ages 13 or 14-17                              -.379       -.689             -.106
                                              (-1.60)     (-2.69)          (-0.37)

N                               1835          582           816               696             822      2911

R2                              .089          .135          .151              .029           .054      .100

NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. The educational categories are defined in the notes to Table 2. N denotes the number
of different respondents included. Each equation includes indicators for the day of the week on which the diary is kept.
Except for the United States robust standard errors that account for the duplication of observations are presented.
1
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of immigrant status, and of
whether English is spoken at home.
2
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of ethnic origin, of health
problems, of the age of the youngest child, and continuous measures of the number of children and of number of persons
in the household.
3
  The equations also include indicators of the "long week" in this sample.
Table 4b. Determinants of Married Women’s Demand for Diversity on a Representative Day: Human Capital
Measures and the Influence of Children

                              Australia1      Israel2 Netherlands3          Sweden     United States West Germany

Education:
 Low Schooling Third             -.547        -1.00        -.550              .097          -.507      -.615
                                (-4.61)       (-2.54)    (-4.13)             (0.53)         (-2.26)    (-6.03)

    Top Schooling Third          .963          .471        .442               .033           .906      .657
                                (4.68)        (9.58)      (3.14)             (0.16)          (5.63)    (5.15)

Age                              .072         -.034        .038              -.061           -.062     -.035
                                (2.28)        (-0.45)     (0.98)            (-1.16)         (-1.40)    (-1.00)

Age2/100                        -.066         .065        -.010               .060           .086      .047
                               (-1.88)        (0.78)     (-0.22)             (1.07)         (1.74)     (1.31)

No. of Children                  .768         .121         .282               .070           .086      .363
                                (6.76)        (3.29)      (3.03)             (0.59)         (0.78)     (4.29)
Youngest child:
Pre-school:
 Ages 0-1                        .339         .883
                                (1.11)        (3.15)
    Ages 0-4 or 5                                          1.695              .919          1.319      1.269
                                                          (9.38)             (2.46)          (3.93)    (5.39)
    Ages 2-4 or 5                1.401         .843
                                (4.38)        (3.91)
Pre-teen and/or teen:
 Ages 5-9                        1.158
                                (3.69)
    Ages 5 or 6-17                                                                            .451     .692
                                                                                             (1.72)    (3.62)
    Ages 6-12, 13 or 14                        .196         .570             .543
                                              (1.13)       (3.26)           (1.69)
    Ages 10-14                  .070
                               (0.31)
Teen:
 Ages 13 or 14-17                              -.697       -.209             -.039
                                              (-2.35)     (-0.97)           (-0.14)

N                               2031           582          816               756            1286      2968

R2                              .231          .129          .145              .060           .069      .129

NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. The educational categories are defined in the notes to Table 2. N denotes the number
of different respondents included. Each equation includes indicators for the day of the week on which the diary is kept.
Except for the United States robust standard errors that account for the duplication of observations are presented.
1
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of immigrant status, and of
whether English is spoken at home.
2
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of ethnic origin, of health
problems, of the age of the youngest child, and continuous measures of the number of children and of number of persons
in the household.
3
  The equations also include indicators of the "long week" in this sample.
Table 5. Determinants of Married People’s Demand for Diversity: Adding Earnings and/or Income

                               Education:          Age       Age2/100    Wage Income/100          R2
                             Low      High

Australia
 (Men N = 1672)             -.324        .900      -.028      .028                  .0063        .099
                           (-2.78)      (5.24)     (-0.78)    (0.74)                (1.08)

 (Women N = 1854)           -.547        .866      .077      -.068                  .0086        .231
                           (-4.38)      (4.07)     (2.25)     (-1.80)               (1.52)

Israel
(Men N = 500)              -.156         .600    -.112         .165                 .0102        .154
                             (-1.33)     (4.87) (-3.70)       (5.22)                (3.98)

(Women N =130)             -.921         .371      -.107       .154                 .0058        .150
                           (-2.66)       (4.12)    (-1.03)     (1.26)               (5.19)

Sweden
 (Men N = 606)             -.016        -.180     -.111       .116        -.0031                 .033
                            (-0.10)    (-0.99)     (-1.96)    (1.98)      (-2.15)

 (Women N = 656)            .089        .099       -.052       .052       -.0028                 .061
                             (0.52)    (0.56)     (-1.05)     (0.97)      (-1.73)

West Germany
 (Men N = 2827)            -.484        .614      -.250       .279                  .0021        .106
                            (-4.47)    (5.35)     (-6.19)     (6.76)                (0.52)

 (Women N = 2891)          -.516        .497       -.082       .0966                .0167        .139
                            (-5.03)    (3.77)     (-2.26)     (2.58)                (6.99)


NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. The equations are specified identically to those presented in Tables 4, except wage or
income measures are included. For Sweden the wage measure is earnings per hour. The income measures are weekly
household income, own earnings excluded, for Australia, monthly family income, own earnings excluded, for Israel, and
spouse’s income for West Germany.
Table 6. Fraction of Activities Dominated by the More Educated Group

                    Australia   Israel      Netherlands    United States   West Germany

Men
High vs. Low           .604     .672            .551            .619            .681
 Education
High vs. Middle        .667     .750            .659            .677            .766
 Education
Middle vs. Low         .633     .609            .567            .656            .637
 Education

Women
High vs. Low           .465     .781            .612            .797            .714
 Education
High vs. Middle        .518     .797            .677            .823            .718
 Education
Middle vs. Low         .653     .594            .597            .645            .692
 Education
Table 7. Number of Nonwork Activities by Duration on a Representative Day

Duration (in minutes)    1-59       60-119      120-239       240-359       360-479   480+      Total No.
                                                                                              of Activities

Australia:     Men       4.82         1.84        0.98          0.33          0.54     0.65       9.17
Low Schooling Third      4.42         1.76        1.02          0.37          0.50     0.71       8.77
Middle Schooling Third   4.86         1.84        0.98          0.31          0.55     0.64       9.18
Top Schooling Third      5.72         2.03        0.89          0.31          0.62     0.54      10.11

              Women      5.60         2.00        0.97          0.26          0.45     0.62       9.90
Low Schooling Third      5.17         1.98        0.99          0.27          0.42     0.65       9.48
Middle Schooling Third   6.02         2.01        0.96          0.26          0.47     0.60      10.32
Top Schooling Third      6.79         2.05        0.90          0.25          0.61     0.50      11.10


Israel:       Men        3.07        1.90         1.06          0.42          0.51     0.43       7.40
Low Schooling Third      2.37        1.91         1.20          0.53          0.45     0.59       7.04
Middle Schooling Third   2.91        1.83         1.05          0.42          0.48     0.46       7.14
Top Schooling Third      3.41        1.96         1.04          0.40          0.55     0.37       7.72

               Women     3.37        2.19         1.24          0.37          0.44     0.53       8.15
Low Schooling Third      2.40        1.76         1.28          0.34          0.37     0.68       6.83
Middle Schooling Third   3.25        2.26         1.23          0.39          0.44     0.59       8.13
Top Schooling Third      3.82        2.28         1.23          0.36          0.46     0.46       8.61

Netherlands: Men         4.26         2.25        1.12          0.28          0.52     0.51       8.94
Low Schooling Third      3.72         2.15        1.22          0.32          0.49     0.53       8.44
Middle Schooling Third   4.36         2.26        1.10          0.27          0.52     0.48       8.99
Top Schooling Third      4.81         2.34        1.00          0.23          0.54     0.50       9.44

              Women      4.98         2.66        1.15          0.20          0.42     0.63      10.03
Low Schooling Third      4.51         2.60        1.19          0.22          0.38     0.67       9.56
Middle Schooling Third   5.11         2.62        1.15          0.19          0.43     0.62      10.12
Top Schooling Third      5.41         2.79        1.09          0.17          0.46     0.58      10.50

Sweden:      Men         2.73         1.49        1.00          0.34          0.57     0.48       6.61
Low Schooling Third      2.69         1.48        1.07          0.37          0.55     0.53       6.68
Middle Schooling Third   2.79         1.48        1.04          0.31          0.60     0.46       6.68
Top Schooling Third      2.73         1.50        0.87          0.33          0.57     0.42       6.41

              Women      2.90         1.69        1.00          0.27          0.48     0.57       6.91
Low Schooling Third      2.74         1.63        1.04          0.31          0.46     0.59       6.77
Middle Schooling Third   2.92         1.69        1.03          0.28          0.47     0.56       6.96
Top Schooling Third      3.10         1.79        0.91          0.21          0.50     0.53       7.05

United States: Men       3.67         1.72        0.94          0.34          0.53     0.47       7.68
Low Schooling Third      3.00         1.77        1.12          0.43          0.47     0.52       7.32
Middle Schooling Third   3.57         1.69        0.92          0.36          0.55     0.46       7.57
Top Schooling Third      4.03         1.74        0.89          0.30          0.54     0.46       7.95

              Women      4.21         2.18        0.97          0.33          0.46     0.53       8.69
Low Schooling Third      3.41         2.03        0.94          0.44          0.47     0.59       7.89
Middle Schooling Third   4.02         2.12        0.98          0.33          0.48     0.53       8.45
Top Schooling Third      4.80         2.33        0.97          0.28          0.44     0.52       9.36
West Germany: Men         4.86        1.80        0.82          0.23          0.52        0.45      8.69
Low Schooling Third       4.35        1.70        0.87          0.25          0.50        0.47      8.14
Middle Schooling Third    4.86        1.82        0.81          0.23          0.52        0.47      8.71
Top Schooling Third       5.46        1.91        0.78          0.21          0.56        0.41      9.32

              Women       5.79        2.11        0.89          0.18          0.47        0.53      9.97
Low Schooling Third       5.18        2.01        0.92          0.18          0.45        0.56      9.31
Middle Schooling Third    6.06        2.14        0.88          0.18          0.48        0.50     10.23
Top Schooling Third       6.73        2.28        0.86          0.16          0.51        0.48     11.02

NOTE: Except for rounding the row-sum equals the entry in the last column, which is copied from Table 3.
Table 8. Number of Routine (R) and Nonroutine (NR) Nonwork Activities of Married People, by Schooling Level

                            Australia         Israel              Sweden         West Germany

                             R    NR         R    NR             R    NR          R    NR

                                                           Men

All Respondents            6.34 5.67       5.05 4.61             3.93 5.53        5.71 5.93
                           (0.05) (0.08)    (0.11) (0.18)        (0.08) (0.10)    (0.02) (0.04)

Low Schooling Third         6.18 5.17       5.23 4.08         4.04 5.34           5.44 5.39
                           (0.07) (0.12)   (0.53) (0.62)     (0.12) (0.17)        (0.03) (0.06)

Middle Schooling Third     6.34 5.73       5.03 4.36          3.95 5.74           5.72 5.97
                          (0.07) (0.12)    (0.18) (0.27)     (0.13) (0.16)       (0.05) (0.08)

Top Schooling Third       6.74 6.71        5.03 4.89          3.74 5.59            6.04 6.55
                         (0.12) (0.20)     (0.15) (0.27)     (0.15) (0.19)        (0.04) (0.07)


                                                       Women

All Respondents            6.63 6.59        5.72 5.19        4.16 5.49            6.51 6.91
                          (0.05) (0.08)    (0.13) (0.19)     (0.07) (0.09)        (0.03) (0.06)

Low Schooling Third        6.42 6.12        4.74 4.04         4.27 5.05           6.14 6.33
                          (0.06) (0.10)    (0.29) (0.57)     (0.10) (0.14)       (0.03) (0.04)

Middle Schooling Third     6.74 7.26        5.89 5.15         4.05 5.78           6.63 7.21
                          (0.09) (0.15)    (0.20) (0.29)     (0.13) (0.16)       (0.04) (0.08)

Top Schooling Third       7.52 7.14         5.83 5.49         4.11 5.85           7.16 7.73
                         (0.16) (0.16)     (0.18) (0.27)     (0.15) (0.18)       (0.06) (0.09)

NOTE: Standard errors of the means are in parentheses. The educational categories are defined in the notes to
Table 2.
Table 9a. Determinants of Married Men’s Demand for Diversity in Routine (R) and Nonroutine (NR) Activities

                              Australia1         Israel2          Sweden             West Germany

                              R     NR           R     NR          R    NR              R      NR

Education:
Low Schooling Third        -.112 -.452         -.228 -1.199        .065 -.265          -.250 -.518
                          (-1.18) (-2.79)      (-0.26) (-1.28)    (0.35) (-1.08)      (-3.16) (-3.62)

    Top Schooling Third      .370 1.011         .246 .678          -.164 -.104          .323 .588
                            (2.90) (4.66)       (0.97) (1.57)      (-0.82) (-0.39)     (3.72) (4.00)

Age                          -.002 -.106        -.037 -.298       -.085 -.147          -.131 -.209
                           (-0.06) (-2.07)     (-0.36) (-1.98)   (-1.38) (-1.80)      (-4.63) (-4.20)

Age2/100                     -.001 .114          .060 .338         .096 .152           .154 .220
                           (-0.02) (2.08)       (0.52) (1.97)     (1.50) (1.80)       (5.28) (4.30)

No. of Children             .110 .650           .060 1.022         -.044 .094           -.009 .101
                           (1.46) (5.07)        (0.25) (2.41)     (-0.27) (0.44)      (-0.17) (1.00)

N                                 1708               146               592                  2911

R2                         .113     .142        .145   .203         .053   .056         .049   .085


NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. The educational categories are defined in the notes to Table 2. Each
equation includes indicators for the days of the week on which the diary is kept and for the age of the youngest
child.
1
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of immigrant status,
and of whether English is spoken at home.
2
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of ethnic origin, of
health problems, of the age of the youngest child, and continuous measures of the number of children and of
number of persons in the household.
Table 9b. Determinants of Married Women’s Demand for Diversity in Routine (R) and Nonroutine (NR)
Activities

                              Australia1             Israel2           Sweden          West Germany

                              R     NR           R       NR           R         NR         R      NR

Education:
Low Schooling Third         -.071 -.901         -1.017 -1.403         .473 -.495         -.260 -.711
                           (-0.72) (-5.55)      (-2.07) (-1.29)      (2.52) (-2.10)      (-3.41) (-5.20)

    Top Schooling Third      .872 .132          -.002   .243          .197 .035           .423 .467
                            (5.21) (0.49)       (-001) (0.49)        (1.91) (0.15)       (4.38) (2.82)

Age                           .045 .038          -.188 -.249          -.115 .001         -.033 -.004
                            (-1.46) (0.81)       (-1.54) (-1.31)     (-2.24) (0.02)     (-1.28) (-0.10)

Age2/100                     -.046 -.020         .247 .339           .113 -.004           .043 .007
                           (-1.46) (-0.40)       (1.91) (1.60)       (2.07) (-0.05)      (1.62) (0.16)

No. of Children              .335    .874        -.045      .719     -.047      .178     .184    .354
                            (4.19) (6.74)      (-0.20) (1.27)       (-0.42) (1.28)      (2.89) (3.31)

N                                 1870                149                 634                  2968

R2                           .113   .198          .145      .220      .053      .061      .142   .064


Note: t-statistics in parentheses. The educational categories are defined in the notes to Table 2. Each equation
includes indicators for the days of the week on which the diary is kept and for the age of the youngest child.
1
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of immigrant status,
and of whether English is spoken at home.
2
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of ethnic origin, of
health problems, of the age of the youngest child, and continuous measures of the number of children and of
number of persons in the household.
Table 10. Number of Nonwork Activities of Married People by Schooling Level, Weekdays (Day) and Weekends
(End)

                    Australia         Israel        Netherlands         Sweden            United         West
                                                                                          States        Germany
                    Day End         Day End          Day End            Day End          Day End        Day End

                                                      Men

All Respondents     9.32 8.79        7.07 8.21        8.49 10.07      6.51 6.86        7.44 8.27        8.50 9.75
                   (0.05) (0.08)    (0.08) (0.12)     (0.04) (0.07)   (0.08) (0.10)    (0.08) (0.14)   (0.04) (0.06)

Low Schooling       8.90 8.44       6.79 7.68          8.03 9.47       6.64 6.78         7.05 8.00       7.83 9.07
Third              (0.08) (0.12)    (0.20) (0.31)     (0.07) (0.12)   (0.13) (0.14)    (0.20) (0.33)   (0.05) (0.10)

Middle Schooling 9.35 8.75           6.78 8.05        8.54 10.11       6.48 7.18        7.26 8.33       8.25 9.88
Third            (0.07) (0.12)      (0.12) (0.18)    (0.07) (0.12)     (0.13) (0.19)   (0.12) (0.23)   (0.07) (0.13)

Top Schooling      10.24 9.78        7.42 8.48        8.90 10.78        6.32 6.64       7.80 8.33       9.31 10.88
Third               (0.14) (0.23)   (0.11) (0.17)    (0.08) (0.14)     (0.17) (0.20)   (0.13) (0.21)   (0.06) (0.11)


                                                        Women

All Respondents     10.14 9.30       8.08 8.32        10.02 10.06       6.94 6.82       8.60 8.90      9.97 9.96
                   (0.06) (0.09)    (0.08) (0.11)     (0.04) (0.06)    (0.08) (0.09)   (0.09) (0.15)   (0.04) (0.06)

Low Schooling       9.75 8.82        6.88 6.70         9.54 9.62       6.74 6.83        7.85 8.00 9.28 9.29
Third              (0.08) (0.10)    (0.15) (0.26)     (0.06) (0.09)   (0.12) (0.12)    (0.21) (0.35) (0.06) (0.09)

Middle Schooling 10.47 9.94          8.09 8.23        10.12 10.13      7.03 6.80        8.37 8.65 10.10 10.25
Third            (0.10) (0.15)      (0.12) (0.16)     (0.06) (0.09)   (0.15) (0.16)    (0.13) (0.18) (0.07) (0.11)

Top Schooling      11.31 10.57       8.51 8.85       10.45 10.62       7.14 6.82        9.21 9.73      10.91 10.73
Third              (0.19) (0.31)    (0.12) (0.15)    (0.08) (0.12)     (0.16) (0.20)   (0.15) (0.26)   (0.08) (0.12)


NOTE: The first number for each country is for the average weekday, the second for the average weekend day. Standard
errors of the means are in parentheses. The educational categories are defined in the notes to Table 2.
Appendix Table 1. Determinants of the Time Allocation of Married People on a Representative Day

                           Education:          Age        Age2/100      Wage Income/100    R2
                        Low       High
Australia1 Men
Total Nonwork           28.54       17.54      -20.65    27.38                  -2.723     .272
                        (2.73)      (1.26)       (-6.48)   (8.02)               (-5.00)

Leisure                 9.50        19.81      -17.29       21.71               -1.492     .203
                        (1.01)      (1.60)     (-5.93)       (6.90)             (-3.26)

Personal Care           18.16       -12.29     -3.26        5.37                -1.164     .122
                        (3.17)      (-1.81)    (-1.93)      (2.94)              (-4.60)

         Women
Total Nonwork           15.22       -31.09     -12.49   17.03                   -2.060     .204
                        (1.87)      (-2.16)     (-5.19)  (6.56)                 (-5.26)

Leisure                 0.55        -25.31     -10.00       13.81                 -.699    .143
                        (0.07)      (-2.02)    (-4.39)       (5.47)             (-1.95)

Personal Care           14.89       -10.78      -2.30        2.86               -1.237     .107
                        (3.01)      (-1.29)    (-1.57)       (1.75)             (-5.46)

Israel2 Men
Total Nonwork           53.18         10.44     -32.31        37.81              .591      .440
                        (2.75)        (0.79)    (-7.89)      (10.39)             (0.90)

Leisure                 -22.67         10.83     -19.85        23.30             .655      .279
                        (-4.04)       (1.02)     (-13.78)     (42.49)            (1.50)

Personal Care            66.09        -6.22     -12.90         14.87             -.260     .283
                         (3.73)      (-0.51)     (-3.24)       (3.17)            (-0.73)

       Women
Total Nonwork           -20.81      -36.53     -19.78    25.04                   -.011     .344
                        (-3.81)     (-2.43)     (-14.50) (16.88)                (-0.13)

Leisure                 -69.68       -30.51    -10.01        13.90               .270      .275
                         (-4.36)    (-9.13)    (-5.36)      (7.88)              (4.49)

Personal Care            46.41       -22.43   -11.30         13.14               -.228     .226
                        (2.46)      (-1.46) (-10.27)         (6.44)             (-4.18)

Netherlands3 Men
Total Nonwork            7.32        5.57      -12.76       20.98                          .457
                        (0.64)      (0.54)      (-3.80)      (5.87)

Leisure                  -7.48       5.02       -8.48       13.46                          .342
                        (-0.75)     (0.53)     (-2.88)      (4.23)

Personal Care           12.85       -8.30       -4.52      7.61                            .207
                        (1.85)     (-1.29)     (-2.31)     (3.65)
                        Education:          Age        Age2/100   Wage Income/100   R2
                      Low    High

       Women
Total Nonwork          -5.83     -.79       -4.43       7.70                        .264
                     (-0.78)   (-0.09)      (-1.92)     (3.04)
Leisure               1.87      12.21       -0.92       3.21                        .180
                      (0.27)    (1.57)     (-0.45)     (1.38)

Personal Care        -2.08     -17.95       -4.43       5.93                        .100
                     (-0.33)   (-3.14)     (-2.42)     (2.99)

Sweden4 Men
Total Nonwork        6.79      -37.64     -34.54         40.10      -.446           .312
                     (0.36)    (-2.04)     (-5.17)       (5.98)   (-2.68)

Leisure              -10.59    -23.67     -21.61        26.95       -.263           .162
                     (-0.51)   (-1.08)     (-3.24)       (3.89)   (-1.58)

Personal Care         18.02    -15.94      -9.84        11.01       -.140           .067
                      (1.44)   (-1.12)      (-2.15)      (2.35)   (-1.20)

       Women
Total Nonwork        -30.62     -26.35     -30.93        35.70      -.579           .243
                     (-1.84)    (-1.56)    (-6.60)       (7.21)    (-3.59)

Leisure              -35.24     -10.10     -24.93        30.65      -.144           .108
                     (-1.69)    (-0.48)     (-3.99)      (4.53)    (-0.76)

Personal Care        17.20       -7.62     -2.71         2.28       -.275           .037
                     (1.25)     (-0.52)    (-0.59)       (0.46)    (-2.14)

United States5 Men
Total Nonwork        -15.44    -12.91     -20.69        27.72                       .254
                     (-0.77)   (-0.90)    (-4.93)       (6.00)

Leisure              -43.44   -16.89      -12.75        17.48                       .173
                      (-2.52) (-1.38)      (-3.55)      (4.42)

Personal Care        20.88      3.75       -8.73        11.17                       .112
                     (1.73)    (0.44)     (-3.47)       (4.04)

       Women
Total Nonwork        30.64      12.83      -17.10        20.75                      .109
                     (1.80)     (1.05)       (-5.12)     (5.52)

Leisure              1.80       11.52       -8.35        11.13                      .083
                     (0.12)     (1.11)     (-2.94)       (3.48)

Personal Care        19.71       -3.26     -4.74          6.25                      .061
                     (1.86)     (-0.43)    (-2.27)       (2.67)
                                   Education:            Age       Age2/100        Wage Income/100             R2
                                 Low    High

West Germany6 Men
Total Nonwork                   -1.00       2.46        -30.04        36.09                     -0.369        .403
                                (0.12)      (0.31)     (-10.25)       (11.98)                   (-1.09)

Leisure                         -1.40     4.85         -17.13         20.05                     -0.100        .259
                                 (-0.22) (0.78)         (-7.05)       (8.00)                    (-0.36)

Personal Care                   6.53         -2.50     -10.95         14.28                     -0.299        .234
                                (1.36)      (-0.55)    (-6.62)        (8.31)                    (-1.64)

       Women
Total Nonwork                    6.67        8.26       -22.8          0.265                    1.213         .245
                                (1.07)      (1.13)      (-10.06)     (11.33)                    (6.39)

Leisure                         3.66         7.17      -9.70         11.52                       .919         .144
                                (0.70)      (1.12)     (-4.99)       (5.56)                     (5.74)

Personal Care                   7.51         1.42       -7.80          10.03                     .144          .155
                                (1.97)      (0.31)     (-5.31)        (6.29)                    (1.30)


NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. N denotes the number of different respondents included. Each equation includes indicators for the
day of the week on which the diary is kept. Except for the United States robust standard errors that account for the duplication of
observations are presented.
1
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of immigrant status, of whether English is
spoken at home and of the age of the youngest child, and a continuous measure of the number of children. Income is weekly
household income, own earnings excluded.
2
  The equations also include indicators of residence in the urban part of a metropolitan area, of ethnic origin, of health problems, of the
age of the youngest child, as well as continuous measures of the number of children and of number of persons in the household.
Income is monthly family income, own earnings excluded.
3
  The equations also include indicators of the "long week" in this sample and of the age of the youngest child, and a continuous
measure of the number of children.
4
  The equations also include indicators of the age of the youngest child, and a continuous measure of the number of children. The
wage measure is gross hourly earnings.
5
  The equations also include indicators of the age of the youngest child, and a continuous measure of the number of children.
6
  The equations also include indicators of the age of the youngest child, and a continuous measure of the number of children. Income is
spouse’s income.
