                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION OF CONTINUOUS-TIME EQUITY RETURN MODELS


                                             Torben G. Andersen
                                                Luca Benzoni
                                                 Jesper Lund


                                            Working Paper 8510
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w8510


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2001


We are grateful to Alexandre Baptista, Menachem Brenner, Sanjiv Das, Bjørn Eraker, Ron Gallant, Rick Green,
Jack Kareken, Marti Subrahmanyam, George Tauchen, Harold Zhang, an anonymous referee and seminar
participants at Boston College, Brown University, University of Chicago, CIRANO, Harvard University,
University of Maryland, Michigan State University, University of Michigan, University of Minnesota, the Newton
Institute at Cambridge (UK), University of North Carolina, Northwestern University (Finance and Statistics
Departments), NYU, the Center for NonLinear Methods in Economics at Svinkløv, Denmark, the Econometric
Society Winter Meeting 1999, and the Option Pricing Conference in Montreal, March 2000, for helpful comments
and suggestions. Also, we would like to thank the MSI center at the University of Minnesota for providing
computing resources. Of course, all errors remain our sole responsibility. Previous versions of this paper were
circulated under the title "Estimating Jump-Diffusions for Equity Returns." The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Torben G. Andersen, Luca Benzoni and Jesper Lund. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
An Empirical Investigation of Continuous-Time Equity Return Models
Torben G. Andersen, Luca Benzoni and Jesper Lund
NBER Working Paper No. 8510
October 2001
JEL No. G12, C50, G13



                                             ABSTRACT


        This paper extends the class of stochastic volatility diffusions for asset returns to encompass
Poisson jumps of time-varying intensity. We find that any reasonably descriptive continuous-time model
for equity-index returns must allow for discrete jumps as well as stochastic volatility with a pronounced
negative relationship between return and volatility innovations. We also find that the dominant empirical
characteristics of the return process appear to be priced by the option market. Our analysis indicates a
general correspondence between the evidence extracted from daily equity-index returns and the stylized
features of the corresponding options market prices.




Torben G. Andersen                  Luca Benzoni                        Jesper Lund
Department of Finance               Department of Finance               Department of Finance
Kellogg School of Management        Carlson School of Management        The Aarhus School of Business
Northwestern University             University of Minnesota             Fuglesangs Alle 4
2001 Sheridan Road                  321 19th Avenue South               DK-8210 Aarhus V
Evanston, IL 60208                  Minneapolis, MN 55455               Denmark
and NBER                            lbenzoni@umn.edu                    jl1204@worldonline.dk
t-andersen@nwu.edu
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             1
Much asset and derivative pricing theory is based on di usion models for primary securi-
ties. However, prescriptions for practical applications derived from these models typically produce
disappointing results. A possible explanation could be that analytic formulas for pricing and hedging
are available for only a limited set of continuous-time representations for asset returns and risk-free
discount rates. It has become increasingly evident that such \classical" models fail to account ad-
equately for the underlying dynamic evolution of asset prices and interest rates. Not surprisingly,
the inadequacy of these speci cations also shows up in bond and derivatives pricing, where the stan-
dard representations falter systematically. For example, the Black-Scholes pricing formula, although
widely used by practitioners, is well known to produce pronounced and persistent biases in the pric-
ing of options. Deviations of actual prices from Black-Scholes benchmarks result in the extensively
documented \volatility smiles" and \smirks" reported in, e.g., Rubinstein (1994).
    The above observations suggest that practical nancial decision making based on the continuous-
time setting will be satisfactory only if it builds upon reasonable speci cations of the underlying asset
price processes. Speci cally, bond and derivatives prices are very sensitive to volatility dynamics.
Likewise, the extent of skewness and the presence of outliers in the underlying return distribution are
critical inputs to hedging and risk management decisions as well as for option pricing. It has long been
asserted that jumps or stochastic volatility may account for such return characteristics. Unfortunately,
these features are generally explored separately and not within a uni ed framework. Until recently,
a major obstacle was the lack of feasible techniques for estimating and drawing inference on general
continuous-time models using discrete observations. Over the last few years, new methods for di usion
estimation have emerged. Nonetheless, the inference tools are often speci c to a limited number of
models. Moreover, the related empirical ndings have so far been inconclusive or contradictory and
most studies fail to produce a satisfactory t to the underlying asset return dynamics.
    From a di erent vantage point, a number of studies extract information about the parameters
of the underlying returns process from derivatives prices and contrast the ndings to the time series
behavior of the return series; see, e.g., Bates (1996a, 2000), Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997), and Chernov
and Ghysels (2000). The results are striking: there is a strong disparity between the characteristics of
the return dynamics implied by the derivative prices and those inferred from the actual time series of
underlying returns. The lack of consensus about the proper speci cation of continuous-time models
for asset returns and the inability to link the estimated representations coherently to corresponding
features of associated nancial instruments remain a cause for concern since they suggest that a
critical element may be missing from the model speci cation.
    The objective of this paper is to identify a class of jump-di usion models that are successful
in approximating the S&P500 return dynamics and should therefore constitute an adequate basis
for continuous-time asset pricing applications. We explore alternative representations for the daily
equity-index return dynamics within a general jump-di usion setting. We consider speci cations
both inside and outside the popular class of aÆne models that generally provide tractable pricing
2                                                             Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




and estimation procedures; see, for example, DuÆe, Pan and Singleton (2000). Our broad-based
approach to model selection is critical in order to establish the merits of the di erent formulations. It
further helps assess the severity of the constraints imposed by inference techniques that are tailored
on the family of aÆne models, which are widely used in the literature. Along the way, we identify
the features of the return dynamics that account for the inadequate performance of the classical
models. Finally, we explore the relationship between our estimated speci cation and the associated
derivatives prices. First, we contrast our estimates for the model parameters that are una ected by
the adjustments for volatility and jump risks with those extracted from options in previous empirical
work. Second, we provide a qualitative comparison of the pricing implications of our model estimated
solely from equity returns and the stylized evidence from actual options data.
    The need for a general, yet eÆcient framework for inference leads us to adopt a variant of the
simulated method of moments (SMM) technique of DuÆe and Singleton (1993). Moment conditions
are obtained from an implementation of the eÆcient method of moments (EMM) procedure of Gallant
and Tauchen (1996) and performance is judged through the associated speci cation tests and model
diagnostics. We apply this approach to daily observations from the S&P500 index. Besides being a
broad indicator of the equity market, this index is the asset underlying the SPX option, an important
and highly liquid contract in the derivatives market. Both data sets have been studied extensively, so
we have natural reference points for our analysis. Finally, the daily sampling frequency allows us to
capture high-frequency uctuations in the returns process that are critical for identi cation of jump
components, while avoiding modeling the intra-day return dynamics which are confounded by market
microstructure e ects and trading frictions.
    Our results indicate that both stochastic volatility and discrete jump components are critical
ingredients of the data generating mechanism. Also, a pronounced negative correlation between
return and volatility innovations appears necessary to capture the skewness in S&P500 returns. A
relatively low-frequency jump component accounts for the fat tails of the returns distribution. We
estimate that jumps occur on average 3-4 times a year. The discontinuities are relatively small, with
most of the jumps lying within the 3% range. All variants of our model without a negative return-
volatility relation or jumps are overwhelmingly rejected, while two stochastic volatility jump-di usion
(SVJD) speci cations provide acceptable characterizations. Hence, we nd that a combination of
fairly standard and parsimonious representations of stochastic volatility and jumps accommodates
the dominant features of the S&P500 equity-index returns, and o ers an attractive alternative to,
for example, the complex four-factor pure di usion speci cation of Gallant and Tauchen (1997). We
thus nd empirical support for the aÆne jump-di usion model of Bates (1996a) and Bakshi, Cao and
Chen (1997), which provides a convenient setting for asset pricing applications.
    Interestingly, our estimates for the model parameters that are una ected by the adjustment for
volatility and jump risks are generally similar to those obtained in previous work exploiting only
equity options. In line with this observation, our model also produces option pricing implications
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             3
that correspond qualitatively to those obtained from actual derivatives data. For example, the jump
component and, more prominently, the asymmetric return-volatility relationship induce a smirk in the
typical implied volatility pattern which resembles that extracted from options data. Moreover, like in
the actual data, this smirk becomes less pronounced as maturity increases. Finally, relatively small
premia for the uncertainty associated with volatility and jumps are suÆcient to replicate most of the
salient features of the term structure of implied volatility. Hence, a large number of characteristics
of the stock price process, which seem to be implied or priced by the derivatives contracts, are
independently identi ed as highly signi cant components of the underlying dynamics uncovered in our
empirical analysis of the S&P500 returns. Consequently, our results indicate a general correspondence
between the dominant features of the equity-index returns and option prices.
    We deliberately avoid exploting derivatives prices for estimation purposes. Although this is not
fully eÆcient, there are important advantages associated with this approach. First, we are able to
focus exclusively on the adequacy of the model under the \physical" measure. Features such as
stochastic volatility, a negative correlation between return and volatility innovations, and jumps, are
consequently not extracted from derivatives prices, and are therefore shown to be inherent character-
istics of the underlying return dynamics. This analysis is an important benchmark since the option
prices speak to the parameters of the return system under the \risk-neutral" measure. Hence, joint
estimation requires distributional assumptions not only for the stock return dynamics, but also for the
associated market premia for undiversi able risks such as stochastic volatility and jumps. Rejection
of the joint model may thus result from either the speci cation of the risk premia (the risk-neutral dis-
tribution), the stock return dynamics (the physical distribution), or both. This ambiguity is avoided
when concentrating solely on the underlying asset return dynamics. Since the stock return dynamics
is critical for a number of practical hedging, risk management, portfolio allocation and asset pricing
decisions, it is advantageous to have a robust characterization that is immune to either misspeci -
cation or instability of the speci ed process for the risk premia. The relevance of this observation
is underscored by the documentation of a structural break in option prices around the market cor-
rection in 1987. Prior to October 1987, the volatility implied by the equity-index option contracts
displayed a largely symmetric smile pattern, but after October 1987 it turned into an asymmetric
smirk, re ecting the higher prices for out-of-the-money put options (which are valuable for portfolio
insurance strategies). Consequently, many studies utilizing option data end up having to focus on a
limited sample from 1988 onwards. There is no evidence of a corresponding break in the underlying
stock price dynamics. Thus, a second advantage of focusing exclusively on equity returns is that
we may exploit a large daily sample originating with the initiation of the S&P500 index in 1953. A
large sample allows for more accurate inference about the strongly persistent volatility process and its
identi cation relative to the jump distribution. We are also able to gauge structural stability directly
by considering subsample estimation. Third, drawing inference from joint return and derivatives data
poses severe computational problems. To circumvent them, we would have to restrict our analysis to
4                                                            Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




models that deliver (near) closed-form solutions for the option price. This would in e ect limit our
applications to speci cations within the aÆne class. But if explicit solutions for derivatives prices
are not required, the EMM simulation approach readily accommodates alternative speci cations for
the di usion and jump components, allowing for a broader study of candidate models including those
outside of the tractable aÆne setting.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section I we discuss the candidate
continuous-time models for stock returns and provide a selective overview of the existing litera-
ture. Empirical results and the details of the EMM implementation are documented in Section II. In
Section III we illustrate potential derivative pricing implications and compare our ndings with the
results reported in the empirical option pricing literature. Concluding remarks are in Section IV.

       I. Model Speci cation and Estimation Methodology
A. Candidate Models
    We focus on a class of continuous-time models that are suÆciently general to capture the salient
features of equity-index returns, and also provide relatively straightforward comparisons to the rep-
resentations appearing in the literature. We pay particular attention to speci cations that facilitate
derivative pricing, but without limiting ourselves to models that deliver (near) closed-form pricing
formulas.
    The following general representations turn out to be satisfactory for our application
                         dSt                            p
                          S
                             =  (  + c Vt (t)  )dt + V t dW1;t + (t) dqt ;                     (1)
                           t

where the (log-)volatility process obeys a mean-reverting di usion, given as
                                  d ln Vt = (      ln Vt )dt +  dW2;t ;                            (2)
or                                                         p
                                  dVt = (       Vt )dt +  V t dW2;t :                              (3)
W1 and W2 are standard Brownian motions with correlation corr(dW1;t ; dW2;t ) = , q is a Poisson
process, uncorrelated with W1 and W2 and governed by the jump intensity (t), i.e., Prob(dqt = 1)
= (t) dt, (t) is an aÆne function of the instantaneous variance,
                                           (t) = 0 + 1 Vt :                                      (4)
(t) denotes the magnitude of the jump in the return process if a jump occurs at time t. It is assumed
to be log-normally distributed,
                              ln(1 + (t)) ; N( ln(1 + ) 0:5 Æ2; Æ2 ) :                            (5)
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             5
    This class of models subsumes a number of important special cases that we consider in our
empirical analysis. To establish a benchmark, we initially estimate a representation that is compatible
with the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This is obtained by assuming that the drift and di usion
coeÆcients in (1) are constant and that there is no jump component, i.e., (t) = 0. Thus, (1) reduces
to                                         dSt
                                            St
                                                = dt + dWt :                                        (6)
The option pricing formula associated with the Black-Scholes di usion (6) is routinely used to price
European options, although it is known to produce systematic biases. These are typically illustrated
by the \smile" in implied volatilities extracted from a cross-section of options, sorted according to the
degree of moneyness. That is, option prices consistently violate the basic assumption of a constant
di usion coeÆcient in the underlying stochastic di erential equation for stock returns. This should
not be surprising since high-frequency stock returns exhibit leptokurtosis, skewness and pronounced
conditional heteroskedasticity, all characteristics ruled out by the Black-Scholes assumptions.
    As a rst extension of the representation (6), we estimate the Merton (1976) model, obtained by
adding a jump component with constant intensity to the Black-Scholes formulation. This is also a
special case of (1), obtained imposing the restriction (t) =  and assuming volatility to be constant.
Economically, jumps in stock returns are easily rationalized: the discrete arrival of new information
induces an instantaneous revision of stock prices. Adding a jump component should improve the t
to the observed time-series of returns, since the jumps may help accommodate outliers as well as
asymmetry in the return distribution. The presence of outliers is regulated by the magnitude and
variability of the jump component, while the asymmetry is controlled by the average magnitude of
the jump, . The Merton jump-di usion has been estimated from time series data on asset returns
by a number of authors { among them, Press (1967), Jarrow and Rosenfeld (1984), Ball and Torous
(1985), Akgiray and Booth (1986), and, more recently, Das and Uppal (1998) and Das (1999). The
jump component has generally been found to be signi cant, and the speci cation does accommodate
some of the observed skewness and leptokurtosis in the returns process. Nonetheless, the resulting
representations are, as also documented below, seriously inadequate. They cannot account for the
strong conditional heteroskedasticity of stock returns nor rationalize the substantial time-variation
that is observed in the level and shape of the implied volatility smile.
    These facts motivate estimation of alternative extensions of representation (6). As a rst step,
we rule out the jump component by setting (t) = 0 in the di usion (1), but allow volatility to be
stochastic. This produces a pure two-factor di usion,
                                    dSt                     p
                                     S
                                         = (  + c Vt ) dt + V t dW1;t ;                              (7)
                                     t

where the variance process V follows either the log-variance speci cation (2) or the aÆne speci -
cation (3). Stochastic volatility induces excess kurtosis in the return process, governed largely by
6                                                              Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




the volatility di usion parameters , and . The asymmetry observed in the return process may
be captured by a negative correlation between shocks to the variance and the return process, i.e.
corr(dW1;t ; dW2;t) =  < 0. The square-root variance speci cation in (3) is particularly attractive
for option pricing applications since Heston (1993) provides a closed-form solution for the option
price when the underlying return process obeys (7) and (3). On the other hand, the log-variance
speci cation in (7) and (2) is more in line with standard discrete-time stochastic volatility models
as well as the popular EGARCH representation for equity-index returns. This suggests that the
log-variance model is a good starting point for our di usion speci cation since it provides a basis for
comparisons with the usual discrete-time results. The representation is, however, less convenient for
derivatives pricing than the speci cation incorporating square-root variance, since numerical methods
are required for the computation of option prices; see, e.g., Melino and Turnbull (1990) and Benzoni
(1998). Also, note that we have included the volatility factor in the mean return (drift coeÆcient),
and thus rule out arbitrage opportunities by ensuring that equities do not provide a xed excess
return over the risk-free rate when volatility approaches zero. However, given the mixed evidence on
volatility-in-mean e ects in the discrete-time oriented empirical literature, the associated coeÆcient
is likely to be small.
     It is strictly an empirical issue whether the models (7) and (2) or (7) and (3) provide adequate
descriptions of stock returns. Our empirical work leads us to expand both representations by including
a jump component. This yields the most general speci cation, that of (1)-(5). The joint presence of
jump and stochastic volatility factors provides additional exibility in capturing the salient features
of equity returns, including skewness and leptokurtosis. From an option pricing perspective, this
extension has the advantage of delivering closed-form solutions if V obeys (3), see Bates (1996a,
2000), or numerical approximation schemes when V satis es (2). Moreover, several studies have
noted that the incorporation of a jump component is essential when pricing options that are close
to maturity.1 Indeed, if volatility follows a pure di usion the implied continuous sample path may
be incapable of generating a suÆciently volatile return distribution over short horizons to justify the
observed prices of derivative instruments.

B. Estimation Methodology
    The main diÆculty in conducting eÆcient inference for continuous-time model from discretely
sampled data is that closed-form expressions for the discrete transition density generally are not
available, especially in the presence of unobserved and serially correlated state variables. The latter
is usually the case, for example, for stochastic volatility models. Although maximum likelihood
estimation is, in principle, feasible via numerical methods { see, e.g., Lo (1988) { the computational
demands are typically excessive if latent variables must be integrated out of the likelihood function.
    In response to this challenge, a number of alternative consistent inference techniques for continuous-
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             7
time processes have been developed in recent years. Among the early contributions are the (semi-
)nonparametric approaches of, e.g., At-Sahalia (1996) and Hansen and Scheinkman (1995); and,
among the more recent, Conley et al. (1997), Stanton (1997), Jiang and Knight (1997), Johannes
(1999), Bandi and Phillips (1998), Bandi and Nguyen (2000) and Poteshman (1998). Unfortunately,
it is diÆcult to apply such methods in our setting because of the joint presence of stochastic volatility
and jumps. At the same time, re nements of the Pedersen (1995) approach of treating the estimation
problem as a missing values problem have appeared. Although the method may appear unable to
accommodate latent factors, the development of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques
has provided interesting progress; see Eraker (2001), Jones (1998), and Elerian, Chib and Shephard
(2001).2 Nonetheless, the approach is not ideal for our application since the implementation of the
MCMC sampler must be tailored to the model of choice, and it is therefore hard to make comparisons
across a broad range of di erent speci cations. Yet another approach, developed in DuÆe, Pan and
Singleton (2000) and Liu (1997), has inspired work using empirical characteristic functions; see, e.g.,
Chacko and Viceira (1999), Jiang and Knight (1999), Singleton (2001) and Carrasco et al. (2001).
However, this methodology is designed for the aÆne class and it is hard to adapt it to, e.g., the
log-variance representation (2).
     We turn instead to the EMM estimation procedure, a simulation-based method of moments tech-
nique. In principle, simulation approaches are feasible if it is possible to simulate the underlying
di usion paths arbitrarily well and obtain suÆcient identifying information for parameter estimation
via moment conditions. This typically produces ineÆcient inference, but careful moment selection can
greatly alleviate this problem. The SMM procedure of DuÆe and Singleton (1993) matches sample
moments with simulated moments, i.e., moments computed using a long simulated series obtained
from the assumed data generating mechanism. The EMM procedure of Gallant and Tauchen (1996)
re nes the SMM approach by providing a speci c recipe for the generation of moment conditions.
They are extracted from the expectation of the score of a discrete-time auxiliary semi-nonparametric
model which closely approximates the distribution of the discretely sampled data. An attractive
feature is that EMM achieves the same eÆciency as maximum likelihood (ML) when the score of the
auxiliary model (asymptotically) spans the score of the true model. Moreover, as for the generalized
method of moments (GMM), the EMM criterion function may be used to construct a Chi-square
statistic for an overall test of the over-identifying restrictions. Since this procedure is based on the
identical moment conditions - the auxiliary model score vector - for all models under investigation,
it allows for comparison of non-nested representations, like the log-variance and aÆne volatility pro-
cesses in (2) and (3). Finally, the t of individual scores may be used to gauge how well the model
captures particular characteristics of the data. Although the EMM procedure has been used before
to estimate stochastic volatility (SV) models, our extension to a fully speci ed SVJD setting, which
produces eÆcient estimation of a model with both stochastic volatility and jumps, is to the best of
our knowledge the rst within the EMM literature.
8                                                             Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




    In our application we use a sample of equity index returns. A number of authors has advocated
instead the use of derivative prices, based on the conjecture that this data contains superior market-
based information about the evolution of the data generating process. As a result, they obtain
model parameters exclusively under the \risk-neutral" probability measure using, for example, the
pricing techniques within general aÆne settings found in, e.g., DuÆe, Pan and Singleton (2000) and
Bakshi and Madan (2000). These approaches allow for inversion of option prices into (constant)
model parameter and period-by-period implied volatility estimates, e.g., Bates (1996a, 2000), or even
period-by-period implied parameters and period-by-period implied volatilities for aÆne stochastic
volatility jump-di usions, as explored by Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997).3 These studies invariably
 nd the extracted time series of volatility to be inconsistent with the observed dynamics of the
underlying equity returns, thus highlighting the diÆculty of jointly rationalizing derivatives prices
and the underlying asset price dynamics. These results can be ascribed to a misspeci cation of the
return generating process, and thus the \physical" measure, as well as the factor risk premia, i.e.,
the \risk-neutral" measure. Our paper, along with a few other recent contributions reviewed in the
following section, shed additional light on the sources of model misspeci cation.

C. Recent Empirical Findings
    Pan (1999) undertakes joint estimation of the return dynamics and the risk-neutral distribution
underlying the derivatives prices using weekly data for 1989-1996 in an aÆne setting. Her constrained
jump-di usion appears to t relatively well, although it fails to capture fully the volatility dynamics.
What is more important for us, however, the use of weekly observations and a relatively small sample
suggest that identi cation of the stochastic process governing the jump behavior is based almost
exclusively on the derivatives prices. This may explain why our results indicate a much higher jump
intensity in the return process than she reports. Jones (1999) exploits the VIX implied volatility index
and daily S&P100 equity-index returns to estimate a constant elasticity of variance (CEV) extension
of the square-root model using a Bayesian MCMC procedure. He nds this speci cation to do better
than the square-root version and suggests that his extension may serve as a reasonable substitute
for a jump component. As in prior work, however, the full option smirks cannot be rationalized
by the estimated model, and the performance of the CEV speci cation relative to jump-di usions
is unclear. Benzoni (1998) estimates square-root and non-aÆne stochastic volatility models using
S&P500 returns, and explores the pricing implications for the corresponding S&P500 index options.
He nds that the two speci cations have similar empirical properties and provide comparable ts
for both equity returns and option prices. He concludes that volatility risk is priced by the market
and documents di erent sources of misspeci cation in the models considered. Chernov and Ghysels
(2000) also estimate the square-root stochastic volatility di usion. In a noteworthy departure from
the extant literature, their EMM based estimates from both stock-index returns and option prices
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                         9
imply no signi cant asymmetry in the relation between return and volatility innovations. Their
speci cations, however, are overwhelmingly rejected by the associated goodness-of- t tests. In recent
work, Johannes, Kumar and Polson (1999) and Eraker, Johannes and Polson (1999) explore discretized
versions of pure jump and square-root stochastic volatility jump-di usions at the daily level with an
emphasis on generalized jump representations. In particular, they consider models with jumps to
volatility and perform estimation with the MCMC method using S&P500 index returns. Eraker
(2000) extends this approach to a joint data set of S&P500 returns and option prices. More general
jump-di usion speci cations are also explored in current EMM-based work by Chernov et al. (1999,
2000).4

                                 II. Empirical Results
    In the following sections we report on our EMM implementation. In Section A we outline the
semi-nonparametric (SNP) estimation of the conditional return density by quasi-maximum likelihood.
In Section B we discuss the EMM estimation results and interpret the speci cation tests used to gauge
the performance of the di erent models along various dimensions.

A. A SNP Model for the S&P500 Returns
    The key to a successful application of the EMM procedure is the choice of an auxiliary model that
closely approximates the conditional distribution of the return process. Loosely speaking, Gallant
and Long (1997) have shown that if the score function of the auxiliary model asymptotically spans
the score of the true model, then EMM is (asymptotically) eÆcient. Also, they have demonstrated
that, within the class of discrete-time auxiliary models, SNP densities are good candidates for this
task.
    SNP models are based on the notion that a polynomial expansion can be used as a nonparametric
estimator of a density function; see Gallant and Nychka (1987). In addition, SNP densities allow
for a leading parametric term that may be used to capture the dominant systematic features of
the (discrete-time) return dynamics, thus providing a parsimonious representation of the conditional
density for the observed series. An ARMA term, potentially extended by a volatility-in-mean e ect,
is a natural candidate for the conditional mean, and the ARCH speci cation generally provides a
reasonable characterization of the pronounced conditional heteroskedasticity of stock returns. Hence,
we search over ARMA-ARCH type models for an initial (leading) term in the SNP-representation.
Our speci cation analysis suggests an EGARCH representation for the conditional variance process.5
Besides superior in-sample performance as measured by standard information criteria statistics, the
EGARCH form has other attractive properties. As originally argued by Nelson (1991), it readily
accommodates an asymmetric response of the conditional volatility process to return innovations and
10                                                                            Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




it renders non-negativity restrictions for the volatility parameters unnecessary.
    To provide a basis for comparison with prior studies, we initially t the pure ARMA-EGARCH
model by quasi-maximum likelihood (QML), thus excluding the nonparametric expansion of the
conditional density that is unique to the SNP approach. Our main results are based on daily returns
for the S&P500 equity index6 from 01/02/1953 to 12/31/1996, a sample of 11,076 observations. We
also make use of a smaller sample of 4,298 daily observations from 01/03/1980 to 12/31/1996 to gauge
the temporal stability of our ndings. Summary statistics are provided in Table I. The unit root
hypothesis is convincingly rejected in favor of stationarity for the return series { a condition required
for any method of moments approach predicated on stability of the return generating mechanism.
The price and return series are depicted in Figure 1.
    The QML estimates of the pure ARMA-EGARCH (not reported) are indicative of strong temporal
persistence in the conditional variance process: the parameters governing the persistence are within,
but close to, the boundaries of the covariance stationary region. Also, the correlation between the
return innovations and the conditional variance is negative and highly signi cant, as observed in
many prior studies. A relatively high-order AR term in the mean equation is necessary to capture the
autocorrelation structure in the S&P500 returns, although this pattern is accommodated nicely by a
single MA(1) term. Such pronounced short-run return predictability is somewhat diÆcult to reconcile
with market eÆciency and is likely spurious since it is consistent with non-synchronous trading in
the stocks of the underlying index; see, e.g., Lo and MacKinlay (1990). Finally, the short-run return
autocorrelation is quantitatively less important than the pronounced volatility uctuations for most
applications, and the inference on the volatility process is largely una ected by the short-run mean
dynamics { a result con rmed by the ndings reported below. For these reasons, we pre lter the
data using a simple MA(1) model for the S&P500 daily returns and rescale the residuals to match
the sample mean and variance in the original data set. This residual series is then treated as the
observed return process.7
    Quasi-maximum likelihood estimation is performed on the fully speci ed semi-nonparametric
(SNP) auxiliary model,
                                                                                !
                     fK (rt jxt ;  ) =  + (1  )  R
                                                           [PK (zt ; xt )]2       p(zt )
                                                                                          ;
                                                       R [PK (zt ; xt )] (u)du
                                                                        2            ht
where  is a small constant ( xed at 0.01),8 (:) denotes the standard normal density, xt is a vector
containing a set of lagged observations, and
                        r 
                zt = tp t ;
                           ht
                                        X
                                        s                   X
                                                            u
               t   =   0 + c ht +            i rt   i+         Æi "t i ;
                                        i=1                 i=1
                             p
                             X                                                                                q
             ln ht =    !+         i   ln ht i + (1 +         1 L + ::: +     q   Lq ) [ 1 zt + 2 (b(zt )       2=) ] ;
                             i=1
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                           11
             b(z ) = jzj for jzj  =20K; b(z) =1(=2 cos(Kz))=K for jzj < =2K ;
                     X
                     K   z          X
                                    K  zX
                                        K      x
         PK (z; x) =     ai (x)z i = @ aij xj A z i ;   a00 = 1 ;
                       i=0           i=0   jj j=0
where j is a multi-index vector, xj  (xj1 ; : : : ; xjM ) and jj j  PMm=1 jm . As in Andersen and Lund
                                           1        M

(1997), b(z) is a smooth (twice-di erentiable) function that closely approximates the absolute value
operator in the EGARCH variance equation, with K = 100.
    With this speci cation, the main task of the nonparametric polynomial expansion in the condi-
tional density is to capture any excess kurtosis in the return process and, to a lesser extent, any
asymmetry which has not already been accommodated by the EGARCH leading term. In practice,
the nonparametric speci cation is implemented via an orthogonal Hermite polynomial representation.
We also allow for heterogeneity in the polynomial expansion (Kx > 0), but these terms are insigni -
cant, indicating that the EGARCH leading term provides an adequate characterization of the serial
dependence in the conditional density.
    Within this class of SNP models, we rely on the Bayesian (BIC) and Hannan-Quinn (H-Q) in-
formation criteria for model selection, as the commonly used Akaike criterion (AIC) tends to over-
parameterize the models. (Actual values of the statistics are not reported.) This selection strategy
points towards an ARMA(0,0)-EGARCH(1,1)-Kz(8)-Kx(0). It is theoretically desirable to include a
volatility-in-mean e ect, but, since the term is insigni cant and induces additional estimation uncer-
tainty for the remaining drift coeÆcients, we report EMM results both excluding and including this
e ect in the auxiliary model. Table II reports the value of the parameter estimates and corresponding
standard errors. Ljung-Box tests for the autocorrelation of the residuals (not reported) con rm that
the selected speci cation successfully removes the systematic rst- and second-order dependencies in
the data.
B. EMM Estimation
    The expectation of the auxiliary model score function provides the moment conditions for simu-
lated method of moment estimation of the continuous-time SVJD.
    Let frt( ); xt ( )gTt=1(N ) denote a sample simulated from the SVJD using the parameter vector
  = (    0 1  Æ ). The EMM estimator of is then de ned by
                                 ^N = arg min mT (N ) ( ; ^) 0 WN mT (N ) ( ; ^) ;
where mT (N ) ( ; ^) is the expectation of the score function, evaluated by Monte Carlo integration at
the quasi-maximum likelihood estimate of the auxiliary model parameter ^, i.e.,
                                                 1 TX  (N ) @ ln f (r ( )jx ( ); ^)
                             mT (N ) ( ; ^) =                    K t      t
                                                                                     ;
                                               T (N ) t=1             @
12                                                              Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




and the weighting matrix WN is a consistent estimate of the inverse asymptotic covariance matrix
of the auxiliary score function. Following Gallant and Tauchen (1996), we estimate the covariance
matrix of the auxiliary score from the outer product of the gradient. In simulating the return sequence
frt ( ); xt( )gTt=1(N ) , two antithetic samples of 75,000  10 + 5,000 returns are generated from the con-
tinuous-time model at time intervals of 1/10 of a day9 The rst 5,000 observations are discarded to
eliminate the e ect of the initial conditions. Lastly, a sequence of T (N ) = 75; 000 daily returns is
obtained by summing the elements of the simulated sample in groups of 10.

                                           B.1. Black-Scholes



    To obtain an initial benchmark, we estimate the Black and Scholes speci cation (6). The results
for the auxiliary model without volatility-in-mean e ect are given in Table III, and for the auxiliary
model including the e ect in Table IV. Note that, from here on, dt = 1 corresponds to one trading
day and parameter estimates are expressed in percentage form on a daily basis.
    As is evident from both tables, the model is overwhelmingly rejected at any reasonable con dence
level, based on the Chi-square test for over-identifying restrictions. Parameter estimates are therefore
largely uninterpretable, the reason being that the EMM procedure confronts the model with auxiliary
scores moments and not sample return moments, as maximum likelihood reduces to in this case.
The former are vastly more informative about the dynamic features of the return data than are
the sample moments. However, without the ability to accommodate any of the dominant SNP
moments, the parameter estimates are determined by features that have little to do with their natural
interpretation in the underlying (misspeci ed) model. For example, the  estimate is approximately
0.6 and signi cantly di erent from the return standard deviation of 0.83. Since the return standard
deviation for the auxiliary model matches that of the data (we checked that it does by simulating a
long return sample from the SNP density), the  estimate of 0.6 is explained by the poor t of the
Black-Scholes speci cation, rather than a problem with the SNP model.
    The signi cance of individual score t-ratios associated with corresponding SNP parameters, re-
ported in Table V, are suggestive of the source of model misspeci cation, even though, given the
above observation, the statistics for the Black-Scholes model must be interpreted with caution. The
moment associated with the asymmetry parameter in the EGARCH variance equation is highly signif-
icant, indicating that the model fails to accommodate the observed asymmetry in the return process.
Also, the moments associated with the even terms in the polynomial approximation are non-zero, and
this suggests that the excess kurtosis of the S&P500 returns exceeds what can be rationalized by the
model. This is consistent with the ndings in, e.g., Gallant, Hsieh and Tauchen (1997). As expected,
the Black-Scholes representation does not provide an acceptable characterization of the time-series
properties of daily stock-index returns.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             13
                                    B.2. Black-Scholes with Jumps


    We rst extend the Black-Scholes model by incorporating a jump component with constant in-
tensity: (t) = 0 . Initial experimentation reveals that the  parameter is insigni cant, but also
somewhat poorly identi ed by the auxiliary score moments, and we consequently impose the restric-
tion  = 0. The results obtained from this constrained speci cation are also reported in Tables III
and IV for the (slightly) di erent versions of the auxiliary score moments. Of particular interest is
the jump intensity parameter 0. The coeÆcient is signi cant and implies an average of about 14
jumps per year. But even though incorporating a jump component improves the t considerably { the
Chi-Square statistic drops from 127.41 to 90.82 { the model is nevertheless overwhelmingly rejected.
    The score t-ratio diagnostics in the BSJ column of Table V are indicative of numerous problems.
The fat tails of the return innovations are somewhat better accommodated, but the model still fails in
this dimension. Further, the conditional variance process appears seriously misspeci ed. In particular,
the symmetric ( = 0) jump-di usion does not capture the asymmetry manifest in the 1 coeÆcient.
Relaxing the  = 0 constraint did not lead to a marked improvement in the t of the score component
corresponding to 1 , suggesting that an asymmetric jump component cannot capture the skewness in
the S&P500 returns.
                            B.3. Stochastic Volatility: Log-Variance Model


    Next, we investigate the stochastic volatility di usion (7) and (2); again the results are reported in
Tables III and IV. The estimation is rst performed with  = 0, but this constraint is subsequently
removed allowing the model to possibly accommodate the asymmetries in the stock returns and
variance. The resulting estimates of  are strongly negative and highly signi cant. Moreover, with an
unconstrained  the overall t is substantially improved. The model is, however, rejected. This result
is consistent with the ndings in empirical studies of corresponding discrete-time stochastic volatility
models, Gallant, Hsieh and Tauchen (1997), Liu and Zhang (1997), van der Sluis (1997) and others.
    Turning to the remaining parameters, we note rst that the estimate of the (daily) drift term 
(in Table 3, 0.0314) implies an annual return of 7.91%, which is in line with the sample mean of 7.59%
for 1953-1996. Second, the signi cantly positive estimate ensures that the (log-)variance process is
stationary and controls the persistence of shocks to the process. The solution to (2) takes the form
[see, e.g., Andersen and Lund (1997)]
                                                                        Zs
     ln s2 = expf (s t )g ln t2 + ( = )(1 expf (s t )g) +  t expf (s v)gdW2;v ; (8)
which is a discrete-time representation of the variance process governed by the di usion parameters.
For s t = 1, expf g = 0:9865 without the volatility-in-mean e ect (Table 3) and 0.9841 with that
e ect (Table 4). Those estimates, which imply a strong daily (log-)volatility persistence, are consistent
with estimates reported in the discrete-time literature. The score t-ratio diagnostics are again reported
14                                                            Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




in Table V. The symmetric ( = 0) stochastic volatility representation fares somewhat better than
the Black-Scholes model, but also fails to accommodate the skewness and kurtosis in the returns.
Allowing for an asymmetric volatility response improves the t dramatically. The corresponding
score parameter 1 is no longer signi cant, which suggests that the asymmetry is induced by a so-
called \leverage" or \volatility feedback" e ect. However, the score moments associated with the
even terms of the nonparametric expansion are again non-zero, indicating that the pure stochastic
volatility di usion is incompatible with the degree of kurtosis observed in the data.
                            B.4. Stochastic Volatility: Square-Root Model



    Here we consider the alternative stochastic volatility di usion (7) and (3), inspired by the square-
root, or Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985) type representation. The model is also estimated with and
without the restriction  = 0. Although the square-root model appears to do marginally worse than
the log-variance version, the ndings reported in Tables III and IV imply similar characteristics. For
example, the square-root model successfully accommodates the asymmetry in the S&P500 returns,
but fails to induce a suÆcient degree of kurtosis in the return series, as con rmed by the score t-
ratios (not reported).10 In summary, allowing for an asymmetric stochastic volatility factor greatly
enhances performance, and yet does not provide an adequate description of the S&P500 returns. We
consequently turn to another generalization.
                                B.5. Stochastic Volatility with Jumps



    The models in this section incorporate both a stochastic volatility and a jump component. We
focus initially on the model (1) and (2) with a log-variance speci cation and constant jump intensity:
(t) = 0 . As for the simple jump-di usion, the  parameter is insigni cant and imprecisely estimated.
This suggests that the asymmetry is more appropriately captured through a negative correlation
between the return innovations and the di usion variance (i.e.,  < 0.). Consequently, the restriction
 = 0 is imposed in the following estimation results.
    The SVJD provides a substantial improvement over the earlier results, as is evident from the results
in Tables III and IV. The Chi-square test statistics for overall goodness-of- t decrease to 13.34 without
the volatility-in-mean e ect and 13.13 with that e ect. The associated p-values are 6.4% and 6.9%, so
the model is not rejected at a 5% signi cance level. Furthermore, the stochastic volatility parameters
are virtually una ected by the introduction of the jump component. Thus, the earlier interpretation
of these parameters remains valid, except that it applies only to the di usion component of the return
variance. We must include a genuine return jump component in the characterization of the overall
volatility process.
    The estimates of the jump parameters are of independent interest. The average number of jumps
per day, 0 , is 0.0137, which implies 3 to 4 jumps per year. The variability of the jump magnitude is
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                            15
characterized by the Æ coeÆcient. Our estimate for Æ implies a standard deviation of 1.5%, so most
jumps should fall within the 3% range.11
    The score t-ratio diagnostics, reported in the SV J1 column of Table V, reveal that almost all score
moments are insigni cant at the 5% level. These results do not point to any particular inadequacy
of the SVJD, but rationalizing exceptional episodes such as the sharp market drop in October 1987
remains diÆcult. It may be that adding another jump component or an alternative distribution for
the jump magnitude (t) that allows for larger (negative) jumps would help. However, given the
very few instances of such jumps, over tting is a very real possibility, and we did not consider either
of those extensions. Overall, allowing for Poisson jumps as well as stochastic volatility appears to
capture the main characteristics of the return series quite well.
    We also estimate the SVJD (1) and (3) with a square-root volatility speci cation and constant
jump intensity which then becomes the Bates (1996a) model. The results are included in Tables
III and IV. The model performs marginally worse than the SVJD (1) and (2) with a log-variance
speci cation { for the square-root representation, the test associated with the over-identifying restric-
tions attains a p-value of 3.73% (4.96%) { but, realistically, we cannot di erentiate between the two
models. Again, the t-ratio diagnostics do not identify any particular source of misspeci cation: all
score moments are insigni cant at the 5% level.
    We come now to the most general model considered, where the jump intensity is a function of the
volatility level: (t) = 0 + 1 Vt. This generalizes not only the constant intensity representations,
but also the model of Pan (1999) for which (t) = 1 Vt . Our results are summarized in Tables III
and IV. Across the di erent speci cations, the estimates of 1 are all positive, suggesting that the
jump probability may depend on the instantaneous volatility. On the other hand, the point estimates
of 1 are also imprecise and insigni cant in all cases.
    The point estimates of 0 are also insigni cant. This nding, somewhat surprising, could be an
artifact of the approximation used to compute the (Wald) standard errors.12 To investigate that
possibility, we also constructed con dence intervals by inverting a critical region for the criterion
function, as proposed by Gallant and Tauchen (1997). The constructed intervals are in general
good approximations to those computed from the Wald standard errors, except for 0. For the
SVJD with log-variance, the 95% con dence interval for 0 becomes [0.008, 0.022]. Consequently,
when con dence intervals are constructed by inverting the criterion function, the aÆne term 0 is
statistically signi cant and, overall, results are similar to those for the corresponding model with
constant jump intensity. Identical conclusions hold for the square-root speci cation.
    Consistent with the above observations, the p-values associated with the overall goodness-of- t
test are marginally lower than in the models with constant jump intensity. Hence, the linear part
of the jump intensity speci cation seems to have little explanatory value for the distribution of
daily equity-index returns. Of course, there is a possibility that the parameter 1 simply cannot be
estimated precisely from our return data. Moreover, even if it is insigni cant under the \physical"
16                                                            Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




measure, the identical e ect may still be important under the risk-neutral distribution and thus for
valuation of derivatives. Speci cally, a large risk premium associated with the jump intensity and the
use of option prices for estimation may explain in part the distinctly di erent conclusions obtained
by Pan (1999) for both the average jump intensity and the (conditional) dependence of the jump
intensity on concurrent (di usion) volatility.
    As estimated, both SVJD's indicate a weak volatility-in-mean e ect. The c coeÆcients are small,
but positive. Hence, there is some evidence of a positive association between equity volatility
and expected return, which is consistent with a volatility risk premium. However, since the esti-
mated premium is small and statistically insigni cant, the empirical importance of the e ect remains
questionable.13 Note also that, except for a compensating decrease in the drift term constant, none of
the parameter estimates change signi cantly with its inclusion. To conclude, the volatility-in-mean
e ect has a limited impact on the quality of our characterization of the equity-index return process
and will likely be of minimal concern for practical option pricing applications.

                               B.6. Estimation over a Shorter Sample



    EMM results for our continuous-time models based on the relatively small daily sample 1980-1996,
and an SNP auxiliary model with a leading EGARCH(2,1) term, are given in Table 6. The auxiliary
model is further characterized in Table 7.
    The small sample ndings are generally consistent with those obtained from the full sample.
Consequently, there is no need to qualify our conclusions regarding the inadequacy of the speci cations
without stochastic volatility or jump components. Furthermore, the SVJD's appear to t the return
distribution better over the small than over the full sample, although the speci cation tests with the
small sample are less powerful. As was found using the full sample, allowing the jump intensity to
depend on volatility does not improve the quality of the t, and the small sample estimate of 1
remains insigni cant.
    Between the two sets of estimates, one main di erence is in the strength of the asymmetric return-
volatility relationship. For the small sample, it is also highly signi cant but appears somewhat weaker,
with estimates of  around -0.40. Not surprisingly, given the dramatic market corrections observed
over this sample, the jump intensity is now estimated marginally higher with a jump probability per
day of around 1.9% or about 5 jumps per year. Moreover, the estimated average jump size increases
as re ected in a larger Æ coeÆcient, implying a standard deviation of 2.15%, i.e. jumps will typically
fall within the 4:3% range. Finally, the volatility persistence measure given by expf g drops
marginally to approximately 0.980 at the daily level.
    In summary, there are no indications of a substantial structural change in the return generat-
ing mechanism during the years 1953-1996. What the relatively smaller sample yields, less precise
inference aside, is a marginal increase in the level and variability of volatility, as re ected in more
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                          17
frequent and larger jumps and a quicker mean reversion in the volatility di usion process. Overall, we
deem the longer sample more useful in providing identifying information regarding the jumps in the
equity-index return process and the asymmetric relation between returns and volatility. But on the
record, the EMM procedure seems fully capable of extracting meaningful inference from the shorter
sample as well. We conclude that the empirical ndings discussed in the previous sections are not an
artifact of our choice of sample period.

                     III. Implications for Option Pricing
    A common nding of the empirical derivatives pricing literature is that the return dynamics im-
plied by option prices are incompatible with the time series properties of the underlying asset prices.
To the contrary, in this section we establish a general correspondence between the dominant char-
acteristics of the equity return process and options prices. More speci cally, we show that most
parameter estimates obtained from the daily S&P500 returns under the \physical" probability mea-
sure are similar to those extracted in previous studies from option prices under the \risk-neutral"
distribution. We also show that the jump component and the asymmetric return-volatility relation-
ship identi ed from the equity return series are qualitatively consistent with the dynamics implied by
derivative prices. For example, our EMM point estimates generate a pronounced volatility \smirk"
e ect for short-maturity contracts, which, just as in the actual data, becomes less pronounced as
maturity increases. Finally, we illustrate how small and sensible risk premia for jump and volatility
components are able to reconcile the typical shape of the term structure of implied volatilities in the
option prices generated by our model to that observed in market prices. Hence, a large number of
characteristics of the stock return process which seem to be implied or priced by associated derivative
contracts are independently identi ed in our empirical analysis as highly signi cant components of
the underlying dynamics of the S&P500 returns.
    The computations below rely on the jump-di usion with square-root volatility de ned through
equations (1) and (3).14 The parameters , , , , 0, 1 and Æ under the \physical" measure are xed
at the EMM estimates in Table IV. In the presence of jumps and stochastic volatility, appropriate
risk adjustment must be incorporated into derivative prices. As suggested by Bates (2000), this can
be done in a representative agent economy by rewriting the model (1) and (3) in \risk-neutral" form:
                         dSt                             p
                          St
                               =  ( r d  (t)  ) dt + V t dW1;t +  (t) dqt ;                 (9)
                                                         p
                         dVt = (         Vt  Vt ) dt +  V t dW2;t ;                             (10)
where r and d are respectively the instantaneous risk-free interest rate and the dividend yield for
the underlying stock, q is a Poisson process with parameter , W1 and W2 are Standard Brownian
Motions under the risk adjusted measure with correlation corr(dW1;t; dW2;t) = , and  is the jump
18                                                              Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




in the return when the Poisson event occurs, with expected value  and variance var( ). With this
speci cation, a (semi-)closed form solution { reproduced in Appendix B { is available for computing
option prices.

A. Stochastic Volatility and Jumps
    The e ects of stochastic volatility and jumps on the pricing of options are shown in Figure 2.
Each panel displays Black-Scholes implied volatilities extracted from put option prices computed
from our SV di usion, both with and without a jump component. In all panels, the independent
variable is \moneyness," de ned as the ratio of the strike price K to the underlying price S minus
unity, K=S 1. All option prices are computed for a value of the underlying equity-index price S of
$800. The interest rate r and dividend yield d equal 5.1% and 2%, respectively, and the risk premia
on volatility and jump risk are xed at zero. Maturities go from a week to six months.
    The left column panels are drawn for an instantaneous volatility level corresponding to an annual
return volatility of 11:5%, which is consistent with the estimates for the long-run mean of volatility
reported in previous sections. The pronounced skew in implied volatility patterns, induced by the
negative relationship between return innovations and volatility, is evident across all maturities. The
jump component adds an upward tilt to the pattern at the right end for shorter maturities. This is
indicative of a return distribution with fatter tails. Interestingly, with our speci cation the smile is
induced by jumps rather than stochastic volatility, which traditionally has been identi ed as causing
smiles. When the jump intensity is constant (dashed line), the relatively small number of jumps
identi ed in our EMM estimation does not a ect the long-term return distribution much: jumps
simply add to the unconditional long-term mean of the volatility process. Allowing the jump inten-
sity to depend on volatility (dotted line) does not alter this conclusion: the two plots are virtually
indistinguishable, except for minor di erences at longer maturities. This should not be surprising,
given the small and insigni cant 1 estimate. Thus, in sum, the presence of jumps manifests itself in
the (asymmetric) smile pattern of implied volatility at shorter maturities, but the smile dissipates at
longer horizons where we observe a pure skew. Since the long-run mean of volatility is near identical
across our two models, implied volatilities are virtually the same at longer maturities.
    In the right column panels of Figure 2 we illustrate the sensitivity of the option price to the level of
(instantaneous) return volatility. The panels depict the Black-Scholes implied volatilities of put prices
generated from the SVJD with constant jump intensity. The plots are constructed for instantaneous
volatilities that correspond to annualized return volatility of 7%, 11.5%, and 15.5%, respectively.
Obviously, an increase in the instantaneous return volatility increases implied volatilities, i.e. option
prices. The e ect is very strong at short maturities, but becomes less pronounced rather quickly as
the time to expiration increases. Indeed, at longer maturities the mean-reverting component of the
variance process pushes volatility back towards its long-run level, and the plots converge to that for
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             19
a long-run average of 11.5%. Also of interest, the implied volatility smile for the short maturity and
low volatility case is nearly symmetric, while for the short maturity and high volatility scenario it is a
pure negatively sloped smirk. This is because in the low instantaneous volatility case a large fraction
of return volatility is attributable to the jump component, and for the high volatility scenario that is
not so. In the latter case, the e ect of the jump component not surprisingly weakens.
    The evidence in Figure 2 indicates a qualitative correspondence between our estimation results,
obtained from a sample of equity returns only, and the stylized characteristics of option prices.
This analysis is reinforced by a comparison of our parameter estimates to those reported in studies
in which models in \risk-neutral" form are estimated using derivative prices. One key parameter
is the  asymmetry coeÆcient, which is independent of risk adjustments for volatility and jump
uncertainty. Our point estimates fall in the -0.58 to -0.62 range for all model speci cation. These
estimates are similar to those obtained from derivative prices. Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997) report
values between -0.57 and -0.64 for the corresponding speci cations. Interestingly, they portray their
estimates as inconsistent with the underlying equity return dynamics, and, in support of their claim,
cite the typical estimate for the discrete-time EGARCH asymmetry coeÆcient, 1 , in the time-series
literature, which is about -0.12; see, e.g., Nelson (1991). Our estimate of 1 is -0.17 (Table II), which,
as our results indicate, is fully consistent with { indeed implies { a much more negative value for
the corresponding asymmetry coeÆcient  in the continuous-time model. Another striking, albeit
indirect, validation of this nding within the option pricing literature comes from Dumas, Fleming
and Whaley (1998). They compute a correlation of -0.57 (page 2064) for the rst-order di erences of
equity-index prices and Black-Scholes implied volatilities.
    The importance of this strong negative return-volatility relation in the continuous-time represen-
tation of equity index returns is illustrated in Figure 3. The left column of Figure 3 conveys the
impact of the  coeÆcient. The panels depict the Black-Scholes implied volatilities at di erent matu-
rities, for both the asymmetric ( 6= 0, solid line) and symmetric ( = 0, dashed line) pure stochastic
volatility model. Volatility risk premia are constrained to zero. It is evident that a negative  not
only is critical for obtaining an adequate t to the dynamics of equity returns, but it also induces
an asymmetric volatility smile over both short and relatively longer maturities, consistent with the
volatility \smirk" typically observed in equity-index option markets.
    Another set of parameters, and , are invariant to the risk adjustment in equations (9)-(10).
Our estimates for the SVJD with constant jump intensity, annualized and expressed in decimal form,
are = 0:0470 and  = 0:1845. The corresponding (average) estimates based on option prices
in Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997) are 0.04 and 0.38 (Table III, p. 2018). The estimates of are
essentially the same, so the only di erence arises with the  coeÆcient, where the options data
indicate a signi cantly higher volatility of volatility. There are several plausible explanations for this
discrepancy. First, it may be evidence of model misspeci cation. An implausibly high value of  may
be needed to accommodate the volatility smile/smirk observed in actual options data. This problem
20                                                            Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




may be alleviated by a model with two volatility factors or, possibly, by the presence of jumps in the
volatility process. This latter hypothesis has also been conjectured by Pan (1999) and Bates (2000),
and investigated by Eraker, Johannes and Polson (1999) and Eraker (2000). Second, it may be
attributed to a misspeci cation of (time-varying) risk premia in option prices. Such misspeci cation
may show up in a high \volatility of volatility" coeÆcient , which helps accommodate the otherwise
unexplained variability in the (risk neutral) volatility process. Third, there may be a small sample
bias in the Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997) coeÆcient estimate arising from the fact that they consider
a short sample for which return volatility typically is well above the average for our longer sample.
Fourth, it is likely that the volatility process estimated from daily (squared) returns data using our
models is overly smooth, as the daily innovation variance in the volatility process is small { and thus
hard to discern from daily data { relative to the variance of the daily return innovation. Hence,
although the models generally perform well, they may fail to pick up high-frequency uctuations in
the volatility process. This is illustrated in Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Labys (2001), who
contrast volatility estimates obtained from daily data to more accurate high-frequency measures of
volatility obtained from intraday time series. The implication is that estimation from daily return
data will be able to identify the dominant characteristics of the volatility process, but systematically
underestimate the extent of high-frequency movements in the volatility process. In contrast, option
based volatility measures are better equipped to capture such movements.
    In summary, the qualitative correspondence between the option pricing implications of our EMM
estimates and the patterns in actual data is encouraging. This conclusion is supported by the close
similarities observed for the key parameters that are invariant across the two probability measures.
The only noteworthy exception is the  coeÆcient which, according to our estimates, is about one
half the value reported in the option pricing literature. As indicated, this nding suggests a number
of potential model misspeci cations in both the objective and the risk-neutral probability measure
representations. Since these conjectures are impossible to test eÆciently using only daily return data,
we leave them for future research.

B. Volatility and Jump Risk Premia
    It has been pointed out in numerous studies that Black-Scholes implied volatilities are systemat-
ically higher than realized (historical) volatilities, an observation which suggests that option prices
embody premia for either volatility or jump risk, or both. In this section we illustrate the pric-
ing of options for \moderate and reasonable" speci cations of the risk premia. More speci cally,
we show that small risk adjustments to our parameters suÆce to replicate many of the qualitative
characteristics of the volatility \smirk."
    The panels on the right in Figure 3 illustrate how a variance risk premium changes option prices.
Each panel contains plots of Black-Scholes implied volatilities computed from put prices generated
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             21
by the asymmetric ( 6= 0) stochastic volatility model (no jumps). The assumption underlying the
solid line plots is a zero volatility premium, and for the dashed line plots the underlying assumption
is a  = 0:01 risk adjustment for volatility uncertainty. The premium increases implied volatilities:
a negative  increases the long-run mean of the (risk-neutral) volatility process, thus boosting option
prices, and the e ect is more pronounced at longer maturities.
    In Figure 4 we illustrate how a jump risk premium a ects option prices. The model used is one
with constant jump intensity. Di erent plots re ect variation in the (average) jump size coeÆcient
 (left column) and intensity 0 (right column). Plotted in the left panels are Black-Scholes implied
volatilities obtained from put prices generated by the SVJD with  equal to 0%, -1%, and -3%.
Making the  coeÆcient more negative increases the skewness in the risk neutral return distribution
and thus potentially rationalizes the even more pronounced \smirk" pattern. For  = 0, the an-
nualized instantaneous return volatility is 11:5%. But because volatility changes with  , we adjust
the (instantaneous) di usion volatility at which we compute option prices to o set changes in  ,
and thus keep the level of instantaneous volatility constant over the values of  .15 Given the mean
reversion in the volatility process, signi cant di erences in average volatility to maturity remain, but
the adjustment renders the scenarios more comparable at the short end, where the impact of the
jump component is most important. The negative  accentuates the smile asymmetry, suggesting
that a negative premium for jump uncertainty may be helpful, or even necessary, in accommodating
the volatility smirk observed in option prices, as argued by, e.g., Pan (1999). However, the impact of
the jump speci cation is again only pronounced at shorter maturities. That is, the implied volatility
plots atten as time to expiration increases. At long maturities, the volatility smile approaches the
same degree of asymmetry as for  = 0, even though, with a reversion of volatility to its higher
long-run value, the implied volatility level is much higher. In summary, given our estimated asymme-
try coeÆcient , a small risk adjustment on  generates a deep volatility \smirk" in short-maturity
options. This e ect becomes less pronounced as maturity increases, as it does for actual S&P500
options data.
    Figure 4, right column, relates to the identical model, but illustrates the e ect of a risk adjustment
involving 0. The unbroken line is for 0 = 0:0202, or an average of 5 jumps per year. Increasing
the average number of jumps to 10 per year increases implied volatilities (dotted line); and reducing
the average number of jumps to 2 per year lowers the implied volatilities (dashed line). For short
maturities, the increased jump intensity accentuates the upward tilt at the right end of the implied
volatility pattern, making the smirk more of a symmetric smile. But the change is minimal for
the longest maturities. Similar results (not reported) are obtained if the jump intensity is an aÆne
function of volatility:  (t) = 0 + 1 Vt. The impact of more jumps per year increases with the level
of volatility and the magnitude of 0 and 1. Higher values of the intensity parameters increase the
probability of a jump, and a higher volatility level magni es the e ect. We can sum up as follows:
changing the jump intensity impacts the qualitative characteristics of option prices mostly at the
22                                                             Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




shorter maturities, and a time-dependent jump intensity does not alter this result signi cantly.

C. The Term Structure of Implied Volatilities
    The term structure of implied volatilities in Figure 5 are for put prices obtained using the stochastic
volatility model with constant intensity jumps. The full drawn line displays an \average" Black-
Scholes implied volatility dynamics under the \physical" probability measure, as estimated in Table
IV, and the dashed line incorporates instead the combined e ect of jump and volatility risk premia.
The panels on the left are constructed for instantaneous volatility xed at 11.5%, while the panels on
the right portray an average term structure across di erent volatility levels, as indicated below. To
compare our term structures to those implicit in actual option data, we rely on the evidence in Table
II (p. 2015) of Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997) (BCC). Among their ndings is that Black-Scholes
implied volatilities for out-of-the-money puts are decreasing in term to maturity. That is consistent
with the term structure in the upper left panel. Another nding of BCC is that the term structure
for at-the-money puts is at or sometimes slightly upward sloping. This is also in line with our model
implications in the middle left panel. The term structure is at under the \physical" probability
measure, while very small values of the risk premia are enough to generate a moderate upward tilt, as
observed in market prices. Finally, BCC report a downward sloping term structure for in-the-money
puts. This is partially con rmed by the bottom panel of Figure 5. The downward sloping pattern is
strong for maturities up to 2 months. For longer maturities, though, the term structure exhibits a
slight upward tilt. Nevertheless, these results are readily reconciled. The key is to recognize that the
BCC ndings arise from an averaging of term structures across di erent (instantaneous) volatility
levels. By comparison to our daily series, the sample used by BCC is small and characterized by
alternating periods of average and well above average equity-index return volatility. Hence, their
Table II describes the average Black-Scholes implied volatilities over a period with generally high
return volatility. It is obviously not necessary for any individual term structure, even if it attains the
average volatility over the sample, to replicate the shape of the term structure averaged across all
realized volatility levels. Nonetheless, to assess the consequences of the BCC high volatility bias, we
average our implied volatilities across medium- and high-volatility states (11.5%-15.5%). The averages
are plotted in the right column of Figure 5. Averaging accentuates the downward trend in the term
structure, as higher volatility states revert towards the lower long-run mean. The term structure in
the bottom panel of the right column mimics that estimated using the BCC sample. Moreover, very
small values of the volatility and jump risk premia are enough to make the term structure virtually
  at for at-the-money contracts, as observed in market prices. Thus, our model, obtained under the
\physical" measure, replicates most of the stylized facts for option prices. Volatility and jump risk
premia provide additional exibility, and only small risk adjustments are required to make model and
market patterns of implied volatilities qualitatively very similar.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             23
                                       IV. Conclusions
    Much asset and derivative pricing theory is based on di usion models for primary securities. Yet,
there are very few estimates of satisfactory continuous-time models for equity returns. The objective
of this paper is to identify a class of jump-di usions that are successful in approximating the S&P500
return dynamics and therefore should constitute an adequate basis for continuous-time asset pricing
applications. We extend the class of stochastic volatility di usions by allowing for Poisson jumps of
time-varying intensity in returns. We also explore alternative models both within and outside of the
popular aÆne class. Estimation is performed by careful implementation of the EMM that provides
powerful model diagnostics and speci cation tests. Finally, we explore the relationship between our
estimated models and option prices. We contrast those of our parameter estimates which are invariant
to adjustments for volatility and jump risk to those reported in the option literature, and provide a
qualitative comparison of the pricing implications of our estimated system and the stylized evidence
from actual option data.
    We nd that every variant of our stochastic volatility di usions without jumps fails to jointly
accommodate the prominent characteristics of the daily S&P500 returns. Further, every speci cation
that does not incorporate a strong negative correlation between return innovations and di usion
volatility fails as well. In contrast, two versions of our SVJD's that incorporate discrete jumps and
stochastic volatility, with return innovations and di usion volatility strongly and negatively correlated,
accommodate the main features of the daily S&P500 returns. This is true not only of the models
estimated using the entire sample of daily return observations, but also as estimated using subsamples.
The models therefore appear to be structurally stable. Finally, we nd that those parameter estimates
which are invariant to adjustments for volatility and jump risk generally are similar to those reported
in the option literature, and document that \small" risk premia suÆce to produce pronounced patterns
in Black-Scholes option implied volatilities that are qualitatively consistent with the stylized evidence
from derivatives markets. Thus, the main characteristics of the stock price process implied by options
data are independently identi ed as highly signi cant components of the underlying S&P500 returns
dynamics.
    One potential extension of our work is to obtain direct estimates for the underlying volatility pro-
cess. That could be done, as Gallant and Tauchen (1998) suggest, by means of \reprojection" within
the EMM setting. Obtaining such estimates will facilitate forecasting of future return distributions,
with obvious implications for portfolio choice and derivatives pricing. Further, providing a reasonable
  t to the long memory characteristics of the volatility process { excluded by us from our di usion
speci cations { appears to be another interesting extension. Finally, there is more experimentation
with alternative jump speci cations to be done, in light of the extreme and infrequent outliers that
have been observed and not yet fully rationalized. On this dimension, the recent work of Eraker,
Johannes and Polson (1999) and Chernov et al. (1999) provides an interesting starting point.
24                                                            Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




         Appendix A: Numerical Implementation of EMM
    In this Appendix we provide more details on the algorithm used to simulate returns from the
SVJD model.
    First, log-returns are used to t the auxiliary model, hence It^o's Lemma is applied to the
continuous-time model to obtain a characterization for the log-return process. Expressing returns
in decimal form, this yields:
                                                         q
                    d ln(S ) = ( (t)    0:5 Vt)dt +    Vt dW1;t + ln(1 + (t))dqt             (11)
where ln(1 + (t)) ; N( ln(1 + ) 0:5 Æ2; Æ2 ) and the (log-)variance process V obeys either (2) or
(3). Log-returns in percentage form satisfy an expression similar to (11), obtained by multiplying
(11) by a factor of 100.
     The Euler scheme - see, e.g., Kloeden and Platen (1992) - is then applied to generate a sample
frt ( ); xt( )gTt=1(N ) from the continuous-time model for log-returns. Simulation from the stochastic
volatility model is not problematic, hence we refer to Andersen and Lund (1997) for more details and
focus exclusively on the jump component.
     Poisson jumps are rst approximated with a Binomial distribution, i.e., we replace dqt with a
random variable Y such that ProbfY = 1g = (t) dt and ProbfY = 0g = (1 (t) dt). For this
purpose, we generate a random variable U Uniform(0,1) and we smooth the discontinuity of Y over
an interval centered around 1 (t):
                              8
                              <0
                              >
                              >        if 0  U < 1 (t) dt h=2,
                          Y = > g (X ) if 1 (t) dt h=2  U < 1 (t) dt + h=2,
                              >
                              :1       if 1 (t) dt + h=2  U  1,
where X = U (1 (t) dt h=2) and g(X ) = 2=h3X 3 + 3=h2X 2 for 0  X  h. Notice that g is
a C 1 function, and that it becomes steeper as the interval length h goes to zero. In our application
we ne-tune h by choosing the smallest possible size for the interpolation interval that eliminates the
numerical problems in the EMM criterion function. This yields an accurate approximation to the
jumps in the simulated return sequence.
     Convergence conditions for the Euler approximations in a jump-di usion setting are discussed
in, e.g., Kloeden and Platen (1989) and Protter and Talay (1997). These conditions are not ex-
plicitly veri ed for our speci c approximation algorithm. As is often the case with these high-level
assumptions, it is very hard to do. Nevertheless, it does not appear to constitute a problem for our
application as extensive simulations verify that the moments of the simulated process converge.
     As a nal remark, at any iteration of the minimization each jump (t) is generated, in the event
dqt = 1, using the identical seed. Also, we obtain variance reduction through the use of antithetic
variates in the simulation; see, e.g., Geweke (1996) for a discussion of this technique.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             25
    Appendix B: Option prices in the presence of stochastic
                    volatility and jumps
    Given the risk-adjusted model (9)-(10) a closed-form formula is available for computing option
prices. As shown in, e.g., Bates (2000), it is given by
                                  f (St ; Vt ;  ; K ) = e    d
                                                                   St P1 + e          r
                                                                                           KP2 ;
where, for j = 1; 2 :
                                                                    
                             1+1         Z1    imag    Fj (i )e ix
                        Pj    =
                             2  0                              d;
              Fj (; V;  )   =
                             exp fAj ( ; ) + Bj ( ; )V + 0  Cj ()g ;
                Aj ( ; )   (r d)   2 (   j j )
                              =
                                                                         !
                             2 ln 1 + 1 (                   1   e   
                                                            j)
                                                                                            j
                                                                           ;
                              2           2            j
                                                                   j

                Bj ( ; ) = 2
                                 1=2 (2 + (3 2 j )) + 1 Cj () ;
                                                + 1+e  j         j1   e
                                                                             j
                                                                             j
                                                                                                  
                   Cj ()     = (1 +  )(2 j) (1 +  )e1=2Æ ( +(3 2 j)) 1   ;
                                                                         2        2

                                q
                         j    = (   j )2 22(1=2 (2 + (3 2 j )) + 1 Cj ()) ;
                         j    = +  +   (j 2) ; x = ln(K=St) ;
and r, d are respectively the instantaneous risk-free interest rate and the dividend yield for the
underlying stock.
26                                                         Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




                                     REFERENCES
 At-Sahalia, Yacine, 1996, Nonparametric Pricing of Interest Rate Derivative Securities, Economet-
      rica 64, 527-560.
 Akgiray, Vedat, and Geo rey Booth, 1986, Stock Price Processes with Discontinuous Time Paths:
      An Empirical Examination, The Financial Review 21, 163-184.
 Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys, 2001, Modeling and
      Forecasting Realized Volatility, Working Paper, Northwestern University.
 Andersen, Torben G., Hyung-Jin Chung, and Bent E. Srensen, 1999, EÆcient Method of Moments
      Estimation of a Stochastic Volatility Model: A Monte Carlo Study, Journal of Econometrics
      91, 61-87.
 Andersen, Torben G., and Jesper Lund, 1996, Stochastic Volatility and Mean Drift in The Short
      Term Interest Rate Di usion: Sources of Steepness, Level and Curvature in The Yield Curve,
      Working Paper #214, Northwestern University.
 Andersen, Torben G., and Jesper Lund, 1997, Estimating Continuous-Time Stochastic Volatility
      Models of the Short Term Interest Rate, Journal of Econometrics 77, 343-377.
 Backus, David K., and Allan W. Gregory, 1993, Theoretical Relations between Risk Premiums and
      Conditional Variances, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 11, 177-185.
 Backus David K., Silverio Foresi, Kai Li, and Liuren Wu, 1997, Accounting for Biases in Black-
      Scholes, Working Paper, New York University.
 Bakshi, Gurdip, Charles Cao, and Zhiwu Chen, 1997, Empirical Performance of alternative Option
      Pricing Models, Journal of Finance 52, 2003-2049.
 Bakshi, Gurdip, Charles Cao, and Zhiwu Chen, 2000, Pricing and Hedging Long-Term Options,
      Journal of Econometrics 94, 277-318.
 Bakshi, Gurdip, and Nikunj Kapadia, 2001, Delta-Hedged Gains and the Negative Market Volatiilty
      Risk Premium, Working Paper, University of Maryland.
 Bakshi, Gurdip, and Dilip Madan, 2000, Spanning and Derivative-Security Valuation, Journal of
      Financial Economics 55, 205-238.
 Ball, Cli ord A., and Walter N. Torous, 1985, On Jumps in Common Stock Prices and Their Impact
      on Call Option Pricing Journal of Finance 40, 155-173.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                      27
 Bandi, Federico M., and Thong Nguyen, 2000, On the Functional Estimation of Jump-di usion
    Processes, Working Paper, University of Chicago and Yale University.
 Bandi, Federico M., and Peter C. B. Phillips, 1998, Econometric Estimation of Di usion Models,
    Working paper, Cowles Foundation, Yale University.
 Bates, David S., 1996a, Jumps and Stochastic Volatility: Exchange Rate Processes Implicit in
     Deutsche Mark Options, The Review of Financial Studies 9, 69-107.
 Bates, David S., 1996b, Testing Option Pricing Models, in G. S. Maddala and C. R. Rao, eds.:
     Handbook of Statistics, vol. 14, Statistical Methods in Finance (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
 Bates, David S., 2000, Post-'87 Crash Fears in S&P 500 Futures Options, Journal of Econometrics
     94, 181-238.
 Benzoni, Luca, 1998, Pricing Options under Stochastic Volatility: an Econometric Analysis, Working
     Paper, University of Minnesota.
 Brenner, Menachem, and Young H. Eom, 1997, No-Arbitrage Option Pricing: New Evidence on the
     Validity of the Martingale Property, Working Paper, New York University.
 Carrasco, Marine, Mikhail Chernov, Eric Ghysels, and Jean-Pierre Florens, 2001, Estimating Di u-
     sions With a Continuum of Moment Conditions, Working Paper, University of North Carolina.
 Chacko, George, and Luis M. Viceira, 1999, Spectral GMM Estimation of Continuous-Time Pro-
     cesses, Working Paper, Harvard University.
 Chernov, Mikhail, and Eric Ghysels, 2000, A Study towards a Uni ed Approach to the Joint Es-
     timation of Objective and Risk Neutral Measures for the Purpose of Options Valuation, The
     Journal of Financial Economics 56, 407-458.
 Chernov, Mikhail, A. Ronald Gallant, Eric Ghysels, and George Tauchen, 1999, A New Class of
     Stochastic Volatility Models with Jumps: Theory and Estimation, Working Paper, Penn State
     University, University of North Carolina, Duke University.
 Chernov, Mikhail, A. Ronald Gallant, Eric Ghysels, and George Tauchen, 2000, Alternative Models
     for Stock Price Dynamics, Working Paper, Columbia University, University of North Carolina,
     Duke University.
 Conley, Timothy G., Lars P. Hansen, Erzo G. J. Luttmer, and Jose A. Scheinkman, 1997, Short-Term
     Interest Rates as Subordinated Di usions, The Review of Financial Studies 10, 525-577.
28                                                         Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




 Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, A Theory of the Term Structure
      of Interest Rates, Econometrica 53, 385-407.
 Das, Sanjiv R., 1999, The Surprise Element: Interest Rates as Jump-Di usions, Working Paper,
      Harvard Business School.
 Das, Sanjiv R., and Silverio Foresi, 1996, Exact Solutions for Bond and Option Prices with System-
      atic Jump Risk, Review of Derivatives Research 1, 7-24.
 Das, Sanjiv R., and Rangarajan K. Sundaram, 1999, Of Smiles and Smirks: A Term-Structure
      Perspective, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 34, 211-239.
 Das, Sanjiv R., and Raman Uppal, 1998, International Portfolio Choice with Systemic Risk, Working
      Paper, Harvard Business School and MIT.
 DuÆe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1993, Simulated Moments Estimation of Markov Models
      of Asset Prices, Econometrica 61, 929-952.
 DuÆe, Darrell, Jun Pan, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2000, Transform Analysis and Asset Pricing for
      AÆne Jump Di usions, Econometrica 68, 1343-1376.
 Dumas, Bernard, Fleming, Je , and Robert E. Whaley, 1998, Implied Volatility Functions: Empirical
      Tests, Journal of Finance 53, 2059-2106.
 Elerian, Ola, Siddhartha Chib, and Neil Shephard, 2001, Likelihood Inference for Discretely Ob-
      served Non-linear Di usions, forthcoming Econometrica.
 Eraker, Bjrn, 2000, Do Stock Prices and Volatility Jump? Reconciling Evidence from Spot and
      Option Prices, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
 Eraker, Bjrn, 2001, MCMC Analysis of Di usion Models with Application to Finance, Journal of
      Business and Economic Statistics, 19, 177-191.
 Eraker, Bjrn, Michael S. Johannes, and Nicholas G. Polson, 1999, The Impact of Jumps on Volatility
      and Returns, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
 Gallant, A. Ronald, David A. Hsieh, and George Tauchen, 1997, Estimation of Stochastic Volatility
      Models with Diagnostics, Journal of Econometrics 81, 159-192.
 Gallant, A. Ronald, Chien-Te Hsu, and George Tauchen, 1999, Using Daily Range Data to Calibrate
      Volatility Di usions and Extract the Forward Integrated Variance, The Review of Economics
      and Statistics, 81, 617-631.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                          29
 Gallant, A. Ronald, and Jonathan R. Long, 1997, Estimating Stochastic Di erential Equations
     EÆciently by Minimum Chi-Square, Biometrika 84, 125-142.
 Gallant, A. Ronald, and Douglas W. Nychka, 1987, Semi-Nonparametric Maximum Likelihood Es-
     timation, Econometrica 55, 363-390.
 Gallant, A. Ronald, Peter E. Rossi, and George Tauchen, 1992, Stock Prices and Volumes, The
     Review of Financial Studies 5, 199-242.
 Gallant, A. Ronald, and George Tauchen, 1996, Which Moments to Match?, Econometric Theory
     12, 657-681.
 Gallant, A. Ronald, and George Tauchen, 1997, Estimation of Continuous-Time Models for Stock
     Returns and Interest Rates, Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 135-168.
 Gallant, A. Ronald, and George Tauchen, 1998, Reprojecting Partially Observed Systems With
     Application to Interest Rate Di usions, Journal of the American Statistical Association 93,
     10-24.
 Geweke, John, 1996, Monte Carlo Simulation and Numerical Integration, in Amman, Hans M., David
     A. Kendrick and John Rust, eds.: Handbooks in Economics, vol. 13, Handbook of Computational
     Economics, vol. 1, (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
 Ghysels, Eric, Andrew C. Harvey, and Eric Renault, 1998, Stochastic Volatility, in G. S. Maddala and
     C. R. Rao, eds.: Handbook of Statistics, vol. 14, Statistical Methods in Finance (North-Holland,
     Amsterdam).
 Glosten, Lawrence R., Ravi Jagannathan, and David Runkle, 1993, On the Relation Between the
     Expected Value and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return on Stocks, Journal of Finance
     48, 1779-1801.
 Hansen, Lars P. and Jose A. Scheinkman, 1995, Back to the Future: Generating Moment Implication
     for Continuous-Time Markov Processes, Econometrica 63, 767-804.
 Heston, Steven L., 1993, A Closed Form Solution for Options with Stochastic Volatility with Appli-
     cations to Bond and Currency Options, The Review of Financial Studies 6, 327-343.
 Ho, Mun S., William R. M. Perraudin, and Bent E. Srensen, 1996, A Continuous-Time Arbi-
     trage Pricing Model With Stochastic Volatility and Jumps, Journal of Business and Economic
     Statistics 14, 31-43.
 Jacquier, Eric, Nicholas G. Polson, and Peter E. Rossi, 1994, Bayesian Analysis of Stochastic Volatil-
     ity Models, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 12, 371-389.
30                                                       Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




Jarrow, Robert, and Eric Rosenfeld, 1984, Jump Risks and the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing
     Model, Journal of Business 57, 337-351.
Jarrow, Robert, and Andrew Rudd, 1982, Approximate Option Valuation for Arbitrary Stochastic
     Processes, Journal of Financial Economics 10, 347-369.
Jiang, George J., and John L. Knight, 1997, A Nonparametric Approach to the Estimation of
     Di usion Processes, with an Application to a Short-Term Interest Rate Model, Econometric
     Theory 13, 615-645.
Jiang, George J., and John L. Knight, 1999, EÆcient Estimation of the Continuous Time Stochastic
     Volatility Model Via the Empirical Characteristic Function, Working Paper, York University.
Jiang, George J., and Pieter J. van der Sluis, 1999, Index Option Pricing Models with Stochastic
     Volatility and Stochastic Interest Rates, European Finance Review 3, 273-310.
Johannes, Michael, 1999, A Non-Parametric Approach to Jumps in Interest Rates, Working Paper,
     Columbia University.
Johannes, Michael, Rohit Kumar, and Nicholas G. Polson, 1999, State Dependent Jump Models:
     How do US Equity Indices Jump?, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Jones, Christopher S., 1998, Bayesian Estimation of Continuous-Time Finance Models, Working
     Paper, Rochester University.
Jones, Christopher S., 1999, The Dynamics of Stochastic Volatility: Evidence from Underlying and
     Option Markets, Working Paper, Rochester University.
Jorion, Philippe, 1988, On Jump Processes in the Foreign Exchange and Stock Markets, The Review
     of Financial Studies 1, 427-445.
Kim, Sangjoon, Neil Shephard, and Siddhartha Chib, 1998, Stochastic Volatility: Likelihood Infer-
     ence and Comparison with ARCH Models, Review of Economic Studies 65, 361-393.
Kloeden, Peter E., and Eckhard Platen, 1989, A Survey of Numerical Methods for Stochastic Dif-
     ferential Equations, Stochastic Hydrology and Hydraulics 3, 155-178.
Kloeden, Peter E., and Eckhard Platen, 1992, Numerical Solutions of Stochastic Di erential Equa-
     tions, Springer-Verlag.
Liu, Jun, 1997, Generalized Method of Moments Estimation of AÆne Di usion Processes, Working
     Paper, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                       31
 Liu, Ming, and Harold H. Zhang, 1997, Speci cation Tests in the EÆcient Method of Moments
      Framework with Application to the Stochastic Volatility models, Working Paper, The Chinese
      University of Hong Kong and Carnegie Mellon University.
 Lo, Andrew W., 1988, Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Generalized It^o Processes With Discretely
      Sampled Data, Econometric Theory 4, 231-247.
 Lo, Andrew W., and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1990, An Econometric Analysis of Nonsynchronous Trad-
      ing, Journal of Econometrics 45, 181-212.
 Longsta , Francis A., 1995, Option Pricing and the Martingale Restriction, Review of Financial
      Studies 8, 1091-1124.
 Melino Angelo, and Stuart M. Turnbull, 1990, Pricing Foreign Currency Options with Stochastic
      Volatility, Journal of Econometrics 45, 239-265.
 Merton, Robert C., 1976, Option Pricing when Underlying Stock Returns Are Discontinuous, Journal
      of Financial Economics 3, 125-144.
 Naik, Vasant, 1993, Option Valuation and Hedging Strategies with Jumps in the Volatility of Asset
      Returns, Journal of Finance 48, 1969-1984.
 Naik, Vasant, and Moon H. Lee, 1990, General Equilibrium Pricing of Options on the Market
      Portfolio with Discontinuous Returns, The Review of Financial Studies 3, 493-521.
 Nelson, Daniel B., 1991, Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns: a New Approach, Econo-
      metrica 59, 347-370.
 Pan, Jun, 1999, The Jump-Risk in Options: Evidence from an Integrated Time-Series Study, forth-
      coming Journal of Financial Economics.
 Pastorello, Sergio, Eric Renault, and Nizar Touzi, 2000, Statistical Inference for Random Variance
      Option Pricing, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 18, 358-367.
 Pedersen, Asger, 1995, A New Approach to Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Stochastic Di er-
      ential Equations Based on Discrete Observations, Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 22, 55-71.
 Poteshman, Allen M., 1998, Estimating a General Stochastic Variance Model from Option Prices,
      Working Paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
 Press, S. James, 1967, A Compound Events Model for Security Prices, Journal of Business 40,
      317-335.
32                                                        Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




 Protter, Philip, and Denis Talay, 1997, The Euler Scheme for Levy Driven Stochastic Di erential
     Equations, Annals of Probability 25, 393-423.
 Rubinstein, Mark, 1994, Implied Binomial Trees, Journal of Finance 49, 771-818.
 Singleton, Kenneth J., 2001, Estimation of AÆne Asset Pricing Models Using the Empirical Char-
     acteristic Function, Journal of Econometrics 102, 111-141.
 Stanton Richard H., 1997, A Nonparametric Model of Term Structure Dynamics and the Market
     Price of Interest Rate Risk, Journal of Finance 52, 1973-2002.
 van der Sluis, Pieter J., 1997, Computationally Attractive Stability Tests for the EÆcient Method
     of Moments, Working Paper, University of Amsterdam.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                             33
                                               Notes
   1 See,  e.g., Das and Foresi (1996) and Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997). Also, on the importance of
jumps for option pricing and hedging see, among others, Ball and Torous (1985), Das and Sundaram
(1999), Jorion (1988), Naik and Lee (1990) and Naik (1993).
    2 This work builds on the earlier contributions on discrete-time MCMC estimation by Jacquier,
Polson and Rossi (1994) and Kim, Shephard and Chib (1998).
    3 See also the analysis in Jarrow and Rudd (1982), Longsta (1995), Brenner and Eom (1997) and
Backus et al. (1997) based on a semi-nonparametric approximation of the return density.
    4 Additional work on continuous- and discrete-time estimation of stochastic volatility models for
asset returns based on method of moments procedures includes, among others, Andersen and Lund
(1996, 1997), Gallant and Tauchen (1997, 1998), Gallant, Hsu and Tauchen (1999), Ho, Perraudin
and Srensen (1996), Jiang and van der Sluis (1999), Liu and Zhang (1997), Pastorello, Renault and
Touzi (2000), and van der Sluis (1997).
    5 Gallant and Long (1997) show that certain non-Markovian score generators are valid auxiliary
models, so that lower-order GARCH and EGARCH models may be used in lieu of less parsimonious
pure ARCH representations. This is essential for good nite-sample performance, as is evident from
the simulation evidence in Andersen, Chung and Srensen (1999).
    6 Since the S&P500 index is not adjusted for dividends, it is more correct to state that we model
the observed series of log-price di erences. We adopt the term \return process" for ease of exposition.
    7 Gallant, Rossi and Tauchen (1992) also use dummy variables to capture day-of-the-week, week,
month, and year e ects in the S&P500 returns. Our approach falls somewhere between using their
extensive pre ltering procedure and using the raw returns.
    8 The mixture in the conditional density f (r jx ;  ) is used to avoid instability during EMM
                                                 K t t
estimation. For a given simulated trajectory, PK (z; x) might equal zero, which would cause numerical
problems when evaluating the score function (the practical importance of this point was noted by
Qiang Dai).
    9 We also estimated the system using two antithetic simulated samples of 150,000  10 + 10,000
returns, nding nearly identical results. Furthermore, when the data generating process contains a
jump component, the simulation step involves an additional layer of approximation as our procedure
for generating jumps render the EMM criterion function discontinuous in the parameter vector, and
this creates problems for the numerical minimization of the EMM objective function. To avoid this
problem, jumps are smoothed using a close continuously di erentiable approximation, as described
in Appendix A.
   10 To facilitate a comparison with the empirical option pricing literature, it may be useful to convert
parameter estimates for the square-root model into decimal form on a yearly basis. Assuming 252
business days per year, they become:  = 0:0756, = 0:0438, = 3:2508,  = 0:1850,  = 0:5878.
   11 t-ratios and con dence intervals are constructed in the usual way from the (Wald) estimate of
34                                                            Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




asymptotic standard errors. Gallant and Tauchen (1997) warn that this approach may be somewhat
misleading if the EMM criterion function is highly nonlinear in the parameters as may occur near
the boundary of the parameter space. To address this concern we also compute likelihood-ratio style
con dence intervals via an inversion of the criterion function as illustrated in Gallant and Tauchen
(1997). The constructed intervals are in general good approximations of those computed from the
Wald standard errors. The only noteworthy exception concerns the 0 coeÆcient in the case where
the jump intensity depends on the volatility level. This case is discussed below.
   12 Alternatively, there is a multicollinearity type problem induced through a high degree of correla-
tion between the estimates of 0 and 1 .
   13 There is, in fact, no compelling theoretical reason to believe that c must be positive over the
entire support of the volatility process, as discussed by, e.g., Backus and Gregory (1993) and Glosten,
Jagannathan and Runkle (1993). The violation of no-arbitrage conditions is limited to the case
where stocks earn (risk-free) excess returns while the di usion volatility is (near) zero. Volatility
levels approaching zero are actually not observed over our sample.
   14 See also, among others, Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997, 2000), Bates (1996a,b, 2000), Benzoni
(1998), Chernov and Ghysels (2000), Das and Sundaram (1999), DuÆe, Pan and Singleton (2000),
Heston (1993), Jiang and van der Sluis (1999), Jones (1999), Poteshman (1998) and Pan (1999) for
applications based on a similar model.
   15 With constant jump intensity, the variance of the jump component, evaluated under the risk-
neutral measure, is given by VJ ( )  V art (k(t) dq(t))=dt = (1 +  )2(eÆ 1)0 + ( )20. In our
                                                                            2


application, we adjust the return volatility by VJ ( = k) VJ ( = 0), where k = 1% and k = 3%
respectively.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                                  35
                                   Tables and Figures

                                          Table I
                                  S&P500 daily rate of return
Summary statistics. Data on daily rates of return of the S&P500 index, 01/02/1953-12/31/1996
(N=11,076 observations) and 01/03/1980-12/31/1996 (N=4,298 observations). All gures expressed
on a daily basis in percentage form.
                                               1953-96               1980-96
                                  Mean         0.0301                0.0453
                                Std. Dev.      0.8324                0.9619
                                Skewness       -2.0353               -3.3390
                                 Kurtosis      60.6019               83.4004

Autocorrelation of Returns:
                       1st          2nd         3rd                  4th           5th             6th
        1953-96      0.1240       -0.0320      -0.0084              -0.0056       0.0222          -0.0131
        1980-96      0.0535       -0.0322      -0.0324              -0.0424       0.0418          0.0089

Augmented Dickey Fuller test for the presence of unit roots. The test is based on the regression:
                                                         12
                                                         X
                              Xt =  + Æt +   Xt 1 +           j   Xt j + "t:
                                                         j =1


                                            S&P500 daily prices                S&P500 daily returns
         Augmented D. F.       53-96               2.85                                  -29.65
                               80-96               -0.40                                 -18.97
             5% critical value                     -3.41                                  -3.41
             1% critical value                     -3.96                                  -3.96
36                                                       Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




                                          Table II
                                     SNP model estimates
Data on daily rates of return of the S&P500 index, 01/02/1953-12/31/1996, ltered using an MA(1)
model (N=11,076 observations). Parameter estimates are expressed in percentage form on a daily
basis, and refer to the following model:
                                                                          !
               fK (rt jxt ;  ) =  + (1  )  R
                                                     [PK (zt ; xt )]2       (zt )
                                                                            p ;  = 0:01;
                                                 R [PK (zt ; xt )] (u)du
                                                                  2           ht
where (:) is the standard normal density,
           zt   = rtpht ;
                         t
            t = 0 + c ht ;
                        X p                                                  q
         ln ht = ! + i ln ht i + (1 + 1L + ::: + q Lq ) [ 1zt + 2 (b(zt ) 2=) ] ;
                        i=1
          b(z ) = jz j for jz j  =20
                                     K; b(z ) =1(=2 cos(Kz ))=K for jz j < =2K ; K = 100 ;
                  X
                  K z           z X
                                  K    X
                                       K
                                       x
     PK (z; x) =       ai (x)z i = @ aij xj A z i ;    a00 = 1 :
                  i=0         i=0   jj j=0


                Parameter EGARCH leading term EGARCH-M leading term
                          Estimate (std. error) Estimate (std. error)
                    0         0.0331        (0.0142)   0.0546        (0.0394)
                    c                                   0.0315        (0.0331)
                    !          4.3769        (1.1249)   3.5526        (1.4211)
                              -0.4391        (0.0635)   -0.4367       (0.0624)
                         1     0.9893        (0.0022)   0.9880        (0.0028)
                        1    -0.1581        (0.0195)   -0.1407       (0.0304)
                        2     0.2973        (0.0280)   0.3003        (0.0269)
                    a10       -0.0102        (0.0109)   -0.0489       (0.0495)
                    a20       -0.2499        (0.0291)   -0.2480       (0.0314)
                    a30       -0.0208        (0.0069)   -0.0021       (0.0242)
                    a40        0.1234        (0.0177)   0.1213        (0.0195)
                    a50       -0.0065        (0.0077)   -0.0177       (0.0161)
                    a60       -0.0516        (0.0089)   -0.0504       (0.0100)
                    a70        0.0010        (0.0065)   0.0087        (0.0100)
                    a80        0.0508        (0.0098)   0.0509        (0.0097)
                                              Table III
 EMM estimates of the Black and Scholes and the continuous-time, stochastic volatility models (1) and (2)
                                           and (1) and (3)
Estimates are for to the sample period 01/02/1953-12/31/1996. Standard errors are reported in brackets. Parameter estimates
are expressed in percentage form on a daily basis, and refer to the following model:
                                            dSt
                       BS (J ) :                 = ( 0 ) dt +  dWt + (t) dqt ;
                                             St
                                            dSt                       p
                      SVi (J ) :                 =  (  (t) ) dt + V t dW1;t + (t) dqt ;   i = 1; 2 ;
                                             St
                          SV1 :          d ln Vt = (       ln Vt )dt + p dW2;t ;
                          SV2 :             dVt = (        Vt ) dt +  V t dW2;t ;
                                                                                                                                      Andersen, Benzoni and Lund




                                   ln(1 + (t)) ; N( ln(1 + ) 0:5 Æ2; Æ2 ) ;  = 0 ;
                             corr(dW1;t; dW2;t) =  ; Prob(dqt = 1) = (t) dt ; (t) = 0 + 1 Vt :
 Parameter      BS         BSJ                         6
                                    SV1 ,  = 0 SV1 ,  = 0                6
                                                                  SV1 J ,  = 0                         6
                                                                                     SV2 ,  = 0 SV2 ,  = 0                6
                                                                                                                   SV2 J ,  = 0

               0.0398     0.0350      0.0396      0.0314       0.0304      0.0304      0.0394      0.0300       0.0304      0.0304
     
              (0.0054)   (0.0061)    (0.0055)    (0.0057)     (0.0063)    (0.0076)    (0.0055)    (0.0058)     (0.0061)    (0.0099)
               0.5933     0.6243
     
              (0.0255)   (0.0294)
                                      -0.0061     -0.0114      -0.0120    -0.0120    0.0025         0.0069       0.0064    0.0064
                                     (0.0050)    (0.0022)     (0.0021)   (0.0021)   (0.0019)      (0.0013)     (0.0013)   (0.0017)
                                      0.0062      0.0136        0.0145     0.0145    0.0063         0.0129       0.0120    0.0120
                                     (0.0048)    (0.0022)     (0.0019)   (0.0019)   (0.0049)      (0.0024)     (0.0023)   (0.0032)
                                      0.0374      0.1148        0.1153     0.1153    0.0229         0.0734       0.0711    0.0711
     
                                     (0.0147)    (0.0089)     (0.0094)   (0.0105)   (0.0087)      (0.0072)     (0.0079)   (0.0127)
                                                  -0.5755      -0.6127    -0.6125                  -0.5877      -0.6220    -0.6219
     
                                                 (0.0432)     (0.0623)   (0.0632)                 (0.0447)     (0.0542)   (0.0608)
                          0.0104                               0.0151      0.0150                                0.0134    0.0134
     Æ
                         (0.0005)                             (0.0008)   (0.0008)                              (0.0007)   (0.0010)
                          0.0501                               0.0137     0.0137                                0.0202     0.0202
    0
                         (0.0045)                             (0.0013)   (0.0264)                              (0.0011)   (0.0246)
                                                                         0.00010                                          0.00002
    1
                                                                         (0.0197)                                         (0.0650)
 2 [d.f. ]127.35 [12] 89.60 [10] 121.11 [10]     30.92 [9]    13.34 [7] 13.31 [6] 121.15 [10]     31.94 [9]    14.90 [7] 14.89 [6]
                                                                                                                                      37




 (P-Value) (< 10 5 ) (< 10 5 ) (< 10 5 )         (0.00031)    (0.06429) (0.03840) (< 10 5 )       (0.00020)    (0.03736) (0.02109)
                                                                                      Table IV
                                        EMM estimates of the Black and Scholes and the continuous-time, stochastic volatility models (1) and (2)
                                                         and (1) and (3), with the volatility-in-mean e ect in the drift term
                                       Estimates are for the sample period 01/02/1953-12/31/1996. Standard errors are reported in brackets. Parameter estimates
Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




                                       are expressed in percentage form on a daily basis, and refer to the following model:
                                                                                dSt
                                                          BS (J ) :                  = ( 0 ) dt +  dWt + (t) dqt ;
                                                                                 St
                                                                                dSt                              p
                                                          SVi(J ) :                  = ( + c Vt (t) ) dt + V t dW1;t + (t) dqt ;   i = 1; 2 ;
                                                                                 St
                                                             SV1 :           d ln Vt = (       ln Vt )dt + p dW2;t ;
                                                             SV :
                                                                2               dVt = (        Vt ) dt +  V t dW2;t ;
                                                                       ln(1 + (t)) ; N( ln(1 + ) 0:5 Æ2; Æ2 ) ;  = 0 ;
                                                                corr(dW1;t ; dW2;t) =  ; Prob(dqt = 1) = (t) dt ; (t) = 0 + 1 Vt :
                                        Parameter      BS         BSJ      SV1 ,  = 0 SV1 ,  = 0
                                                                                               6          SV1 J ,  = 0
                                                                                                                   6         SV2 ,  = 0 SV2 ,  = 0
                                                                                                                                                6          SV2 J ,  = 0
                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                     0.0366      0.0347       0.0900      0.0252       0.0203      0.0203       0.0913     0.0202       0.0148      0.0147
                                            
                                                    (0.0054)    (0.0059)    (0.0182)     (0.0117)     (0.0129)    (0.0135)    (0.0172)    (0.0126)     (0.0179)    (0.0375)
                                                                             -0.1446      0.0149       0.0258      0.0258      -0.1484     0.0256       0.0402      0.0403
                                            c
                                                                            (0.0551)     (0.0255)     (0.0267)    (0.0280)    (0.0523)    (0.0282)     (0.0389)    (0.0577)
                                                     0.5999      0.6069
                                            
                                                    (0.0238)    (0.0260)
                                                                             -0.0076      -0.0136       -0.0125   -0.0125    0.0027         0.0081        0.0074    0.0074
                                                                            (0.0037)     (0.0030)      (0.0026) (0.0026)    (0.0012)      (0.0016)      (0.0021) (0.0027)
                                                                             0.0074        0.0160        0.0150    0.0150    0.0068         0.0156        0.0147    0.0147
                                                                            (0.0034)     (0.0030)      (0.0026) (0.0028)    (0.0031)      (0.0032)      (0.0043) (0.0068)
                                                                             0.0524        0.1206        0.1153    0.1153    0.0308         0.0782        0.0732    0.0732
                                            
                                                                            (0.0115)     (0.0093)      (0.0111) (0.0109)    (0.0065)      (0.0074)      (0.0075) (0.0077)
                                                                                          -0.5778       -0.6036   -0.6035                  -0.5973       -0.6196   -0.6196
                                            
                                                                                         (0.0433)      (0.0473) (0.0495)                  (0.0448)      (0.0665) (0.0855)
                                                                 0.0101                                 0.0150    0.0150                                 0.0122    0.0122
                                            Æ
                                                                (0.0004)                               (0.0010) (0.0010)                                (0.0007) (0.0009)
                                                                 0.0503                                 0.0137    0.0137                                 0.0202    0.0202
                                           0
                                                                (0.0017)                               (0.0015) (0.0377)                                (0.0017) (0.0285)
                                                                                                                 0.00010                                          0.00007
                                            1
38                                                                                                               (0.0288)                                         (0.0488)
                                         2 [d.f. ] 132.01 [13] 88.10 [11] 116.98 [10]    31.53 [9]    13.13 [7] 13.10 [6] 116.21 [10]     30.74 [9]    14.09 [7] 14.07 [6]
                                        (P-Value) (< 10 5 ) (< 10 5 ) (< 10 5 )          (0.00024)    (0.06905) (0.04142) (< 10 5 )       (0.00033)    (0.04957) (0.02882)
                                                                 Table V
                                               t-ratios of the average score components
Columns correspond to the following models: Black and Scholes with and without jumps (BS and BSJ), stochastic volatility
(SV1,  = 0), asymmetric stochastic volatility (SV1,  6= 0), stochastic volatility with jumps, model (1) and (2), constant and
aÆne jump intensity with (SV1 J -m) and without volatility-in-mean e ect (SV1J ), stochastic volatility with jumps, model (1)
and (3), constant and aÆne jump intensity with (SV2J -m) and without volatility-in-mean e ect (SV2J ). Estimates are for the
sample period 01/02/1953-12/31/1996. The score vector components are relative to the parameters of the model:
                                                                        !
          fK (rt jxt ;  ) =  + (1  )  R
                                                   [ PK (zt ; xt )]2      (zt )
                                                                          p ;  = 0:01; (:) standard normal density ;
                                                                2           ht
                                               R [PK (zt ; xt )] (u)du
                                      ;
                             rtp t
                       zt =
                                 ht
                                                                                                                                                  Andersen, Benzoni and Lund




                       t = 0 + c ht ;
                                  X p                                                   q
                   ln ht = ! + i ln ht i + (1 + 1 L + ::: + q Lq ) [ 1zt + 2 (b(zt ) 2=) ] ;
                                  i=1
                    b(z ) = jz j for jz j  =20
                                               K; b(z ) =1(=2 cos(Kz ))=K for jz j < =2K ; K = 100 ;
                             K
                             X z            K
                                            X Xz K    x
                                        i      @
             PK (z; x) =         ai (x)z =            aij xj A z i ;    a00 = 1 :
                            i=0             i=0    jj j=0

 Parameter     BS        BSJ       SV1 ,  = 0 SV1 ,  = 0  6        SV1 J               SV2 J              SV1 J -m             SV2 J -m
    0       -2.7484* -0.3528       -3.1627*       -1.0224      -0.7608   -0.7724   -0.3227   -0.3264   -0.2952    -0.2905   -0.7160   -0.7986
    c                                                                                                   -0.2502    -0.2744   -0.5249   -0.5527
    !        -0.7762     1.9744     -0.2929        -0.8041      -0.7903   -0.8002   -0.6044   -0.6224   -0.3088    -0.3122   -0.7465   -0.8610
             -1.9453    -4.0984*    -2.0370*        1.0512       0.7529    0.7826    0.4929    0.5007    0.3364     0.3343    0.6791    0.7382
      1       0.1944    -2.5716*    -0.1261         0.6904       0.6225    0.6442    0.4348    0.4452    0.2155     0.2177    0.5809    0.6835
    1        6.6568*    6.9004*     6.8255*        1.0125       1.1349    1.2245    1.2257    1.2847    2.0515*    1.9055    1.8229    2.1938*
    2       -0.6021    -3.4531*    -0.4971         0.7279       0.2409    0.2482   -0.0668   -0.0690   -0.2390    -0.2413   -0.1107   -0.1178
    a10       3.7847*    2.9218*     3.7448*       -0.2681      -0.5153   -0.6773   -0.4057   -0.6440    0.7962     0.6245    0.7021    0.9387
    a20      -6.1682*   -1.2102     -5.5726*       -3.5362*     -1.3363   -1.0946   -0.4355   -0.4341   -0.8404    -0.6869   -0.8582   -0.9120
    a30       2.2223*    1.3558      2.1846*        1.2617       1.0110    0.9738    1.3088    1.3506    1.1455     0.8950    1.0255    1.2466
    a40      -1.3601    -1.1204     -1.7794        -2.0056*     -0.6009   -0.5846   -0.0469   -0.0487   -0.6650    -0.6456   -0.5530   -0.5549
    a50       0.3824    -3.2770*     0.3144         1.5990       0.6973    0.7525    0.5015    0.5231    0.6487     1.0834    0.8081    0.8018
    a60       0.6007    -2.8914*     0.5521         0.3402       0.1301    0.1666    0.0704    0.0704   -0.1718    -0.1767   -0.5882   -0.5895
    a70      -0.0189    -0.1926      0.0338        -1.1112      -0.5530   -0.7774   -0.5094   -0.6061   -0.5828    -0.6437   -0.9358   -0.8638
    a80      -2.8570*   -1.0918     -2.6818*       -2.2894*     -0.2663   -0.2144   -0.3524   -0.3705   -0.3500    -0.3636   -0.7466   -0.9325
                                                                                                                                                  39




 * Average score components signi cantly di erent from 0.
                                                                                     Table VI
                                        EMM estimates of the Black and Scholes and the continuous-time, stochastic volatility models (1) and (2)
                                                                                  and (1) and (3)
Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




                                       Estimates are for the sample period 01/03/1980-12/31/1996. Standard errors are reported in brackets. Parameter estimates
                                       are expressed in percentage form on a daily basis, and refer to the following model:
                                                                                   dSt
                                                             BS (J ) :                  = ( 0 ) dt +  dWt + (t) dqt ;
                                                                                    St
                                                                                   dSt                       p
                                                             SVi (J ) :                 = ( (t) ) dt + V t dW1;t + (t) dqt ;  i = 1; 2 ;
                                                                                    St
                                                                SV1 :           d ln Vt = (       ln Vt )dt + p dW2;t ;
                                                                SV2 :              dVt = (        Vt ) dt +  V t dW2;t ;
                                                                          ln(1 + (t)) ; N( ln(1 + ) 0:5 Æ2; Æ2 ) ;  = 0 ;
                                                                    corr(dW1;t; dW2;t) =  ; Prob(dqt = 1) = (t) dt ; (t) = 0 + 1 Vt :
                                        Parameter        BS          BSJ        SV1 ,  = 0 SV1 ,  = 0
                                                                                                   6          SV1 J ,  = 0
                                                                                                                       6          SV2 ,  = 0 SV2 ,  = 0
                                                                                                                                                     6          SV2 J ,  = 0
                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                       0.0603       0.0631        0.0593       0.0496      0.0460      0.0476       0.0617       0.0500      0.0550      0.0573
                                            
                                                      (0.0098)     (0.0103)      (0.0099)     (0.0104)    (0.0084)    (0.0102)     (0.0096)     (0.0104)    (0.0108)    (0.0108)
                                                       0.7176       0.7166
                                            
                                                      (0.0272)     (0.0281)
                                                                                  -0.0200      -0.0084     -0.0102     -0.0104      0.0074        0.0107      0.0089     0.0088
                                                                                 (0.0133)     (0.0027)    (0.0014)    (0.0016)     (0.0030)     (0.0035)    (0.0016)    (0.0021)
                                                                                  0.0317        0.0154      0.0206      0.0208      0.0123        0.0162      0.0134     0.0133
                                                                                 (0.0199)     (0.0044)    (0.0010)    (0.0009)     (0.0051)     (0.0052)    (0.0021)    (0.0029)
                                                                                  0.1146        0.1009      0.1135      0.1138      0.0578        0.0771      0.0683     0.0676
                                            
                                                                                 (0.0301)     (0.0161)    (0.0043)    (0.0036)     (0.0131)     (0.0141)    (0.0114)    (0.0145)
                                                                                               -0.4000     -0.3856     -0.3844                   -0.3799     -0.3234     -0.3301
                                            
                                                                                              (0.0709)    (0.0189)    (0.0229)                  (0.0827)    (0.0267)    (0.0854)
                                                                    0.0135                                  0.0217      0.0217                                0.0195      0.0194
                                            Æ
                                                                   (0.0003)                               (0.0005)    (0.0006)                              (0.0006)    (0.0005)
                                                                    0.0591                                  0.0192      0.0192                                0.0195      0.0193
                                            0
                                                                   (0.0005)                               (0.0011)    (0.0010)                              (0.0025)    (0.0115)
                                                                                                                        0.0008                                            0.0004
                                            1
                                                                                                                      (0.0016)                                          (0.0331)
40                                       2 [d.f. ]   64.51 [13]   23.47 [11]   49.74 [11]   30.16 [10]   11.19 [8]   10.49 [7]   48.17 [11]   30.93 [10]   10.86 [8]   10.10 [7]
                                        (P-Value)     (< 10 5 )     (0.0152)    (< 10 5 )     (0.0008)    (0.1911)    (0.1625)    (< 10 5 )     (0.0006)    (0.2095)    (0.1830)
                                                      Table VII
                            SNP model estimates and t-ratios of the average score components
t-ratios correspond to the following models: Black and Scholes (with jumps): BS(J). Stochastic volatility (with jumps), model
(1) and (2): SV1(J ). Stochastic volatility (with jumps), model (1) and (3): SV2(J ). Estimates are for the sample period
01/03/1980-12/31/1996 (N=4,298 observations). The score vector components are relative to the parameters of the following
auxiliary model:                                                   !
             fK (rt jxt ;  ) =  + (1  )  R
                                                 [ PK (zt ; xt )]2   (zt )
                                                             2K     t   t                 t
                                               [P (z ; x )] (u)du ph ;  = 0:01; (:) std: normal density ;
                                                          R
                       zt                ;
                                 rtp t
                          =           ht
                      t =       0 ;
                                                                                                                                                              Andersen, Benzoni and Lund




                                  X p                                                  q
                                                                  q
                   ln ht = ! + i ln ht i + (1 + 1 L + ::: + q L ) [ 1 zt + 2 (b(zt ) 2=) ] ;
                                  i=1
                    b(z ) = jz j for jz j  =20
                                               K; b(z ) =1(=2 cos(Kz ))=K for jz j < =2K ; K = 100 ;
                            K
                            X       z       K
                                            X    K
                                                 X    z       x
               PK (z; x) =       ai (x)z i = @ aij xj A z i ;    a00 = 1 :
                                 i=0                i=0   jj j=0

                                                                                  t-ratios
Parameter   Estimate   Std. Error
                                          BS        BSJ       SV1 ,  = 0 SV1 ,  6= 0        SV1 J           SV2 ,  = 0 SV2 ,  6= 0        SV2 J

    0      -0.0398     0.0398          -1.3737     0.2456        -0.9776    -0.7946     -1.3666   -2.6811*     0.2495      -0.7181      -0.0908     0.9726
    !        2.6724     0.4565          -1.3856     0.8402        -1.0252    -0.7795      0.8203    0.9175     -1.0278      -0.9170       0.0620     0.1879
             0.5712     0.1559          -0.0242    -1.2590         0.9601     1.9228      0.3604    0.1660      1.1443       1.8231       0.5458     0.4037
     1       0.0388     0.0199           0.8083    -1.2869         0.5728     1.1296     -0.6576   -0.7666      1.1316       1.0697       0.1150    -0.0592
     2       0.9213     0.0183           0.7378    -1.4187         0.4666     0.9534     -0.8842   -0.9736      1.0202       0.8913      -0.0108    -0.1597
   1       -0.0916     0.0234           2.4965*    3.3108*        2.7965*    0.2105      1.2768    1.3482      2.6322*      0.5164       1.4941     1.1995
   2        0.2011     0.0340          -0.1720    -1.9194         1.2242     0.6332     -1.7594   -1.9509      1.3473       0.6875      -0.5944    -0.6891
   a10       0.0534     0.0249           1.5898     1.0289         1.1190    -1.3014     -1.4824   -1.6794      1.4046      -1.1897      -0.6531    -0.2666
   a20      -0.2407     0.0257          -5.0370*   -1.1035        -3.0445*   -3.0283*    -1.2353   -0.8112     -3.4895*     -3.2545*     -1.8984    -1.8332
   a30      -0.0297     0.0130          -0.1742    -0.0601        -0.0158    -0.0835      0.7839    0.7232     -0.1996      -0.0159       0.2459     0.1462
   a40       0.0820     0.0119           1.3489     2.0423*        1.0267     0.5737      0.0632    0.1970      0.7397       0.5217      -0.1874    -0.2428
   a50       0.0223     0.0103          -0.7371    -0.2057        -0.6979    -0.0787      0.2917    0.3376     -0.6146      -0.1458       0.0338     0.3228
   a60      -0.0781     0.0068           4.4936*    0.6511         3.8508*    4.0672*     1.2939    1.2528      4.1496*      4.0909*      2.4054*    1.8978
   a70      -0.0043     0.0123          -0.1250     0.7321        -0.3976    -0.8629     -1.1614   -1.2301     -0.3795      -0.8834      -0.7111    -0.3384
   a80       0.0697     0.0123          -5.3750*   -2.0016*       -4.4820*   -4.7559*    -1.0532   -1.1688     -4.6979*     -4.7641*     -1.6401    -1.9388
                                                                                                                                                              41




* Average score components signi cantly di erent from 0.
42                                                   Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




                             Panel 1: S&P500 price index.




                         Panel 2: S&P500 daily rate of return.

Figure 1. S&P500 prices and returns, 01/02/1953-12/31/1996.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                                                     43



                                 Puts imp. vol. − SV and Jumps                Puts imp. vol. − Variation in volatility
                          16                                           20

                          14
                                                                       15
                          12
                                                                       10
                          10

                           8                                            5
                          −0.2    −0.1         0       0.1       0.2   −0.2       −0.1          0          0.1           0.2
                                            1 week                                           1 week
                          16                                           20
   Implied Volatilities




                          14
                                                                       15
                          12
                                                                       10
                          10

                           8                                            5
                          −0.2    −0.1        0        0.1       0.2   −0.2       −0.1          0          0.1           0.2
                                           3 weeks                                           3 weeks
                          16                                           20

                          14
                                                                       15
                          12
                                                                       10
                          10

                           8                                            5
                          −0.2    −0.1        0        0.1       0.2   −0.2       −0.1         0           0.1           0.2
                                           6 months                                         6 months

Figure 2. Black-Scholes implied volatilities from option prices generated by the stochastic
volatility model, square-root speci cation. Model coeÆcients are equal to the EMM estimates
in Table IV. Underlying stock price equals $800. Volatility and jump risk premia are set equal to
zero. Left column panels: Put prices are generated from the stochastic volatility model without (|)
and with jumps: constant (- -) and aÆne (  ) jump intensity. The underlying returns volatility is
11.5% (equal to the long-run volatility mean). Right column panels: Put prices are generated from
the stochastic volatility model with jumps, constant jump intensity. Instantaneous return volatility
is set equal to 7% (- -), 11.5% (|), 15.5% (  ).
44                                                                                  Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




                                   Puts imp. vol. − Volatility "smirk"                Puts imp. vol. − Volatility risk premium
                            20                                                 20



                            15                                                 15



                            10                                                 10

                            −0.2     −0.1          0          0.1        0.2   −0.2        −0.1          0         0.1           0.2
                                                1 week                                                1 week
                            20                                                 20
     Implied Volatilities




                            15                                                 15



                            10                                                 10

                            −0.2     −0.1         0           0.1        0.2   −0.2        −0.1         0          0.1           0.2
                                               3 weeks                                               3 weeks
                            20                                                 20



                            15                                                 15



                            10                                                 10

                            −0.2     −0.1         0           0.1        0.2   −0.2        −0.1        0           0.1           0.2
                                               6 months                                             6 months

Figure 3. Black-Scholes implied volatilities from option prices generated by the stochastic
volatility model without jumps, square-root speci cation. Model coeÆcients are equal to the
EMM estimates in Table IV. Put prices are generated using a stock price of $800 and a volatility of
11.5% (equal to the long-run volatility mean.) Left column panels: Di erent plots illustrate the e ect
of the asymmetry coeÆcient :  = 0 (- -) and  = 0:6 (|). The volatility risk premium is set equal
to zero. Right column panels: Di erent plots illustrate the e ect of the volatility risk-adjustment:
 = 0 (|) and  = 0:0100 (  ). The  coeÆcient is set equal to -0.6.
Andersen, Benzoni and Lund                                                                                                   45



                                 Puts imp. vol. − Jump size premium              Puts imp. vol. − Jump intensity premium
                          20                                                16

                                                                            14
                          15
                                                                            12

                          10                                                10

                                                                             8
                          −0.2      −0.1         0        0.1         0.2   −0.2       −0.1        0         0.1       0.2
                                              1 week                                            1 week
                          20                                                16
   Implied Volatilities




                                                                            14
                          15
                                                                            12

                          10                                                10

                                                                             8
                          −0.2      −0.1        0         0.1         0.2   −0.2       −0.1        0         0.1       0.2
                                             3 weeks                                            3 weeks
                          20                                                16

                                                                            14
                          15
                                                                            12

                          10                                                10

                                                                             8
                          −0.2      −0.1        0         0.1         0.2   −0.2       −0.1       0          0.1       0.2
                                             6 months                                          6 months

Figure 4. Black-Scholes implied volatilities from option prices generated by the stochastic
volatility model with jumps, constant jump intensity, square-root speci cation. Model
coeÆcients are equal to the EMM estimates in Table IV. Put prices are generated using a stock
price of $800 and a volatility of 11.5% (equal to the long-run volatility mean.) Left column panels:
Di erent plots illustrate the e ect of the risk-adjustment on the jump size:  = 0 (|),  = 0:01
(- -),  = 0:03 (  ). Volatility and jump intensity risk premia are set equal to zero. Right column
panels: Di erent plots illustrate the e ect of the risk-adjustment on the jump intensity, 0 coeÆcient:
0 = 0:0202 (|), 0 = 0:0079 (- -), 0 = 0:0397 (  ). Volatility and jump size risk premia are set
equal to zero.
46                                                            Continuous-Time Equity Return Models




                    SVJ model − 11.5% volatility           SVJ model − average of high−volatility states

               16                                        16
     ootm IV




               14                                        14

               12                                        12

               10                                        10
                      100         200        300                     100         200         300


               16                                        16
     atm IV




               14                                        14

               12                                        12

               10                                        10
                      100         200        300                     100         200         300


               16                                        16

               14                                        14
     itm IV




               12                                        12

               10                                        10
                      100        200         300                     100        200          300
                         Days to maturity                               Days to maturity

Figure 5. The term structure of Black-Scholes implied volatilities from option prices
generated by the stochastic volatility model with jumps, constant jump intensity,
square-root speci cation. Model coeÆcients are equal to the EMM estimates in Table IV.
Put prices are generated using a stock price of $800. Out-of-the-money (K=S = :9) puts in the
top panels, at-the-money in the middle and in-the-money (K=S = 1:1) bottom. Di erent plots
illustrate the e ect of jump and volatility risk adjustments: [0 ; ;  ] = [0:0202; 0; 0] (|) and
[0 ; ;  ] = [0:0397; 0:005; 0:0015] (- -). Left column panels: Black-Scholes implied volatilities
from put prices generated using a return volatility of 11.5% (equal to the long-run volatility mean.)
Right column panels: Average of Black-Scholes implied volatilities computed across high-volatility
states. (11.5% and 15.5%).
