                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE MEASUREMENT OF MEDICAID COVERAGE IN THE SIPP:
                      EVIDENCE FROM CALIFORNIA, 1990-1996


                                                David Card
                                          Andrew K. G. Hildreth
                                          Lara D. Shore-Sheppard


                                            Working Paper 8514
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w8514


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2001


This project was made possible by the cooperation of the California Department of Health Services (DHS) and
the U.S. Census Bureau. We are grateful to Gene Hiehle and James Klein of DHS and David Illig of the
California Health and Human Services Agency for assistance and guidance in the use of DHS data. We also thank
John Abowd, Julia Lane, Ron Prevost, and Lars Vilhuber of the U.S. Census Bureau for their assistance with SIPP
data. Barrett Graf provided outstanding research assistance. Funding for part of this project was provided by the
California Program on Access to Care (grant number 447615-19900) and by the Joint Center for Poverty
Research/U.S. Census Bureau Research Development Grant Program. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the U.S. Census Bureau or
the California Department of Health Services.



© 2001 by David Card, Andrew K. G. Hildreth and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Measurement of Medicaid Coverage in the SIPP:
Evidence from California, 1990-1996
David Card, Andrew K. G. Hildreth and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard
NBER Working Paper No. 8514
October 2001
JEL No. I38, C81



                                              ABSTRACT


        This paper studies the accuracy of reported Medicaid coverage in the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP) using a unique data set formed by matching SIPP survey responses to
administrative records from the State of California. Overall, we estimate that the SIPP underestimates
Medicaid coverage in the California population by about 10 percent. Among SIPP respondents who can
be matched to administrative records, we estimate that the probability someone reports Medicaid
coverage in a month when they are actually covered is around 85 percent. The corresponding probability
for low-income children is even higher – at least 90 percent. These estimates suggest that the SIPP
provides reasonably accurate coverage reports for those who are actually in the Medicaid system. On the
other hand, our estimate of the false positive rate (the rate of reported coverage for those who are not
covered in the administrative records) is relatively high: 2.5 percent for the sample as a whole, and up to
20 percent for poor children. Some of this is due to errors in the recording of Social Security numbers
in the administrative system, rather than to problems in the SIPP.




David Card                         Andrew K. G. Hildreth              Lara D. Shore-Sheppard
Department of Economics            California Census Research         Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall                     Data Center                        Willams College
UC Berkeley                        2538 Channing Way                  Williamstown, MA 01267
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880            Berkeley, CA 94720-5100            and NBER
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu
       One of the most widely debated policy concerns in the United States is the adequacy of

health insurance coverage for low-income families. Since 1965 Medicaid has been the primary

health insurance program for public assistance recipients and other low-income groups.

Medicaid was originally designed to provide health insurance for single parent families and the

aged, blind, and disabled. Over the past two decades, however, the program has gradually

expanded to cover children in lower-income families that are not participating in other welfare

programs.1 Despite these expansions, measured health insurance coverage rates remain far

below 100 percent. Data from the Census Bureau’s Current Population Survey, for example,

show that about 23 percent of people under age 18 who lived in poor households lacked health

insurance coverage in the mid-1990s (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1997). In the wake of recent

federal and state-level welfare reforms there have been renewed efforts to maintain and expand

Medicaid coverage.2 Nevertheless, measured health insurance coverage rates have actually

drifted downward over the past decade.3

       While analysts agree that expansions in the potential availability of Medicaid have not

led to equivalent increases in measured coverage (Shore-Sheppard, 1999; Gruber, 2000), there is



1
 See Gruber (2000) for a description of these expansions and a review of the literature on their
effects.
2
 Most prominent is the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), implemented in
California as the Healthy Families Program. Not all legislative changes have been in the
direction of expanding Medicaid coverage: the 1996 federal welfare reforms substantially
restricted Medicaid eligibility for immigrant children (see US House of Representatives
Committee on Ways and Means Green Book, 2000, pp. 908-911).
3
 In 1992, 86.1 percent of all individuals and 87.3 percent of children under 18 had health
insurance coverage. In 1999 the corresponding rates were 84.5 percent of all individuals and
86.1 percent of children. (U.S. Census Bureau, 2000). These data are based on tabulations from
the Current Population Survey.
                                                 1
less consensus on the reasons for this phenomenon. One simple explanation is that some people

fail to report their true Medicaid status to the Current Population Survey (CPS) or the Survey of

Income and Program Participation (SIPP) – the two key sources of data on health insurance

coverage in the U.S. Available evidence suggests that under-reporting of participation in means-

tested government programs is significant. For example, estimates reported in the SIPP Quality

Profile (U.S. Bureau of the Census, undated) suggest that SIPP respondents under-report

participation in Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), Food Stamps, and

Supplemental Security Income (SSI) by 25 percent. Such a high rate of under-reporting could

easily account for the absence of measured health insurance coverage among low-income

populations who are eligible for Medicaid.4

       In this paper we present new evidence on accuracy of reporting of Medicaid coverage in

the SIPP among California residents in the early 1990s. Our analysis is based on a unique

matched data set composed of survey information from the 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993 SIPP

panels and administrative data on Medicaid eligibility from the State of California’s Medi-Cal

Eligibility File (MEF). As described below, MEF data were matched to SIPP records for the

roughly three quarters of individuals in the SIPP who provided a valid Social Security number

(SSN), or granted permission for the Census Bureau to look up their SSN. Using this matched

data file it possible to compare reported versus actual Medicaid eligibility on a month-by-month

basis for about 20,000 individuals.



4
 For example, Gruber (2000) reports that 32 percent of California children were eligible for
Medicaid coverage in 1996, whereas data from the 1993 SIPP show that 29 percent of children
(age 16 or younger) were covered by Medicaid in late 1995. If Medicaid coverage is under-
reported by 25 percent, however, then the SIPP data actually imply a takeup rate of over 100
percent.
                                                2
       The next section of the paper provides a brief overview of the Medicaid program, with

special reference to California. In Section II we describe the SIPP survey and present a variety

of data on measured Medicaid participation patterns in the SIPP California sample. Section III

describes the eligibility file that is the source of our administrative data, and summarizes the

matching process. We also present information on the characteristics of the matched sample

versus the overall SIPP California sample. Section IV contains our main results, including

cross-tabulations of reported Medicaid status in the SIPP survey and the MEF for the overall

matched sample, and various subsamples, including children. Finally, Section V presents our

main conclusions.



I. The California Medicaid Program in the Early 1990s

       Medicaid is a joint state-federal program that pays for medical services for eligible low-

income individuals, including elderly, blind, and disabled recipients of SSI5; the “medically

needy” (people who have recently incurred large medical expenses); and people in low income

families. Historically, the latter group was comprised of cash welfare recipients in the AFDC

program. Starting in the mid-1980s, however, a series of federal law changes expanded

Medicaid eligibility to families with incomes above the AFDC threshold, and others that did not

meet the family composition rules of AFDC. The 1989 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act

(OBRA) mandated that states offer Medicaid coverage to pregnant women and children up to

age 6 with family incomes below 133 percent of the federal poverty threshold. OBRA 1990

further expanded coverage to all children born after September 30, 1983 and living in families


5
 California operates a state supplemental program known as the State Supplemental Payment
(SSP) program that parallels the federal SSI program.
                                                  3
with incomes below 100 percent of the poverty line. Other legislative changes in the late 1980s

and early 1990s allowed states to expand Medicaid coverage beyond these minimum mandates.

Many states responded by raising the income thresholds for coverage: California, for example,

raised the family income limit for pregnant women and infants to 200 percent of the federal

poverty line. Enrollment patterns in the California Medicaid program – known as Medi-Cal –

have closely tracked national trends. During the period from 1990 to 1995 the state accounted

for a steady 15 percent of the total Medicaid caseload for the U.S. Further, the ratio of per-capita

expenditures in California to the nation as a whole remained relatively constant. In light of this

relative stability and the size and diversity of the California population, we believe that the state

provides an excellent testing ground for evaluating the quality of survey data on Medicaid

coverage.

       Table 1 reports the various Medi-Cal eligibility categories in effect in California as of

late 1995, along with estimates of the number of people and the fraction of the eligible

population in each category. Despite the coverage expansions in the late 1980s and early 1990s,

more than three quarters of individuals covered by Medi-Cal in 1995 were adults or children

who were enrolled in AFDC or SSI. The majority of this group – about 60 percent of total Medi-

Cal eligibles – consisted of AFDC recipients. Another 10 percent were medically needy adults

and children; 5 percent were refugees and undocumented aliens; and 5 percent were medically

indigent adults and children. Only about 3 percent of Medi-Cal cases in 1995 were women or

children who were receiving coverage as a result of the poverty-relaterd expansion programs.6


6
 One reason for the low fraction of the caseload arising from the poverty-related expansions in
California is that California has very generous AFDC benefit rates. Consequently, the number of
children in families with incomes above the AFDC threshold but below the poverty line is lower
than in most states.
                                                  4
       Given the high fraction of Medi-Cal enrollees whose eligibility is linked to welfare

participation, it is not surprising that changes in Medi-Cal enrollment are strongly related to

changes in the welfare caseload. Indeed, as shown in Figure 1, changes in Medi-Cal enrollment

over the early 1990s were roughly proportional to changes in the AFDC rolls.7 The recession of

the early 1990s led to a steep rise in California’s welfare rolls and similar proportional increases

in the Medi-Cal-eligible population. Since the middle of the decade welfare rolls and Medicaid

coverage have both declined sharply in California, with evidence that most of the fall in Medi-

Cal enrollment has been attributable to the fall in the number of families receiving cash welfare

(Broaddus and Guyer, 2000).



II. Medicaid Coverage Among California Respondents in the 1990-1993 SIPP Panels

       In this paper we study the reporting of Medicaid coverage by California respondents in

the 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993 SIPP panels. Table 2 provides an overview of the four panels.

Each SIPP panel consists of four rotation groups who were interviewed on a staggered schedule

every four months. Individuals in the 1990 and 1991 panels were interviewed 8 times,

individuals in the 1992 panel were interviewed 10 times, and those in the 1993 panel were

interviewed 9 times. Overall, the four panels contain information for a total of 238,938 people

over the period from October 1989 to December 1996. Just over 10 percent of the sample

(24,681 individuals) were in California in their first interview. A larger fraction – about 13

percent of the sample or 31,336 people – spent at least one month in California.



7
 Over the 1988-96 period, each additional person in the average monthly AFDC caseload in
California was associated with 6 additional Medi-Cal enrollees at some point during the calendar
year.
                                                  5
       Table 3 presents some descriptive statistics for the sample of individuals who were in

California at the first SIPP interview, and for various subsets of this population including young

children (age 6 or under), all children, people living in poor and “near-poor” families, and people

who reported that they were covered by Medicaid in the first survey month. About one quarter

of the SIPP California sample are children, and just over 10 percent are elderly. Consistent with

national patterns, children are over-represented among the populations of poor and near-poor,

and make up close to one-half of Medicaid enrollees. The diversity of the California population

is evident in the ethnic composition of the SIPP sample. White non-Hispanics account for only

60 percent of Californians, and make up even smaller fractions of children, people in poverty,

and Medicaid recipients. Hispanics (of all racial groups) make up one-quarter of the overall

California population, and larger shares of children, people in poverty, and Medicaid recipients.

       An important feature of the SIPP is sample attrition: about 10 percent of individuals who

were in the first SIPP interview left the sample by the 6th interview, and another 3 percent left by

the 8th interview. Attrition rates are about the same for children as for the overall sample, but are

higher for people who were in poor or near-poor families in the first interview, or were enrolled

in Medicaid. The non-randomness of sample attrition has some implications for our estimates of

SIPP response accuracy which we hope to be able to address in future work.

       In the early and mid-1990s California had somewhat higher poverty rates than the nation

as a whole, and higher welfare recipiency and Medicaid enrollment rates.8 On average about 15

percent of the SIPP California sample was poor (i.e., had family income below the federal


8
 In the early 1980s California poverty rates were below the national average. By the late 1980s,
however, the state’s poverty rates consistently exceeded the national average. See Card (2001)
for a comparative analysis of labor market and poverty trends in California over the 1980s and
1990s.
                                                  6
poverty line), with an even higher poverty rate among children. In view of Medicaid eligibility

criteria, it is not surprising that over one-half of Medicaid enrollees are poor, and over 85 percent

live in families with incomes less than 200% of the federal poverty line.

       The bottom rows of Table 3 present Medicaid enrollment data for the SIPP sample.

About13 percent of the sample report that they were covered by Medicaid in the first interview.

Consistent with the trends in Figure 1, enrollment is rising within the panels over time. More

detail is shown in Figure 2, which plots the fraction of SIPP respondents who were enrolled in

Medicaid by panel and month.9 For reference, we have super-imposed a time line that represents

the ratio of average monthly Medi-Cal enrollment in each year to the population of the state –

i.e., the “true” fraction of the California population enrolled in Medicaid.10 The data in Figure 2

suggest that Medicaid enrollment is under-reported in the SIPP. Taking a weighted average over

all months from October 1989 to December 1996 (weighted by the number of people in the

combined SIPP California sample in each month) we estimate that the SIPP sample under-

estimates Medicaid enrollment by 12 percent.

       A prominent feature of Figure 2 is that average Medicaid enrollment rates vary from

panel to panel of the SIPP. For example, the average enrollment rate in January 1993 was 13.3

percent for people in the 1991 panel, 14.0 percent for people in the 1992 panel, and 16.1 percent



9
 The rates are weighted coverage rates, using a fixed weight for each individual based on his or
her weight for the first calendar year of the appropriate panel. We compare alternative
weighting procedures below.
10
  State population is measured as of July 1 from U.S. Census Bureau data. Medi-Cal enrollment
is the average monthly number of people who were ever enrolled during the calendar year.
Comparisons for 1993-1998 show that average monthly enrollment is very similar to the July
enrollment count. One caveat to this calculation is that the state population probably grew faster
over the 1990s than was estimated by the Census Bureau.
                                                  7
for people in the 1993 panel.11 By comparison, the ratio of MEF enrollment to the total

California population in January was (approximately) 16.2 percent. We suspect that most of the

variation across panels is attributable to variation in the characteristics of people included in the

California sample that are correlated with eligibility for Medicaid.12 In particular, inter-panel

comparisons of the fraction of people who live in poverty suggest that the 1990 panel under-

represents poorer families relative to the 1991 and 1992 panels, whereas the 1993 panel over-

represents poorer families.13 Cross-panel differences in Medicaid coverage rates are narrowed

substantially once the comparisons are conditioned on age, ethnicity, and family poverty status.14

       The strong link between family income and Medicaid coverage is illustrated in Figure 3,

which shows the fraction of individuals in different age ranges who report being covered in a

given month as a function of their relative family income (the ratio of their family income to the


11
  The underlying sample sizes are 4,432, 6,105, and 6,597. Using conventional sampling errors,
the rates are significantly different from each other.
12
 The SIPP sample is not designed to be representative of the California population, and some
variation will arise across panels in the composition of the sample relative to the underlying
population.
13
  We fit a regression for the incidence of poverty to a pooled sample of person-months from the
four SIPP panels and included a full set of indicators for the calendar month and dummies for the
different panels. Using the 1992 panel as a base, average poverty rates are 3.35% lower in the
1990 panel (standard error 0.19), 0.30% lower in the 1991 panel (standard error 0.15), and
4.00% higher in the 1993 panel (standard error 0.15).
14
  Specifically, if we fit a regression model for the incidence of Medicaid coverage to a pooled
sample of person-months from the four SIPP panels and include indicators for the calendar
month and dummies for the different panels, we find that the probability of Medicaid coverage is
1.94% lower (standard error 0.18) in the 1990 panel relative to the 1992 panel, and 2.91% higher
(standard error 0.15) in the 1993 panel relative to the 1992 panel. Rates in the 1991 panel are
not significantly different from those in the 1992 panel. When we augment the model with
controls for ethnicity and interactions of a family poverty indicator with dummies for 5 age
ranges, the difference between the 1990 and 1992 panels becomes insignificant, and the
difference between the 1993 and 1992 panels narrows to 0.91% (standard error 0.13).
                                                  8
appropriate poverty threshold). Apart from the lowest income category, the probability of

Medicaid enrollment falls steadily with relative income. As would be expected from the nature

of the Medicaid eligibility rules summarized in Table 1, enrollment rates conditional on relative

family income are highest for young children, somewhat lower for older children, lower still for

adult women, and lowest for adult men.

       The rise in Medicaid coverage rates in Figure 3 between the lowest income group (with

family incomes under 50% of the poverty line) and the next category (with family incomes

between 50% and 75% of the poverty line) illustrates an important feature of the enrollment

process. For a variety of institutional and behavioral reasons (including asset limits, spend-down

provisions, and the lengthy and complex Medicaid application process) Medicaid enrollment

rates vary with both current and “long run” or permanent income. It turns out that families in the

SIPP whose current monthly incomes are less than 50% of the poverty line have higher long-run

average incomes than those in the next highest income group.15 Thus, the relatively low

Medicaid coverage rate for the lowest income category is explained by the relatively high

permanent incomes for people in this category. Apart from this anomaly, average relative

incomes over all months of the SIPP are in the same rank order as relative income in any given

month, and comparisons across groups based on current monthly income effectively compare

Medicaid coverage rates between groups that have similar differences in current and permanent

relative income.

       A well-known feature of longitudinal data collected in retrospective surveys is that


15
  The average ratio of monthly family income to the poverty threshold for people in the lowest
income category is 1.28, whereas the average ratio for people in the next category is 0.97. Many
families that have very low incomes in a month actually report zero or even negative incomes in
the month, but much higher incomes in adjacent months.
                                                9
measured spells of program participation tend to exhibit so-called “seam biases” (see e.g., U.S.

Census Bureau, undated, chapter 6; Czajka and Olsen, 2000). SIPP participants are interviewed

every four months about activities in the immediately preceding four months. Because

individuals have difficulty recalling precise dates in the past (Groves, 1989, chapter 9) and for

other unknown reasons there is a tendency for changes in status to be measured at the interview

“seams” – between the 4th and 5th months for example. Not surprisingly, this is true for changes

in reported Medicaid coverage. Figure 4 shows the transition rates into and out of Medicaid

coverage in each month of the combined 1990-1993 SIPP panels. (The sample underlying this

figure includes only individuals who were living in California in the current and previous

month.) In addition, the figure shows the average fraction of individuals who report Medicaid

coverage by SIPP interview month in the pooled sample.16 Roughly two-thirds of all spell

starting and ending events occur at a seam (versus an expected frequency of 25 percent).

Moreover, there is a small but noticeable seam pattern in the rate of Medicaid coverage, with a

tendency for higher coverage rates in the most recent months just before the SIPP interview (i.e.,

interview months 4, 8, 12, ....). These patterns provide prima facie evidence of measurement

error in SIPP-reported Medicaid coverage.




16
  The apparent rise in Medicaid coverage rates in interview months 33-36 is attributable to the
influence of observations from the 1993 SIPP panel. Only the 1992 and 1993 panels have data
beyond month 32, and only the 1992 panel has data beyond month 36. Medicaid coverage is
about 3-4 percentage points higher in the 1993 panel than in other years. The shift in the fraction
of data from this panel (from one-quarter in months 1-32 to one-half in months 33-36) would be
expected to raise the average coverage rate by 1 percentage point, which is about the increase
observed in Figure 4.
                                                 10
III. Matching SIPP and Administrative Eligibility Data

a. Potential Matching of Medi-Cal Data to SIPP

           Our analysis of reporting errors in Medicaid coverage is based on a matched file

composed of 1990-1993 SIPP records and administrative data for individuals who appear in the

State of California’s Medi-Cal Eligibility Data system at some point between June 1988 and

June 1997. Records were matched using Social Security Numbers (SSNs). Since not all

individuals in the SIPP have a valid SSN (or allow the Census Bureau to use their SSN for

research purposes), it is important to understand the characteristics of the subsample of SIPP

respondents who are eligible for matching.

           In the first SIPP interview household respondents are asked to provide names and SSNs

for all people in the household. Respondents can provide SSNs, or they can refuse to allow their

SSN to be used, or they respond that they don’t have an SSN or don’t know it.17 In subsequent

waves the interviewers try to obtain SSNs for individuals who have not yet provided one.

Information for respondents who have not explicitly refused the use of their SSN is forwarded to

the Social Security Administration for SSN validation. An attempt is made to assign an SSN

(using name, sex, and address information) to respondents whose numbers were not reported.

           For purposes of this project a list of validated SSNs for all individuals in the 1990-1993

SIPP panels was searched for matches with SSNs in the administrative file described below.

Among the 31,296 individuals in the four SIPP panels who lived in California for at least one

month, 76.1 percent had a valid SSN. The fraction is higher (82.2 percent) for the 24,681 people

who were living in California at the first SIPP interview. The difference is potentially explained



17
     This information is provided by parents or guardians for children.
                                                    11
by two factors. First, most of those who are observed in California at some point but not in the

first interview are people who joined a household that is already in the SIPP – only 7 percent

were first interviewed in some other state and then followed to California. The “joiners” include

new-born infants and young children who are presumably shifting between households.18 As

noted below, children are less likely to have a valid SSN. Second, the joiners tend to be in the

SIPP for a relatively short time: the median number of months covered by the SIPP interviews is

only 10. Thus, interviewers have less chance of obtaining a valid SSN.

       Table 4 compares the characteristics of three samples of SIPP respondents who were

living in California at the first SIPP interview. Column 1 reports the characteristics of the

overall sample. Column 2 reports the characteristics of the subsample who have a valid SSN,

and are therefore potentially eligible to match to the administrative Medicaid records. Finally,

column 3 reports the characteristics of the subsample without a valid SSN. Just over one-third of

this group consists of people who refuse to allow the use of their SSN, while the remainder

consists of people who either do not have an SSN, or report a invalid SSN that cannot be

validated using their name and address information.

       As shown in Appendix Table 1, a key factor determining whether a valid SSN is

available is age: only 69 percent of children under the age of 6 (at the first interview) have a

valid SSN, compared to 79 percent of older children and youths (ages 6-24), and over 85 percent

of older adults. Because of these differences, the valid-SSN subsample under-represents

children relative to the overall sample. Ethnicity is also related to the probability of a valid SSN.

About 86 percent of white non-Hispanics have a valid SSN, compared to 77 percent of black


18
  About 11 percent of the joiners were born during the panel. Another 13 percent were between
the ages of 1 and 16 when they joined the panel.
                                                 12
non-Hispanics, 82 percent of Asian non-Hispanics, and 76 percent of Hispanics. Thus, the valid-

SSN subsample slightly over-represents white non-Hispanics relative to other groups.

Individuals with valid SSNs are also less likely to be poor or near-poor than those without an

SSN. Sample attrition rates, however, are fairly similar for the two groups.

       Most importantly for this study, reported Medicaid coverage rates are fairly similar in the

subsamples with and without valid SSNs. This equality may seem rather surprising, given that

the subsample without SSNs includes a higher fraction of children (who have higher Medicaid

coverage rates) and a higher fraction of individuals with low incomes (who also have higher

coverage rates). It should be noted, however, that the public assistance and Medicaid systems

require SSNs for those who are covered. Thus, nearly all adults and children who receive Medi-

Cal coverage should actually have an SSN. On balance, this requirement seems to offset the

lower rate of SSNs for children and poor adults, leading to a roughly proportional representation

of people covered by Medicaid in the valid-SSN subsample. Based on the comparisons in Table

4 we conclude that the group of individuals in the SIPP who can be matched to administrative

Medicaid records via their SSNs is not completely representative of the California population,

but does include reasonable fractions of children and people from low-income families.



b. The Medi-Cal Eligibility File

       Eligibility for Medicaid coverage in California is established at county social welfare

offices through on-line access to a state-wide database maintained by the state’s Health and

Welfare Data Center.19 This file has a record for each individual who is currently eligible for


19
  “Eligibility” as used by the state denotes that an individual is enrolled in the program and may
receive services paid for by Medi-Cal.
                                                13
Medi-Cal, or was eligible at any time over the previous 15 months. Around the 24th of each

month a “snapshot” is taken of the eligibility data base: these snapshots are known as the Medi-

Cal Eligibility Files (MEFs). Each monthly MEF includes individual identifying information

(sex, date of birth, ethnicity, address, Social Security Number) and two key pieces of

information regarding eligibility for Medi-Cal coverage in each month: an “eligibility code”

summarizing eligibility status, and an “aid code” giving the type of program the individual is

covered by.20 We use these codes to determine Medicaid eligibility for each person in each

month.

         For this project the California Department of Health Services granted access to a series of

17 MEFs drawn every six months from July 1989 to July 1997. Each file contains data for the

current and previous 12 months. These files provide data for the 109 month period from June

1988 (the earliest date covered by the July 1989 MEF) to July 1997. The files were shipped

directly to the U.S. Census Bureau, where all records for individuals with Social Security

Numbers that matched those of people in the 1990-1993 SIPP panels were retained, and coded

with an identifier that could be matched to the “public use” versions of the SIPP data. The MEF

records for this subset of matched people were then shipped to the California Census Research

Data Center, where we matched them to the SIPP files.

         An important feature of the MEF records is the overlap in information provided for each

person. For example, eligibility information for December 1991 is contained in the January


20
  Medi-Cal, like other state Medicaid systems, offers different types of coverage to different
classes of eligible people. Some individuals’ expenses are fully covered whereas others have to
share costs, or spend a certain amount before they are covered. This introduces some ambiguity
in the interpretation of Medicaid eligibility: individuals who are ineligible until they reach a
certain level of expenses could be considered “covered by health insurance” but would be
classified as “ineligible” for Medicaid in the MEF.
                                                 14
1992 and July 1993 MEF’s, while data for January 1992 is contained in the January 1992 MEF,

the July 1993 MEF, and the January 1993 MEF. For a variety of reasons, the information for a

given month is not necessarily consistent across MEFs. As noted in Klein (1999), one important

source of inconsistency is the fact that Medicaid eligibility can be established ‘after the fact’ –

this is particularly likely to affect eligibility under medically needy and medically indigent

programs. One simple way of combining data across MEF files is to adopt the rule that the latest

information is “best”: thus, eligibility in any given month is assigned based on the last MEF that

covers that month.21 After close examination of the monthly eligibility patterns in overlapping

MEF files we decided on a variant of this rule. Specifically, for any calendar month we use the

eligibility data in the most recent MEF, with the exception that we did not use the information

provided for the 12th previous month.22 Even with this rule, however, the administrative

coverage data exhibit a “seam bias” pattern, suggesting that there is some remaining

measurement error in assigned coverage. In particular, a relatively high fraction of transitions

into or out of coverage occur at months that represent “seams” between data drawn from

different MEFs. Using MEF records for individuals who can be matched to the SIPP, we

estimate that roughly 40 percent of spell transitions in any six month period occur at a seam date

(months 6, 12, 18,... of the 109 month sample period) versus an expected frequency of 16.7

percent if transitions occurred equally across months.

           At least some of this administrative data seam bias appears to be due to the way the



21
     This is the procedure used by State analysts to construct longitudinal coverage histories.
22
 We found many cases where it seemed that eligibility information for the 12th previous month
had been over-written with information from the current month. Use of data for the 12th previous
month led to a relatively high number of 1-month “gaps” in spells coverage or non-coverage.
                                                    15
matching between the MEFs and the SIPP public-use identifiers was done. Each record in a

MEF that had an SSN was linked individually to the SIPP, and the matched records were

shipped to the California Census Data Research Center. Consequently, if an individual received

an SSN after beginning Medi-Cal (so that initial MEF records for that individual did not have an

SSN but later records did), then later MEF records for that individual would be included on the

matched file, but early records would be missing. Thus it would appear in the matched data as if

that individual had started Medi-Cal at the time of a seam.23 This is most likely to have occurred

in children, as they are less likely to have an SSN but would be required to obtain one as they

participated in Medi-Cal. We are unable to determine the magnitude of this source of seam bias

as we have access only to those MEF records that were successfully matched to a SIPP record.

However it is likely that the MEF data probably contain some errors – a fact that must be taken

into consideration in evaluating the reliability of SIPP-reported coverage.



IV. Analysis of The Matched File

       To analyze the accuracy of Medicaid coverage in the SIPP we compare reported

coverage rates in the SIPP and MEF file for the same individual in the same calendar month.

The analysis is restricted to individuals who report a valid SSN and who were living in

California (according to SIPP records) in the month in question. Appendix Table 2 provides a

brief summary of the resulting sample. Overall, there are 23,850 individuals in the 1990-1993

SIPP panels who reported living in California in at least one month, and who provided a valid

SSN. On average, each person in this sample has just under 28 months of valid SIPP interview


23
 Similarly, if the SSN was missing or incorrectly coded in a later MEF but was present and
correct earlier, exit from Medi-Cal would appear to have occurred at a seam.
                                                16
data, and provided just under 27 months of data while living in California, leading to a total of

642,859 person-months of potential Medicaid Coverage. The average fraction of months

recorded as covered by Medicaid is 14.02 percent.

       For individuals who match with a MEF record, we derive MEF-based coverage for each

month directly from their administrative data. In months when an individual appears not to be in

the MEF system (but is still living in California) we assume that the individual is not covered by

Medicaid. Similarly, for individuals who report a valid SSN and are living in California but

never appear in the MEF’s during the period from July 1988 to July 1997, we assume that the

individual was never covered by Medicaid.

       It is worth emphasizing that any errors in the matching process will lead us to under-

estimate Medicaid coverage in the MEF. For example, if the wrong SSN is assigned to an

individual in the SIPP there is relatively little chance of finding a match in the MEFs, and an

individual who is covered by Medicaid will be incorrectly coded as uncovered.24 Perhaps more

importantly, if an individual’s SSN is mis-coded or missing in the MEF, then no match will be

found between the SIPP and MEF records, and an individual who is actually covered by

Medicaid will be assigned an uncovered status. We discuss some circumstantial evidence on the

extent of this problem below.

       Table 5 presents the cross-tabulations of MEF and SIPP Medicaid coverage for the

overall sample of California residents with valid SSNs, and for various subsamples, including

children, individuals in poor or near-poor families, and children in lower-income families. The


24
  There is some possibility that an individual with an incorrect SSN will be matched to a MEF
record that falsely indicates Medicaid coverage. Since only about 15% of people are covered in
any given month, however, a random match is far more likely to lead to a false negative report of
coverage than a false positive report of coverage.
                                                 17
table contains two sets of entries – the upper entry in each cell is based on unweighted data,

while the lower entry (in italics) is estimated using the first year sample weights for each person

to weight their person-month observations.25

       The first two columns of Table 5 provide some information on the particular subsample –

the fraction of overall person-months contributed by the subsample, and the fraction of person-

months for the subgroup as a whole attributable to people with a valid SSN. The latter ratio is

over 80 percent for the overall sample, but is lower for children and people in poor families, as

would be expected given the results in Table 4 and Appendix Table 1. The next four columns

show the fractions of person-months in each of four possible categories: covered by Medicaid in

both MEF and SIPP; uncovered in both files; covered in MEF but not in SIPP; and uncovered in

MEF but covered in SIPP. On average just over 4 percent of the person-month observations

appear in the two conflicting categories. Interestingly, for the entire sample and for almost all

subgroups, the fraction of people who report coverage in the SIPP but are uncovered in the MEF

exceeds the fraction who are covered in MEF but fail to report coverage in the SIPP. As a result

of this inequality the estimated Medicaid coverage rate for individuals with valid SSNs is higher

using SIPP-reported coverage than using the MEF records.

       Given the evidence in Figure 2 that overall Medicaid coverage rates are understated in

the SIPP, this is a surprising conclusion. Under the assumptions that the MEF data are accurate,

and that there are no errors in the matching process, the only explanation for this pattern is that

SIPP respondents without valid SSNs substantially under-report their coverage. As we discuss



25
 These weights do not take account of differential probabilities of having a valid SSN, or of
differences in sample attrition rates. In future work we plan to implement alternative weighting
schemes that adjust for these two phenomena.
                                                 18
below, however, we believe that at least part of the explanation for the lower rate of coverage in

the administrative data is incorrect or missing SSNs in the MEF system.

          The three right-hand columns of Table 5 present statistics that summarize the accuracy of

Medicaid reporting in the SIPP. The first is the probability of reported Medicaid coverage in the

SIPP survey for people who are currently covered in the MEF. In the overall sample this

fraction is just over 85 percent using the unweighted data, and slightly higher using the weighted

data. The second is the probability of reported Medicaid coverage in the SIPP for people who

are currently not covered in the MEF – this “false positive” response rate is about 2.8 percent for

the unweighted sample, and about 2.5 percent using the weighted results. Finally, the last

column of the table presents the so-called “reliability” of SIPP-reported Medicaid coverage: this

is the regression coefficient of MEF coverage status on observed SIPP coverage status.26 The

reliability index measures the degree of attenuation bias that would arise if observed SIPP

coverage status were used as an explanatory variable in a regression model in place of “true”

MEF coverage. For the overall sample the reliability of SIPP Medicaid coverage (as a measure

of MEF status) is about 80 percent, or slightly higher using weighted data.

          Looking at the patterns of SIPP and MEF coverage for children and people in low

income families in Table 5, the probability of SIPP-reported coverage for those who are covered

in MEF is fairly stable at 85-90 percent. By comparison, the probability of a false positive SIPP

response varies substantially across groups, with a rate up to 24-28 percent (depending on the

use of weights) for children under the age of 5 in poor families. These results suggest that SIPP-

reported coverage is relatively accurate for those who are actually covered by Medicaid.



26
     The reliability index is P(MEF=y | SIPP=y) – P(MEF=y | SIPP=n).
                                                  19
However, the SIPP has a higher rate of errors for people who are not currently covered by

Medicaid, but belong to groups with high average probabilities of coverage.

       An important caveat to the conclusion that SIPP has a high rate of false positive coverage

responses for children is the possibility that MEF coverage status is incorrect. There are two

potential sources of errors in MEF coverage status. First, judging by the presence of seam

patterns in the coverage transition rates, the MEF records themselves appear to contain some

errors. Second, and potentially more important for understanding the apparently high rate of

false positive coverage responses in the SIPP, errors in the merging process caused by invalid

SSNs in either the SIPP or MEF will lead to cases where an individual is recorded as uncovered

in the MEF (because we were unable to find a record for their SSN in the MEF) but is actually

covered.

       Although we are uncertain about the overall probability of such errors, several factors

suggest that the error rate is likely to be higher for children. On the SIPP side, SSNs for children

are provided by their parents, and may be less accurately reported than the numbers for adults.

On the MEF side, many children enter the MEF system without an SSN and are processed while

an application for an SSN is pending. Consequently, early months of participation in Medicaid

by such individuals, though correctly reported in the SIPP, will appear to be false positives. In

addition, if the SSN is not subsequently updated in the MEF, it will be impossible to find any

MEF record for the child, even though the child has a valid SSN and is covered by Medi-Cal.

       The MEF contains a field which indicates the validity status of the SSN. Over 80 percent

of the 5.9 million SSNs in the MEF in June 1991 are coded as validated. However, 7 percent of

MEF records are coded as having “no valid input” for the SSN field, and 8 percent are coded to



                                                 20
indicate that there was no SSN at the date of entry into the system.27 By comparison with these

statistics, virtually all of the MEF records that we can match to individuals in the SIPP are coded

as having a validated SSN. The very low match rate for MEF records without a validated SSN

suggests that the number entered in the SSN field for these records is invalid.

       To get a sense of the likely effect of such errors, suppose that 4 percent of all SSNs in the

MEF are incorrect, with a 2 percent error rate for adults and a 10 percent error rate for children.28

Suppose further that 25 percent of the children with incorrect SSNs are actually covered by

Medicaid (roughly consistent with the data for children age 0-15 in Table 5) and that 10 percent

of all adults with incorrect SSNs are covered by Medicaid. Finally, assume that people with

incorrect SSNs report their true coverage status to the SIPP.29 Under these assumptions, 3.2

percentage points of the person-months recorded as “MEF=no and SIPP=no” should be

eliminated from the sample of valid SSN person-months (these are the observations for

individuals with incorrect SSNs who are not covered by Medicaid) and another 0.8 percentage

points of the person-months recorded as “MEF=no and SIPP=yes” should be eliminated from the

sample (these are observations for people with incorrect SSNs who are actually covered by

Medicaid). These changes have no effect on the estimated probability of SIPP coverage among

those who are covered in the MEF, but they lead to a substantially lower estimate of the



27
  Another 2 percent of records have an unvalidated SSN, and 2.5 percent indicate that the
individual is an undocumented alien. We are grateful to Lars Vilhuber for his assistance in
processing the SSN validity codes on the MEF records.
28
 Anecdotal evidence on the validity of SSNs in other administrative data sets (such as
unemployment insurance records) suggests that error rates of 2-6 percent are plausible.
29
  If actual misreporting rates are no higher than 15 percent (as suggested in Table 5) then
ignoring misreporting has little effect on the calculations.
                                                 21
probability of SIPP coverage for those without MEF coverage. In particular, the false positive

rate for the unweighted data falls to 1.97 percent, versus 2.81 percent in Table 5.30 Carrying out

parallel calculations for children age 0-15, the estimated probability of SIPP-reported coverage

for those covered in MEF is again unaffected, but the probability of a false positive SIPP

response falls to 2.17 percent (versus 5.22 percent in Table 5).

       Given the limitations of the data, it is difficult to determine the true magnitude of

matching errors caused by incorrect or missing SSNs in the MEF. However, we are able to

examine likely errors among one group: children whose mothers report Medicaid coverage in

both the SIPP and the MEF. Since most mothers who are covered by Medicaid are eligible

through AFDC, their children should also be covered by Medicaid. In Table 6 we show an

alternative version of Table 5 in which we have assumed that all children who are recorded as

covered by Medicaid in the SIPP but not in the MEF and whose mothers report Medicaid

coverage in both data sets are actually enrolled in Medicaid, but erroneously missing from the

MEF (either because of missing SSNs or other matching problems). We believe that this is a

relatively conservative assumption that gives a lower-bound estimate of the effect of matching

errors and missing SSNs. Unfortunately, it only affects some of the children who are potentially

missing in the SIPP-MEDS match: those who are living with their mother, whose mothers are

themselves covered by Medicaid, and whose mothers also provided valid SSNs to both SIPP and

MEDS. Nevertheless, use of this assumption raises the coverage rate for children in the MEF to

a level slightly above the SIPP coverage rate. The probability of a false positive response for all

children falls by about one-fifth, from 5.22 percent to 4.18 percent. Not surprisingly, the


30
 If we double the assumed error rates to 4 percent for adults and 20 percent for children, the
implied false positive rate falls to 1.05 percent.
                                                 22
decrease in measured false positive responses is greatest for poor children. Based on these

results, we believe that the false positive response rates recorded in Tables 5 and 6 should be

viewed as “upper bounds” on the rate of over-reporting of Medicaid coverage in the SIPP.31

       As noted earlier, the presence of the high rate of false positive coverage responses in

Table 5, taken together with the evidence in Figure 2 of overall under-reporting of Medicaid

coverage in the SIPP, implies that people without valid SSNs must be substantially under-

reporting their true coverage to the SIPP. To see this, let RV* represent the fraction of individuals

with valid SSNs who are covered by Medicaid according to the MEF, let RI* represent the

corresponding fraction among those with invalid SSNs, and let 8 denote the fraction of people

who report a valid SSN to the SIPP. The fraction of the state population covered by Medicaid

according to the MEF is 8 RV* + (1-8) RI*. Similarly, let RV and RI represent the fraction of

individuals with and without valid SSNs, respectively, who report Medicaid coverage in the

SIPP. Then the estimated Medicaid coverage from the SIPP for the entire population is 8 RV +

(1-8) RI . Finally, let ( represent the ratio of the Medicaid caseload measured in the SIPP to the

actual number of Medicaid recipients in California. These definitions imply that

(1)    8 RV + (1-8)RI = ((8 RV* + (1-8) RI*).

The fractions RV, RI, and 8 are all observable from SIPP data, and RV* is also observable as the

MEF-based coverage rate of people in the SIPP with valid SSNs. For the population as a whole

the data from Figure 2 suggest that ( is approximately 0.89. Equation (1) can therefore be

solved for the “true” rate of Medicaid coverage of people with invalid SSNs in the SIPP (RI*),


31
  As the approach taken in Table 6 will miss child-only AFDC or Medicaid cases, we also tried
using a child’s sibling’s report of Medicaid coverage as additional information, however this
approach made little difference in the results, probably because there were few children with a
sibling who was recorded as receiving Medicaid in both data sets.
                                                 23
and the net under-reporting rate of Medicaid coverage in the SIPP for people with invalid SSNs

(RI/RI*). Using the unweighted data in the top row of Table 5 and an estimate of RI = 15 percent

(see Table 4), the implied estimate of RI* is 26.1 percent and the implied estimate of RI /RI* is

57.6 percent. The very conservative corrections in Table 6 (which affect a limited fraction of

children in the sample) reduce the estimate of RI* to 25.1 percent and increase the estimate of

RI/RI* to 59.8 percent.

       If an adjustment is made for the possibility of incorrect or missing SSNs for people other

than the children whose records were updated in the construction of Table 6, however, the

calculations change substantially. For example, assuming that 4 percent of people (10 percent of

children and 2 percent of adults) have incorrect SSNs in the MEF, the estimate of RI* falls to 21

percent and the implied estimate of RI /RI* rises to 71 percent. Doubling the fractions of invalid

SSNs to 8 percent (20 percent of children and 4 percent of adults) leads to an implied estimate of

RI /RI* equal to 83 percent. Since P(SIPP=yes | MEF=yes) for people with valid SSNs is fairly

stable across groups, we believe it is unlikely that the relative rate of under-reporting of

Medicaid coverage in the SIPP for people with invalid SSNs is as low as 55 percent. A more

plausible explanation, which is supported by the evidence in Table 6, is that erroneous or

missing Social Security numbers in the MEF lead to matching errors, and hence the MEF-based

Medicaid coverage rate for people with valid SSNs in the SIPP is understated.




                                                  24
V. Conclusions

       In this paper we use a unique data set, formed by matching California respondents of the

1990-1993 SIPP panels to state administrative records, to assess the validity of reported

Medicaid coverage in the SIPP. Our main finding is that the SIPP provides relatively accurate

data on Medicaid coverage for those who are actually receiving it. For the population in the

SIPP who have valid Social Security Numbers and can be matched, we estimate that 85-87

percent of all “person-months” of actual Medicaid coverage are accurately reported. This ratio is

even higher (at least 90 percent) for groups with a high likelihood of Medicaid coverage,

including children and people in low-income families. Our conclusions on the accuracy of

reported coverage for people who are not actually receiving Medicaid are tempered by the

observation that any errors in the matching process between the SIPP and the administrative

records will lead to an overstatement of the false positive coverage rate. Making no allowance

for such errors, we estimate that 2.5 to 3 percent of people who are not covered by Medicaid

report that they are covered in the SIPP. This rate is substantially higher for children and people

from poor families. The apparent false positive error rate for low-income children is reduced by

about one-quarter when we use a relatively conservative assumption to update the administrative

records of children whose mothers report coverage in both the SIPP and the administrative data.

Although such a correction can only be performed for a small subset of the sample, simulations

with plausible error rates suggest that the 2.5 to 3 percent rate of false positive coverage

responses should be viewed as an upper bound, and that the true rate is probably closer to 2

percent.




                                                  25
                                           References

Broaddus, Matt and Jocelyn Guyer. “Losing Ground: Recent Declines in the Medi-Cal
Enrollment of Families with Children.” Unpublished Working Paper, Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities (Washington, D.C), May 2000.

Card, David. “Welfare Reform and the Labor Market Outcomes of Women.” In James Lincoln
and Paul Ong, eds., The State of California Labor. University of California at Berkeley Institute
of Industrial Relations, 2001.

Currie, Janet and Gruber, Jonathan. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care,
and Child Health,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 111, 1996, pp.431-466.

Czajka, John L. and Cara Olsen. “The Effects of Trigger Events on Changes in Children's Health
Insurance Coverage.” Unpublished Paper, Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. (Washington,
D.C.), April 2000.

Dorinski, S. M. “Continuing Research on Use of Administrative Data in SIPP Longitudinal
Estimation.” Working Paper 209, SIPP Data Program, US Bureau of the Census, 1995.

Ellwood, Marilyn R. and Kimball Lewis. “On and Off Medicaid: Enrollment Patterns for
California and Florida in 1995." Assessing the New Federalism Occasional Paper No. 27,
Urban Institute (Washington D.C.), July 1999.

Groves, Robert M. Survey Errors and Survey Costs. New York: John Wiley, 1989.

Gruber, Jonathan. “Medicaid”, NBER Working Paper 7829, August 2000.

Klein, James. “A Researcher’s Guide to Medi-Cal Data.” Unpublished Paper, Medical Care
Statistics Section, Department of Health Services, October 1999.

Shore-Sheppard, Lara. “Stemming the Tide? The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on
Health Insurance Coverage”, Unpublished Working Paper, University of Pittsburgh Department
of Economics, 1999.

State of California Legislative Analyst’s Office. “Medi-Cal Program,” Sacramento: LAO,
January 1995.

United States Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census. “Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) Quality Profile.” Available at www.census.gov/sipp/ (undated).

United States Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census. “Heath Insurance Historical
Tables.” Available at www.census.gov/hhes/hlthins/historic/ (updated December 2000).

United States House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means. “Green Book.” 2000
edition. Available at www.access.gpo.gov/congress/wm001.html.


                                                26
Table 1: Medi-Cal Eligibility Criteria and Caseload as of 1995



                                                             Number     Percent of
Eligibility Basis                                           Eligible     Eligibles


1. Categorically Eligible AFDC/SSI Recipients               4,054,300       77.5
      Families with dependent children in AFDC
      Aged, blind, and disabled in SSI/SSP

2. Women and children in low income families                  202,000        3.4
      Pregnant women with family income < 185% FPL
      Infants in families with income < 185% FPL
      Children Age 1-6 in families with income < 133% FPL
      Children Born After Sept. 1983 in families
        with income < 100% FPL

3. Undocumented persons and refugees                          282,600        5.4
      Refugees (aged, blind, disabled, under 19)
        with family income < 133% of 1991 AFDC level
      Undocumented pregnant women meeting Medi-Cal
        criteria (pregnancy-related services)
      Undocumented persons meeting Medi-Cal
        criteria (emergency services only)

4. Medically Needy Low income families                        522,500       10.0
      Families with dependent children and aged, blind
        and disabled persons with family income < 133%
        of 1991 AFDC level
      Low income families who have “spent down” to
        eligibility limits

5. Medically Indigent Women and Children                      280,500        5.4
      Pregnant women and children up to age 21 with
        family income < 133% of 1991 AFDC level, or
        who have “spent down” to eligibility limits

6.   TOTAL                                                  5,230,800      100.0


Source: State of California Legislative Analyst’s Office (1996). FPL denotes the
federal poverty line for the family unit.
Table 2: Characteristics of 1990-93 SIPP Panels



                                   1990       1991      1992      1993

Number of Interviews                  8            8      10         9

Number of Months of Coverage         32           32      40        36

Earliest Month of Coverage         10/89     10/90      10/91     10/92

Latest Month of Coverage            7/92      7/93       3/95     12/96

Number of People Ever in Panel    69,432    44,373     62,412    62,721

Number Ever in California          9,200     5,806      8,081     8,249
  [percent of total]               [13.3]    [13.1]     [12.9]    [13.2]

Number in California at First      7,213     4,707      6,307     6,454
 Interview [percent of total]      [10.4]    [10.6]     [10.1]    [10.3]


Note: Based on authors’ tabulations of SIPP full panel research files.
Table 3: Characteristics of California Residents in First Interview of
         1990-1993 SIPP Panels


                                               Status in First Interview Month:
                                                            Below      Below
                                        Under     Under    Poverty   2*Poverty    On
                                  All    Age 6    Age 16     Line      Line     Medicaid

Percent With Age:
 Under 6                         11.0    100.0      42.7      20.1       15.8     22.7
 Under 16                        25.8    100.0     100.0      43.7       35.8     46.1
 65 and Older                    10.9      0.0       0.0       3.4       10.5     12.8

Ethnicity (percent):
 White Non-Hispanic              57.7     46.6      47.4      33.1       40.0     35.2
 Black Non-Hispanic               6.3      7.8       7.6       9.6        7.8     15.2
 Asian Non-Hispanic              10.5      8.7      10.7      11.7       10.0     14.2
 Hispanic                        25.5     36.9      34.3      45.6       42.2     35.4

Attrition:
 In Survey to Month 12           97.6     98.2      98.7      95.8       96.1     97.4
 In Survey to Month 24           89.3     90.0      90.5      85.2       85.8     86.4
 In Survey to Month 32           84.8     87.3      87.8      81.1       82.2     82.6

Ratio of Family Income to Poverty Line:
 Under 1.0                    15.1      28.2        26.3     100.0      44.4      52.8
 Under 2.0                    34.9      50.1        48.4     100.0     100.0      85.6

Received AFDC During Month        6.9     17.5      15.6      31.5       18.0     53.8

Medicaid Coverage:
 On Medicaid Month 1             12.7     26.3      22.8      43.5       31.3    100.0
 On Medicaid Month 12            13.9     28.6      24.9      47.2       33.8     86.7
 On Medicaid Month 24            13.9     28.1      24.4      45.8       33.6     80.1

 On Continuously Months 1-12     10.5     20.7      18.5      38.3       26.5     82.6
 On Continuously Months 1-24      8.6     17.2      15.3      32.4       22.5     69.9

Number of Observations         24,681    2,934     6,771     4,028     8,895     3,206


Source: Authors’ tabulations of SIPP microdata. Means are weighted by SIPP weight
assigned for first year of panel (e.g., 1990 weights are used for 1990 panel).
Table 4: Characteristics of California Residents in First Interview of
         1990-1993 SIPP Panels with and Without Valid SSN




                                              Mean Characteristics
                                  All                With SSN        Without SSN

Percent with Age:
 Under 6                       11.1 (0.2)            9.0 (0.2)        21.3 (0.6)
 Under 16                      25.8 (0.3)           22.9 (0.3)        40.8 (0.7)

Ethnicity (percent):
 White Non-Hispanic            57.7   (0.3)         60.2    (0.3)     44.6    (0.7)
 Black Non-Hispanic             6.3   (0.2)          5.9    (0.2)      8.6    (0.4)
 Asian Non-Hispanic            10.5   (0.2)         10.4    (0.2)     11.0    (0.5)
 Hispanic                      25.5   (0.3)         23.5    (0.3)     35.9    (0.7)

Attrition:
 In Survey to Month 12         97.6 (0.1)           98.0 (0.1)        95.7 (0.3)
 In Survey to Month 24         89.3 (0.2)           90.2 (0.2)        84.8 (0.5)
 In Survey to Month 32         84.8 (0.2)           85.8 (0.2)        79.6 (0.6)

Ratio of Family Income to Poverty Line:
 Under 1.0                     15.5 (0.2)           14.3 (0.2)        21.8 (0.6)
 Under 2.0                     34.9 (0.3)           33.2 (0.3)        43.6 (0.7)

Received AFDC During            6.9 (0.2)            6.9 (0.2)         6.4 (0.4)

Medicaid Coverage:
 On Medicaid Month   1         12.7   (0.2)          13.0    (0.2)     11.6    (0.5)
 On Medicaid Month   12        13.9   (0.2)          13.7    (0.3)     14.7    (0.6)
 On Medicaid Month   24        13.9   (0.2)          13.6    (0.3)     15.7    (0.6)
 On Medicaid Month   32        13.8   (0.2)          13.5    (0.3)     15.9    (0.6)

Number of Observations          24,681                20,281            4,400


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Based on authors’ tabulations of 1990-1993 SIPP
microdata. Means are weighted by SIPP weight assigned for first year of panel (e.g.,
1990 weights are used for 1990 panel).
Table 5: Medicaid Coverage Rates in SIPP versus MEF for Individuals with Valid SSNs (Unweighted and Weighted)

                  Percent   Percent                                                       Conditional
                  Of all     With       MEF/SIPP Medicaid Coverage         Overall       Probability of
                  Person-    Valid     MEF=y   MEF=n   MEF=y   MEF=n   Coverage Rate:    SIPP Coverage: SIPP
GROUP             months      SSN     SIPP=y SIPP=n SIPP=n SIPP=y      MEF       SIPP    MEF=y MEF=n Reliability

All                100.00    81.04    11.59    83.98    2.00    2.42   13.59     14.01   85.27    2.81    0.80
                   100.00    84.28    11.43    84.69    1.69    2.19   13.12     13.62   87.12    2.52    0.82

Children Only:
Age 0-5             10.80    64.24    24.75    66.29    3.92    5.04   28.67     29.79   86.32    7.06    0.77
                     8.59    63.22    24.73    67.84    3.46    4.17   28.15     28.90   87.74    6.80    0.81

Age 6-15            15.88    77.05    20.47    73.21    3.07    3.25   23.54     23.72   86.95    4.25    0.82
                    15.49    77.86    20.89    73.34    2.58    3.19   23.50     24.08   88.99    4.17    0.83

Age 0-15            26.67    71.86    22.02    70.71    3.38    3.90   25.40     25.92   86.69    5.22    0.80
                    24.09    74.42    22.15    71.47    2.87    3.51   23.50     25.02   88.53    4.68    0.85

By Family Income Status:
Poor               15.79     74.52    43.64    44.59    4.86    6.90   48.50     50.54   89.98   13.41    0.77
(<100% Poverty)    14.92     78.18    44.29    44.62    4.43    6.66   48.72     50.95   90.90   12.99    0.78

Near Poor          20.69     78.16    19.28    73.21    3.40    4.11   22.68     23.39   85.01    5.31    0.78
(100-200% Poverty) 20.42     81.64    19.95    73.22    2.99    3.83   22.95     23.79   86.96    4.98    0.80

Higher Income       63.52    83.60     2.15    95.98    0.94    0.92    3.09      3.07   69.49    0.95    0.69
(>200% Poverty)     64.66    86.53     2.04    96.47    0.73    0.76    2.77      2.80   73.79    0.78    0.72

Lower-Income Children:
Age 0-5 and         2.98     63.71    63.69    22.27    5.53    8.51   69.22     72.20   92.01   27.64    0.68
<100% Poverty       2.37     66.48    66.39    22.08    4.61    9.92   71.60     73.31   93.50   23.86    0.73

Age 0-15 and         6.85    69.28    61.00    26.54    5.08    7.38   66.08     68.38   92.31   21.75    0.73
<100% Poverty        6.10    71.88    63.21    25.65    4.21    6.93   67.42     70.14   93.76   21.27    0.76

Age 0-5 and          5.53    62.38    45.09    41.40    5.53    7.98   50.62     53.07   89.07   16.16    0.73
<200% Poverty        4.36    65.83    46.56    42.03    4.89    6.52   51.45     53.08   90.49   13.43    0.77

Age 0-15 and       13.23    69.07    42.48   46.09    5.07    6.36    47.55      48.84    89.34 12.13      0.77
<200% Poverty      11.79    71.69    43.67   46.22    4.34    5.78    48.09      49.45    90.97 11.12      0.80
Notes: Entries are percentages of person-months for individuals with valid SSN   who are living in California in the
month. Unweighted percentages are in regular type, weighted percentages are in   italics.
Table 6: Medicaid Coverage Rates in SIPP versus MEF for Individuals with Valid SSNs, Medicaid Coverage Assigned if
Reported in SIPP and Mother Covered in MEF (Unweighted only)

                  Percent   Percent                                                      Conditional
                  Of all     With       MEF/SIPP Medicaid Coverage         Overall      Probability of
                  Person-    Valid     MEF=y   MEF=n   MEF=y   MEF=n   Coverage Rate:   SIPP Coverage:      SIPP
GROUP             months      SSN     SIPP=y SIPP=n SIPP=n SIPP=y      MEF       SIPP   MEF=y    MEF=n   Reliability

All                100.00    81.04    11.82    83.98    2.00    2.20   13.82   14.01    85.51     2.55      0.82

Children Only:
Age 0-5             10.80    64.24     25.78   66.29    3.92    4.00   29.71   29.79    86.80     5.69      0.81

Age 6-15            15.88    77.05     21.16   73.21    3.07    2.56   24.23   23.72    87.32     3.38      0.85

Age 0-15            26.67    71.86     22.83   70.71    3.38    3.08   26.21   25.92    87.11     4.18      0.84


By Family Income Status:
Poor             15.79       74.52    44.76    44.59    4.86    5.79   49.62   50.54    90.20    11.49      0.79
(<100% Poverty)

Near Poor        20.69       78.16     19.52   73.21    3.40    3.87   22.91   23.39    85.17     5.03      0.79
(100-200% Poverty)

Higher Income       63.52    83.60      2.18   95.98    0.94    0.90    3.12    3.07    69.73     0.93      0.70
(>200% Poverty)

Lower-Income Children:
Age 0-5 and       2.98       63.71     66.05   22.27    5.53    6.14   71.58   72.20    92.28    21.62      0.72
<100% Poverty

Age 0-15 and         6.85    69.28     63.34   26.54    5.08    5.04   68.42   68.38    92.57    15.95      0.77
<100% Poverty

Age 0-5 and          5.53    62.38     46.88   41.40    5.53    6.19   52.41   53.07    89.44    13.00      0.77
<200% Poverty

Age 0-15 and        13.23    69.07     44.06   46.09    5.07    4.79   49.13   48.84    89.69     9.41      0.80
<200% Poverty

Notes: Entries are percentages of person-months for individuals with valid SSN who are living in California in the
month.
Appendix Table 1: Probabilities of Having Valid SSN for
Individuals Living In California in First Month of 1990-1993 SIPP
Panels



 Subgroup                         Percent with Valid SSN


  All                                     82.2

By Age:
   Age 5 or less                          68.5
   Age 6-15                               78.9
   Age 16-24                              78.5
   Age 24-64                              86.7
   Age 65 or older                        90.7

By Ethnicity:
  White Non-Hispanics                     85.7
  Black Non-Hispanics                     76.6
  Asian Non-Hispanics                     81.6
  Hispanics                               76.4

By Poverty Status and Age:
   In poor family, age 15 or less         72.9
   Not in poor family, age 15 or less     74.9

   In poor family, age 16 or older        78.7
   Not in poor family, age 16 or older    86.0

By Reported Medicaid Coverage:
   Covered by Medicaid in Mo.1            84.1
   Not Covered by Medicaid in Mo. 1       81.9

   Ever Covered by Medicaid               79.8
   Never Covered by Medicaid              82.3


Notes: All table entries are unweighted counts. Sample includes
24,681 people who were living in California in first month of the
1990-1993 SIPP Panels.
Appendix Table 2: Counts of People and Person Months for
Individuals in 1990-1993 SIPP Panels Who Were Ever in California



                                                      Missing or
                       Total Sample   Valid SSN      Invalid SSN

Number of People           31,336       23,850           7,486

Average Number of           26.16        27.91           20.58
Months in SIPP with
valid Medicaid data

Average Number of        25.32           26.95           20.09
Months in SIPP with
valid Medicaid data
and Living in California

Percent of Valid            96.79        96.56           97.62
Months in California

Person Months:
Number Person-Months      793,283      642,859         150,424
in California (with
valid Medicaid data)

Number Person-Months      112,828       90,120          22,708
in California and
Covered by Medicaid

Percent of Person-          14.22        14.02           15.10
Months Covered by
Medicaid


Addendum:   percent of people ever in California         76.11
            with valid SSN

            percent of person-months in California       81.03
            contributed by people with valid SSN


Notes: all table entries are unweighted counts.
      Figure 1: AFDC and Medi-Cal Enrollment, 1988-1996


                      6000


                      5500
Enrollment (1000's)




                      5000


                      4500


                      4000


                      3500                       Medi-Cal Enrollment

                                                 Average Monthly AFDC Enrollment (x 6)
                      3000
                         1988   1989   1990   1991   1992     1993     1994     1995     1996
Figure 2: Medicaid Participation Rates in California, SIPP versus Admininstrative Data



                                      0.20

                                      0.18
 Fraction of Population on Medicaid




                                      0.16

                                                Caseload/Population                                                                                        1993 SIPP
                                      0.14
                                                                                                                                            1992 SIPP
                                                                                                               1991 SIPP
                                      0.12

                                      0.10                                                 1990 SIPP

                                      0.08

                                      0.06

                                      0.04

                                      0.02

                                      0.00
                                         89-1     89-7    90-1        90-7   91-1   91-7      92-1     92-07     93-01     93-07   94-01   94-07   95-01    95-07      96-01

                                                                                                Year and Month
Figure 3: Medicaid Coverage Rates for SIPP California Sample, by Family Income

                               90

                               80

                               70                                                                                                                 Ages 0-5
 Percent Covered by Medicaid




                                                                                                                                                  Ages 6-15
                               60
                                                                                                                                                  Women 16-64

                               50                                                                                                                 Men 16-64


                               40

                               30

                               20

                               10

                               0
                                    <0.5   0.50-0.75 0.75-1.00 1.00-1.25 1.25-1.50 1.50-1.75 1.75-2.00 2.00-2.50 2.50-3.00 3.00-4.00 4.00-5.00 5.00-7.50 7.50-10.0   10.0+

                                                                        Ratio of Monthly Family Income to Poverty Threshold
Figure 4: Medicaid Coverage, Entry and Exit Rates by Survey Month


                                 0.16

                                 0.14
Coverage, Entry, and Exit Rate




                                 0.12

                                 0.10

                                 0.08

                                 0.06

                                 0.04

                                 0.02

                                 0.00
                                        1   5   9   13      17      21      25     29         33   37
                                                           SIPP Survey Month

                                                    Coverage Rate    Exit Rate   Entry Rate
