NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BONES, BOMBS AND BREAK POINTS:
THE GEOGRAPHY OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
Donald R. Davis
David E. Weinstein
Working Paper 8517
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8517
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

The authors want to especially thank Mary Berry, Wayne Farris, and Hiroshi Kito who helped us enormously
in obtaining and understanding the historical demographic data. While their help was instrumental, all
remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors. Kazuko Shirono gave us tremendous help with the
archival and data construction aspects of the paper. Joshua Greenfield also helped input the bombing data.
Weinstein wants to also thank the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for funding part of this
research, and Seiichi Katayama for providing him with research space and access to the Kobe University
library. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2001 by Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Bones, Bombs and Break Points: The Geography of Economic Activity
Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 8517
October 2001
JEL No. F1, R1, J1

ABSTRACT
We consider the distribution of economic activity within a country in light of three leading
theories - increasing returns, random growth, and locational fundamentals. To do so, we examine the
distribution of regional population in Japan from the Stone Age to the modern era. We also consider the
Allied bombing of Japanese cities in WWII as a shock to relative city sizes. Our results support a hybrid
theory in which locational fundamentals establish the spatial pattern of relative regional densities, but
increasing returns may help to determine the degree of spatial differentiation. One implication of these
results is that even large temporary shocks to urban areas have no long-run impact on city size.

Donald R. Davis
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1038 Int’l Affairs Building
420 West 118th St.
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
drd28@columbia.edu

David E. Weinstein
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th St.
MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dew35@columbia.edu

2

Bones, Bombs and Break Points
The Geography of Economic Activity
I. Introduction
In the last decade, the field of economic geography has enjoyed a renaissance.1 The
central question in this literature is how to explain the distribution of economic activity across
space – across countries of the world, across regions within a country, and across cities. Three
principal theoretical approaches have emerged, which may be termed increasing returns; random
growth; and locational fundamentals. The increasing returns theories posit that advantages of
size may arise from knowledge spillovers, labor market pooling, or the advantages of proximity
for both suppliers and demanders in a world of costly trade. In this approach, a distribution of
city sizes may arise from technological characteristics of individual industries (Henderson 1974)
or from the tacit competition among locations for mobile factors of production (Krugman 1991).
The random growth theory (Simon 1955, Gabaix 1999) holds that a distribution of cities of quite
different sizes emerges from very simple stochastic processes. One large advantage of this
approach is that it is able to explain a key empirical regularity known as Zipf’s Law regarding
the distribution of city sizes that, to date, the increasing returns theories cannot explain. The
locational fundamentals theory (Krugman 1996) may be thought of as a variant of the random
growth theory. Instead of city growth itself being random, it is fundamental economic
characteristics of locations that are random. If we posit that these characteristics are distributed
according to the same process as in Gabaix (1999), then the locational fundamentals theory also
can account for Zipf’s Law. However, in contrast to the random growth theory, the locational
1

Paul Krugman has argued that the study of the spatial location of economic activity should assume a stature in the
profession equal to one of the flagship fields such as international trade [Paul R. Krugman 1995]. A new Journal of
Economic Geography has been founded. While demurring from some of Krugman’s strongest claims, J. Peter
Neary, writing a review article in the Journal of Economic Literature, declares “New economic geography has come
of age” [Neary 2001, p. 536].

3
fundamentals story predicts that the size of specific locations should be robust even to large
temporary shocks.2
In this paper, we will examine these three theories empirically. A few key questions
emerge. How important are scale economies in explaining the degree of spatial concentration of
economic activity?3 The premise that we work from is that the forces of increasing returns must
be vastly stronger in a modern, knowledge-based economy than in more primitive, agricultural or
pre-agricultural, economies. To investigate this, we employ a unique data set on Japanese
regional population over the past 8,000 years. The answer that we provide has two parts. First,
for the 8,000 years in our data set, there has always been a great deal of variation in measures of
regional population density. This alone suggests that important factors other than increasing
returns help to explain the variation in the density of economic activity. Second, there has been a
notable rise in concentration in the last century as Japan industrialized and become ever more
integrated into the world economy. This suggests that the increasing returns theories may help to
account for the rise in dispersion.
The same data set can be employed to address a second key question. Over tens,
hundreds or thousands of years, how much persistence should we expect in the identity of the
most densely settled regions? The increasing returns theories do not answer with a single voice.
Insofar as the size distribution is tied to technological characteristics of particular industries, then
2

It is tempting to say that one of the main things missing from the new economic geography is geography! This
would be a bit too strong, since Fujita and Mori (1996), for example have a very nice paper on the role of ports.
More typical, though, is a tendency to focus almost exclusively on factors with no real geographical counterpart, as
in the survey by Fujita and Thisse (1996): “The main reasons for the formation of economic clusters involving firms
and/or households are analyzed: (i) externalities under perfect competition; (ii) increasing returns under
monopolistic competition; and (iii) spatial competition under strategic interaction.”
3
Indeed, FKV have staked strong claims for the IR theories: “[T]he dramatic spatial unevenness of the real economy
– the disparities between densely populated manufacturing belts and thinly populated farm belts, between congested
cities and desolate rural areas; the spectacular concentration of particular industries in Silicon Valleys and
Hollywoods – is surely the result not of inherent differences among locations but of some set of cumulative
processes, necessarily involving some form of increasing returns, whereby geographic concentration can be selfreinforcing.” [FKV, p. 2].

4
as we move from hunter-gatherer societies, to agriculture-based societies, through feudalism,
into and out of autarky, and finally to a modern industrial economy, one might guess that there
would be radical shifts over time in which are the densely populated regions. On the other hand,
an important strand within the increasing returns theories has stressed the role of path
dependence (David 2000, Krugman 1991b). An early start in one location provides that site with
advantages at each succeeding stage of locational competition. The random growth theory is
likewise consistent with correlation across long stretches of time in the spatial density of
particular locations so long as the variance of growth rates is not too large relative to the mean
growth rate. The clearest prediction comes from the locational fundamentals theory, which
would hold that many of the crucial characteristics for locations have changed little over time
even if the economic meaning may have evolved. For example, there are advantages of being
near a river, on the coast, on a plain instead of a mountain or desert, etc. Our empirical results
strongly confirm that there is a great deal of persistence across time in which are the densely
settled regions. For the increasing returns theory, this would stress the importance of path
dependence. For the random growth theory, this requires that the variance of growth have not
been too high. However, we believe that this persistence arises most naturally from the locational
fundamentals story and suggests this may be an important component of a complete answer.
Finally, the theories have quite distinct stories to tell about how the distribution of city
sizes will be affected by a powerful, but temporary, shock. The increasing returns literature, as
noted earlier, has given a prominent role to path dependence as well as to the possibility of
catastrophes in which even small shocks may give rise to large and irreversible structural

5
changes in relative city sizes.4 By looking at a large shock, one can gauge how important these
theoretical possibilities of catastrophic spatial change are in practice. The pure random growth
theory predicts that growth follows a random walk. All shocks have permanent effects. By
contrast, the locational fundamentals story holds that so long as the shock is purely temporary,
even strong shocks should shortly be reversed, as the advantages of the particular locations
reassert themselves in relatively rapid growth rates on the path to recovery.
The particular experiment that we consider is the Allied bombing of Japanese cities
during World War II. This is one of the most powerful shocks to relative city sizes that the world
has ever experienced. We find that, in the wake of the destruction, there was an extremely
powerful recovery. Most cities returned to their relative position in the distribution of city sizes
within about fifteen years. This strikes most strongly at the random growth theory, which
predicts no reversion to the prior path. For the increasing returns theory, this suggests that
however appealing the theoretical possibility of spatial catastrophes, in practice the distribution
of city sizes seems to be highly robust to temporary shocks even of great magnitude. Finally, the
reversion to the prior growth path would seem to be a strong confirmation of a locational
fundamentals theory.
In sum, our experiments are very problematic for the pure random growth theory. While
this theory provides a foundation for understanding Zipf’s Law, it fails utterly to predict the great
robustness of particular locations to strong temporary shocks. For the increasing returns theory,
the message is more nuanced. There has long been a great deal of spatial dispersion of economic
activity, so increasing returns is not necessary to explain this. Nonetheless, in the last century
there has been a substantial rise in the degree of spatial dispersion, and this well might be
4

For example, Krugman (1998) writes: “The new work is highly suggestive, particularly in indicating how historical
accident can shape economic geography, and how gradual changes in underlying parameters can produce
discontinuous change in spatial structure.”

6
accounted for by increasing returns. The emphasis within the increasing returns literature on the
possibility of spatial catastrophes in the distribution of city sizes seems to be of greater interest
theoretically than empirically. Finally, the locational fundamentals theory fares quite well in our
empirical investigations. It has an advantage over the increasing returns theory in that it provides
a simple account of Zipf’s Law. It can provide a consistent story about why there has been a
great deal of spatial dispersion over long stretches of time. It can explain why there has been a
great deal of persistence in which regions are most densely settled. And it can explain why
specific locations are highly robust even to temporary shocks of great magnitude. The one
weakness is that it does not provide a reason why the degree of concentration in Japan should
have increased in the last century.
These considerations lead us to believe that the most promising direction for research is
to consider a hybrid theory in which locational fundamentals play a key role in establishing the
basic pattern of relative regional densities and in which increasing returns plays a strong role in
determining the degree of concentration.

II. Bones: Archaeology, History and Economic Geography
A. The Data
In this section, we examine 8,000 years of data on Japanese regions in order to address
key questions concerning variation and persistence of regional population densities. Historically,
how large has the variation in regional population density been and are there important changes
over time? And how persistent is the identity of the regions that have been most densely settled?
We then discuss the results in light of the three theories noted above.

7
The data that we bring to bear is of two main types.5 As we move back in time two
millennia and more, one has access neither to regional accounts nor to population censuses.
However, Koyama (1978) provides detailed data on the number of archaeological sites, including
28,013 from the Jomon period (-6,000 to –300) and another 10,530 sites from the Yayoi period
(-300 to 300). These have been divided according to the 46 modern prefectures in which they are
located. We take a count of these archaeological sites for the respective periods as a proxy for the
level of economic activity in the prefectures.
The second type of data is population. In order to provide a basis for taxation, Japan
began censuses of population quite early. This was done at a regional level because of the
substantial autonomy of local lords. Kito (1996) provides the best estimates of regional
population for 68 provinces (kuni) for the period beginning in 725 and ending in 1872. In 1920
regional censuses began using a system based on 46 prefectures (ken), and this system continues
through our most recent data for the year 1998.6 Often we will find it convenient to work with
data that allows a comparison across all of these periods of time. A quite close match between
the data sets can be achieved when we aggregate up to 39 regions. Kito (1996) also provides
estimates of total population of Japan for the Jomon and Yayoi periods.
We need to discuss the unit of analysis. A great deal of work on economic geography
considers cities rather than regions as the unit of analysis. We do have data on cities, and we will
discuss it, but this data extends back only to 1925. All of our earlier data concerns regions, which
thus must be the unit of analysis. There are, nonetheless, good reasons why one might prefer the
regional data. The first is that since the definition of a city always involves a threshold, even
purely uniform growth of population in all locations may appear non-uniform because

5
6

Details on data construction are discussed in Appendix I.
The move to prefectures occurred earlier, but the 1920 census is the first to use these categories.

8
populations may cross the threshold in some locations but not others. A second reason is that,
especially over long stretches of time, the appropriate definition of cities changes. For example,
areas that are considered core parts of modern Tokyo would not have been thought of as part of
historical Tokyo (Edo). It is not at all clear how one should or could deal with such issues. Third,
for some of our early periods, virtually all of the population lived outside of anything that in
modern terms would be thought of as a city. Taken together, these factors suggest that the turn to
regional data may be a necessity, but it is one with many virtues.
By focusing on regional data, one transformation becomes absolutely essential.
Differences in region sizes are large and the demarcation between regions does not always
correspond to an obvious economic rationale. This suggests that we work not with the raw
regional population, but instead with the population deflated by the regional area. This measure
of regional population density will be the unit of analysis for this portion of our study.7
One of the key reasons for turning to the historical data is that economies of the remote
past look quite different from the modern economy. By examining such data, we are able to
abstract from forces that we think are important today, but much less so in earlier times. Hence it
is also important to have in mind the principal features of the earlier economies (as outlined in
Table 1). Our earliest data on archaeological sites of the Jomon period (-6,000 to –300) takes us
back to the Stone Age. The economy is based on hunting and gathering. There are no metal tools
or agriculture, although there is evidence of pottery. The Yayoi period (-300 to 300) is a
revolutionary time, with the introduction of primitive forms of agriculture, metallurgy and some
coins. As yet, there is neither writing nor cloth. Our next stop in history is the year 725. A feudal
regime had risen and we have the first population census. Writing is well developed and farming
is widespread. The capital is in Nara. By 800, the capital has moved to Kyoto and greater
7

Rappaport and Sachs (2001) also focus on regional population densities in the U.S. for similar reasons.

9
protection of peasant property rights has encouraged more widespread cultivation. The next
century would see more extensive usage of metal farm tools, raising productivity. By 1150,
Japan was racked by instability and civil war, particularly in the North. By 1600, the
reunification of Japan was complete and there is extensive trade and contact with the West. Japan
is a major regional power. By the 1630s, however, Japan began more than two centuries of selfimposed isolation. By 1721, the capital moved to Tokyo and population movement became more
restricted. Even as late as 1798, fully 80 percent of the population was farmers, about 6 percent
nobility, with the remainder merchants and artisans. By the 1870s, Japan witnessed a civil war,
the end of the Shogun’s government, a jump from autarky to free trade, and the subsidized
import of Western technology. This can be thought of as the very start of Japan’s industrial
revolution. By the 1920s, industrialization and the accompanying militarization are in full swing.
Japan is a major exporter of silk and textiles. Nonetheless, approximately 50 percent of the work
force is still composed of farmers. By 1998, of course, Japan is a highly industrialized society,
with farmers now comprising only 5 percent of the population. Tokyo is one of the world’s great
cities with a population of 12 million. In sum, our data covers Japan from the Stone Age to the
modern era.

B. Population and Variation in Regional Density
We begin by examining the evolution of the total population of Japan. The main features
are developed in Table 1. Kito (1996) estimates that the population in Jomon period Japan would
have been approximately 125,000; by 1998, it would fall just shy of 120 million. In short, our
data encompasses a period in which Japanese population rises by a factor of nearly one thousand.
If we restrict attention to the period for which we have censuses, i.e. from 725 to 1998, the

10
population rises from 4.5 million to nearly 120 million. That is, our census data encompasses a
period in which total Japanese population rises by a factor greater than 25. From the Jomon
period through about 1721, the broad trend is substantial population growth. In large measure,
this reflects the development of agriculture and its implements, extension of regions of
cultivation, and establishment of institutions that encouraged investments in the land. For the
next century and a half, through the 1870s, there is very little population growth. In the next
hundred and twenty years, through 1998, Japanese population would double twice over, rising
from 30 to 120 million.
There are several measures one can give of variation in regional population density. A
very coarse but simple measure is the share of population accounted for by the five most
populous regions. This concentration was quite high, at 39 percent, in the Jomon period. This
appears to reflect the fact that without agriculture, metal tools, or clothing, major sections of
Japan were virtually uninhabitable. From here through the dawn of the twentieth century, the
share of the five largest regions typically hovered around 20 percent, occasionally rising toward
30 percent. Remarkably, by the end of the twentieth century, the share of the five most populous
regions would rise above 40 percent.
A second measure of regional variation is what may be termed the relative variance of
log population density, which measures variance in proportional terms. To get this, first take logs
of the regional population densities. For each period, this allows us to compute a variance of the
log population densities. If we now normalize this by the same measure of variation for 1998, we
get a measure that is above unity if the variation is greater in the historical period than in modern
Japan and below unity in the reverse case. 8

8

An advantage of using this measure over simply using the variance in population density is that the former is
invariant to average density while the latter tends to rise with it. The reason for this is that as population, and hence

11
A first observation is that regional population variation is substantially higher in the
modern period than at all prior dates except the Jomon and Yayoi periods. Again, one reason
there is so much variation in the Jomon and Yayoi periods is simply that the economies were so
primitive that major sections of Japan were almost uninhabitable. A second observation is that all
of the censuses from 700 to 1600 show a great deal of variation in regional population density –
typically two-thirds to three-fourths of the modern variation. Indeed an F-test reveals that we
cannot reject the hypothesis that variance in regional population density in any year prior to 1721
was the same as the modern variance (at the 5 percent level). Interestingly, the data from 1721
through 1872 show, the closure of Japan seems to have been accompanied by a substantial
reduction in regional population variation. A plausible reason is that eight out of the twelve
densest regions in 1600 comprised port cities whose share of population declined markedly over
this time period.9 Closure to trade probably dramatically reduced the value of locating in a port
relative to remaining in farming.10 Finally, the re-opening of Japan and the development of the
modern economy gave rise to a substantial increase in regional variation in population density.
We can also examine a third measure of variation in regional density, the Zipf coefficient.
We have already noted, in reference to the random growth theory, that there is an empirical
regularity known as Zipf’s Law for Cities. To understand this, rank the cities by population and
now take logs of both the rank of the city and of its population. Zipf’s Law for Cities holds that a
regression of the log rank against log population will have a slope of minus unity. Gabaix (1999)
reports a slope of –1.004 for the United States and Rosen and Resnick (1980) report slopes for a
variety of OECD countries, many of which are reasonably close to minus unity.
average density, rises, the same proportional density differences produce higher absolute variations in density.
Since we wanted to sweep this effect out of the data, we calculate variance based on log population density.
9
These were Chiba, Fukuoka, Kobe, Nagoya, Osaka, Tokyo, Yokkaichi, and Yokohama.
10
Other policies may also have affected city sizes such as the construction of castle-towns, tax evasion in rural
areas, and declining finances for samurai [See Hall (1968) and Hanley and Yamamura (1977)]

12
In this context, the magnitude of the Zipf coefficient provides information about variation
in regional density. If there were only trivial variation in regional population density, then the
Zipf slope would be close to minus infinity. If virtually all of the population were clustered in a
single region, the Zipf coefficient would be close to zero. Hence when the magnitude of the Zipf
coefficient is small, the variation is large. Here we will report Zipf coefficients computed not on
city populations but on regional population densities. As we will see, this transformation does
little to disturb the basic relation.
One should not directly run Zipf-style regressions on historical data since the population
data is surely measured with error. In order to obtain unbiased estimates, we need an instrument
correlated with historical population data but not correlated with the measurement error in that
survey. An obvious instrument that fits the need is modern population density, since it is
strongly correlated with historical density but not with historical census errors. We therefore
used density in 1998 as an instrument for earlier census data. We had a different problem with
the Jomon and Yayoi data. Urban density in 1998 is not a good instrument, since archaeological
discoveries might be correlated with modern construction. However, since most Japanese
archaeological discoveries of Jomon and Yayoi sites occurred since 1960 [see Koyama (1978)],
we used 1920 density data as an instrument for these regressions.
Table 1 reports the Zipf coefficient for each of our time periods. The broad story that it
tells confirms the results from the prior non-parametric statistics. Dispersion was relatively high
in the Jomon and Yayoi periods – indeed very close to fitting Zipf’s Law. Regional variation in
density declined modestly for the period 725 to 1600, before declining sharply in the period in
which Japan was closed to the West. Since Japan reopened and began its industrialization,

13
regional variation has increased substantially, reaching a Zipf coefficient of –0.96 in 1998. 11 The
coefficients are quite precisely estimated. With the exception of the Jomon period, which has a
standard error of 0.22, our standard errors on the Zipf coefficient range from 0.03 in 1998 to 0.17
in the year 900. We cannot statistically distinguish the modern coefficient from that in 1600 or
any prior date.
Our examination of 8,000 years of Japanese regional data reveals three important facts.
First, regional population densities have always varied greatly in Japan. This is true in the Stone
Age, at the dawn of the agricultural revolution, during the long period of feudalism, and it
remains true in modern industrial Japan. Indeed, with the exception of Stone Age Japan, our
spread of Zipf coefficients is well within the range of coefficients that one would find in a
sample of OECD countries [cf. Rosen and Resnick (1980)].12 Second, the closure of Japan to
trade for more than two centuries was accompanied by a substantial reduction in the variation of
regional population density. Large port-based regions appear to have lost ground relative to
regions directed more exclusively to national activity. Third, the industrial revolution in Japan,
coming hand in hand with its re-opening to international trade, does seem to have promoted a
very high degree of regional concentration and variation in regional population density.

C. Persistence in Regional Population Densities
We now turn to consider persistence in the identity of the regions that are densely settled.
Table 1 reports both raw and rank correlations between the regional population densities in the
11

On first blush, this might appear to conflict with the results of Eaton and Eckstein (1997) that showed the stability
of the Zipf coefficients for Japanese cities over the period 1925-1985. Here the difference between their use of city
data and our use of regional data is crucial, since this suggests that even if there is little change in the distribution of
city sizes, there may be important spatial correlation among cities that are growing, which could explain the
increased variation in regional densities.
12
Rosen and Resnick (1980) estimate the Zipf relationship for a broad set of countries using a comparable number
of observations. Within the OECD countries in their sample, Zipf coefficients range from −0.88 to −1.96.

14
various periods with those for 1998. Consider first the Jomon data, dating from Japan’s Stone
Age (-6,000 to –300). The raw and rank correlations of the density of archaeological sites from
this period and 1998 regional population density are 0.53 and 0.31 respectively. The higher raw
correlation especially captures the fact that the most densely settled regions are common in the
two periods. The lower rank correlation captures the fact that large sections of Japan were
relatively untouched by the Jomon people and so the rankings among these are weak.
Consider next the Yayoi period (-300 to 300). Agriculture and metallurgy are just being
introduced. Writing has not yet appeared. In the next two millennia, total population will rise by
a factor of 200. If we know the distribution of the regional density of archaeological sites from
the Yayoi period, how much information would we expect this to provide about the distribution
of modern regional population densities? The raw and rank correlations are 0.67 and 0.50
respectively. Given that two millennia of Japanese history separate these dates, with the
accompanying economic transformations, we consider this persistence to be quite remarkable.
In moving to the year 725, we now are able to work with the first census data and ask the
same questions. A feudal regime is in place. The vast majority of the population is agricultural.
Nonetheless, the raw and rank correlations of regional population densities in 725 and 1998 are
0.60 and 0.71 respectively. Again, these show a remarkable persistence.
We will not discuss every date. Perhaps not surprisingly, there is a general trend that raw
and rank correlations with modern regional densities rise pretty steadily. We will cite just one
last date. If we look four centuries back to the year 1600, a time in which Japan had a population
just over 10 percent of its modern population, the raw and rank correlations with the modern
regional densities are 0.76 and 0.83 respectively.

15
In sum, it is absolutely striking how much persistence there is in the distribution of
regional population density throughout Japanese history. The high correlations trace back
virtually to the Stone Age. The correlations between modern regional densities and those of
Japan four centuries ago are remarkably strong. Persistence is a very strong feature of the data.

III. Bombs and Break Points
Imagine a calamity destroys a large share of a city’s productive capacity and drastically
reduces its population. Will this temporary shock have permanent effects? Or is there a strong
tendency for locations to be robust even to large temporary shocks so that this city will shortly
revert to its former place in the constellation of cities? An ideal experiment would have several
key features. The shocks would be large, highly variable, clearly identifiable and purely
temporary. In this section, we will consider the Allied bombing of Japanese cities during World
War II as precisely such an experiment.

A. Data
Our data covers 303 Japanese cities with population in excess of 30,000 in 1925.
Population is recorded at five-year intervals between 1925 and 1965, with the exception that the
regular 1945 census is delayed until 1947 due to disruption from the war. These data allow us to
compute population growth rates for the pre-war period, 1925-1940; the period of the war itself
and its immediate aftermath, 1940-1947; and two measures of the recovery period, 1947-1960
and 1947-1965.13
One measure of the intensity of the shocks will be the dead and missing city residents due
to war actions. The missing are included because the magnitude of the shocks frequently made
13

More detail is provided in the Appendix.

16
recovery of bodies impossible, as for example with those vaporized by the Hiroshima nuclear
blast. In order to have a measure of the intensity of the shocks, the dead and missing will
typically enter deflated by the number of city residents in 1940. A second measure of the
intensity of the shocks will be the number of buildings destroyed per resident. We also at times
report the percentage of the built up area destroyed for the 66 Japanese cities covered by the
United States Strategic Bombing Survey.
If we are to understand the impact of private actions that may lead cities to recover, it is
important to control for government actions. The Japan Statistical Yearbook provides data on
expenditures from US and Japanese government sources designated for the reconstruction of war
damage in each prefecture. We allocate these among the cities within the prefecture in
proportion to the shares of buildings destroyed in that prefecture. These are divided by the
population in the city in 1947 to create our variable, “government reconstruction expenses,”
which is thousands of yen per capita spent by the government to reconstruct a city. These
geographically-directed expenditures are quite small. For example, most food aid, income
assistance, and industrial subsidy programs did not discriminate on the basis of location, and
therefore do not count as regional subsidies. Interestingly, rural prefectures, which typically
sustained less war damage, received significantly more aid relative to the number of buildings
destroyed than more urban areas. This was probably due to Japan’s long-term policy of
subsidizing rural districts at the expense of urban ones.

B. Magnitude of the Shocks

17
The Allied strategic bombing in World War II devastated Japanese cities. It targeted
sixty-six cities. The bombing destroyed almost half of all structures in these cities – a total of 2.2
million buildings. Two-thirds of productive capacity vanished. Three hundred thousand Japanese
were killed. Forty percent of the population was rendered homeless. Some cities lost as much as
half of their population owing to deaths, missing, and refugees.14
The nuclear bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki are, of course, well known. The first
atomic weapon was dropped on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, and was the equivalent of 12
kilotons of TNT. The temperature at the blast site is believed to have surpassed one million
degrees Celsius. Over two-thirds of the built up area of the city was destroyed. The blast may
have killed as many as 80,000 people – more than 20 percent of Hiroshima’s population. The
second atomic weapon was dropped on Nagasaki on August 9 and had a power nearly twice that
of Hiroshima, at 22 kilotons. The hilly topography of Nagasaki and the fact that the bomb missed
its target by a wide margin kept the destruction of the built up area under 40 percent. Still, more
than 25,000 were killed or went missing, approximately 8.5 percent of city residents.
While the nuclear attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki are widely known among the
public in the West, the devastation of other Japanese cities is much less well known. An example
of the magnitude of the destruction is a single firebombing raid on Tokyo the night of March 9,
1945. United States B-29 Superfortress bombers, based in the Marianas Islands, flew more than
300-strong over Tokyo that night. Under a new strategy devised by General Curtis LeMay, the
bombers flew with minimal defenses and at low altitudes. This allowed them to maximize the
payload of napalm incendiaries and to release these at precise intervals. Tokyo had received no
rain in a week and the wind that night blew at 25 miles per hour. Tokyo, a city of straw, paper,
and wood, lay in wait. The B-29 Superfortresses flew over Tokyo for just three hours on March
14

These numbers are from USSBS (1947).

18
9, dropping 1.7 kilotons of napalm incendiaries. This unleashed a firestorm. Rivers boiled.
Asphalt streets liquefied and burst into flame. The results were devastating. Sixteen square miles
of Tokyo were reduced to ash. At least 80,000 people were killed in that raid alone (Werrell p.
162-3).
The magnitude of destruction in the March 9 raid on Tokyo was large not only by
Japanese standards; when it happened, it was the deadliest single-day air attack in the history of
the world. The number of people killed was of the same order of magnitude as the nuclear
bombing of Hiroshima. Japan suffered more civilian casualties in that one raid than Britain
suffered in all of World War II. And this was just the beginning. By the end of the war, the US
had destroyed more square miles of Tokyo than the combined destruction in the fifteen most
heavily bombed German cities [Werrell (1996) p. 32].
A major reason why Tokyo stands out in Japanese data is due to the fact that with a 1940
population of 7.3 million it was by far the largest target in Japan. Given that Tokyo was sixteen
times the size of Hiroshima and more than twenty times the size of Nagasaki, even nuclear
bombs could not kill as many people in these smaller cities. This suggests the value of
considering destruction in proportional rather than absolute terms. Seen this way, the destruction
in the course of the war of 56 square miles of Tokyo only amounted to 50.8 percent of its built
up area (USSBS p. 42). This is actually just under the median percentage of urban destruction of
50.9 percent for the 66 targeted cities. In short, in terms of the destruction of built up area for the
targeted cities, the devastation of Tokyo we described made it just a typical city.15

15

The Allies dropped 17 pounds of incendiaries per capita on the median firebombed city, but only 4 pounds per
capita on Tokyo. Tokyo nonetheless still stands out for the number who died. It seems likely that in smaller cities
there was greater opportunity to escape the firestorms.

19
C. Variance of the Shocks
While the magnitude of the shocks to city sizes was large, there was also a great deal of
variability in these shocks. In fact, approximately 80 percent of the 300 cities in our sample,
collectively representing 37 percent of the urban population, were virtually untouched by the
bombings. This includes large cities. Kyoto, the fifth largest city at the beginning of the war, was
not bombed at all.16 Given the city’s historical significance, it was believed that its destruction
might strengthen the Japanese will to resist. The large cities of Niigata and Kitakyushu escaped
substantial damage because they were preserved as potential nuclear bomb targets. Cities in the
North of Japan, such as Sapporo, escaped heavy bombing because they were largely out of range
of US bomber forces.
Even among those cities that did suffer firebombing, there is a high degree of variability
in the destruction. One reason is learning by doing. The creation of a firestorm from napalm
incendiaries depended on having a sufficient number of planes, dropping the incendiaries in
precise patterns and at relatively close intervals. While some tests of the incendiaries had been
conducted on mock Japanese cities at the Dugway Proving Grounds in Utah, it was only as a
result of the experience of actual bombing raids that US forces achieved the optimal pattern.
Moreover, cities such as Nagoya, which were firebombed early, had as a result of those raids the
equivalent of firebreaks within the city. In the subsequent raids, it became nearly impossible to
create highly destructive firestorms.
In addition, there were a large number of other factors at work that created variance in the
destruction of cities. These include the steady growth in the number of B-29s available for
service; the evolving defense capabilities of the Japanese cities (which was important notably for
16

Our definition of “virtually untouched” is casualties of under 100. Hammel (1998) reports no air attacks on
Kyoto. Nakamura and Miyazaki (1995) do report 82 casualties in Kyoto (1940 Pop. 1.1 million) due to the war.
Presumably these were due to targeting errors, strafing, and/or Kyoto residents who were killed in other cities.

20
Osaka); the topography of specific cities; and sheer fortune, as in the fact that Nagasaki was
bombed only when the primary target, Kokura (now Kitakyushu), could not be visually
identified due to cloud cover.

D. Temporary Nature of the Shocks
Rarely does one find shocks that can so clearly be identified as temporary. For much of
World War II, Japanese cities were simply out of range of US bombers. In the first year of the
war, the US managed only the single “Doolittle raid” on Japan from a US carrier, and this had
little more than psychological impact. Later, the US tried to use China as a base for attacks on
Japanese cities. But the long flights required and the difficult supply lines insured that these had
only minimal effect. It was only with the capture of the Marianas islands as a B-29 base, the
seizure of Iwo Jima (which lay directly between the Marianas and Japan) as a base for fighter
escorts, a rise in the number of planes available, and the introduction of new tactics by General
LeMay that the US attacks reached an apogee. The most powerful attacks were compressed in
the last five months of the war.
While the devastation of many of these cities was powerful, once the flames were out, the
geographical characteristics of particular locations are affected little or not at all. The one
possible exception, of course, is the lingering radiation in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This will
make these particularly interesting cases to see whether they were special cases in the period of
recovery from the war.

E. Impact of the Shocks: Temporary or Permanent?

21
We now inquire whether temporary shocks have permanent effects on relative city sizes.
Let Sit be city i’s share of total population at time t, and let sit be the natural logarithm of this
share. Suppose further that each city has an initial size Ωi and is buffeted by city-specific shocks

εit. In this case we can write the size of any city at any point in time as,
sit = Ωi + ε it

(1)

We can model the persistence in these shocks to population shares as:

ε it +1 = ρε it + ν it +1

(2)

The parameter ρ ∈ [0,1] and the innovation, νit, is an iid error term.
We examine the evolution of this system by first differencing equation (1). This yields
sit +1 − sit = ε it +1 − ε it

(3)

If we substitute equation (2) into equation (3), we then obtain
sit +1 − sit = ( ρ − 1)ν it + ν it +1 + ρ (1 − ρ ) ε it −1 

(4)

The key parameter is ρ, which tells us how much of a temporary shock is dissipated in one
period. If ρ = 1, then all shocks are permanent and city size follows a random walk.17 In this
case,
sit +1 = sit + ν it +1

(5)

If ρ ∈ [0,1), then city share is stationary and any shock will dissipate over time. In other words,
these two hypotheses can be distinguished by identifying the parameter ρ.
One approach to investigating the magnitude of ρ is to search for a unit root. It is well
known that unit root tests usually have little power to separate ρ < 1 from ρ = 1. This is due to
the fact that in traditional unit root tests the innovations are not observable and so identify ρ with
17

Equation (5) is identical with the key equation in Gabaix (1999).

22
very large standard errors. A major advantage of our data set is that we can easily identify the
innovations due to bombing. In particular, since by hypothesis the innovation, νit, is uncorrelated
with the term in square brackets, then if we can identify the innovation, we can obtain an
unbiased estimate of ρ.
An obvious method of looking at the innovation is to use the growth rate from 1940 to
1947. However, this measure of the innovation may contain not only information about the
bombing but also past growth rates. This is a measurement error problem that could bias our
estimates in either direction depending on ρ.18 In order to solve this, we instrument the growth
rate from 1940-47 with buildings destroyed per capita and deaths per capita.
We can obtain a general feel for the data by considering the impact of bombing on city
growth rates. As we argued earlier, if city growth rates follow a random walk, then all shocks to
cities should be permanent. In this case, one should expect to see no relationship between
historical shocks and future growth rates. Moreover, if one believes that there is positive serial
correlation in the data, then one should expect to see a positive correlation between past and
future growth rates. By contrast, if one believes that location specific factors are crucial in
understanding the distribution of population, then one should expect to see a negative
relationship between a historical shock and the subsequent growth rate. In Figure 1 we present a
plot of population growth between 1947 and 1960 with that between 1940 and 1947. The sizes
of the circles represent the population of the city in 1925. The figure reveals a very clear
negative relationship the two growth rates. This indicates that cities that suffered the largest

The actual estimating equation is si60 – si47 = (ρ - 1) νι47 + [νi60 + ρ (ρ - 1) εi34]. Our measure of the shock is the
growth rate between 1940 and 1947 or si47 – si40 = νι47 + [ρ εi34 - εi40]. This is clearly correlated with error term in
the estimating equation, hence we instrument.
18

23
population declines due to bombing tended to have the fastest postwar growth rates, while cities
whose populations boomed conversely had much lower growth rates thereafter.
In Table 2, we present a regression showing the power of our instruments. Deaths per
capita and destruction per capita explain about 41 percent of the variance in population growth of
cities between 1940 and 1947. Interestingly although both have the expected signs, destruction
seems to have had a more pronounced effect on the populations of cities. Presumably, this is
because, with a few notable exceptions, the number of people killed was only a few percent of
the city’s population.
We now turn to test whether the temporary shocks give rise to permanent effects. In
order to estimate equation (4), we regress the growth rate of cities between 1947 and 1960 on the
growth rate between 1940 and 1947 using deaths and destruction per capita as instruments for
the wartime growth rates. The coefficient on growth between 1940 and 1947 corresponds to (ρ 1). In addition, we include government subsidies to cities to control for policies designed to
rebuild cities.
If one believes that cities follow a random walk or that catastrophes can permanently alter
the size of cities, then one should expect the coefficient on the 40-47 growth rate, (ρ -1), should
be zero. If one believes that the temporary shocks have only temporary effects, then the
coefficient on 40-47 growth should be negative. A coefficient of minus one indicates that all of
the shock was dissipated by 1960.
The results are presented in Table 3. The coefficient on 40-47 growth is –1.0, indicating
that at this interval ρ is zero. This means that the typical city completely recovered its former
relative size within 15 years following the end of World War II. Given the magnitude of the
destruction, this is quite surprising. Apparently, US bombing of Japanese cities had no impact on

24
the typical city’s size in 1960. This strongly rejects the hypothesis that growth in city size share
is a random walk.
As expected, reconstruction subsidies seem to have had a positive and statistically
significant impact on rebuilding cities. However, the economic impact is quite modest. Our
estimates suggest that a one standard deviation increase in reconstruction expenses would
increase the size of a city in 1960 by 2.2 percent. Reconstruction expenses probably had a small
effect because both the sums spent and the variance in the sums were small. In the cities that
suffered the heaviest destruction – Tokyo, Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and Osaka – our estimates
indicate that government reconstruction expenses accounted for less than one percentage point of
their cumulative growth between 1947 and 1960. Given that cumulative growth in these cities
over that period was between 55 and 96 percent, we conclude that reconstruction expenses had
relatively small impacts. As we noted earlier, a major reason for this was that reconstruction
policies, like most Japanese regional policies, disproportionately sent money to rural areas. As a
result, the four biggest per capita recipients of assistance were small northern cities that were
never targeted by US bombers.
One potential problem with these results is that it is possible that the US inadvertently
targeted cities based on underlying growth rates. While this was not an explicit strategy, we
cannot rule it out. If the US bombed rapidly growing cities more heavily, then we may be
biasing our results downwards. We therefore repeated our exercise adding the growth rate
between 1925 and 1940 to our list of independent variables. This improves the fit, but does not
qualitatively change the results, although the coefficient on 40-47 growth falls to –0.76. This
implies that bombed cities had recovered over three-fourths of their lost growth by 1960. One
reasonable question to ask, then, is whether these cities ever returned to their prewar trajectories

25
or not. If one believes in the location specific model, then one should expect that the coefficient
on wartime growth should asymptotically approach unity as the end period increases. In the last
column of Table 3 we repeat the regression, only now extending the endpoint to 1965 instead of
1960. The estimated coefficient now reaches –1.0. That is, after controlling for prewar growth
trends, by 1965 cities have entirely reversed the damage due to the war. Again, the impact of
reconstruction subsidies also lessens as we move into the future. Together, these results suggest
that the effect of the temporary shocks vanishes completely in less than twenty years.
One possible objection to our interpretation is that in most cases, the population changes
corresponded much more to refugees than deaths. Of the 144 cities with positive casualties, the
average number of deaths per capita was only 1 percent. Most of the population movement that
we observe in our data is due to the fact that the vast destruction of buildings forced people to
live elsewhere. However, forcing them to move out of their cities for a number of years may not
have sufficed to overcome the social networks and other draws of their home cities. Hence it
may seem uncertain whether they are moving back to take advantage of particular characteristics
of these locations or simply moving back to the only real home they have known.
However, there are two cases in which this argument cannot be made: Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. In those cities, the number of deaths was such that if these cities recovered their
populations, it could not be because residents who temporarily moved out of the city returned in
subsequent years. We have already noted that our data underestimates casualties in these cities.
Even so, our data suggest that the nuclear bombs immediately killed 8.5 percent of Nagasaki’s
population and 20.8 percent of Hiroshima’s population. Moreover given that many Japanese
were worried about radiation poisoning and actively discriminated against atomic bomb victims,
it is unlikely that residents felt an unusually strong attachment to these cities or that other

26
Japanese felt a strong desire to move there. Another reason why these cities are interesting to
consider is that they were not particularly large or famous cities in Japan. Their 1940
populations made them the 8th and 12th largest cities in Japan. Both cities were close to other
cities of comparable size so that it would have been relatively easy for other cities to absorb the
populations of these devastated cities.
In Figure 2 we plot the population of these two cities. What is striking in the graph is that
even in these two cities there is a clear indication that they returned to their prewar growth
trends. This process seems to have taken a little longer in Hiroshima than in other cities, but this
is not surprising given the level of destruction.
Taken together, these tests establish that even the spectacular destruction inflicted on
Japanese cities by the US Strategic Bombing of Japanese cities in WWII had virtually no long
run impact on the relative size of Japanese cities. Within the space of just twenty years, they
recovered from the devastation to return to their former place in the constellation of cities.

IV. Three Theories in Light of the Evidence
The preceding two sections establish a series of stylized facts about the economic
geography of Japan. It is now time to collect those facts and consider them in light of the major
theories. The facts are: (1) A high degree of variation in Japanese regional density has existed at
all points in time. (2) Zipf’s law holds approximately for the distribution of regional densities
throughout Japanese history. (3) The variation in regional densities begins to rise in the very
period that Japan re-opens to the world economy and begins its industrialization. (4) There is
tremendous persistence in the identity of the most densely settled regions. (5) Even very strong
temporary shocks have virtually no permanent impact on the relative size of cities.

27
The three theories that we have identified are increasing returns (IR), random growth
(RG), and locational fundamentals (LF). Properly, the IR approach is less a theory than a family
of theories with common structural elements. Hence we do not think it is appropriate to consider
our exercises a test of the IR theories. Rather, we will use the facts to consider which of various
themes that have featured prominently within the IR literature. We summarize our findings in
Table 4 where a “+” indicates that the stylized fact is predicted by the theory, a “–” indicates that
the theory does not predict it, and a question mark indicates that the theory either makes no
prediction or is ambiguous.
As a point of analysis, the increasing returns theories frequently ask how spatial
differentiation may emerge even in a framework in which all locations are identical in terms of
economic primitives (FKV 1999). From an analytic standpoint, this is precisely the right starting
point because it emphasizes theoretical features of the IR approach that are unique and
surprising. However, it is an empirical question how much of the actual variation in regional
densities owes to IR forces and how much to other factors. An extremely important advantage of
the long time series with which we work is that it is both able to examine the distribution of
regional densities for a period in which the forces of increasing returns must have been vastly
weaker than they are today and also to see if there is a rise in regional variation in the period in
which the theory predicts there should be.
The fact that there has been a high degree of variation in regional population densities at
all points in Japanese history, even those in which increasing returns is most likely of at most
modest importance, strongly suggest that there are forces quite apart from increasing returns that
have long been important contributors to this regional variation. However, the fact that the
variation in regional population density rose precisely in the period in which Japan industrialized

28
is something that we may well have expected based on the IR approach. This seems reasonably
strong evidence that IR theories do have something important to contribute to a complete theory
of economic geography.
We have noted that the Zipf relation holds reasonably well for the distribution of regional
densities, just as it does for the distribution of city sizes. Fujita, Krugman, and Venables (1999)
have been very forthright that the IR theories provide no obvious account for the Zipf relation.
The IR theories do not provide a definitive answer to the degree of persistence one should
expect in regional densities. One strand of the theory, due to Henderson (1974), ties city sizes to
technological characteristics of specific industries. Since we are looking over periods with very
radical shifts in industrial structure, one might on this basis suppose that there would be similarly
radical shifts in regional densities (which we don’t observe). However, there is an alternative
tradition within the IR approach, typified by Paul David (2000) and very evident in FKV (1999),
which stresses the role of path dependence. Small initial advantages cumulate, so that even as the
industrial structure changes radically, the head start provides an advantage in the next stage of
locational competition. It seems to us that if one is to interpret the strong locational persistence
from the perspective of the IR framework that one does need to rely strongly on path
dependence.
Finally, again the IR framework does not provide a unique answer to whether temporary
shocks will have permanent effects. Nonetheless, the investigation of the bombing of Japanese
cities does prove useful. One of the most striking features of the IR literature is the existence of
bifurcations in parameter space – what FKV term break points and sustain points – which

29
separate radically different spatial equilibria.19 The literature emphasizes as well that because of
the existence of multiple stable equilibria, there may be irreversibility of these changes even
when the forces that brought about the initial change are reversed. An important practical
question, then, is whether such spatial catastrophes are theoretical curiosa or a central tendency
in the data. Our results provide an unambiguous answer: Even nuclear bombs have little effect on
relative city sizes over the course of a couple of decades. The theoretical possibility of spatial
catastrophes due to temporary shocks is not a central tendency borne out in the data.
The random growth (RG) theory can be discussed briefly. The most important advantage
of the RG theory over the IR theory is simply that it provides a foundation for understanding the
Zipf distribution, which is also evident in the distribution of regional densities. The existence of
substantial variation in regional densities across all of Japanese history is consistent with the RG
theory provided the stochastic process starts sufficiently far back in time. The persistence of the
identity of the densely settled regions can be made consistent with the RG theory only if one is
willing to believe that the variance of growth rates is quite small. The RG theory provides no
explanation why the industrial revolution in Japan should have been accompanied by a rise in the
variation in regional densities. However, the most devastating strike against the RG theory
comes from the examination of the bombing data. The RG theory holds that growth will be a
random walk. This is strongly rejected by the data on the recovery of Japanese cities in the wake
of the WWII bombing. Hence we consider this a decisive rejection of the pure RG theory.
The locational fundamentals (LF) theory holds that there are permanent features of
specific locations that make these locations an excellent site for economic activity. Access to the
sea, rivers, and a large plain has been useful at all points in time. Location on a mountaintop, in
19

Formally, a break point is a parameter value that marks a threshold between values for which a symmetric
equilibrium is stable or not. A sustain point, similarly, is the threshold governing the stability of a concentrated
equilibrium.

30
the desert, or in harsh climactic conditions has always been a disadvantage. This provides a very
natural account of the high degree of variation in regional densities at all points in time. If these
fundamentals are distributed as suggested by Krugman (1996) and Gabaix (1999), then they also
provide an account for Zipf’s law. Persistence is highly compatible with this account. Moreover,
since the bombing of cities would not be expected to affect these fundamentals, the LF theory
provides a very natural account for the postwar mean reversion of cities. The one area in which
there seems to be an important shortfall is that the LF theory does not provide an obvious
explanation for the rise in the variation of regional densities coincident with the industrial
revolution in Japan.

V. Policy
While we do not directly examine any policy interventions, our results are pertinent to
policy discussions. One of the most important reasons for the renewed interest in economic
geography is precisely the possibility that in a world of cumulative causation, path dependence,
and critical break points, even temporary policy interventions may alter the long run spatial
structure of economic activity. These in turn may have important welfare consequences,
particularly for immobile factors in the regions favored or not. Our results suggest a great deal
more stability in the spatial structure of economies than one might have guessed. There is
tremendous persistence in which regions are most densely settled, even as the economy passes
through multiple economic revolutions – the rise of agriculture, the rise and decline of feudalism,
the move to autarky and the reversal to free trade, and finally the rise of the industrial revolution.
Destruction of half or more of a city’s structures and killing as much as 20 percent of its
population does little to disturb the long run relative size of a city. In the face of these facts, how

31
much chance is there that temporary subsidies of economically relevant magnitudes will
significantly alter the long run spatial structure of an economy?20
Jeffrey Sachs and various co-authors have raised a policy-relevant question bearing on
issues of economic development.21 To what extent is geography destiny? Is living in the tropics
instead of a temperate zone a long run impediment to economic development? Is the lack of a
coast or navigable rivers an insuperable obstacle to growth? We believe that the evidence we
provide complements the results of Sachs and others which stress that there are deep, very likely
geographical, characteristics of particular locations that have a very strong influence on their
opportunities for growth relative to other locations in a common technological regime.

VI. Conclusions
We began with the defining question of economic geography: What gives rise to the
observed variation in economic activity across regions? It is impossible, of course, to provide
final answers to such an important question on the basis of one study of the experience of one
country. Nonetheless, we believe that the present study does allow important progress in
understanding this question.
We examined data on regional population density in Japan from the Stone Age to the
modern era. We also considered the implications for relative city sizes of the Allied bombing of
Japanese cities during World War II. These data exercises allowed us to develop a number of key
stylized facts. Variation in regional population density has been high at all points in time, obeys
Zipf’s law, and rose in the period coincident with the industrial revolution. There is a great deal
20

It is important to note that for these issues, the degree of geographical aggregation may matter. For example, it
may well be that Tokyo was destined to be a great city, but it may have been harder to say which sub-regions of
Tokyo would take on the specific character that they have. Similarly, this need not rule out that such subsidies could
importantly affect the industrial mix as opposed to aggregate activity.
21
Cf. Rappaport and Sachs (2001), Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger (1999), etc.

32
of persistence in the identity of the most densely settled regions. And temporary shocks, even of
frightening magnitude, appear to have little long run impact on the spatial structure of the
economy.
We then used these facts to consider three prominent theories designed to explain the
distribution of city sizes. The simple random growth theory of Simon (1955) and Gabaix (1999)
is decisively rejected by the bombing experiment, since that theory counterfactually predicts that
city sizes will follow a random walk. The strongest point in favor of the increasing returns theory
is its clear suggestion that industrialization should have raised the variation of regional densities,
a prediction confirmed by the data. The locational fundamentals theory emerges as an important
part of a full account. It can explain why there is a great deal of variation in regional densities
long before increasing returns is a plausible account; it explains why the densities obey Zipf’s
law – something the increasing returns theory cannot do; it predicts a great deal of persistence in
the distribution of regional densities; and it predicts that even quite large temporary shocks will
have little long run impact. The one dimension in which the increasing returns theory clearly
dominates the locational fundamentals theory is the account that it provides of the rise in the
variation of regional densities in the period of industrialization. Taken together, these
considerations lead us to favor a hybrid theory in which locational fundamentals play a leading
role in accounting for the spatial pattern of relative regional densities, but increasing returns may
help to determine the degree of spatial differentiation.

Table 1
Population Share of 5 Relative
Zipf
Raw
Rank
in
Largest Var of log Coefficient Correlation Correlation
Thousands Regions Pop Den
with 1998 with 1998 History
-6000 to
-0.809
Hunter-gatherer society, not ethnically Japanese, no metal tools or
125
0.39
2.46
0.53
0.31
agriculture.
-300
(0.217)
Year

-300 to
300

595

0.23

0.93

-1.028
(0.134)

0.67

0.50

First appearance of primitive agriculture and ethnically Japanese
people. Some metallurgical skills, some coins, no writing or cloth.

725

4511

0.20

0.72

-1.207
(0.133)

0.60

0.71

Creation of feudal regime, population censuses begin, writing well
developed, farming is widespread. Capital is Nara.

800

5506

0.18

0.75

-1.184
(0.152)

0.57

0.68

Capital Moves to Kyoto. Property rights for peasant farmers
continue to improve leading to greater cultivation.

900

7442

0.29

0.68

-1.230
(0.166)

0.48

0.65

Use of metallic farm tools doubles over average for previous 300
years. Improved irrigation and dry-crop technology.

1150

6836

0.20

0.66

-1.169
(0.141)

0.53

0.73

Multiple civil wars especially in (rice-rich) northern Japan.
General political instability and rebellions.

1600

12266

0.30

0.64

-1.192
(0.068)

0.76

0.83

Reunification achieved after bloody war, extensive contact with
West. Japan is a major regional trading and military power.

1721

31290

0.21

0.43

-1.582
(0.113)

0.85

0.84

Closure of Japan to trade with minor exceptions around Nagasaki.
Capital moves to Tokyo. Political stability achieved.

1798

30531

0.21

0.37

-1.697
(0.120)

0.83

0.81

Population is approximately 80% farmers, 6% nobility. Population
stability attributed to infanticide, birth control, and famines.

1872

33748

0.18

0.30

-1.877
(0.140)

0.76

0.78

Collapse of shogun's government, civil war, jump to free trade, end
of feudal regime, start subsidized import of foreign technology

1920

53032

0.25

0.43

-1.476
(0.043)

0.94

0.93

Industrialization and militarization in full swing, but still 50% of
labor force is farmers. Japan is a major exporter of silk and
textiles.

-0.963
(0.025)

1.00

Japan is a fully industrialized country, Tokyo, with a population of
12 million, is one of the largest cities in the world.
Note: Population for years prior to 725 is based on Koyama (1978). All time periods have 39 regions with Hokkaido and Okinawa dropped from all years. The
relative variance of the log population is the variance of the log of population density in year t divided by the variance of the log of population density in 1998.
The Zipf coefficient is from a regression of log rank on log population density using 1920 log density as instruments for the years prior to 725 and 1998 data for
later years. Standard errors are in parentheses. The correlation columns indicate the raw and rank correlations between regional density in a given year and
regional density in 1998.

1998 119486

0.41

1.00

1.00

Table 2
Instrumental Variables Equation

Dependent Variable is the rate of
growth in city population between
1940 and 1947
Constant

0.213
(0.006)

Deaths Per Capita

-0.665
(0.506)

Buildings Destroyed
Per Capita

-2.335
(0.184)

R2
Number of
Observations

0.409
303

Standard errors in parentheses

35
Table 3
Two-Stage Least Squares Estimates of Impact of Bombing on Cities
(Instruments: deaths per capita and buildings destroyed per capita)

Dependent variable is
growth rate of population
between 1947 and 1960

Dependent variable
is growth rate of
population between
1947 and 1965

Growth Rate of population
between 1940 and 1947

-1.048
(0.097)

-0.759
(0.094)

-1.027
(0.163)

Government reconstruction
expenses

1.024
(0.387)

0.628
(0.298)

0.392
(0.514)

0.444
(0.054)

0.617
(0.092)

0.566
303

0.386
303

Growth Rate of population
between 1925 and 1940
R2
Number of Observations

0.279
303

Standard errors in parentheses

36
Table 4
Match Between Theories and Predictions
Stylized Fact
Large Variation in
Regional Densities
at all Times
Zipf’s Law
Rise in Variation
with Industrial
Revolution
Persistence in
Regional Densities
Mean Reversion
After Temporary
Shocks

Increasing Returns

Random Growth

Locational Fundamentals

-

+

+

-

+

+

+

-

-

?

?

+

?

-

+

37

Figure 1

Growth Rate 1947 to 1960

1

.5

0
-.5

0
Growth Rate 1940 to 1947

.5

Effects of Bombing on Cities with More than 30000 Inhabitants
(Cities with Positive Casualty Rates Only)

Figure 2

Population Growth
13.80

13.60

Log of Populaton

13.40
1925-1940 Hiroshima Trend

13.20

13.00

Hiroshima
Population
1925-1940
Nagasaki Trend

12.80

Nagasaki
Population

12.60

12.40

12.20
1925

1930

1935

1940

1947

1950
Year

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

References
David, Paul A. (2000) “Path Dependence, Its Critics, and the Quest for ‘Historical Economics,’
Stanford University Working Papers 00-011.
Eaton, Jonathan; Eckstein, Zvi (1997) “Cities and Growth: Theory and Evidence from France
and Japan,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, vol. 27, no. 4-5, August, pp. 44374.
Farris, W. Wayne (1984) Population, Disease, and Land in Early Japan: 645-900, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Fujita, M., P. R. Krugman, and A. J. Venables (1999) The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions, and
International Trade, Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Fujita M., Mori T. (1996) “The role of ports in the making of major cities: Self-agglomeration
and hub-effect,” Journal of Development Economics, 49 (1): 93-120 APR.
Fujita M, Thisse JF (1996) “Economics of agglomeration,” Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies, 10 (4): 339-378 DEC.
Gabaix, Xavier (1999) “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114 (3), August 1999, pages 739-67.
Gallup, John, Jeffrey Sachs, and Andrew Mellinger (1999) “Geography and Economic
Development,” International Regional Science Review, vol. 22, no. 2, August, pp. 179232
Hall, James Whitney (1979) Japan: From Prehistory to Modern Times, New York: Dell
Publishing Co., Inc.
Hall, James Whitney (1968) “The Castle Town and Japan’s Modern Urbanization,” in Hall,
James Whitney and Marius B. Jansen eds. Studies in the Institutional History of Early
Modern Japan, Princeton University Press, pp. 169-188.
Hammel, Eric (1998) Air War Pacific: America’s Air War Against Japan in East Asia and the
Pacific 1941-1945 Chronology, Pacifica: Pacifica Press.
Hanley, Susan B. and Kozo Yamamura (1977), Economic and Demographic Change in
Preindustrial Japan, 1600-1868.
Henderson, J.V. (1974) “The Sizes and Types of Cities,” American Economic Review 64: 64056.
Kito, Hiroshi (1996) “[Chosa] Meiji Izen Nihon no Chiiki Jinko” [The Regional Population of
Japan before the Meiji Period], Jochi Keizai Ronsyu, Vol. 41, No.1-2.

40

Koyama, Shuzo, “Jomon Subsistence and Population,” Senri Ethnological Studies, 2, 1978.
Krugman, P. R. (1991a) “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of Political
Economy, 99: 483-499.
Krugman, Paul R. (1991b) “History versus Expectations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
106, no. 2, May, pp. 651-67.
Krugman, Paul R. (1995) “Incidents from My Career,” www.pkarchive.org.
Krugman, P. R. (1996) “Confronting the Mystery of Urban Hierarchy,” Journal of the Japanese
and International Economies, vol. 10, no. 4, December 1996, pp. 399-418.
Krugman, Paul R. (1998) “What's New about the New Economic Geography?” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, vol. 14, no. 2, Summer 1998, pp. 7-17.
Lucas, Robert E , Jr. (2001) “Externalities and Cities,” Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 4,
no. 2, April 2001, pp. 245-74.
Management and Coordination Agency of Japan, Nihon Choki Tokei Soran (Historical Statistics
of Japan), Vol.1, 1987, pp.94-104.
Naikaku tokei-kyoku (1882) Dai-Nihon Teikoku Tokei Nenkan [Japanese Imperial Statistical
Yearbook], Tokyo: Tokyo Tokei Kyokai.
Nakamura, Takahide, and Masayasu Miyazaki. ed., Shiryo Taiheiyo Senso Higai Chosa Hokoku
[Damage Survey Report of the Second World War] Todai Shuppankai, 1995.
Neary JP, (2001) “The spatial economy: Cities, regions and international trade by Fujita M,
Krugman P, Venables AJ,” Journal of Economic Literature, 39 (2): 536-561 June.
Rosen, Kenneth T.; Resnick, Mitchel (1980) “The Size Distribution of Cities: An Examination of
the Pareto Law and Primacy” Journal of Urban Economics;8(2), September, pages 16586.
Rappaport, Jordan and Jeffrey D. Sachs (2001) “The US as a Coastal Nation,” Mimeo.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. (2001) “Tropical Underdevelopment,” NBER Working Paper 8119, February.
Sawada, Goichi (1927) Nara-cho jidai minsei keizai no suteki kenkyu [Numerical Analysis of the
Nara Period Economy], Tokyo : Fuzanbo.
Sekiyama, Naotaro (1958) Kinsei Nihon No Jinko Kozo: Tokugawa Jidai No Jinko Chosa To
Jinko Jotai Ni Kansuru Kenkyu, [Modern Japanese Population Structure: Research on
Tokugawa Population Censuses and Situation] Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan.

41

Statistics Bureau of the Prime Minister’s Office, Nihon Tokei Nenkan (Japan Statistical
Yearbook), 1950, pp.154-155.
Simon, H. (1955) “On a class of skew distribution functions,” Biometrika 42: 425-440.
Toyo Keizai Shinposha. ed. Kanketsu Showa Kokusei Soran [Complete Showa Census
Compendium] Vol.1, 1991.
United States Strategic Bombing Survey (1947) Effects of Air Attack on Japanese Urban
EconomyVol. 55, Washington, D.C.: Urban Areas Division.
Werrell, Kenneth P. (1996) Blankets of Fire: U.S. Bombers over Japan during World War II,
Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.

42

Appendix I
Details on the Construction of Regional Population Data
Japan has one of the most complete sets of historical regional census data of any country
in the world. A major reason why data was collected on a regional level is that while Japan was
unified in theory, in practice local lords often had substantial autonomy and Japanese
government records reflected this. Until the mid 1870’s Japan was divided into 68 provinces or
kuni. However one of the kuni, Ezo, now Hokkaido, reported data very erratically due to the low
Japanese population and was dropped from our sample. These data were collected as a part of
the Japanese tax system envisaged in the Taika reform of 646. However, a series of
assassinations, coups, and civil wars delayed full-scale implementation until 702. At that time,
cultivators over the age of 6 were allocated land from the government and in return had to pay
lump sum in-kind taxes. (Hall p. 54). This forced the government’s Popular Affairs Ministry to
keep detailed population and tax records many of which exist today.
The raw census data is hard to use, because censuses were done infrequently and often
included different standards for covering samurai, non-land holders, women, children, etc. For
example, Kii did not report people under the age of 8 while other provinces reported significantly
younger children. Over the last 75 years, due in large measure to enormous efforts on the part of
Japanese historical demographers, notably Sawada (1927), Sekiyama (1958), and Kito (1999),
these data have been carefully organized and rendered systematic. This typically involves
incorporating procedures to estimate the missing youth population based on age distributions in
neighboring regions.
Our data on regional population between 725 and 1872 is based on Kito (1996). The
Kito dataset represents the culmination of these efforts by providing best estimates of the
provincial population for 725, 800, 900, and 1150. For these years, data is either based on actual
census data where available or on the number of "villages" (go) per province. In the Japanese
system used at the time, each "village" or go was comprised of three hamlets containing 50
households per hamlet. Hence, if one can estimate the number of family members per
household, based on existing household data in some regions, one can obtain reasonable
estimates of the regional population based on the number of "villages".
How well this method works can be assessed by how well these estimates conform to
subsequent discoveries of census data. For example, Farris (1984, p. 175) reports that after
Sawada (1927) did his original analysis, archaeologists uncovered actual census data for Hitachi
province in the year 800, a missing datum in Sawada. Sawada’s estimate of 217,000 residents
was quite close to the census number of 190,000.
Data for 1600 is based on a major cadastral survey conducted under the order of Shogun
Hideyoshi Toyotomi. The frequency of census data increases from 1721 when Japan began to
use these censuses as part of their anti-Christian campaign. Unfortunately, there were no
regional censuses taken between 1872 and 1920. Although some authors report figures for the
intervening years, these are largely interpolations between the two end points.
Another complication arises from the fact that historical regional data is based on 68
provinces whose boundaries do not correspond precisely to the 47 prefectures used in modern
census reporting. For example, the province of Musashi was broken up into two prefectures,
Tokyo and Saitama. Others are harder to map into modern prefectures – e.g. the province Kii
contains all of Wakayama prefecture and part of Mie. Feudal lords in Japan ruled over several

43
hundred domains, which, in general did not have boundaries that correspond to provincial
boundaries. The borders of these domains changed significantly over the course of the next
millennium in response to wars and patronage, but the borders of the provinces did not. We
solved this problem by using a historical map provided by Hanley and Yamamura (1977) and
comparing it with modern maps. This generates a concordance, which we present in Appendix
Table 1. We then checked our matching by comparing the aggregate area of the provinces [from
the 1882 Japanese Imperial Statistical Yearbook] with the areas of corresponding prefectures
[from the 1998 Japan Statistical Yearbook]. This suggests that we matched the data quite
closely.
We measured regional density as the number of people per square kilometer. One
problem that can arise is that regional definitions using provincial data may be slightly different
from those using prefectural data. In order to eliminate this problem, we implemented the
following procedure. Whenever we formed a region using provincial population data we deflated
it with provincial area data. Likewise, whenever we formed a region using prefectural
population data, we deflated using prefectural area data.
While there is a very large literature in Japan on the accuracy of historical numbers, most
researchers believe that the population numbers, at least from 1721 onwards, are accurate to
within 15 percent. The reason that we have a good sense about the accuracy is that in a few
cases provincial boundaries and feudal domain boundaries coincided. Sometimes the feudal lord
in these areas would conduct an independent population census of his domain, and then we can
compare the results of the two surveys. So, for example, in the province of Bizen, central
government data puts the 1798 population at 321,221 while the lord of Okayama believed the
total to be 320,795. However, both of these numbers underreport the population of the castle
town, which Hanley and Yamamura (1977) suggest would take the total to 342,013. The point,
of course, is that while the data from 1721 onwards is far from perfect, the level of measurement
error is not so high as to render the data meaningless.
Prior to 725, it is also possible to obtain estimates of the Japanese population based on
archeological evidence. Japan has been populated for at least 10,000 years and there are 28,013
archaeological sites from the Jomon period (-8000 to –300) and another 10,530 sites from the
Yayoi period (-300 to 300). Koyama (1978) has divided categorized these sites by prefecture
and they can be used to provide a rough idea of the regional distribution of population by
prefecture.

Details on Urban Data
There are two principal sources of information on death and destruction caused by World
War II in Japan: the US Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS) (1947) and Nakamura and
Miyazaki (1995). This latter source is basically a reprint of “The Report on Damage and
Casualties of World War II” compiled by The Central Economic Stabilization Board (CESB) in
1949. The US source is particularly good for matching death and destruction to particular US air
operations, while the Japanese source is a 600-page census of all death and destruction that
occurred within Japan proper. As such, the Japanese source provides a more complete record of
how the war affected civilians.
Since our primary interest was obtaining information on the magnitude of shocks to cities
regardless of the particular air operation that gave rise to it, we felt the Japanese source was more

44
appropriate. Japanese numbers for casualties and destruction tend to be larger than the numbers
reported above for a number of reasons. First, the USSBS only covers destruction due to
planned strategic bombing. It therefore does not include urban deaths due to other bombing
activities, strafing, naval bombardments of coastal cities, and the mining of harbors, nor does it
cover destruction arising from accidentally bombing the wrong targets. Second, US fatality data
appear to be only reported for confirmed deaths. In nuclear bombing and firebombing, it is quite
common for thousands, if not tens of thousands of people, to be vaporized. People who went
missing on the day of a bombing raid and did not turn up within several years are not counted as
casualties in US sources but are listed as missing in CESB and are added to fatality numbers.22
Third, US data does not treat mortally injured people as fatalities, whereas Japanese data does.
This is particularly a problem in Hiroshima and Nagasaki where large numbers of people died of
radiation poisoning within a few years of the attack. This helps explain why the CESB reports
twice as many fatalities in Nagasaki as USSBS. A more difficult issue concerns radiationinduced deaths in the period between 1949 and 1965. However, since direct deaths were so
large, even high estimates (in the tens of thousands) of the number dying from radiation do not
affect our numbers on deaths per capita very much.
Population data were taken from the Kanketsu Showa Kokusei Soran. A key feature of
this source is that city areas are held constant across the time period. This data source reports
urban populations for several hundred cities based on censuses every five years.23 The only
exception is 1945. The 1945 census of cities was not performed until 1947 due to the war. This
is actually fortunate for us. Japanese ground transportation was largely unaffected by the war.
This means that by 1947, anyone who had fled due to the fear of air strikes, could have returned
provided that housing and employment existed there.

22

One might worry that the missing category might be capturing something else, but the number of people reported
missing in cities not subject to bombing is almost always zero.
23
We dropped the city of Kure from our data. Kure became the site of a major Japanese naval arsenal. As a result
its population rose 50% between 1925 and 1940 as Japan built up its fleet. Kure was heavily bombed during the war
and then returned to its prewar size as demand for naval warships approached zero.

45
Appendix Table 1
Concordance between Provinces and Prefectures
Province (Kuni)
Iwaki, Iwashiro, Rikuzen, Rikuchu, and Mutsu
Uzen-Ugo
Awa1, Kazusa, Shimo-osa
Awa2
Bingo, Aki
Bungo
Chikuzen, Buzen, Chikugo
Echigo, Sado
Etchu
Harima, Tajima, Awaji
Higo
Hitachi
Hizen, Tsushima, Iki
Hyuga
Iga, Ise, Shima
Inaba, Hoki
Iyo
Izumo, Iwami, Oki
Kaga, Noto
Kai
Kawachi, Izumi, Settsu
Kii
Kozuke
Mimasaka, Bizen, Bitchu
Mino, Hida
Musashi
Omi
Osumi, Satsuma
Owari, Mikawa
Sagami
Sanuki
Shimotsuke
Shinano
Suo, Nagato
Tosa
Totomi, Suruga, Izu
Wakasa, Echizen
Yamashiro, Tamba, Tango
Yamato

Prefecture (Ken)
Aomori, Iwate, Miyagi, and Fukushima
Akita, Yamagata
Chiba
Tokushima
Hiroshima
Oita
Fukuoka
Niigata
Toyama
Hyogo
Kumamoto
Ibaraki
Nagasaki-Saga
Miyazaki
Mie
Tottori
Ehime
Shimane
Ishikawa
Yamanashi
Osaka
Wakayama
Gunma
Okayama
Gifu
Tokyo-Saitama
Shiga
Kagoshima
Aichi
Kanagawa
Kagawa
Tochigi
Nagano
Yamaguchi
Kochi
Shizuoka
Fukui
Kyoto
Nara

