NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A DECADE LOST AND FOUND: MEXICO AND CHILE IN THE 1980s
Raphael Bergoeing
Patrick J. Kehoe
Timothy J. Kehoe
Raimundo Soto
Working Paper 8520
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8520
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

We would like to thank the participants at the Minneapolis Fed’s “Great Depressions of the Twentieth
Century” Conference - especially Pete Klenow - and participants at seminars at the Centre de Recerca de
Economia de Benestar and the East-West Center for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Edgardo
Barandiarán, Bob Lucas, Rolf Luders, Jaime Serra-Puche, and especially Ed Prescott for useful discussions.
Jim MacGee provided invaluable research assistance. Kehoe and Kehoe thank the National Science
Foundation and Soto thanks the Banco Central de Chile for research support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.

© 2001 by Raphael Bergoeing, Patrick J. Kehoe, Timothy J. Kehoe and Raimundo Soto. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Decade Lost and Found: Mexico and Chile in the 1980s
Raphael Bergoeing, Patrick J. Kehoe, Timothy J. Kehoe and Raimundo Soto
NBER Working Paper No. 8520
October 2001
JEL No. E32, N16, O40

ABSTRACT
Chile and Mexico experienced severe economic crises in the early 1980s. This paper analyzes
four possible explanations for why Chile recovered much faster than did Mexico. Comparing data from
the two countries allows us to rule out a monetarist explanation, an explanation based on falls in real
wages and real exchange rates, and a debt overhang explanation. Using growth accounting, a calibrated
growth model, and economic theory, we conclude that the crucial difference between the two countries
was the earlier policy reforms in Chile that generated faster productivity growth. The most crucial of these
reforms were in banking and bankruptcy procedures.

Raphael Bergoeing
Centro de Economía Aplicada, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, CHILE
raphaelb@dii.uchile.cl
Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480,
Department of Economics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455,
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
Timothy J. Kehoe
Department of Economics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455
and Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480
tkehoe@atlas.socsci.umn.edu
Raimundo Soto
Instituto de Economía, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, CHILE
and Gerencia de Investigación Económica, Banco Central de Chile, Santiago, CHILE
rsoto@faceapuc.cl

1. INTRODUCTION
Chile and Mexico, like most of the other countries in Latin America, experienced
severe economic crises in the early 1980s that led to large drops in output. The paths of
recovery from these crises differed markedly. Figure 1 shows that output per workingage (15-64) person1 in Chile returned to trend within a decade and since then has grown
even faster than trend.2 In contrast, output in Mexico never fully recovered and even two
decades later is still 30 percent below trend. For Mexico, like much of the rest of Latin
America, the 1980s were a “lost decade” — while for Chile they were a decade in which
the economy began to grow spectacularly.
This paper analyzes four possible explanations for the different paths of recovery in
the two countries:
The first explanation is the standard monetarist story that, short of inducing a
hyperinflation, the more rapidly a country in a severe recession expands its money supply,
the faster it will recover. Although this story is not often proposed for the cases of
Mexico and Chile, we examine it because it probably is the most common story for both
the severity of and the slow recovery from depressions like that of the 1930s in the United
States.
The second explanation is Corbo and Fischer’s (1994) story for rapid recovery. After
the crisis, the Chilean government reversed its previous policy of wage indexation and
allowed real wages to fall sharply. Corbo and Fischer argue that this policy, together with
policies that produced a rapid depreciation of the real exchange rate, fueled an export
boom that was the principal cause of the rapid recovery.

1

Throughout we focus on output per working-age person — which is appropriate for our
growth accounting and our model — rather than output per capita — which is not
appropriate. Since both Mexico and Chile went through demographic transitions during
1960-2000 in which population growth rates fell sharply, the percentage of working-age
persons in the total population changed, and these two measures of output do not move
proportionately.
2

To detrend the GDP data in figure 1, we use a common, 2 percent growth rate, which
comes close to matching both Mexico’s and Chile’s average annual growth rates over our
entire sample, 1960-2000.

1

The third explanation is Sachs’s (1989) story for Mexico’s slow recovery. Sachs
argues that Mexico’s large external debt led new investors to fear that most of the returns
on any new investment would be taxed to pay off old loans. Hence, new investors were
discouraged from investing, and both investment and output remained low.
The fourth explanation is a story based on the timing of structural reforms. Chile had
undertaken a series of structural reforms in the 1970s that set the stage for the successful
performance of the 1980s. In contrast, Mexico undertook these reforms only in the mid1980s or later. We examine reforms in a number of areas: trade policy, fiscal policy,
privatization, banking, and bankruptcy laws.
For each explanation we ask: Can it explain the different paths of recoveries in Chile
and Mexico? We find that, although each of the first three explanations has some merit,
none can account for the different paths of recovery: The standard monetarist story
implies that Chile should have recovered more slowly than Mexico. The real wages and
real exchange rate depreciation story implies that exports should have boomed even more
in Mexico than in Chile — and they did — but Mexico stagnated while Chile grew. The
debt overhang story implies that Chile should have stagnated even more than Mexico.
A comparison of data from Chile and Mexico allows us to rule out only one part of
the structural reforms story — trade reforms. The timing of reforms is crucial if they are
to drive the differences in economic performance of the two countries. During the decade
following the crisis, Mexico’s trade grew faster than Chile’s, partly because Mexico was
engaged in vigorous trade reform while Chile had already done so (and, in fact,
backtracked until the early 1990s). By the mid-1990s, Mexico was just as open as Chile.
To shed light on the ability of the other reforms to account for the different paths, we
turn to a growth accounting exercise. We ask: Were the differences in recoveries due
mostly to differences in paths for factor inputs, like capital and labor, or were they due to
differences in productivity? We find that nearly all of the differences in the recoveries
resulted from different paths of productivity.
From our growth accounting exercise, we conclude that the only reforms that are
promising as explanations are those that economic theory dictates would show up
primarily as differences in productivity, not those that would show up as differences in
factor inputs. We use this implication to rule out fiscal reforms. These reforms primarily
affect the incentives to accumulate capital and to work, not productivity. Moreover, the
2

timing is not right for the fiscal reforms explanation: both countries reformed their tax
systems by the mid-1980s, so these cannot account for the different paths.
We do find that fiscal reforms are important in explaining some features of the
recoveries, just not the differences. In particular, when we use a calibrated growth model
to quantitatively account for the recovery paths for Chile and Mexico, we find that a
numerical experiment that incorporates the different paths for productivity but leaves out
the fiscal reforms misses badly. In the same model, however, a numerical experiment
that keeps the different paths for productivity and adds an identical fiscal reform in both
countries fares much better.
Our analysis suggests that it is differences in the timing of reforms in the other three
areas — privatization, banking, and bankruptcy laws — that can account for the
differences in economic performance between the two countries. Once again, however,
the matter of timing is crucial: reforms in privatization were probably less important than
those in banking and bankruptcy law precisely because Chile had already reaped the
benefits of these reforms while Mexico was doing so during the period in which Mexico
was stagnating and Chile was growing. The crucial differences between Mexico and
Chile were in banking and bankruptcy laws: Chile was willing to pay the costs of
reforming its banking system and of letting inefficient firms go bankrupt; Mexico was
not. This is not to say that the reforms in Mexican trade policy, fiscal policy, and
privatization were not important. The long period of crisis and stagnation that afflicted
Mexico from 1982 through 1995 would have been far worse without them.
Two good general references for Mexico during the 1980s and 1990s are Aspe (1993)
and Lustig (1998); good general references for Chile are Bosworth, Dornbusch, and
Labán (1994), Corbo (1985), and Edwards and Edwards (1991). Edwards (1996)
provides an interesting comparison of the 1981-1983 crisis in Chile with the 1994-1995
crisis in Mexico.

2. DIFFERENT REACTIONS TO SIMILAR INITIAL CONDITIONS
What is striking about the economic performances of Mexico and Chile depicted in
Figure 1 is not so much the initial downturn in the early 1980s, but the markedly different
paths of recovery from these crises. In Chile, output returned to trend within a decade and

3

since then has grown even faster than trend. In Mexico, output never recovered and after
almost two decades, in 2000, it was still more than 30 percent below trend.
Figure 1 uses indices of real GDP and is useful when thinking about movements in
output relative to a base year. It is not useful in comparing levels of GDPs across
countries. To do that, Figure 2 plots levels of real GDP per working-age person in
common units of 1985 dollars using purchasing power parity adjustments. (Appendix A
provides descriptions and sources for the data used in this paper.) As the figure makes
clear, in 1980 Mexico had a level of average income almost twice that of Chile. Over the
next two decades Chile erased this gap.
In the early 1980s, both countries faced fairly similar conditions, at least on the
macroeconomic level: Both countries had sizeable foreign debts, appreciating real
exchange rates, large current account deficits, and weaknesses in the banking sector.
Both countries were also hit by similar external shocks. These shocks consisted of a jump
in world interest rates, plummeting prices of their primary exports, and a cutoff of foreign
lending.
Some simple data provide a feel for the initial conditions: Like many developing
countries, Mexico and Chile took advantage of low world interest rates in the late 1970s
to build up large levels of foreign debt. Total external debt in Mexico in 1982, which had
grown by 140 percent in U.S. dollars since 1978, was 53 percent of GDP. In Chile, total
external debt had grown by 134 percent in U.S. dollars since 1978 and was 71 percent of
GDP. The real exchange rate against the U.S. dollar — and the United States was by far
both Mexico’s and Chile’s largest trading partner – had appreciated by 27 percent in
Mexico between 1978 and 1981 and by 26 percent in Chile. The current account deficit in
Mexico in 1981 was 5.8 percent of GDP, while in Chile it reached 14.5 percent. By the
end of 1982, foreigners stopped financing new capital inflows, and the current account
deficits disappeared. The banking sectors in Mexico and Chile were so vulnerable to the
shocks that buffeted their economies that, in each case, the government found it necessary
to take over private banks: In Mexico the government nationalized all the banks, and in
Chile the government took over distressed banks and nonbank financial institutions
(financieras) that held more than 55 percent of the assets in the financial sector.
The following data provide a feel for the magnitude of the shocks: Loans to Mexico
and Chile were offered at a spread over the London Inter Bank Offer Rate (LIBOR).
4

Between 1978 and 1981, in response to contractionary U.S. monetary policy, the threemonth U.S. dollar LIBOR jumped from 8.8 percent to 16.8 percent per year. In the early
1980s, Mexico was heavily dependent on its exports of crude petroleum, which accounted
for 52 percent of total exports in 1980. Chile was similarly heavily dependent on its
exports of copper, which accounted for 48 percent of its total exports in 1980. Figure 3
plots the prices of crude petroleum and copper relative to the U.S. Producer Price Index.
The relative price of crude petroleum fell 21 percent from 1980 to 1982, while that of
copper fell 39 percent. By the end of 1982, following Mexico’s default, essentially no
new private foreign loans were granted to Mexico or Chile until the end of the decade:
although Mexico’s total external debt increased by 25 percent in U.S. dollars between
1981 and 1987 and Chile’s increased by 23 percent, almost all of the increases can be
accounted for by loans from the International Monetary Fund and, in the case of Mexico,
accumulation of unpaid interest.

3. DIFFERENT STORIES FOR DIFFERENT RECOVERIES
Despite the similarities in their initial conditions, Mexico and Chile experienced very
different recoveries from their crises. In this section, we consider four potential
explanations for these different recoveries. Comparing the case of Mexico with that of
Chile allows us to rule out three of these explanations: although a story may have some
merit when applied to one of the countries in isolation, we rule it out if it is incapable of
explaining the differences between the experiences of the two countries.
Standard Monetarist Story
Crudely stated, the standard monetarist story is that, short of inducing a
hyperinflation, the more rapidly a country in a severe recession expands its money supply,
the faster it recovers. We include this story, not because it has been proposed as a serious
explanation of these episodes, but rather because it is probably the most common story
for recovery from crisis. Even though we have oversimplified the story, the basic theme
can be found in Friedman and Schwartz's (1963) analysis of the Great Depression in the
United States and is pervasive in the literature (see, for example, Lucas (2001)).
In Table I , we consider some simple statistics for 1983-1987, the crucial period in
which Chile began to recover while Mexico was still mired in crisis. We see that the

5

annual growth rate of the money supply was substantially higher in Mexico than in Chile.
This higher growth of money was associated with a faster growth of prices in Mexico
than in Chile. It does not show up, however, in a faster growth of output for Mexico.
Indeed, output per working-age person contracted in Mexico while it grew in Chile. Of
course, even the most avid proponents of the monetarist story do not claim that monetary
forces can account for a decade of growth. Nevertheless, it is interesting that these forces
seem incapable of explaining even a single year or two of the path of output following the
crisis.
Table I
Annual growth rates of output, money, and prices
1983-1987

GDP per working-age person
money (M1)
prices (CPI)

Mexico
-2.20
66.45
83.24

Chile
3.27
22.39
27.05

While the monetary story seems unable to account for the different paths of recovery,
part of the downturn may well be associated with monetary factors. The jump in world
interest rates that adversely affected Mexico and Chile was clearly associated with a
monetary contraction in the United States. Moreover, in a failed effort to defend its
nominal exchange rate, Chile contracted its money supply during the first three quarters
of 1982, and this policy may have deepened and prolonged its crisis. Of course, this
argument begs the question of why Chile recovered so rapidly while Mexico, which had
no contraction, did not.
Although we have treated the monetarist story in a superficial manner, at first blush it
does not seem to be a promising route to follow. More generally, in most Latin American
countries, high inflation is often associated with large drops in output, not with
substantial recoveries. It may be that this pattern for Latin America is quite different from
the patterns in the United States and Europe in which large drops in output are associated
with deflations, not inflations. If so, this is an area that warrants further study.

6

Real Wages and Real Exchange Rate Depreciation Story
In an influential article, Corbo and Fischer (1994) argue that one of the principal
causes of Chile’s crisis in the early 1980s was the government’s policy of fixing the
nominal exchange rate for the four years before the crisis, while at the same time
mandating that wages be adjusted at least one-for-one with past inflation. Given the high
inflation the country had already experienced, these policies led to a continuation of past
inflation, an appreciation of the real exchange rate, and a sharp increase in real wages.
After the crisis, the government reversed its position. It undid its wage indexation policies
and allowed the real exchange rate to depreciate. Figure 4 shows that real wages in
manufacturing declined by 15 percent in the two years after 1982. Furthermore, as shown
in Figure 5, between 1982 and 1987, Chile’s real exchange rate against the U.S. dollar
depreciated by 124 percent. This decline in wages, together with the depreciation of the
real exchange rate, according to Corbo and Fischer (1994), generated an export boom (as
shown in Figure 6) that was the principal cause of Chile’s rapid recovery.
The story of declining real wages and a depreciating real exchange rate generating an
export boom that spurred the recovery sounds convincing for Chile. But can it explain
the differences in the economic performances of Mexico and Chile? Probably not. The
fall in real wages was substantially greater in Mexico than in Chile: in the two years
following the crisis, real wages fell by almost 30 percent, compared with 15 percent in
Chile. Furthermore, between 1981 and 1987, the Mexican peso depreciated by 95 percent
against the U.S. dollar, compared with 124 percent in Chile. As Figure 6 shows, exports
boomed in Mexico as well as in Chile as a percent of GDP.
The data in Figure 6, which express exports as a percent of GDP, can be misleading
as indicators of the movements in value of exports when there are substantial fluctuations
in GDP and in the real exchange rate. Looking at the value of exports in U.S. dollars
deflated by the U.S. Producer Price Index in Figure 7, we see that the value of Chile’s
exports actually fell after 1981 while that of Mexico’s exports rose, falling below its 1981
level only briefly in 1986. Much of the movement in the dollar value of Mexico and
Chile’s exports should come as no surprise, given the data on commodity prices in Figure
3. What is surprising is that, even though the price of copper recovered in the late 1980s
and early 1990s and the price of crude petroleum did not, the dollar value of Mexico’s
exports grew faster during this period than did Chile’s. By 2000, Mexico was exporting
7

427 percent more than it had in 1981, measured in terms of deflated U.S. dollars, while
Chile was only exporting 250 percent more. Moreover, returning to Figure 6, we see that,
by 2000, Mexico’s trade as a percent of GDP exceeded Chile’s, even though Mexico’s
economy was seven times larger.
If declining real wages and a depreciating real exchange rate generated an export
boom in Chile, they had even more pronounced effects in Mexico.3 Yet, after 1983,
Chile’s economy recovered rapidly while Mexico’s stagnated. Consequently, we need to
look elsewhere for an explanation of the differences in the recoveries.
Debt Overhang Story
A hypothesis often associated with Sachs (1989) for Mexico's slow recovery is the
debt overhang story. The idea is that Mexico’s large external debt led to fears by potential
new investors that most of the returns on any new investment would be used to pay down
old loans. Potential new investors viewed the outstanding debt as leading to future
(implicit or explicit) taxes on the returns to their new investments. Hence, these investors
were discouraged from making new investments, and private incentives were distorted
towards consuming rather than investing. The larger the outstanding debt, the higher the
implicit tax on new investment, and the lower the actual investment.
To analyze this story, we plot the ratio of foreign debt to output in Mexico and Chile
in Figure 8, and we plot the investment rate in these two countries in Figure 9. It is clear
that, both during and after the crisis, Mexico had an increasing ratio of debt to output and
that, during the same period, Mexico’s investment-output ratio fell below its pre-crisis
level. So, at least for Mexico, the pattern is not inconsistent with Sachs’s story.
Can Sachs’s story explain the difference between Mexico’s slow recovery and Chile’s
fast recovery? As Figure 8 makes clear, both during and after the crisis, Chile had a
much higher debt-output ratio than Mexico. Furthermore, in Figure 9, we see that Chile’s
investment rate fell more abruptly than Mexico’s and only caught up and passed it in
1989. Looking at macroeconomic aggregates like investment rates, we do not see how
debt overhang can explain the different recoveries of Mexico and Chile.

3

This was especially true during and after the 1994-1995 crisis.

8

Before leaving the debt overhang story, it is worth making two comments. First, it
could be argued that Chile’s debts were somehow different from Mexico’s because a
large portion had been privately contracted: in 1981 only 35.6 percent of Chile’s debt
was public or publicly guaranteed, while 80.8 percent of Mexico’s were. Following the
bailout of Chile’s banking system, however, the portion of debt in Chile that was public
or publicly guaranteed shot up, reaching 86.3 percent in 1987, compared to 85.6 percent
in Mexico. If the crucial factor in the debt overhang story is the level of public debt,
Chile had more debt overhang during the crucial period when it was recovering and
Mexico was not. Second, comparing Figure 8 with Figure 5, we see that most of the
fluctuations of both counties’ ratios of debt to output were due to depreciation of the
domestic currency. This depreciation increased the relative value of debt, which was
mostly denominated in U.S. dollars. This suggests that Corbo and Fischer’s story for
Chile’s recovery, which says that depreciation is good because it drives up exports,
conflicts with Sachs’s story for Mexico’s stagnation, which says that depreciation is bad
because it drives up the relative value of foreign debt. Neither story is capable of
explaining the differences between the economic performances of Mexico and Chile.
Structural Reforms Story
A promising explanation of the different recovery patterns is that in the 1970s Chile
had undertaken structural reforms that set the stage for successful performance of the
economy in the 1980s. These reforms covered trade policy, fiscal policy, privatization,
banking, and bankruptcy. In contrast, Mexico only undertook such reforms in the 1980s
or later. Could the different timing of the reforms have determined the different recovery
patterns? Here we argue that neither trade policy reforms nor fiscal reforms can explain
the differences. Privatization, banking, and bankruptcy reforms, however, may well be
able to.
Consider first the differences in trade policy. By 1979 Chile had eliminated all
quantitative restrictions on imports and imposed a uniform tariff of 10 percent. The
uniform tariff was increased to 20 percent in 1983 and to 35 percent in 1984 and then
gradually lowered until it fell below its original level in 1991 (see De la Cuadra and
Hachette (1991)). In Mexico in 1985, there was massive protection: in addition to tariffs,
import licenses protected 100 percent of domestic production, and there were numerous

9

other nontariff barriers and a system of dual exchange rates that gave preferred treatment
to industries favored by the government. Starting in the mid-1980s, however, Mexico
embarked on a massive liberalization of trade policy that culminated in the
implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1994 (see, for example,
Kehoe (1995)). Trade liberalization, like real exchange rate depreciation, generated
exports in both Mexico and Chile, but it is hard to see how differences in the timing
determined the different recoveries. As we have seen in Figures 6 and 7, trade grew more
in Mexico during the crucial period of the late 1980s and early 1990s than it did in Chile,
partly because Mexico was more closed than Chile to start with.
Consider next differences in fiscal policy. In Chile, there was a major tax reform in
1975, a major social security reform in 1980, and another major tax reform in 1984. In
Mexico, there were major tax reforms in 1980 and in 1985. Corporate tax policy in
Mexico was reformed in 1987 and 1989 to lower distortions on investment. As Figure 10
indicates, throughout much of the 1980s Chile ran either a government surplus or a small
deficit, while Mexico ran a deficit on the order of 10 percent of GDP. Fiscal reforms
undoubtedly played important roles in both Mexico and Chile in inducing higher rates of
capital accumulation and work effort. In the next section, we use growth accounting and
numerical experiments with a growth model to argue that these reforms had roughly
similar impacts on both economies — leaving the differences in their performances still
unexplained.
Now consider differences in privatization. (See, for, example, Glade (1996) and
Hachette and Luders (1993).) In Chile, by the end of the Allende administration in 1973,
a large fraction of the economy was under direct or indirect government control. From
1974 to 1979, the Chilean government reprivatized much of the economy. In contrast,
following the 1982 crisis in Mexico, the government nationalized the banking system
and, moreover, effectively appropriated the banks’ holdings of private companies.
Economists like Lustig (1998) estimate that, directly or indirectly, the government
controlled 60 to 80 percent of GDP. In 1984, Mexico began to reprivatize what it had
nationalized, but only after 1989 was the reprivatization substantial. The nationalized
banks were only privatized after 1990. The different paces of privatization had effects
both on the incentives to accumulate capital and on the efficiency with which that capital
was allocated.
10

It is worth pointing out, however, that it is easy to exaggerate the importance of
privatization in Chile relative to that in Mexico: although the number of state enterprises
in Chile was reduced from 596 in 1973 to 48 in 1983, the portion of GDP generated by
state enterprises only fell from 39 percent to 24 percent. Chile’s national copper
company, Corporación Nacional del Cobre (CODELCO), was still run by the
government in 2000, and its exports of copper accounted for 13.8 percent of Chile’s
exports. In contrast, crude petroleum exports in Mexico, which are controlled by the
government’s Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX), accounted for 9.8 percent of Mexico’s
exports in 2000. Significantly, however, the government in Chile has allowed private
competition in copper extraction, while the government in Mexico has not done so in
petroleum extraction.
We turn now our attention to the banking sector. (See, for example, Barandiarán and
Hernández (1999) and Gruben and Welch (1996).) One way that differences in the
workings of the banking systems manifested themselves was in the amount of private
lending in the two economies. Figure 11 graphs private credit (which consists of all loans
to the private sector and to non-financial government enterprises) as a percent of output.
Clearly, there was substantially more private lending taking in place in Chile than in
Mexico. In 1973 Chile had 18 national banks and one foreign bank. After a series of
financial reforms that included deregulation, low reserve requirements, and opening to
foreign competition, the number of financial institutions increased by 1980 to 26 national
banks, 19 foreign banks, and 15 financieras — the latter being nonbank financial
institutions that were subject to less stringent regulations than banks. The explosion of
financial institutions that were not highly regulated and that paid market-determined
interest rates led to an explosion in private credit.
In Mexico, in contrast, banks were few, highly regulated, and subject to very high
reserve requirements. The government set very low deposit rates in order to give lowinterest-rate loans to preferred industries. Overall, the banking system in Mexico was
used by the government as a way to channel funds to preferred borrowers at low interest
rates.
These differences in banking systems led to huge differences in the allocation of
credit in the two economies after the crisis. In Chile, credit allocation was determined
mostly by the market; in Mexico it was determined by the government. Although banks
11

and financial institutions collapsed and were taken over by the government in both
countries, the authorities reacted in very different ways when rescuing the financial sector
and restoring credit flows. The Chilean authorities liquidated insolvent banks and
financieras, quickly reprivatized solvent banks that had been taken over because of
liquidity problems, and set up a new regulatory scheme to avoided mismanagement.
Banks were able to channel credit to firms at market rates – which were very high
immediately following the crisis. The banking reforms in Chile were costly: Sanhueza
(2001) estimates that during 1982-1986, the costs amounted to 35 percent of one year’s
GDP.
In Mexico, in contrast, banks were nationalized and credit was allocated
discretionarily at below-market rates. Figure 11 shows that credit to the private sector fell
in Mexico after 1982 and continued to be very low for most of the decade. In fact,
despite the massive bailout during the 1994-1995 crisis, Mexico’s banking system still
failed to provide credit to the private sector at levels comparable to that in Chile even in
the late 1990s. In contrast, in Chile credit to the private sector expanded during 19821985 and steadily declined as a fraction of GDP during the rest of the decade mostly
because of GDP growth. In retrospect, it appears that the immediate cost of the bank
bailout paid for by Chile during the crisis was more than compensated by later gains.
Finally, consider differences in the timing of the reform of bankruptcy procedures. In
Chile, the 1929 bankruptcy law did not provide for an efficient and timely administration
of bankruptcies because it relied on poorly paid public officials (sindicos) and highly
bureaucratic procedures. Until the late 1970s, bankruptcy proceedings languished for
years in courts. Following an administrative reform of the bankruptcy management
service in 1978, the 1982 bankruptcy reform law clearly defined the rights of each
creditor and replaced public sindicos with private sindicos. The law was passed at the
onset of the crisis, and the government allowed firms to go bankrupt, avoiding the use of
subsidies to keep them afloat, under the conviction that protection would unnecessarily
lengthen the adjustment period.
It was this bankruptcy policy, in retrospect, that was crucial in making the initial
phase of the crisis more severe in Chile than in Mexico. Figure 12 shows that
bankruptcies increased fivefold between 1980 and 1982 in Chile, but quickly returned to
average levels. In contrast, Mexico had an obsolete and unwieldy bankruptcy law from
12

1943 in place until 2000. The 2000 bankruptcy law includes features similar to Chile’s
1982 law, particularly the establishment of bankruptcy specialists (especialistas de
concursos mercantiles), who are intended to play much the same role as sindicos in Chile.
Our interpretation is that Chile paid the short-term costs of letting many firms fail and
this led to a sharp, but short, fall in output followed by a strong recovery. Mexico, in
contrast, attempted to muddle through the crisis. It had a less severe initial downturn, but
a much weaker recovery.
Like privatization and the reforms in banking, the reform of bankruptcy procedures in
Chile had effects both on the incentives to accumulate capital and on the efficiency with
which that capital was allocated. We argue in all three of these cases that it was effects
on efficiency that were crucial for explaining the differences between Mexico and Chile
after the crisis. Some support for that view is given by the data in Figure 9, which show
that the investment rate in Mexico was not much below that in Chile. Our growth
accounting analysis in the next section bolsters this view, namely that most of the
differences in the paths of recovery stem from differences in productivity and not from
differences in factor inputs. Hence, for these types of reforms to account for the different
paths of recovery, they must have two features. First, they must show up primarily in
productivity. Second, given the timings of reforms discussed above, they must have
dynamic effects on productivity that show up gradually over time.

4. GROWTH ACCOUNTING AND THE GROWTH MODEL
To see whether the different timing of reforms can explain the different economic
performances of Mexico and Chile, we use growth accounting to answer the questions:
What portion of the different performances of Mexico and Chile can be accounted for by
differences in inputs of factors like capital and labor? What portion can be accounted for
by differences in the efficiency with which these factors were used?
Growth Accounting
In this paper, we employ the aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function
Yt = At Ktα L1t −α ,
where Yt is output, Kt is capital, Lt is labor, and At is total factor productivity (TFP),

13

(1)

At = Yt / Ktα L1t −α .

(2)

To calculate At , given series for Yt and Lt , we need to choose a value for α and to
generate series for Kt . National income accounts indicate that the share of labor
compensation in GDP valued at factor prices (GDP at market prices minus indirect taxes)
in both Mexico and Chile is small relative to, say, that in the United States. In 1980, for
example, according to the United Nations (1986), this share — which corresponds to
1− α in our production function — was 0.42 in Mexico and 0.53 in Chile. We choose a

higher value of the labor share for our growth accounting and numerical experiments,
0.70 — corresponding to α = 0.30 — for two reasons, however. First, measured labor
compensation in countries like Mexico and Chile fails to account for the income of most
self-employed and family workers, who make up a large fraction of the labor force.
Gollin (2001) shows that, for countries where there is sufficient data to adjust for this
mismeasurement, the resulting labor shares tend to be close to the value in the United
States, 0.70. Second, a high capital share implies implausibly high rates of return on
capital in our numerical experiments. (We provide alternative growth accounting and
numerical experiments for a production function in which α = 0.60 in Appendix B; the
qualitative nature of our conclusions does not change.)
To calculate a capital stock series, we cumulate investment, I t , using
Kt +1 = (1 − δ ) Kt + I t .

(3)

for some chosen depreciation rate δ and an initial condition on capital. We use a
depreciation rate δ = 0.05 for both countries, and, for the initial condition on capital, we
assume the capital-output ratio grew from 1960 to 1961 by the same amount that it did
over the period 1961-1970. As a check, we note that with these choices the share of
capital consumption in GDP, which in the model is measured by δKt / Yt , is equal to the
number reported by the United Nations (1986) for Mexico in 1980. To reproduce the
corresponding number for Chile in 1980, we would need a higher depreciation rate,

δ = 0.08 . We choose to use δ = 0.05 for two reasons. First, we want to use the same
production technology in our growth accounting and numerical experiments for Chile as
for Mexico. Second, a higher value of δ for Chile yields implausibly low values of the
capital-output ratio there. (We provide alternative growth accounting and numerical

14

experiments for a production technology in which δ = 0.08 in Appendix B; the
qualitative nature of our conclusions does not change.)
Given our choice of α and generated series for Kt , we can calculate TFP series.
Figure 13 plots the series for Mexico and Chile detrended by 1.4 percent per year. We
detrend at this rate because in a balanced growth path, where output and capital per
worker grow by 2 percent per year, TFP would have to grow by 1.4 percent per year,
.
. What is striking about Figure 13 is how closely the TFP data match
1.021− 0.3 = 10140
those for GDP per working-age person in Figure 1. (In fact, the correlation between
detrended At and detrended Yt / N t is 0.99 for Mexico and 0.92 for Chile.) This suggests
that it was not changes in inputs that were responsible for the crises and recoveries in
Mexico and Chile, but rather the efficiency with which these factors were used.
Taking natural logarithms of the production function, we follow Hayashi and Prescott
(2001) in rearranging terms to obtain

log

FG Y IJ = 1 log A + α logFG K IJ + logFG L IJ ,
1− α
H N K 1− α
HY K HN K
t

t

t

t

t

t

t

(4)

where N t is the number of hours available for work by working-age persons. We use
this expression to decompose the change in real GDP per capita over the period t to t + s
as

LMlogF Y I − logF Y I OP / s = 1 log A − log A / s
N GH N JK GH N JK Q 1 − α
(5)
O
L
L
O
I
I
I
I
F
F
F
F
K
K
L
L
α
+
logG
− logG J P / s + MlogG
− logG J P / s.
M
J
J
1− α N H Y K
H Y KQ N H N K H N KQ
t +s

t +s

t

t +s

t

t

t +s

t

t +s

t

t +s

t

t +s

t

The first term on the right-hand side of this equation is the contribution to growth of TFP
changes, the second is the contribution of changes in the capital-output ratio, and the third
is the contribution of changes in hours worked per working-age person. On a balanced
growth path, output per worker and capital per worker grow at the same rate, and the
capital-output ratio and hours worked per working-age person are constant. On such a
path, our growth accounting would attribute all growth to changes in TFP. In our growth
accounting, therefore, the second two terms measure the contributions of deviations from
balanced-growth behavior: changes in the investment rate and changes in work effort.

15

Table II
Growth accounting:
Decomposition of average annual changes
in real output per working-age person (percent)
model
base case

model
tax reform

-3.28
-5.22
2.06
-0.12

-4.80
-5.22
3.17
-2.75

-4.80
-5.22
3.17
-2.75

-0.66
-0.98
0.63
-0.31

-1.59
-0.98
-0.17
-0.43

-0.07
-0.98
0.50
0.41

3.04
2.59
-0.74
1.19

2.04
2.59
-1.92
1.37

2.53
2.59
-1.29
1.23

-11.19
-9.61
5.29
-6.87

-11.48
-9.61
6.49
-8.36

-11.48
-9.61
6.49
-8.36

4.43
3.57
-0.17
1.03

2.96
3.57
-1.15
0.54

4.37
3.57
-0.23
1.03

data

Mexico
Crisis 1981-1987
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Stagnation 1987-1995
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Recovery 1995-2000
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N

Chile
Crisis 1981-1983
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Recovery 1983-2000
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N

The first column in Table II presents the growth accounting for Mexico and Chile
during the period 1981 to 2000. This growth accounting confirms the impression given
by comparing Figures 1 and 13. Most of the economic fluctuations in output per
working-age person Yt / N t in the two countries were due to changes in total factor
productivity At , rather than changes in the capital-output ratio Kt / Yt or in the hours per

16

working-age person Lt / N t : In Mexico, TFP accounted for a fall in the logarithm of
output per working-age person of 0.39, compared to the fall of 0.25 in the data, during the
crisis and stagnation periods 1981-1995; it accounted for an increase of 0.13, compared to
the increase of 0.15 in the data, in the recovery period 1995-2000. In Chile, TFP
accounted for a 0.19 fall, compared to 0.22 in the data, during the crisis period 19811983; it accounted for an increase of 0.61, compared to 0.75 in the data, during the
recovery period 1983-2000.4
Numerical Experiments

Although growth accounting indicates that most of the changes in output in Mexico
and Chile were due to changes in TFP, the contributions of changes in the capital-output
ratio and of changes in hours worked per working-age person were not negligible. How
much of these changes can we account for as equilibrium responses to the observed
productivity shocks in a growth model?
To answer this question, we calibrate a simple growth model of a closed economy in
which consumers have perfect foresight over the sequence of TFP shocks to Mexico and
to Chile. The representative consumer maximizes utility function

å

∞
t =1980

β t γ log Ct + (1 − γ ) log( N t − Lt )

(6)

subject to the budget constraint in each period,
Ct + Kt +1 − Kt = wt Lt + (1 − τ t )(rt − δ ) Kt + Tt

(7)

and an initial condition on capital, K1980 . Here N t is the number of hours available,
taken to be 100 hours per week, 52 weeks per year for working-age persons, and
( N t − Lt ) is leisure. In addition, τ t is the income tax rate on capital income, which we
4

In interpreting our results, remember that we using logarithmic approximations to
growth rates, which are accurate for small rates, but not for large ones: The logarithmic
approximation says, for example, that Mexico’s output per working-age person grew by
15.2 (=5×3.04) percent between 1995 and 2000; it actually grew by 16.4 percent
( e 0.152 = 1164
.
). On the other hand, the logarithmic approximation says that Chile’s
output per working-age person grew by 75.3 (=17×4.43) percent between 1983 and 2000;
it actually grew by 112.3 percent ( e 0.753 = 2.123 ). The major advantage of using
logarithms is that they allow us to do an additive decomposition of the determinants of
growth.

17

start by assuming fixed — but later lower to mimic the fiscal reforms — in Mexico and
Chile in the 1980s. Tt is a lump-sum transfer that in equilibrium is equal to the tax
revenue τ t (rt − δ ) Kt . (In Appendix B we show that the qualitative nature of our
conclusions are not very sensitive to the specification of the utility function.)
Given the production technology that we have used for growth accounting, the
feasibility constraint for this model is
Ct + Kt +1 − (1 − δ ) Kt = At Ktα L1t −α .

(8)

Here we include government spending and net exports in consumption. To run numerical
experiments, we need to impose values on the parameters β and γ in the consumer’s
utility function and on the tax parameter τ t . Using the first-order conditions for
maximization problem of the representative consumer in our model economy, we obtain

β=

Ct
Ct −1 1 + (1 − τ t )(rt − δ )

(9)

Ct
,
Ct + wt ( N t − Lt )

(10)

γ =

where rt and wt are, of course, the marginal products of the production function with
respect to Kt and Lt . Rather than fix the tax rates in Mexico and Chile and estimate a
different discount factor β for each country, we fix β = 0.98 in each country and.
estimate a different average tax parameter τ t over the period 1960-1980. We obtain

τ t = 0.43 for Mexico and τ t = 0.51 for Chile. Our view is that people are fundamentally
the same across countries, but that different tax distortions induce different consumptioninvestment decisions. To find γ , however, we simply take averages using (10) and data
from 1960-1980. We estimate γ = 0.30 for Mexico and γ = 0.28 for Chile.
It would be equally possible to fix the same value of γ in both countries and to
estimate different tax distortions to consumption-leisure decisions, like consumption
taxes and labor taxes, for each country. Despite some changes in these sorts of taxes in
both Mexico and Chile, however, we find that the value of γ in (10) does not vary much
over the period 1960-2000 in either country. It is worth remembering, however, that our
estimates of γ implicitly incorporate differences in tax distortions and labor market
institutions in the two countries.

18

The second column in Table II and the first columns of graphs in Figures 14 and 15
report the results of our base case numerical experiments. In each country, we set K1980
equal to its observed value in 1980 and compute the perfect foresight equilibrium path
where the sequence of TFP, A1980 , A1981 ,..., A2000 , is given by data and TFP after 2000 is
assumed to grow at the same average rate as it did over the period 1960-2000. Notice
that, for both Mexico and Chile, the model captures that initial decline in output well, but
misses from about 1985 on. In particular, it predicts that detrended output in 2000 should
be about 20 percent below its value in the data in both countries. In terms of the model’s
results, it seems equally surprising that Chile did so well in its recovery period and that
Mexico did not do worse.
Our discussion of structural reforms in the previous section suggests that changes in
taxes may have changed incentives to accumulate capital in both Mexico and Chile. The
results of our base case numerical experiments suggest, however, that such reforms had
effects that were roughly equal, leaving at question what caused the different
performances in the two countries in differences in TFP. We analyze this possibility by
running new numerical experiments in which we introduce the same tax reform in both
Mexico and Chile in 1988.
Using (9), we estimate that both countries had tax rates of τ t = 0.12 over the period
1988-2000. The third column in Table II and the second columns of graphs in Figures 14
and 15 report the results of numerical experiments where we compute the equilibrium in
which consumers have perfect foresight between 1980 and 1988, they are surprised by a
tax reform in 1988 that in Mexico lowers τ t from 0.43 to 0.12 and in Chile lowers τ t
from 0.51 to 0.12, and they have perfect foresight from then on. Notice that the model
now does an accurate job of accounting for both the crises and the recoveries in Mexico
and Chile. Furthermore, there is some direct evidence that the sorts of tax distortions that
we have estimated are sensible: In Chile, for example, taxes on firms’ income were
lowered from 46 percent to 10 percent in 1984; this tax was increased to 15 percent in
1991 (see Larraín and Vergara (2000)). Interestingly, although the tax reform has direct

19

effects only on the incentive to accumulate capital, it increases the incentive to work by
raising real wages.5
The tax reform that we have imposed on the model is crude and is sure to miss
important institutional details and matters of timing. (The results for Chile, for example,
look better if we impose the tax reform earlier.) Nonetheless, the results of our numerical
experiments are striking and the message is clear: Changes in tax policy were
undoubtedly important in both countries, but they cannot explain more than a small
fraction of the differences in the recoveries. In both Mexico and Chile, changes in the
capital-output ratio and changes in hours worked per working-age person contributed to
making the recovery stronger than the base case model predicts. Within the context of
our model, the same crude tax reform in both countries can roughly account for these
changes in factor inputs. Consequently, to explain the different experiences in Mexico
and Chile, we need to explain the different performances of TFP.

5. HOW REFORMS CAN INCREASE TFP
Since most of the differences in the recovery paths in Mexico and Chile can be
directly traced to the different paths for TFP, any serious explanation for the different
economic performances must boil down to an explanation of the different productivities.
Our hypothesis is that higher productivity growth in Chile was driven by the timing of
reforms in three areas: privatization, banking, and bankruptcy procedures. Given the data
on the speed of, and relative importance of, privatization in the two countries, we
conjecture that reforms to banking and bankruptcy procedure were quantitatively more
important than privatization in determining the differences in productivity. In this
section, we sketch out simple examples of how the removal of distortions in each of these
three areas can lead to higher productivity.
Before we turn to our examples, let us contrast our hypothesis with a potential
explanation for measured productivity movements that is common in the business cycle
5

Notice that the model overpredicts work effort in the early 1980s in both countries, both
before and during the crisis. This is not a matter of secular trends: Remember that we
have calibrated the crucial parameter, γ , for determining work effort to data from the
1960s and 1970s. Hours worked per working-age person were, in fact, low by historical
standards during the early 1980s in both countries.

20

literature (see, for example, Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1993)). This
explanation is that unobserved movements in factor utilization cause large movements in
measured productivity. To make this concrete, supposed that aggregate output Y is
produced according to the Cobb-Douglas function
Y = A(uK )α (eL)1−α

(11)

where 0 ≤ u ≤ 1 is unobserved capacity utilization of capital and 0 ≤ e ≤ 1 is unobserved
labor effort. It is important to note that variations in e do not correspond to variations in
the employment rate, the participation rate, or average hours worked: if these variations
are properly measured, they show up as variations in L . If we observe K and L in the
data and do not observe u or e , we would mistakenly identify movements in
A = Auα e1−α as changes in productivity instead of correctly identifying them as
movements in factor utilization. In our growth accounting exercise, for example, we have
used L / N to measure work effort, but we should have used eL / N .
Such shifts in utilization may be important in the onset of the crisis. It seems
farfetched, however, to argue that they can account for large differences in productivity
movements between countries over a period of a decade or more, when firms are making
new investments and hiring new workers. Indeed in Mexico, the country with falling
productivity, the story would have to be that, at the same time that the average firm in
Mexico was gradually lowering its utilization rate of capital, it was investing in new
capital. Similar comments apply to labor: at the same time firms were supposedly
“hoarding” labor by requiring low effort, on average, they were hiring new workers. This
type of behavior is inconsistent with that of firms in the standard growth model.
One could imagine a richer model in which some firms were under utilizing factors
and hiring no new factors at the same time that others were utilizing factors fully and
hiring new factors. Even so, it is hard to imagine that this situation could have persisted
and even worsened for as long as a decade. Presumably, during that long of a period, the
depreciation of physical capital and the natural turnover of workers would have gradually
raised the utilization rates, not persistently lowered them.
In contrast, our general hypothesis is that, absent reforms, government policy
distorted the allocations of resources both within and across sectors and this led the
economy to be inside the aggregate production possibility frontier. As reforms were

21

carried out, the economy moved closer to the production possibility frontier, and this
movement showed up as an improvement in productivity.
Static Inefficiencies

The government’s favored treatment of certain sectors can interfere with the market
mechanism and lower aggregate productivity. To see this in the simplest possible
example, consider an economy with two sectors in which labor Li produces a
homogenous output good Yi according to the production function Yi = Ai Lαi , i = 1, 2 .
For simplicity, set A1 = A2 = 1 . The aggregate resource constraint is L1 + L2 = L .
Before the reform, sector 1 is the government enterprise sector that is subsidized at
rate τ 1 and sector 2 is the private sector that is taxed at rate τ 2 . Any residual from the
taxes and subsidies is financed with lump-sum taxes or transfers. A competitive labor
market equates the marginal products of labor in the two sectors, which implies
L1
L2

F 1 + τ IJ
=G
H 1− τ K
1

1
1−α

.

(12)

2

Substituting the allocations of labor back into the resource constraint and solving yields

F 1 + τ IJ
1+ G
H 1− τ K
Y (τ , τ ) =
LM F 1 + τ I
MM1 + GH 1 − τ JK
N
1

α
1−α

2

1

2

1

2

1
1−α

OP
PP
Q

α

Lα .

(13)

Now imagine a privatization that sets both the subsidy and the tax to zero. The
efficient allocation of labor would be Li = L / 2 and the aggregate output would be
Y (0,0) = 21−α Lα . Relative to the efficient allocation, before reform the government
enterprise in sector 1 produces too much output, and the private firm in sector 2, too little
output. Overall, output is lower in the economy before reform than it is afterward. If

α = 3 / 4 and τ 1 = τ 2 = 1 / 3 , for example, then output in the distorted economy is about
10 percent less than in the undistorted economy. Consequently, productivity would rise
with the reform.
This example illustrates how distortions can affect the static aggregate production
possibility frontier. We have focused on a direct subsidy, but any differential treatment
22

for one sector over another will have a similar impact. It illustrates how, in theory,
different paths for privatization in the two countries can lead to different paths for
aggregate productivities.
In terms of the data, the timing of the privatization in the two countries does not
match up well with the differences in productivity. This makes it doubtful that
privatization can be the main force that accounts for the different paths of productivity.
During the crucial period 1987-1995 Chile was growing and Mexico was stagnating. In
Chile, most privatization had already occurred well before this time, while, in Mexico, it
was vigorously under way. Consequently, unless there are long lags between changes in
incentives and changes in the allocation of resources, this story will not work. Galal et al.
(1994) estimate that improvements in productivity were achieved very rapidly in
privatized firms in Mexico and Chile.
Reforms in the banking sector can also reduce static inefficiencies similar to those in
the privatization story above. Suppose that, before banking reform, the government
chooses some firms or sectors to favor with low-interest-rate loans. Holding fixed the
return on deposits, these lower interest rates for one sector must be paid either by higher
rates in the unfavored sector or by transfers to the banking system from the government.
Consider a model in which, for simplicity, we suppress labor and let the production
functions be given by Ai Kiα , i = 1, 2 . Sector 1 receives a proportional subsidy of τ 1 on
the interest rate that it pays on loans, and sector 2 pays a tax τ 2 . The first-order
conditions for profit maximization are

αA1 K1α −1 αA2 K2α −1
=
=r
(1 − τ 1 )
(1 + τ 2 )

(14)

We can think of these subsidies and taxes as being accomplished through preferential
lending by banks. Any net revenues that are needed are supplied to the banks using lumpsum taxes or transfers. The relative allocations of capital are given by
K1
K2

F A I F 1 + τ IJ
=G J G
H A K H 1− τ K
1

1
1−α

2

2

1
1−α

(15)

1

In contrast to the efficient outcome, a higher fraction of the capital stock is allocated to
the subsidized sector than is warranted by the differences in productivity. For a fixed
level of total capital, these distortions lower the amount of output due to sectoral
23

misallocations, as in the first example. If these distortions decrease the incentives to
make loans, as they did in Mexico, then they can also lead to a lower level of overall
capital and have an additional negative effect on output.
Despite the static nature of the inefficiency, this story has potential for explaining the
differences in TFP performance: Banking reform was the major reform that Chile had
not gotten right in the 1970s and had to redo in the 1980s. See Galvez and Tybout (1985)
for a description of the sort of preferential lending arrangements that existed for some
firms, but not others, in Chile before the crisis. Furthermore, the privatization of the
Mexican banking system in the early 1990s did not make it an efficient provider of credit,
as Figure 11 and the problems in 1995 demonstrate.
Dynamic Inefficiencies

One way poorly designed bankruptcy rules can lead to lower aggregate productivity is
by discouraging poorly performing firms from exiting from production. By keeping alive
firms that otherwise would have died, in equilibrium, these poorly designed rules can
prevent new potentially productive firms from entering. The models developed by
Atkeson and Kehoe (1995) and Chu (2001) could be used to address such issues. In these
models, new firms enter with the newest technology, stochastically learn over time, and
then exit when their prospects for further productivity improvements are poor. In such
models, any policy that interferes with the natural birth, growth, and death of production
units based on prospective productivities can move the economy further and further
inside the production possibility frontier and will show up as a decrease in measured
productivity. Simulations by Chu (2001) indicate that these dynamic distortions can have
enormous effects over time.
To get some idea of how this sort of model works, consider Atkeson and Kehoe’s
(1995) model in which production is done in a continuum of plants. Each plant has its
own level of productivity A and is operated by a manager. A plant with productivity A has
the production function y = A1−ν ( k α l 1−α )ν . The manager’s span of control parameter,
v < 1 , determines the degree of diminishing returns at the plant level. A manager who

decides to operate a plant chooses capital k and labor l to maximize static returns
d t ( A) = max A1−ν ( k α l 1−α )ν − rt k − wt l − wtm ,
k ,l

24

(16)

where wtm is the manager’s opportunity cost of not working or starting another plant. Let
the solutions be denoted k t ( A) and lt ( At ) . For a given distribution λ t (A) of
productivities across plants, it is easy to show that aggregate output is given by
Yt = At1−ν Ktα L1t −α where

At = ò Aλt (dA)

(17)

A

is aggregate productivity and K = ò A k t ( A)λ t (dA) and L = ò A lt ( A)λ t (dA) are aggregate
capital and labor. That is, aggregate productivity depends on the mean of the
productivities of all of the plants that are in operation.
Over time, the productivity of each plant evolves stochastically: a plant with
productivity A at t has random productivity Aε at t + 1, where ε is drawn from a
probability distribution π(ε) . The crucial decision for the manager of whether or not to
operate a plant is dynamic and is described by the Bellman equation
Vt ( A) = max[0, Vt o ( A)]

where Vt o ( A) = d t ( A) +

z

1
Vt +1 ( Aε )π (dε )
1 + Rt ε

(18)

Here Rt is the market rate of interest between periods t and t + 1, Vt o ( A) is the value if
the plant is operated in the current period, and Vt (A) is the maximum of the returns from
either closing the plant or operating it. New plants can enter according to a similar
process. The outcome of all the managerial decisions to operate or not is a new
distribution λ t +1 ( A) over productivities in period t + 1.
So far we have described a simple version of the model in which the probability
distribution π(ε) that generates shocks to plant-specific productivity does not change
with plant age. In the data, the labor employed and output produced by a cohort of plants
tend to start low when they are young, grow for the next 20 years or so, and then
gradually decline (see, for example, Cahmi, Engel, and Micco (1997) for evidence from
Chile). To capture this sort of pattern, Atkeson and Kehoe (1995) modify the model.
They add a frontier level of new technology that grows over time, and they allow the
mean value of shocks to the productivity of a plant to increase for the first twenty years
and then to decrease. In the model, new plants start with the newest technology, but little
specific knowledge on how to use it. Over time, these plants build up their specific
knowledge and grow as they draw shocks to productivity from a distribution with an

25

increasing mean. After 20-some years, the mean of the shocks ε starts to fall, as the
learning process slows down. Plants then decline in size and eventually die.
Now consider the effects of a distortion in the financial system in which the
government encourages the banks to lend at a subsidized rate R = R (1 − τ ) to firms
1t

t

1t

(identified with plants in the model) in sector 1 and to lend to other firms at a relatively
high rate R = R (1 + τ ) . The favored firms discount the future less than the unfavored
2t

t

2t

ones. Substituting these distorted interest rates into the Bellman equation (18) produces
different solutions to the managers’ dynamic programming problems in sectors 1 and 2.
In particular, favored firms will choose to continue to operate in situations where
unfavored firms would choose to shut down: even if a favored firm experiences a low
productivity A, it will be more prone than an unfavored firm to borrow to cover losses and
to continue operating, hoping for a favorable shock ε to increase its productivity in the
future.
Consider next the effects of inefficient bankruptcy procedures that make it difficult
for firms to exit or subsidize the losses of firms to keep them operating. This distortion
causes firms to keep operating for longer than they would have with no distortions.
Together, distortions in the financial system and bankruptcy procedures change the
mix of firms that operate in the economy, leading to inefficiently many low-productivity
firms continuing. This leads to a lower value of aggregate productivity A .
How would the removal of these distortions affect the path of productivity over time?
Some effects would be immediate. Upon removal, some previously favored firms that
would have continued will fail, and some unfavored firms that would have failed will
continue. The more subtle, and potentially more important, effects take more time to
show up in aggregates. The removal of distortions would encourage new firms to enter.
Such new firms would have the newest technologies, but would build up their
organization-specific productivity only slowly over time. Consequently, removing these
distortions would show up with a lag in the aggregate productivity statistics.

6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
The sort of lag between government policy change and the resulting change in
productivity discussed in the previous section may, in fact, provide major roles for
Chile’s trade reforms and privatization in the 1970s in explaining productivity increases a
26

decade or more later. Openness to foreign direct investment and deregulation in domestic
industry, once again reforms that took place in Chile earlier than Mexico, also may have
played significant roles. To disentangle the dynamic effects of these reforms on
productivity and output from the effects of banking and bankruptcy reforms, more work is
needed: the task for the future is to build a quantitative model that incorporates the
theoretical structure sketched out in this section and to calibrate it to Mexico and Chile.
The challenge is to use the same model to explain why Chile boomed while Mexico
stagnated. This paper has provided sharp directions pointing to where the explanation
can be and where the explanation cannot be.

27

REFERENCES

Aspe, P. (1993), Economic Transformation the Mexican Way. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Atkeson, A. and P. J. Kehoe (1995), “Industry Evolution and Transition: Measuring
Investment in Organization Capital,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Staff Report
201.
Barandiarán, E. and L. Hernández. (1999), “Origins and Resolution of a
Banking Crisis: Chile 1982-86, ” Banco Central de Chile, Working Paper 57.
Bosworth, B., R. Dornbusch, and R. Labán, editors (1994), The Chilean Economy:
Policy Lessons and Challenges. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (1993), “Labor Hoarding and the Business
Cycle,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 245-273.
Cahmi, A., E. Engel, and A. Micco (1997), “Dinámica de Empleo y Productividad en
Manufacturas: Evidencia Micro y Consecuencias Macro,” in F. Morande and R. Vergara,
editors, Análisis Empírico del Crecimiento en Chile. Santiago: ILADES/Georgetown,
197-225.
Chu, T. (2001), “Exit Barriers and Economic Stagnation,” unpublished manuscript, EastWest Center.
Corbo, V. (1985), “Reforms and Macroeconomic Adjustments in Chile during 1974-84,”
World Development, 13, 893-916.

28

Corbo, V. and S. Fischer (1994), “Lessons from the Chilean Stabilization and Recovery,”
in B. Bosworth, R. Dornbusch, and R. Labán, editors, The Chilean Economy: Policy
Lessons and Challenges. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 29-67.
De la Cuadra, S. and D. Hachette (1991), “Liberalizing Foreign Trade, The Experience of
Chile,” in D. Papageorgiou, M. Michaely, and A. Choksi, editors, Liberalizing Foreign
Trade. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 169-231.
Edwards, A. and S. Edwards, (1991), Monetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean
Experiment. Second edition. Cambridge, MA: Harper and Row.
Edwards, S. (1996), “A Tale of Two Crises: Chile and Mexico,” National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper 5794.
Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 18671960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Galal, A., L. Jones, P. Tandon, and I. Vogelsang (1994), Welfare Consequences of
Selling Public Enterprises. An Empirical Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press
for the World Bank, 1994.
Galvez, J. and J. Tybout (1985), “Microeconomic Adjustments in Chile during 19771981: The Importance of Being a Grupo,” World Development, 13, 969-994.
Glade, W. (1996), “Privatization: Pictures of a Process,” in R. Corona and W. Glade,
editors, Bigger Economies, Smaller Governments: Privatization in Latin America. New
York: HarperCollins, 3-24.
Gollin, D. (2001), “Getting Income Shares Right,” unpublished manuscript, Williams
College, forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy.

29

Gruben, W. and J. Welch (1996), “Distortions and Resolutions in Mexico’s Financial
System,” in L. Randall editor, Changing Structure of Mexico: Political, Social, and
Economic Prospects. London: Sharpe, 63-75.
Hachette, D. and R. Luders, (1993), Privatization in Chile. San Francisco: International
Center for Economic Growth.
Hayashi, F. and E. C. Prescott (2001), “The 1990s in Japan: A Lost Decade,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, this volume.
Kehoe, T. J. (1995), “A Review of Mexico’s Trade Policy from 1982 to 1994,” The
World Economy, 18 (1995), 135-151.
Larraín, F. and R. Vergara (2000). “Un Cuarto de Siglo de Reformas Fiscales,” in F.
Larraín and R. Vergara, editors, La Transformación Económica de Chile. Santiago:
Centro de Estudios Públicos, 71-109.
Lucas, R. E. (2001), “Depressions and Deflations,” unpublished manuscript, forthcoming
in American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings.
Lustig, N. (1998), Mexico: The Remaking of an Economy. Second edition. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution.
Sachs, J. (1989), “The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries,” in R. Findlay, G. Calvo,
P. Kouri and J. Braga de Macedo, editors, Debt, Stabilization and Development: Essays
in Memory of Carlos Diaz-Alejandro. Oxford: Blackwell, 80-102.
Sanhueza, G. (2001), “Chilean Banking Crisis of the 1980s: Solutions and
Estimation of the Costs,” Banco Central de Chile, Working Paper 104.
United Nations (1986), National Accounts Statistics: Main Aggregates and Detailed
Tables, 1984. New York.
30

APPENDIX A: DATA SOURCES
Data cited in text: The data on current account deficits, LIBOR, and nominal exchange

rates are from the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS).
The data on crude petroleum and copper exports in 1960 are from the United Nations’
International Trade Statistics Yearbook; these same data for 2000 are from the web sites
of Mexico’s Instituto Nacional de Estadística Geografía e Informática
(http://dgcnesyp.inegi.gob.mx/) and the Banco Central de Chile
(http://sie.aplicaciones.cl/basededatoseconomicos/). The information on the exports of
CODELCO in 2000 is from the web site of the Comisión Chilena del Cobre
(http://www.cochilco.cl/home/esp/frameset-estadistica.htm). The data on the fraction of
total external debt that is public or publicly guaranteed is from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators 2001 (WDI) CD-ROM. The information on the fraction of GDP
generated by government enterprises is from WDI.
Data for growth accounting: The GDP series are from IFS. The investment series used

to compute the capital stocks are the sum of gross fixed capital formation and change in
inventories reported by IFS. The labor series have been estimated using data from a
number of sources: The labor inputs for both countries are the products of total
employment and a survey of average hours per worker. In Mexico, total employment
from 1980-1990 is total employment from the Penn World Table 5.6 multiplied by the
ratio of Penn World Table employment and IFS employment in 1988. This series is
spliced with the available data on employment reported by IFS for the 1990s. The data
for missing years were calculated using linear interpolation. Employment in Mexico in
1999 has been calculated as the product of the economically active population in 1999
from WDI and the ratio of employment in 1998 to the economically active population in
1998. Employment in 2000 has been calculated by multiplying the value of an index of
manufacturing employment reported by the OECD in Main Economic Indicators in 2000
by the average ratio of this index to total employment over the 1996-1999 period. The
average hours worked in Mexican manufacturing series is calculated using an index of
total hours and an index of total employment from Main Economic Indicators. The labor
series in Chile is calculated computed using data on total employed from the Penn World

31

Table 5.6 from 1980-1985 and total employment reported in IFS from 1985-2000. The
hours series is Average Hours Worked in Urban Santiago from the survey Encuesta de
Ocupación y Desocupación released quarterly by the Departamento de Economía,
Universidad de Chile.
Table I: All the data are from IFS.
Figure 1: The real GDP series are indices of real GDP volume from IFS. The population

aged 15-64 is from WDI. These data end in 1999. The population aged 15-64 in 2000
was estimated by linear extrapolation.
Figure 2: The real GDP series are real GDP per capita in constant dollars (international

prices, base year 1985). These series are downloaded from the World Bank’s Global
Development Network Growth Database. To convert GDP per working-age person we
use the population data from WDI. The data for 2000 have been calculated using the
1999 data and the real growth rated from the data in Figure 1.
Figure 3: The data are from IFS: the price of copper is the London price, while the price

of oil reported in the average world price. Both series are deflated using the U.S. PPI
from IFS.
Figure 4: The real manufacturing wage in Chile is a series reported in Indicadores

Mensuales de Empleo y Remuneraciones from Chile’s Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas.
The real wage in manufacturing for Mexico was created by splicing a series reported by
IFS with a series from Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development’s
Main Economic Indicators. The IFS series is deflated using the CPI reported by IFS. The
OECD series is a real series. These series are spliced using their ratio in 1995.
Figure 5: The real exchange rates are calculated using period averages of the nominal

exchange rates and Consumer Price Indices from IFS.
Figure 6: The series are the ratios of nominal imports and exports and nominal GDP

from IFS.
Figure 7: The U.S. PPI is from IFS. The export values in U.S. dollars are from WDI and

the World Trade Organization’s International Trade Statistics 2000.
Figure 8: Total external debt for 1980-1999 is from WDI. The GDP series are from

IFS, and are converted into U.S. dollars using period average nominal exchange rates
from IFS. The 2000 value was obtained from the Banco Central de Chile’s Boletín

32

Mensual, Julio 2001 for Chile and the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean’s Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2000-2001.
Figure 9: Nominal investment and nominal GDP are from IFS.
Figure 10: Government surplus is from IFS. The value of the surplus in Chile in 2000 is

from the Estadísticas de las Finanzas Públicas 1990-2000, Dirección de Presupuesto,
Ministerio de Hacienda..
Figure 11: Both the private credit and GDP series are from IFS. Private Credit is the

sum of claims on Non-Financial Public Enterprise and Claims on Private Sector.
Figure 12: The data on bankruptcies in Chile correspond to the number of new filings,

not the number of resolutions; the Fiscalía Nacional de Quiebras of the Ministerio de
Justicia provided the authors with these data on request.

33

APPENDIX B: SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Tables III and IV present the growth accounting and numerical experiments for
alternative specifications of the model.
Table III presents the results for a specification of the model with the sort of large
capital share suggested by Mexico and Chile’s national accounts, α = 0.60 , and for a
specification with the sort of high depreciation rate suggested by Chile’s national
accounts, δ = 0.08 . The growth accounting and the numerical exercises still indicate that
it is mostly fluctuations in TFP that account for the different growth paths of Chile and
Mexico. The specification with α = 0.60 is unattractive because it implies implausibly
high (before tax) rates of returns on capital, averaging over 20 percent in both countries
throughout 1960-2000. These returns are out of line with the sorts of real interest rates
found in the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics. The
specification with δ = 0.08 is unattractive because it implies low capital-output ratios,
averaging 1.90 in Mexico and 1.55 in Chile over the period 1960-2000. Both
specifications require unattractive calibrations of capital taxes: For the specification with

α = 0.60 , we estimate τ t = 0.76 in Mexico and τ t = 0.81 in Chile during the period
1960-1980 and τ t = 0.68 in Mexico and τ t = 0.70 in Chile during the period 1988-2000.
In the numerical experiments with a tax reform, we lower τ t to 0.68 in both countries in
1988. For the specification with δ = 0.08 , we estimate τ t = 0.50 in Mexico and

τ t = 0.61 in Chile during the period 1960-1980 and τ t = 0.19 in Mexico and τ t = 0.26 in
Chile during the period 1988-2000. In the experiments with a tax reform, we lower τ t to
0.20 in 1988.
Table IV presents the results for specifications of the model that use the utility
function
~
åt =1980 β N tη
∞

t

F LF C I F N − L I
GG MGH N~ JK GH N JK
H MN
γ

t

t

t

t

t

1−γ

OP
PQ

φ

I
− 1J / φ .
JK

~
Here N t is an adult equivalent measure of population that puts weight 1/2 on persons not
of working age and weight 1 on working-age persons. The utility function used in the
paper is, of course, the special case where φ = η = 0 . The second and third columns of

34

Table IV report the results of numerical experiments where φ = −1 and η = 0. The fourth
and fifth columns report the results of experiments where φ = 0 and η = 1. Because
neither specification changes the production technology, the growth accounting stays the
same. For the specification with φ = −1 , we estimate τ t = 0.36 in Mexico and τ t = 0.47
in Chile during the period 1960-1980 and τ t = 0.06 in Mexico and τ t = −0.03 in Chile
during the period 1988-2000. In the experiments with a tax reform, we lower τ t to 0.04
in 1988. For the specification with η = 1, we estimate τ t = 0.66 in Mexico and τ t = 0.72
in Chile during the period 1960-1980 and τ t = 0.45 in Mexico and τ t = 0.31 in Chile
during the period 1988-2000. In the experiments with a tax reform, we lower τ t to 0.35
in 1988. The numerical experiments still indicate that the differences in TFP paths
account for most of the differences in the economic performances of Mexico and Chile.

35

Table III
Sensitivity analysis: Alternative production technologies
Average annual change in real output per working-age person (percent)

δ = 0.08

α = 0.60
data

model
base
case

model
tax
reform

data

model
base
case

model
tax
reform

Mexico
Crisis 1981-1987
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Stagnation 19871995
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Recovery 1995-2000
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N

-3.28
-10.40
7.24
-0.12

-2.89
-10.40
9.31
-1.80

-2.89
-10.40
9.31
-1.80

-3.28
-4.94
1.78
-0.12

-4.45
-4.94
2.72
-2.23

-4.45
-4.94
2.72
-2.23

-0.66
-2.56
2.21
-0.31

-1.47
-2.56
1.67
-0.58

-0.21
-2.56
2.32
0.03

-0.66
-0.80
0.37
-0.31

-1.34
-0.80
-0.32
-0.21

-0.01
-0.80
0.40
0.39

3.04
4.45
-2.60
1.19

1.41
4.45
-4.13
1.09

2.38
4.45
-3.16
1.09

3.04
2.67
-0.82
1.19

1.91
2.67
-1.90
1.14

2.43
2.67
-1.35
1.11

-11.19
-22.84
18.52
-6.87

-10.46
-22.84
20.07
-7.69

-10.46
-22.84
20.07
-7.69

-11.19
-9.62
5.30
-6.87

-10.54
-9.62
6.58
-7.50

-10.54
-9.62
6.58
-7.50

4.43
4.00
-0.60
1.03

1.80
4.00
-2.53
0.33

3.77
4.00
-1.05
0.82

4.43
3.37
0.03
1.03

2.66
3.37
-1.08
0.37

4.18
3.37
-0.05
0.86

Chile
Crisis 1981-1983
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Recovery 1983-2000
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N

Table IV
Sensitivity analysis: Alternative utility functions
Average annual change in real output per working-age person (percent)

φ = −1

η =1

model
base case

model
tax reform

model
base case

model
tax reform

-3.28
-5.22
2.06
-0.12

-4.45
-5.22
3.18
-2.41

-4.46
-5.22
3.18
-2.41

-4.38
-5.22
3.74
-2.89

-4.38
-5.22
3.74
-2.89

-0.66
-0.98
0.63
-0.31

-1.56
-0.98
-0.06
-0.52

-0.22
-0.98
0.48
0.28

-1.94
-0.98
-0.02
-0.94

-0.13
-0.98
0.64
0.21

3.04
2.59
-0.74
1.19

1.95
2.59
-1.78
1.14

2.41
2.59
-1.18
1.00

1.64
2.59
-2.19
1.24

2.45
2.59
-1.32
1.18

-11.19
-9.61
5.29
-6.87

-10.71
-9.61
5.97
-7.07

-10.71
-9.61
5.97
-7.07

-11.64
-9.61
6.58
-8.61

-11.64
-9.61
6.58
-8.61

4.43
3.57
-0.17
1.03

2.87
3.57
-1.15
0.45

4.22
3.57
-0.29
0.93

2.32
3.57
-1.63
0.37

4.25
3.57
-0.37
1.05

data

Mexico
Crisis 1981-1987
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Stagnation 1987-1995
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Recovery 1995-2000
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N

Chile
Crisis 1981-1983
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N
Recovery 1983-2000
change in Y/N
due to TFP
due to K/Y
due to L/N

Figure 1. Real GDP per working-age (15-64) person detrended by 2 percent
per year.

130
120

Chile

110
100
90
80

Mexico

70
60
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 2. Purchasing power parity real GDP per working-age (15-64)
person.

13000
12000

Mexico

11000
10000
9000
8000
7000

Chile

6000
5000
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

year

1985

1990

1995

2000

Figure 3. Commodity prices deflated by U.S. PPI.

110
100

copper

90
80
70
60
50

crude petroleum

40
30
20
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 4. Index of real wages in manufacturing.

150
140
130

Chile

120
110
100
90
80

Mexico

70
60
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 5. Real exchange rate against the U.S. dollar.

220
200

Chile
180
160
140

Mexico

120
100
80
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 6. International trade as a percent of GDP.

40

35

Exports Chile

percent GDP

30

Imports Chile

25

20

Exports Mexico

15

Imports Mexico

10

5
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 7. Export value in U.S. dollars deflated by U.S. PPI.

700
600
500

Mexico

400
300
200

Chile

100
0
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 8. Total external debt as a percent of GDP.

140

120

100

Chile

80

60

Mexico

40

20
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 9. Investment as a percent of GDP

30

percent GDP

25

Mexico

20

15

Chile
10

5
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 10. Government surplus as a percent of GDP.

8

percent GDP

4

Chile

0

-4

-8

Mexico

-12

-16
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 11. Private credit as a percent of GDP.

90
80

Chile
70
60
50
40

Mexico

30
20
10
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 12. Business bankruptcies in Chile.

500

400

300

200

100

0
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 13. Total factor productivity detrended by 1.4 percent per year.

105
100

Chile

index (1980=100)

95
90
85
80
75
70

Mexico

65
60
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

year

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 14. Numerical experiments for Mexico.

Mexico - Base Case

Mexico - Tax Reform
Y/N (detrended)

Y/N (detrended)
110

110

100

100

90

90

80

80

data

70

70

50

50
1980

data

60

model

60

model

1985

1990

1995

2000 1980

1985

K/Y

1990

1995

2000

1995

2000

1995

2000

K/Y
3.0

3.0
2.8

data

2.8

2.6

2.6

2.4

2.4

2.2

model

2.0

2.0
1.8

1.6

1.6

1985

1990

1995

data

2.2

1.8
1980

model

2000 1980

1985

1990

L/N

L/N
0.32

0.32

0.30

0.30

model
data

0.28

0.28

data
0.26

0.26

model

0.24
1980

1985

1990

1995

0.24
2000

1980

1985

1990

Figure 15. Numerical experiments for Chile.

Chile - Base Case

Chile - Tax Reform

Y/N (detrended)

Y/N (detrended)

130

130

120

120

110
100

data

110
100

model

90

90

80

80

70
1980

data
model

70
1985

1990

1995

2000 1980

1985

K/Y

1990

1995

2000

K/Y

2.8

2.8

2.4

data

2.4

2.0

2.0

1.6

1.6

model

1.2

data
model

1.2

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000 1980

1985

1995

2000

1995

2000

L/N

L/N
0.30

0.30

0.28

0.28

data

model

0.26

0.26

0.24

0.24

model

0.22

0.22

data

0.20

0.20
1980

1990

1985

1990

1995

2000 1980

1985

1990

