                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        WHY DOESN’T THE US HAVE A EUROPEAN-STYLE WELFARE SYSTEM?


                                            Alberto Alesina
                                            Edward Glaeser
                                            Bruce Sacerdote


                                          Working Paper 8524
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8524


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




The paper was presented at the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, Sept 7, 2001. We are grateful to our
discussants Steve Durlauf and Frank Levy and the organizers Bill Brainard and George Perry for very useful
suggestions. We also thank Benjamin Friedman, Roberto Perotti, Andrei Shleifer, Theda Skocpol and a large
number of conference participants for very useful comments. We thank the National Science Foundation for
financial assistance through a grant with the NBER. Arnaud Devleeschauwer and Jesse Shapiro provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Alberto Alesina, Edward Glaeser and Bruce Sacerdote. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Doesn’t the US Have a European-Style Welfare System?
Alberto Alesina, Edward Glaeser and Bruce Sacerdote
NBER Working Paper No. 8524
October 2001



                                               ABSTRACT


        European countries are much more generous to the poor relative to the US level of generosity.
Economic models suggest that redistribution is a function of the variance and skewness of the pre-tax
income distribution, the volatility of income (perhaps because of trade shocks), the social costs of taxation
and the expected income mobility of the median voter. None of these factors appear to explain the
differences between the US and Europe. Instead, the differences appear to be the result of racial
heterogeneity in the US and American political institutions. Racial animosity in the US makes
redistribution to the poor, who are disproportionately black, unappealing to many voters. American
political institutions limited the growth of a socialist party, and more generally limited the political power
of the poor.




Alberto Alesina                                                    Edward Glaeser
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics
Harvard University                                                 Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                           and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu                                               eglaeser@kuznets.harvard.edu

Bruce Sacerdote
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
bruce.i.sacerdote@dartmouth.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

European governments redistribute income amongst their citizens on a much larger scale
than does the United States government. European social programs are more generous
and reach a larger share of citizens. European tax systems are more progressive. Europe
has more intrusive regulations that are often meant to protect the poor. In this paper we
try to understand why.

The literature on “the size of government” is rich and varied. However, here we do not
focus on the size of government per se, but on the redistributive side of government
policies. Thus, our goal is narrower than answering the question “what explains the size
of government,” since we focus on a single, though increasingly important, role of fiscal
policy. In another sense, our focus is broader, because redistributive polices go beyond
the government budget—think, for instance, to labor market policies.

We consider economic, political and behavioral explanations for the differences between
the US and Europe. Economic explanations focus on the variance and the skewness of
the pre-tax, pre-transfer income distribution, the social costs of taxation, the volatility of
income, and the expected income changes for the median voter. We conclude that most
of these theories cannot explain the US-Europe differences. Pre-tax income in the US
has both more variance and is more skewed. There is no evidence that the deadweight
losses from taxation are lower in Europe. The volatility of income in Europe appears to
be lower than in the US. There is some possibility that the middle class in the US has a
greater chance of moving up in the income distribution, a feature that would make the
median voter more averse to redistribution.

Political explanations for the level of redistribution focus on institutions that prevent
minorities from gaining political power or strictly protect individuals’ private property.
Cross-country comparisons indicate the importance of these institutions in limiting
redistribution. For instance, America does not have proportional representation, which
played an important role in facilitating the growth of socialist parties in many European
countries. America has strong courts that have routinely rejected popular attempts at
redistribution, such as the income tax or labor regulation. The European equivalents of
these courts were swept away as democracy replaced monarchy and aristocracy. The
federal structure of the US may have also contributed to constrain the role of the central
government in the redistributive arena.

The political institutions result from particular features of US history. The formation of
the US as a federation of independent territories led to a federal structure that often
creates obstacles to centralized redistributive policies. The relative stability of the US
means that it is still governed by an 18th century constitution designed to protect property.
As world war and revolution swept away the old European monarchies, the 20th century
European constitutions that replaced the old regimes were more oriented towards
majority-rule, and less towards protection of private property. Moreover, the spatial


                                              3
organization of the U.S.—in particular, its low density—meant that the US government
was much less threatened by a socialist revolution. Many of the European institutions
were either directly implemented by revolutionary groups, or a response by elites to the
threat of violence.

Finally, we discuss reciprocal altruism and redistribution. Reciprocal altruism implies
that voters will dislike giving money to the poor, if the poor are perceived as lazy, which
they are in the US. In contrast, Europeans overwhelmingly believe that the poor are
unfortunate. This difference in views is part of what is sometimes refereed to as
“American exceptionalism” (Lipset (1996))

Racial discord plays a critical role in determining beliefs about the poor. Since
minorities are highly over-represented amongst the poorest Americans, any income-based
redistribution measures will redistribute particularly to minorities. The opponents of
redistribution have regularly used race based rhetoric to fight left-wing policies. Across
countries, racial fragmentation is a powerful predictor of redistribution. Within the US,
race is the single most important predictor of support for welfare. America’s troubled
race relations are clearly a major reason for the absence of an American welfare state.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we highlight the different redistributive
roles of government in the US and Europe. We also briefly address the question of
whether larger welfare states have achieved the goals that they were set up to reach.
Section 3 describes the “theories” that we test. We divide possible explanations into
three groups, which we label, for lack of better terms, i) economic; ii) political; and iii)
behavioral. We also illustrate a simple model that allows us to present most of the
explanations in a unified general framework. In Section 4, we present empirical evidence
on all the possible explanations described above. We make a special effort to evaluate
the relative explanatory power of different arguments. The last section concludes and
summarizes our results.

2. THE SIZE AND STRUCTURE OF REDISTRIBUTIVE POLICIES IN THE US
AND EUROPE

In this section, we review the basic facts about the level of redistribution to the poor in
the US and Europe.

2.1. THE SPENDING SIDE OF THE GOVERNMENT BUDGET

Table 2.1 displays the structure of government spending in Europe and in the US.1 In
addition to the average of Western European countries we selected the UK, as the
European country with a “small” government, Germany as the largest European country,
and Sweden as the prototype of a country with an especially large welfare state.
1
  In this table as well as all the other ones in this section, the average for Europe is computed as the
unweighted average for the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark,, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, UK. All the data are from OECD;
see the Appendix for more details on data sources.


                                                   4
Total general government spending in Europe is 48 per cent of GDP, (60 percent in
Sweden). In the US, total government spending is 35.5 percent of GDP. The
composition of spending is also instructive. The largest difference between the US and
Europe is in the area of transfers to households (including social security), and subsidies.
In fact, the sum of these two categories of spending is almost twice as large a share of
GDP in Europe (relative to the US): 20 per cent in Europe vs. 11 per cent for the US.
The US-Europe difference in transfers and subsidies comprises 9 of the 13 points of the
US-Europe difference in total spending.        Consumption of goods and services and
government wages are also higher in Europe, but the difference relative to the US is
much smaller than that for transfers and social security. Public investment is actually
higher in the US than in the “average” European country. Of course, military spending is
higher in the US than in Europe, even today when defense spending in the US is low by
post Second World War standards. Western Europe since the Second World War has
been a “free rider” on the defense provided by the US. That is, if the US did not have to
spend more on defense in order to defend Western Europe from the Soviet threats, the
difference in the overall size of government between Europe and the US would be even
larger.

The OECD offers a different breakdown of social spending, presented in Table 2.2 for
1995 (the latest available date). In all categories, except health, the US spends less than
the European average. There are particularly large differences in family allowances and
unemployment compensation and other labor market programs. According to this
classification, social spending in the US was about 16 percent of GDP in 1995. The
European average was 25 percent.2

Consider the other non-European OECD countries. The size of government in Canada
(52.3 per cent) is similar to France and slightly above the European average. Japan and
Australia have a smaller government (36 and 38 per cent of GDP) but still a bit larger
than the US, while New Zealand with 41 per cent is in between the US and Europe. The
average of the non-European, non-US OECD countries falls somewhere in between the
US and Europe. Thus in comparing the US and Europe we are comparing two extremes
in the OECD group.

Differences in the overall size of governments or even of transfer programs are only
indirectly related to the size of redistribution from the rich to the poor. Take for instance
the social security system; it involves flows from the young to the old, in addition to
flows from rich to poor. Nevertheless, it is uncontroversial that a predominant share of
public goods and especially transfers favor the poor disproportionately.

2.2. THE STRUCTURE OF TAXATION

2
  Note that the total amount of social spending in Table 2.2 is not meant to coincide with the item “social
benefits and other current transfers” in Table 2.1 leaving aside the fact that the two Tables refer to two
different years, the definition of the two items is different. For instance, the “health” component of Table
2.2 would include wages for health sector workers that would be classified as public wages in table 2.1.


                                                     5
Table 2.3 displays the composition of revenues. The most striking differences between
Europe and the US are in social security contributions and taxes on goods and services.
However, there are important differences in the structure of taxation even within
European countries.3 Our concern is with the tax burden of the rich relative to that of the
poor. To calculate a precise measure of the progressivity of the tax system across all
these countries, one would need an entire paper (at least) devoted to the task of
unraveling the intricacies of different tax codes. While this is beyond the scope of the
present paper, a simple attempt is made in Figure 2.1. We have assembled data on the
different income tax brackets of the European countries and taken an average of them.
We then subtracted this average from the federal income tax brackets in the US and we
plotted that difference. Therefore a positive value in that picture implies that the tax
bracket in the US at that level of income is higher than the European average, and vice
versa. The picture shows that tax brackets in the US are higher for low levels of income
(up to about 50 percent of the average worker’s wage) and lower for higher levels of
income. Also, the difference between the US and Europe becomes larger in absolute
value as income levels rise. Thus, this picture shows that the income tax is much more
progressive in Europe than in the US.4

2.3. HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF THE SIZE OF GOVERNMENT

Understanding the reasons for the striking differences between the US and Europe
requires us to understand something of the history of redistribution in both regions. In
particular, we want to know when the size of government, and especially, the size of the
European welfare state diverged from the US. Did the two sides of the Atlantic share a
similar size of government for a while and then diverge, or has the divergence always
been present?

Table 2.4 and Figure 2.2 provide a clear answer: from the very beginning of the
expansion of the public sector, the US and Europe show very distinct patterns. In
absolute values the difference between the US and Europe grew with the size of the
welfare state, but proportionally the difference between the two did not appear only at the
time of the “explosion” of the welfare state in the sixties and seventies. It was there since
the end of the nineteenth century. This observation is important, because it points to
explanations of the US/Europe difference that are not specific to a certain specific period
or event.

2.4. Income Support Policies and Safety Nets

In addition to the aggregate data provided above, it is useful to compare specific
programs for income support and safety nets at a more micro-level. We consider
Germany, Sweden, and the US, and we focus on a representative household. We will
3
  In fact a hotly debated issue within the European Union is precisely the ''harmonization'' of tax structures.
4
  In other federal systems (i.e. Germany) the structure of taxation also entails automatic redistribution from
richer to poorer regions. This is not so, to the same extent, within US states. Some geographical
redistribution does, however, occur within school districts in US states. For more discussion see Oates
(1999) and the references cited therein.


                                                      6
determine the extent to which existing programs and their provisions can be beneficial to
that particular household in case of increasing hardship. We examine the costs of raising
a child, of sickness, of disability and of extreme poverty. We discuss unemployment
policies in the context of more general labor market regulations in the next section.

Our representative household is composed of two adults and two children. The two
adults, both aged 35, are average production workers with 15 years of work experience.
The two children are aged 8 and 12, to take a benchmark that is often used by social
security administrations. The monthly earnings of an average production worker are
given in the following chart:

Average production worker monthly earnings
in $, PPP (1999)                       United States               Germany              Sweden
Pre-tax earnings                       2498                        2561                 1880

Family benefits

Child benefits are available in Germany and Sweden for every parent, without regard to
the income of the parents, up to age 18 in Germany and age 16 in Sweden, but those
limits can be extended if the child pursues higher education. By contrast, family
allowances do not exist in the US.5 However, special allowances for children are
allocated under the recently introduced TANF (Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families) programs, as discussed below. To summarize, each child will entitle the
recipients to the following benefits:

Family benefits
in $, PPP (1999)                                United States      Germany              Sweden
Monthly family benefits per child               0                  136.3                86.91

Health care

Our two European countries also differ significantly from the US in terms of systems of
health care. Both Germany and Sweden have universal coverage, with unlimited
benefits. The US, on the other hand, relies on two programs, Medicare and Medicaid,
which target mainly the aged and the low-income households. If one of the members of
our representative family became sick, and saw a doctor or stayed in a hospital, he or she
would not be eligible for public funds or services in the US. Most of the expenses would
be covered by the German and Swedish health care programs. Benefits include payments
of doctor fees, hospitalization and pharmaceutical products. Some parts of the costs are
still borne by the patient in the form of a deductible, as indicated below:

Health care: patient’s participation
in $, PPP (1999)                                United States      Germany              Sweden

5
  The U.S. does have a fixed per child tax credit and the Earned Income Tax Credit, the amount of which
increases with the number of children in the family.


                                                  7
Medical treatment: patient’s               Full             0                 10 to 14
participation
Hospitalization: patient’s participation   Full             9                 8
for 24 hours

Obviously in the US, a large fraction of employers offer medical insurance as part of
their compensation package.

Sickness benefits

Those funds were created to replace the loss of earnings due to sickness. Once again, the
coverage and the extent of the benefits are radically different between the two European
countries and the US. Indeed, only 5 states in the continental US offer sickness benefits,
while German and Swedish legislation guarantees benefits for all persons in paid
employment, replacing up to 70% and 80% of gross earnings, respectively. For instance,
if the head of our representative household fell sick, the structure of the monthly earnings
and the duration of the benefits would be:

Sickness benefits
                                           United States    Germany           Sweden
                                           (5 states)
Sickness benefits (in $, PPP, 1999)        452 to 1576      1793              1504
Sickness benefits (% of average wage)      18 to 63         70                80
Maximum duration of benefits (weeks)       52               78                no limitation

Accidental injuries occurring in the enterprise or in connection with the working situation
of the employee are covered in the three countries (including every state in the US), and
benefits are this time quite comparable. German and Swedish workers will see their
income replaced according to the amounts allocated by sickness benefits, while the
American laborers will receive a replacement income corresponding to two thirds of their
weekly average earnings, with a maximum of $270-$714 per week, according to the
state.

Disability

All three countries also have provisions to replace the loss of income due to the inability
to engage in any gainful activity. The three systems are also compulsory and are based
on the laborers’ work history. The US and Germany require at least 5 years of coverage
(3 years for Sweden) before the worker can receive benefits. Nevertheless, the extent of
the coverage differs dramatically from one country to the other. For instance, the amount
of the US disability pension is computed on the basis of the worker’s average monthly
earnings, while Swedish schemes rely on a basic pension, augmented by the income-
based supplementary pension, care allowances and handicap allowances. German
pensions are computed using the level of income and the number of years of contribution.
The situation could be summed up the following way for our average production worker.



                                             8
Disability benefits
                                       United States        Germany           Sweden
Monthly disability benefit (in $, PPP, 1063                 n/a               1496
1999)
Monthly disability benefit (% of 42                         n/a               80
average wage)

Poverty Relief Programs

Certain programs are directed to individuals who are not able to support themselves, or
who are not included in the normal schemes (such as sickness benefits, unemployment
benefits). These individuals may fail to meet eligibility criteria due to insufficient
contribution, or have incomes that are too low to take part in insurance schemes. Those
pure cash transfers give rise to different plans in the three countries. Germany and
Sweden rely on unlimited and unconditional unique plans (called Sozialhilfe and
Socialbidrag, respectively), which are meant primarily to alleviate poverty. Additional
plans covering the costs of housing and heating are also available for the recipients of the
German plan. The United States, on the other hand, offers an array of plans targeting
different layers of the population. A first plan, the Supplemental Security Income (SSI),
targets the needy aged, blind and disabled persons (with annual income below $5808),
and provides a federal payment, which can be augmented by a state supplement. A
second plan, the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), is limited to two
years of assistance, as the recipients must find employment at the end of that period.
Furthermore, additional plans, such as the Food and Nutrition Assistance programs, and
the Housing Assistance program, provide relief to low-income households.

We can summarize the various ingredients of those plans in the following chart, in the
case in which our representative household lives with zero income and has exhausted all
other claims to regular benefits. Note that the chart does not include any additional
programs, such as housing allowances.

Non-contributory minimums: monthly benefits
                                   US SSI            US TANF        Germany        Sweden
Monthly benefits (in $, PPP, 1999) 484               580            1008           888
Monthly benefits (as % of average 19.4               23.2           39.3           47.2
wage)

Labor Market Policies

Redistributive polices may go beyond the government budget. Legislation in several
other areas might affect the degree of government role in redistributing income. A
particularly obvious case is that of labor market policies. Labor regulation may keep the




                                             9
real wages higher than they would be in a less regulated market.6 In Table 2.5 we
summarize the available cross-country comparisons of minimum wages, measured as a
share of the average wages. All the sources tell a very similar story. In continental
Europe the minimum wage is between 50 and 60 per cent of average wage (between 40
and 50 in the UK), while in the US it is between 30 and 40 percent. Note, in particular,
the very high level of the minimum wage in France.

Table 2.6 displays various measures of employment protection indices and regulations,
assembled by Nickell and Layard (1999) and Nickell (1997). Even though there is a fair
amount of variation within Europe, in all categories the US scores lower (often much
lower) than the European average in terms of labor regulation and protection. Column 1
reports an index compiled by OECD, which refers to several aspects of legislation that
protects workers in the workplace. The minimum score is zero; the maximum is 10. The
US has a score of zero. Column 2 refers to employment protection. A score of 20 refers
to the strictest protection. The US has a score of zero. Column 3 refers to annual leave
and column 4 and 5 refer to unemployment compensation, their level and duration. In all
categories the US has the lowest level of workers’ protection.

If one looks at non-European, non-US OECD countries (Japan, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand) one finds that this group of countries is somewhere in between the US and
continental Europe. In some dimensions these countries may be closer to the US, in other
dimensions closer to Europe. Overall, the US and Europe appear to be two polar
extremes.

2.5. HAS IT WORKED?

The question concerning the consequences of the greater expansion of the welfare state in
Europe versus the US is only tangential to our purposes. We want to explain the causes
of this difference, not its consequences. While it goes well beyond the (already broad)
scope of the present paper to discuss this question, it is worth pausing to briefly
characterize the conventional wisdom (if there is any) on this issue. Needless to say, the
question of the effect of a large welfare state is difficult to answer and loaded with
ideological biases. We think that a fair and relatively uncontroversial assessment of the
effect of these different levels of redistributive policies in the broadest possible terms is
as follows.

As Tanzi and Schuknet (2000) forcefully argued in a recent study of the growth of
government, the average level of several social indicators such as health measures, life
expectancy, educational achievements, etc. are not that different between countries with a
large (continental European style) government and a small (US style) government. On
the other hand, a large body of research (see for instance Atkinson (1995)), has shown
that post tax income inequality is lower in countries with larger government and, in

6
 One may argue, correctly, that in many cases labor regulations end up redistributing in favor of unionized
and ''protected'' section of the labor force, while less protected members of the labor force may be at a
disadvantage.


                                                    10
particular, with larger social spending. As everybody knows, comparing inequality and
poverty rates across countries is a minefield. However, it is pretty clear that post tax
income inequality is lower in Nordic Countries, intermediate in central and southern
Europe, higher in the UK and even higher in the US. This picture emerges, for instance,
from the detailed studies by Atkinson (1995).

A particularly interesting observation emerges when one compares the distribution of
disposable income across deciles in the US and Europe. The most striking difference is
the much lower proportion of income accruing to the lowest decile. That is, the greater
inequality in the US does not come from the top decile being particularly wealthy relative
to the median, but much more from the bottom decile being particularly poor. For
instance in the eighties the income of the lowest decile of the population was about a
third of the median in the US, compared to more than 55 percent in many European
countries, including France, and more than 60 per cent in several Nordic countries
(Atkinson 1995, pages 49-51). Another way of looking at this is to compute the fraction
of the population with income below 50 percent of the median. This approach is used in
many European countries as a definition of the “poverty line.” Depending on the criteria
used, this fraction was around 17-18 in the US in the eighties, against values of 5 to 8 per
cent in Sweden and Germany for example (Atkinson (1995), page 90).

In the nineties, income inequality increased sharply in the UK and somewhat less sharply
in the US. In continental European countries, changes in income inequality in the last
decade were smaller. It would appear that because of a smaller emphasis on
redistributive policies toward the poor, the bottom decile in the income ladder in the US
is less well off than the bottom decile of the population of European countries. That is,
the poor are really poor in the US.7

How much the reduction in inequality achieved by a more redistributive government
“costs” in terms of lower growth because of higher taxation, intrusive regulation, etc. is
such a large and difficult questing that we do not even begin to answer it. Lindbeck
(1997) provides an excellent and exhaustive discussion of the issue for the case of
Sweden. His conclusion, looking at Sweden, is that in the long run the trade off between
redistribution and growth is rather “steep.” In 1970 (before the “explosion” of the
welfare state in Sweden), this country had a per capita income equal to 115 per cent of
OECD countries, placing Sweden in fourth place. In 1995 Sweden had a per capita
income of 95 per cent of OECD countries, placing it at the 16th place of the OECD
ladder. However, one may wonder whether the trade off is so steep at a level of social
protection less extreme than Sweden’s. However, other countries with extended welfare
states have not done as poorly as Sweden. Also certain aspects of redistributive policies,
like a well functioning public education system may foster human capital accumulation.


7
 It should be clear, though, that this inverse relationship between inequality and the size of government is
not monotonic. That is, certain countries are much more successful than others in reducing inequality for a
given amount of social spending. That is, the welfare state in different countries has different degrees of
success in reaching the really needy. One of the problems is that in certain countries (a perfect example
being Italy), welfare spending is too biased in favor of pensions. See Boeri (2000).


                                                    11
 A related discussion concerns the costs in terms of employment formation and growth
of labor protection, another immense topic which would require not one, but several
papers to do justice to.

2.6. Charity and the “Private Provision of Welfare”

While the preceding evidence makes it clear that European countries have higher public
provision of welfare than the US, Americans engage in more private provision of welfare
(i.e. charity) than Europeans. As private citizens, Americans appear to give more of their
time and their money to the poor than do Europeans.

We use the World Values Survey to calculate the share of adults who are members of
charitable organizations. The World Values Survey is a collection of surveys where the
same questions are asked in different countries in different years. Between 600 and 2000
people are represented in each country; details on the countries and years are in the Data
Appendix. While membership in charitable organizations is an imperfect measure of the
time contribution to charity, it is one of the best measures available.8 In the US, eleven
percent of respondents say that they participated in a charitable group over the last year.
Across the European countries in the survey the average is 4 percent. The European
country with the highest amount of private charity is the Netherlands with 8.6 percent of
respondents saying that they participate in these activities. The lowest amount of
charitable activity is Denmark where two percent of individuals participate in these
activities.

This work corroborates the large literature on private charity in the US. For example, the
UK National Council for Volunteer Organizations and United for a Fair Economy
document that charitable contributions in the US total $190 billion or $691 per person.
Per capita giving is reported as $141 in the UK and $57 for Europe as a whole. Notably a
large fraction of American donors give even though they take only the standard
deduction. This means that for many Americans contributions are not being driven by
the tax deductibility of charitable donations. Skocpol, Ganz and Munson (2000)
document the national coverage of the many US volunteer groups who provide a rich
variety of forms of assistance to members.9

Overall, these results imply that while public provision of welfare is higher in Europe,
private provision of charity is higher in the US. These results suggest, but hardly prove,
two implications. First, public provision of welfare in part crowds out private charity.
As argued by Glaeser and Shleifer (2001), if government transfers to particular
individuals will fall with private donations, then these transfers will reduce the incentive
for private charity. These results also suggest that greater European welfare provision
does not come from a greater innate endowment of altruism in Europe.


8
 One of the problems with this measure is that it does not capture the intensity of involvement.
9
 While Putnam (1999) argues that civic voluntarism has declined in the US, we are not addressing this
decline here. We focus on the differences over space, not over time.


                                                 12
3. THEORY AND DISCUSSION

In this section, we present a brief formal model on the determinants of the level of
redistribution. The logic of this model is closely tied to the work of Benabou and Ok
(2001), Perotti (2000), Picketty (1999), and many others, and this work should be seen as
a synthesis, not as a new model.

We model the welfare system as a schedule of transfers that is indexed with a single
parameter: the tax rate on income τ . In this system, each individual receives net
transfers equal to τ (δYˆ − Y ) , where Y is income, Yˆ is average income in the country and
δ < 1 represents the waste involved in redistribution. This welfare system is self-
financing, in the sense that the average payment in the country is equal to zero. The
parameter δ is meant to capture a wide range of possible inefficiencies related to
government, such as administration costs and politically motivated spending on programs
with little social value. It can also capture the welfare losses due to tax distortions; in
this caseδ should be a function of τ to capture the fact that social welfare losses
generally rise proportionately to the square of the tax rate, but for simplicity we assume
that δ and τ are independent.

The timing of the model is that in the first period, individuals receive first period income
equal to Y0 and choose (τ ) for the second period. The first period tax rate was already
fixed, and we do not model consumption or savings during this first period. First period
income serves just as a signal for second period income and its distribution is captured by
a density function g(.).

In the second period, incomes are revealed and redistribution (and consumption) occurs.
Income in the second period, Y (Y0 , ε ) , equals (1 − θ )Y0 + θ ( µ (Y0 ) + ε ) . The parameter θ
captures the extent of income mobility—a low level of θ means that income in the
second period will be almost equal to income in the prior period. The variable µ (Y0 ) is
mean of the second period income shock, which is a weakly increasing function of prior
income. This function will also capture the extent of income mobility. For example, if
 µ (Y0 ) = Y0 then incomes will be much more fixed than if µ (Y0 ) is constant across
individuals. The term ε represents a mean zero disturbance term that is assumed to be
orthogonal to the other terms and distributed with density f(.).

Individuals consume all of their second period income (net of redistribution) and receive
utility from personal consumption equal to U ((1 − τ )((1 − θ )Y0 + θ ( µ (Y0 ) + ε )) + τδYˆ ) .
Thus, expected utility (as of the first period) from second period personal consumption
equals:

(1)         ∫ U ((1 − τ )((1 − θ )Y
                                  0   + θ ( µ (Y0 ) + ε )) + τδYˆ ) f (ε )dε .
            ε




                                                      13
We assume that people care about the consumption of others, as well as their own
consumption. For tractability we measure altruism as follows: each person puts a weight
α (Y0 ) on the utility from the private consumption utilities of other people—this term
reflects interpersonal altruism and we assume that α (Y0 ) ≥ 0 . Total expected utility from
private consumption and interpersonal utility equals:

           ∫ U ((1 − τ )((1 − θ )Y  0   + θ ( µ (Y0 ) + ε )) + τδYˆ ) f (ε )dε +
           ε
(2)
           ∫ α (Y )∫ U ((1 − τ )((1 − θ )Y
                    0                            0   + θ ( µ (Y0 ) + ε )) + τδYˆ ) f (ε ) g (Y0 )dε dY0
           Y0           ε



We represent the political process as the social choice problem of maximizing a weighted
sum of all people’s expected utility levels. The political arrangement is captured with the
weights that different people get in the political process. In particular, each person
receives a weight of λ (Y0 ) in the social choice problem, where λ (Y0 ) ≥ 0 . This weight is
a function of their initial endowment. For example, under a system of majority rule when
preferences for redistribution (i.e. the level of τ ) are single peaked, then the social
choice problem will put weight only on the tastes of the individual with median income.
In the proposition, we will assume λ (Y0 ) = 1 + λ * (Yˆ − Y0 ) which gives us a single
parameter, λ , that reflects the extent to which the preferences of the poor are internalized
by the political process.

Thus, the total social welfare function becomes:

(3)   ∫ (α (Y ) + λ (Y ))∫ U ((1 − τ )((1 − θ )Y
                0           0                              0   + θ ( µ (Y0 ) + ε )) + τδYˆ ) f (ε ) g (Y0 )dε dY0 ,
      Y0                        ε



and the optimal amount of redistribution will satisfy the first order condition:

(4)   ∫ (α (Y ) + λ (Y ))∫ (δYˆ − Y (Y , ε ))U ′((1 − τ )Y (Y , ε ) + τδYˆ ) f (ε ) g (Y )dε dY
      Y0
                0           0
                                ε
                                             0                            0                         0        0   =0


The following proposition captures the role of altruism or political power:

Proposition 1: If λ (Y0 ) = 1 + λ * (Yˆ − Y0 ) , and α (Y0 ) = α 0 + α (Yˆ − Y0 ) , and the level of τ
that maximizes social welfare is between 0 and 1, then the level of redistribution is rising
in both α and λ .

This proposition is unsurprising, but highlights the two factors that will probably be most
important in driving spatial differences in redistribution. First, factors that reduce
altruism towards the poor will reduce redistribution. Second, factors that increase the
political power of the poor will increase redistribution.




                                                                  14
This proposition suggests two broad explanations for why redistribution levels might
differ between the US and Europe. First, it might be that political structure leads the
level of λ to be higher in Europe, i.e. the poor get more political representation. One
reason why λ might be higher in Europe is that the proportional representation that
exists in several European countries makes it easier for parties focusing on the poorest
citizens to exist. Another reason is that the US constitution puts considerable brakes on
democracy in ways that European institutions do not. Certain US institutions, which are
not all that democratic, have veto rights over redistribution in some contexts. For
example, the Supreme Court ruled the income tax to be illegal in the 1890s in the US
(despite its earlier use during the Civil War).


The level of α might be different in the US and Europe for several reasons. Most
obviously, if (as in Becker, 1957) altruism between races is limited, then we might think
that the racial heterogeneity in the United States leads to a lower desire of a white median
voter to give to a poor person of another color. More subtly, it may be that Americans
are more likely to associate poverty with laziness and being unworthy. We will discuss
these issues later.

We now turn to the economic model of selfish redistribution and majority rule. This
model assumes that there is no altruism, and that the level of redistribution is determined
by the median voter. In this extreme model, the optimization problem becomes:

(3a)   ∫ U ((1 − τ )((1 − θ )Y     Med   + θ ( µ (YMed ) + ε )) + τδYˆ ) f (ε )dε ,
       ε



and this yields the derivative:

(4a)   ∫ (δYˆ − ((1 − θ )Y
       ε
                             Med                           )
                                   + θ ( µ (YMed ) + ε )) U ′(Y (ε )) f (ε )dε .


Inspection of (4a) yields this well known result of the literature:

Proposition 2: When θ = 0 , the median voter will redistribute if and only if δ > YMed / Yˆ ,
and the median voter will demand complete redistribution when that condition holds.

Thus, when there is no income uncertainty, and no altruism, the median voter goes to a
corner solution.10 Proposition 2 is a special case of Meltzer and Richards (1981).11
The absence of income uncertainty when θ = 0 can also be interpreted as suggesting a
static model where income is known at the time that redistribution is chosen.

10
   In this formulation, optimization gives us a corner solution because waste is independent of the tax rate.
In the more general model, the median voter chooses an interior solution for the tax rate that sets the
marginal benefits from an additional dollar of equal to the marginal social loss from waste.
11
   Alesina and Rodrik (1994) and Persson and Tabellini (1994) developed this redistribution model in a
growth context.


                                                               15
In general, there are two things that determine whether the median voter demands
redistribution. If the social welfare losses inherent in taxation may be quite high (i.e. δ
is low), then redistribution is unlikely. Second, if the income distribution is quite skewed
then YMed will be low relative to Ŷ and redistribution is more likely.

When there is income uncertainty, and when levels of redistribution are set before
income levels are revealed, then we are much more likely to find an interior solution for
the level of redistribution. To concentrate on income dynamics, we persist in examining
the median voter model with no altruism. In this case, equation (4a) will be set to zero
when there is an interior solution and differentiating this first order condition provides
the following comparative statics:

Proposition 3:
a.      If the coefficient of relative risk aversion is less than one then the level of
redistribution will fall with µ (YMed ) and rise with δ .
b.      If the variance of epsilon is small, and expected income growth for the median
voter is strictly positive then redistribution will fall with θ .
c.      If µ (YMed ) = δYˆ and expected income growth is weakly negative then
redistribution will rise with θ .


Part (a) tells us that redistribution will fall as the median voter’s expected income in the
second period rises (holding average income) constant. The comparative static for δ
tells us that redistribution declines when it creates more deadweight loss. Part (b) tells us
that when income shocks have a positive mean for the median voter, then more income
mobility leads to a decreased desire for redistribution. This result is closest to the work
of Benabou and Ok (2000) who show that expected income growth for the median voter
limits the demand for redistribution.

Part (c) of the proposition tells us that that the impact of income mobility will increase
the demand for redistribution if income shocks have a negative mean. When income
shocks have a zero mean, risk aversion means that more income mobility leads to more
demand for redistribution. One can also interpret this result as a variant on Rawls (1973),
who argues that risk aversion provides a justification for welfare policies. If there is no
heterogeneity of first period income, so that all people have the same tastes, then a
greater value of θ implies a greater value of the variance of second period income. This
interpretation suggests that countries with high pre-tax income inequality will have more
redistribution.

Overall, there is a complicated relationship between income mobility and redistribution.
More mobility leads to less redistribution if, as in the case of Benabou and Ok (2000),
expected income shocks move the median voter up the income distribution. However, if
expected income shocks have a zero mean, then risk aversion means that more mobility
leads to greater demand for redistribution.


                                             16
4. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE


4.1. Economic Explanations

Pre Tax Income Inequality

Propositions 2 and 3 suggest that redistribution will be higher in Europe if pre-tax income
inequality is higher in Europe, or if the income distribution in Europe is more likely to be
highly skewed. We showed above that after tax income inequality is higher in the US.
Nevertheless, it is possible that government intervention in Europe is so widespread that
it reverses a basic pattern where pre-tax inequality is higher in Europe.

The standard source on pre-tax income inequality is the Denninger and Squire database.
The pre-tax Gini coefficient for the US is 38.5. The pre-tax Gini coefficient averaged
across European countries is 29.6, which means that Europe appears to have significantly
less pre-tax inequality. The United Kingdom has the most income inequality in the
European sample, but still has a Gini coefficient of only 32.3. To look at skewness, we
can look at the share of income earned by the top quintile. In the US, the top 20 percent
earners take home 43.5 percent of the pre-tax dollars in the country. Across European
countries, on average the top quintile earns 37.1 percent of pre-tax dollars in the county,
and in no country did the top quintile earn more than 39 percent of total pre-tax dollars.
It seems clear that the US has more pre-tax inequality than Europe and a more skewed
income distribution. While these numbers are pre-tax, redistribution may still have taken
place in many ways before earnings occur at all (through education, etc.). Indeed, lower
pre-tax income inequality may be yet another example of the effects of European
redistribution. More generally, the evidence on whether inequality creates more
redistribution is mixed at best. Perotti (1996) finds little support for this channel in a
broad empirical investigation.12

There are two possible explanations for the apparent failure of pre-tax inequality as
measured by the Gini coefficient to lead to more redistribution. First, in countries with
high levels of income inequality, the poor are unlikely to have much political clout and as
such they may not be able to extract much redistribution from the rich. That is we do not
have a one person one vote rule, which underlies the model’s results, but something
closer to a one dollar one vote rule. We devote much space below to a discussion of
political determinants of redistribution, and the degree of political power of the poor is a
critical factor in this respect. Second, the measured pre-tax Gini is a poor indicator of
pre-tax inequality since a host of other policies (in addition to the tax system) affect
inequality, so the Gini index may over estimate the true pre-tax inequality in the US.
However, direct evidence on executive compensation and the minimum wage discussed
above suggest that this interpretation is not likely to hold.

12
     Benabou (1998) also surveys the evidence and comes to a similar conclusion.


                                                     17
The Costs of Redistribution

Proposition 2 also suggests that there might be more redistribution in Europe if taxation
created fewer distortions in Europe, or if spending on redistribution in Europe was less
likely to be associated with administrative costs or wasteful pet projects. For example, if
Europeans had access to less distortionary forms of taxation we would expect Europeans
to have bigger welfare states.

While we suspect that improvements in the technology of taxation have played a major
role in increasing redistribution over time, we do not believe that European taxation is
much more efficient than American taxation.13 Indeed, evidence on tax evasion suggests
the contrary—the US appears more efficient at taxation. Tax evasion does not itself
capture inefficiency, but it suggests more limits on efficient tax collection. The ability of
citizens to avoid taxes is a primary limit on the menu of forms of taxation that the state
can use.

The Global Competitiveness Report in 1996 surveyed business leaders about tax
compliance in their countries. According to this subjective ranking, the US received a
score of 4.47 (where 5 represents maximal compliance). While there is considerable
heterogeneity across Europe, on average tax compliance appears to be much lower in
Europe where the average score was 3.5. Furthermore, there is no evidence that the
Europeans are using less distortionary taxes. As discussed above, the tax structure in
Europe is quite varied. Europe is the home of the Value Added Tax, a consumption tax,
which is thought to be less distortionary than pure income taxes. However, Europe also
uses rent control and labor market interventions which appear to be much more
distortionary (see, for example, Blanchard and Portugal, 2001), to help the poor.

While redistribution in the US is probably not more wasteful than redistribution in
Europe, it certainly seems plausible that Americans are inherently more hostile to
government and believe that governments are more wasteful and more likely to spend on
projects that the voters oppose. Indeed, the history of the US includes both an anti-
government revolution which formed the country (and its stated ideology) and a Civil
War in which half of the country fought against the state. Indeed, 48 percent of European
respondents to World Values Survey report that they think that the government should
own more of the economy. Only 26 percent of Americans say that they favor more
government ownership. This probably reflects a greater distrust of the state within the
US.

However, another piece of evidence makes it unlikely that American anti-statism
explains low levels of redistribution and further casts doubt on the view that Europe has
access to less distortionary taxes. If the real or perceived costs of government were
13
  The strongest piece of evidence suggesting massive improvement in tax collection technology is the use
of income taxes rather than much simpler taxes such as import fees and property taxes. It may well be true
that differences in redistribution between the OECD and the developing world are a result differences in
access to less distortionary taxation.


                                                   18
higher in the US, then we would expect European governments to be bigger along every
dimension (since, after all, they face a lower social cost of funds). As we discussed
above, this is not the case.

Social Mobility and Income Uncertainty

The economic model suggests that there are two ways in which social mobility can
explain the gap between US and European levels of welfare. First, the median voter in
the US might have higher expected income growth (relative to the rest of America) than
the median voter in Europe. According to this theory, high income mobility in the US
(specifically upward mobility of the median voter) can explain lower US redistribution.
Second, Europeans might demand more redistribution because they face more exogenous
shocks to their incomes, perhaps because of openness, and redistribution reduces risk.
According to this theory, low income mobility in the US could explain lower US
redistribution.

As we will discuss later, there is also a third—behavioral—theory that links income
mobility with redistribution. This theory suggests that in societies with high levels of
income mobility, the non-poor are more likely to believe that poverty occurs because of
laziness. In static societies, where birth determines income, the non-poor are more likely
to think that the disadvantaged are poor solely because of the accidents of their birth. We
will discuss the third theory as part of our section on the determinants of altruism, and we
just note now that this theory offers an alternative interpretation of why higher American
mobility might be associated with less redistribution.

Alesina and La Ferrarra (2001) provide evidence on the first economic theory linking
economic mobility with support for redistribution. They find that individuals with
greater expected income growth are more likely to oppose redistribution. Within the US,
they compute the probability that individuals in difference income brackets will reach
levels of income in the future which will make them net losers from redistribution. This
probability of upward mobility is a strong predictor of individual support for
redistribution.

For this theory to explain US-Europe differences, it must be the case that the median
voter in the US is more likely than the median European voter to become rich at some
future date. This probability combines mobility with the specific chance of moving
upwards for individuals in the middle of the income distribution. There are two types of
evidence on this question—actual income mobility data and survey questions about
income mobility. Survey questions seem to have the advantage of getting directly at
individual beliefs, which should be the direct determinant of voting behavior.
Differences in income mobility across countries turn out to be quite controversial (Fields
and Ok, 2001, provide a survey), and measurement here is quite difficult because of the
high degree of idiosyncratic measurement error present in all survey measures of
individual income.




                                            19
It is certainly clear that Americans believe that they live in a country with more income
mobility. According to the World Values Survey, seventy one percent of Americans
believe that the poor have a chance to escape from poverty. According to the same
survey, only forty percent of Europeans believe that the poor can escape poverty. While
these survey questions suggest very different beliefs about mobility, they do not directly
relate to the relative income growth prospects of the median voter. Indeed, the question
seems to relate more to feelings about the poor and the altruistic sources of redistribution,
than to the financial gains from redistribution to the median voter.

Harder data on income mobility does not suggest such strong differences between the US
and Europe in mobility for the middle classes. For example, Gottschalk and Spolaore
(2001) produce a fifteen year transition matrix by income quintile for the US and Europe.
This matrix shows the share of the middle income quintile in 1984 who were in various
income quintiles in 1999. To us, the similarity between the US and Germany was
striking, even though there seems to be a slightly higher upward mobility of the middle
class in the US. Ten percent of the Germans in the middle quintile moved up to the top
quintile. Eleven percent of the middle quintile Americans moved to the top quintile.
Twenty-one percent of the Germans in the middle quintile moved up to the second
quintile. Twenty-two percent of Americans in the middle quintile moved up to the
second quintile. Thirty-one percent of both groups stayed in the same middle quintile.
Germans were somewhere more likely to end up in the absolute bottom quintile (sixteen
percent relative to twelve percent) and correspondingly less likely to end up in the next
lowest quintile, but overall the differences seem small.

The Fields and Ok (1999) survey suggests a wide range of estimates on income mobility
and the comparison between the US and Europe. However, there is no clear cut evidence
that the US has substantially more upward relative mobility for the middle quintile. The
bottom line is that the Alesina and La Ferrarra (2001) evidence stresses the importance of
upward mobility. Americans believe that there is more upward mobility in their country.
These two facts together can explain aversion to redistribution. The question of whether
the perception of more mobility in the US s correct or mistaken awaits further research.

The second theory—that income variability drives demand for redistribution—has
received less extensive testing, with the exception of Rodrik (1998), who focuses on the
variability of income induced by openness, an argument to which we now turn.

More on income uncertainty: Openness

Rodrik (1998), following a suggestion by Cameron (1978), has argued that the size of
government and, especially, of income support policies are explained by openness.
Figure 4.1 highlights this relationship. According to Rodrik, open economies are more
“unstable” because they are more subject to external shocks. Larger public transfers
provide insurance and reduce instability in the stream of lifetime income of individuals.
Thus, a larger government is “needed” in more open economies. Alesina and Wacziarg
(1998) argue that open economies are small, that is, size and openness are strongly
inversely correlated. Thus, it is difficult to disentangle the openness argument against an


                                             20
alternative one; that is in larger (and more closed) economies the size of government per
capita, or as a share of GDP, is smaller because of economies of scale in the production
of public goods.14 In fact, the openness argument should apply more directly to transfer
programs, while the economy of scale idea more to public goods and infrastructure.
Since in the present paper we are concerned with transfers and welfare programs, the
openness argument is, in principle, especially appealing.

The US is a larger and less open economy than any European country, but as Table 4.1
shows, the US economy is less stable than the average European economy. Both in terms
of growth, unemployment and productivity, the US economy has displayed more
volatility than the average of the European countries in the last 40 years. We also report
Rodrik’s measure of external induced volatility which is a measure of terms of trade
volatility multiplied by the degree of openness of the economy (exports plus imports over
GDP). This can be interpreted in two ways. First, the US economy has more variability
precisely because transfers are smaller. However, since the US economy is more closed,
it should be less in need of a larger government. In other words, if all countries shared
the same objectives in terms of the trade off between government size and business cycle
variability, the US should be more, not less, stable than Europe.15 Since it is larger and
more closed to begin with, it should cost “less” in terms of taxation to achieve the same
level of stabilization. 16 Therefore if Rodrik’s theory is correct, then the fact that the US
ends up with more variability than Europe suggests that Americans and Europeans
evaluate very differently the trade off between government size and cyclical variability.
Whether or not openness is a major determinant of the size of government, remains, in
any case, an unsettled issue.

4.2. Political Explanations

We begin with several cross-country regressions; we then discuss the role of political
history.

Cross-country regressions: the electoral system

A lively recent literature has investigated theoretically and empirically the relationship
between electoral rules and fiscal policy.17 Particularly relevant for our purposes is recent
work by Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti and Rostagno (2000) (MFPR) and Persson and Tabellini
(2000) (PT).18      These papers test the following idea: in majoritarian systems
characterized by geographically based districts, in which each district chooses one
representative, the elected government will favor spending programs that can be
geographically targeted, like “pork barrel” projects. In proportional electoral systems,

14
   See Alesina and Spolaore (1997) for more discussion.
15
   Similar considerations apply to Japan, a country which has a small government, is relatively closed (and
large) and exhibits more variability than Europe.
16
   An additional measure of income uncertainty could be the extent of long term unemployment. However
this measure is very likely to be directly affected by labor market regulation and policies.
17
   Persson and Tabellini (2000) provide an exhaustive review of this area of research.
18
   See also Persson (2001).


                                                    21
instead, spending on universal programs are favored, since in each district more than one
representative is elected in proportion to the vote received. The clearest example of this
is a purely proportional election in a single national district. In this case geographic
targeting would make no sense at all.

In order to test these ideas, one needs to measure the degree of proportionality of
electoral systems, and differentiate between spending programs that can be
geographically targeted and those that cannot. In theory the contrast between these two
types of programs is clear-cut, in practice, less so. Consider social security, for instance.
Anybody above a certain age is eligible to receive it, regardless of his or her residence.
However, certain districts may be disproportionately populated by elderly voters. In any
event, the hypothesis tested is that universal transfer programs should be larger in more
proportional electoral systems.

Both MFPR and PT report results consistent with this hypothesis. The two papers use
different measures of transfers, a different sample of countries (larger for PT), and a
different definition of proportionality. The differences in the data sets are explained
more precisely in the Appendix, but one important observation in the dependent variable
is that MFPR use OECD as a source for OECD countries and the data set constructed by
Gavin and Perotti (1997) for Latin America. All these data refer to the general
government. PT use IMF data, which is focused on the central government. This
distinction is especially important if one focuses on comparing the US with other
countries; the US is a federal country in which the difference between central and general
government data is much larger than in most other (non-federal) countries. For
proportionality, PT use a zero-one variable, obtained from “Interparliamentary Union.”
This variable assumes the value of one if a country has a majoritarian system and zero
otherwise. Obviously, electoral systems differ in many dimensions, and a zero one
dummy may miss important differences between the two groups of systems lumped
together.

For this reason, MFPR construct (for a smaller sample of countries) a continuous variable
based on the following idea. They want to capture the share of electoral votes that
guarantees a party a Parliamentary seat in an electoral district of average size. This
variable, labeled UMS (Upper Marginal Share), is declining in proportionality since the
higher the UMS, the more difficult it is for small parties to gain access to parliament. In
a two party system with a first past the post rule, UMS is 0.5. This values declines with
the degree of proportionality of the system. As these authors show, constructing this
variable is not simple because of the many dimensions in which electoral systems across
countries differ.19

19
   There is an additional channel through which the electoral system may influence fiscal policy: the degree
of fragmentation of the legislature. Since in proportional systems it is easier for small parties to gain
representation, proportionality leads to multi-party coalition governments and fragmented policy arena.
Theoretical work by Alesina and Drazen (1991), Tornell and Velasco (1999) amongst others, show how
fragmentation of the political system leads to higher and more persistent deficits. Empirical work by
Roubini and Sachs (1988), and Perotti and Kontopoulos (1998), amongst others, provides support for this
hypothesis with regard to OECD countries. In these papers, fragmentation is measured as a function of the


                                                    22
In Table 4.2 we present results obtained using the data sets kindly provided by the
authors of these two papers. Column 1 reports the MFPR regression on OECD countries.
The proportionality variable is constructed as an “average district size” and it is a one to
one inverse transformation from UMS.20 Thus, one should expect a positive sign on this
variable if transfers are larger in more proportional systems. This variable (in logs) has
in fact a highly significant positive coefficient. The other controls used by MFPR are
insignificant. In column 2 we add a measure of openness (exports plus imports over
GDP). This variable is insignificant. Following MFPR, we explored Rodrik’s
specification of openness, which includes the interaction of terms of trade shocks with
openness but we did not find a significant relationship. (The same result is reported by
MFPR). In the third regression, we report the MFPR result using the entire sample
including Latin America. The proportionality variable is still significant, but the size of
the coefficient is much lower and less precisely estimated. (Note that openness is still
insignificant). Figures 4.2a and 4.2b show what is going on. These figures plot the
dependent variable against the measure of proportionality for OECD countries and Latin
American countries. They show a very strong positive correlation for OECD countries
and a very weak one for Latin American countries.

The last column of Table 4.2 uses the PT data set, which allows us to expand the set of
countries. We use their specification. In particular, in addition to the majoritarian
variable, PT also focus on another political variable, that is whether or not a country has a
presidential regime. Note that one should expect a negative sign on both the Presidential
and Majoritarian variable. Neither of the two political variables is significant in the large
sample. If we restrict the sample to OECD countries, the two political variables come
much closer to significance, but the MFPR measure of proportionality seem to be more
strongly correlated with the dependent variable than the PT variables. Note that openness
is insignificant in this sample as well.

The bottom line seems to be that for OECD countries a measure of proportionality of the
electoral system is highly correlated with the amount of government transfers. This
correlation is much weaker or nonexistent for developing countries. The variable
openness is not significant after one controls for political variables.

If we interpret the coefficient on proportional representation as reflecting a causal
relationship, then the cross country regressions described in the previous sections suggest
that if the US had an electoral system similar to that of, say, Sweden, the welfare state in
the two countries would be very similar. This “narrow” interpretation of political
explanations is incomplete. The electoral system is only one of the politico-institutional
forces that have led the US to diverge from Europe. In addition, the electoral system may


number of parties represented in the government coalition and/or in the legislature or by the number of
different spending ministers in the government. Interestingly, Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti and Rostagno (2000)
show that the degree of proportionality of the electoral system affects transfers even controlling for
measures of fragmentation.
20
   The transformation is Standard Magnitude (SM), where SM=1/(1-UMS).


                                                    23
itself be endogenous to other variables, including attitudes towards the poor, which we
discuss later.

One may argue that the in the US the present electoral system was chosen and maintained
precisely because it supported certain policy outcomes. Post War France went back and
forth from more to less proportionality in part to suit the needs to various leaders.21 Italy
recently moved to a less proportional rule in response to the perceived failures (including
fiscal matters) of the previous proportional system. New Zealand recently made a move
in the opposite direction. Nevertheless electoral laws have a certain “stickiness” and do
not change too often. Our preferred interpretation is that while the electoral systems in
part reflect deeper aspects of societies, they also have an important direct effect on the
level redistribution.

Political History

A discussion about political variables would not be complete without an historical
perspective. There are three “monumental” historical forces that distinguish the US from
Europe. The Civil War, the “open frontier” in the west, and the nonexistence of a large
and influential Socialist or Communist party.

Skocpol (1992) noted that at the end of the 19th century, the US had a “minimal” welfare
state similar to that of European countries. This was based on veteran pensions that grew
more and more generous and with more and more “relaxed” eligibility requirements.
Several social reformers viewed this program as the stepping stone upon which to build a
universal social security system. However, their efforts were halted by several factors.
First, a general “mistrust” in the administration of the program and by the fact that it
emerged from a “divisive” experience (the Civil War), rather than a “cohesive” one (an
external war). Second, the US courts systematically rejected any legislation that was
perceived as anti-business. In doing so they appealed to the principle of protection of
private property against government intervention (often the doctrine of freedom of
contract was invoked). Most strikingly, in 1895, the courts declared the US income tax
to be unconstitutional, and it took a constitutional amendment to undo this decision.22
The pro-property actions of the courts were influenced both by the US constitution,
which was designed by property owners, in part, to protect property from democracy, and
by incentives that firms created to influence judges.

Different legal systems (say, the French versus the Anglo Saxons) attribute very different
roles to Courts, which also have a different institutional structure.23 The involvement of
Courts in social legislation in the US has been a constant feature of the US experience,
contrary to that of countries based on the French or German legal tradition. Indeed, the
power and independence of US courts are unique and are not even matched in England

21
   In 1958 De Gaulle changed the proportional system of the Fourth Republic making it more majoritarian.
Mitterand in 1986 reintroduced proportionality.
22
    The Supreme Court’s decision in this case was far from a foregone conclusion. The US had a
functioning income tax during the Civil War which was not challenged by the court.
23
   See Glaeser and Shleifer (2000) for a recent discussion.


                                                  24
where parliamentary dominance is much more established. In the UK, the House of
Lords was the closest equivalent to the Supreme Court and its power was stripped in the
triumph of parliamentary democracy.

Given the relative failure of public provision of welfare, social assistance took a turn
toward “private” initiatives, which permeate US society even today.24 Skocpol, Ganz
and Muson (2000) document the active role of a varied universe of civic associations that
provide a host of civic assistance to their members and “target groups.” Many of these
organizations have a national coverage. Obviously these private organizations are very
far from providing the kind of social protection that a European government would offer.
However, this is another example of the fact that we documented above, namely that
private charities in the US tend to substitute a little for the lower provision of public
assistance.

The open frontier in a country of immigrants strengthened individualistic feelings and
beliefs in equality of opportunities, rather than equality of outcomes. In fact, one may
argue that self-selection led to a systematic difference between those Europeans who
migrated to the US and those who didn’t. The former might have been those that, ceteris
paribus, were more sensitive to “individual” incentives and were less risk averse. This of
course contributed to cementing an anti-statist feeling that permeates American culture.

A related factor is the lower density of the United States. Redistribution in many
contexts is a response to the physical power of the poor and the threat of riot and
revolution. Acemoglu and Robinson (1999) argue that democracy in Europe is itself a
response to the physical power of the poor. While America was full of class-related
violence in the late 19th century (see Skowronek, 1982), and saw riots in the 1930s and
1960s, American decentralization has generally meant that the US has never had a
rebellion that threatened the centers of government.25 On the other hand, popular
uprisings in Paris led to at least four changes of government. Berlin and London were
more stable but still faced considerably more popular unrest than Washington, D.C.

Indeed, across OECD countries there is a significant positive effect of density on
redistribution: 38.6 percent. Elsewhere (DiPasquale and Glaeser, 1998) one of us has
argued that urban density facilitates riots and rebellions. More generally, the historical
evidence on countries like France suggests that urban density lead to the political
empowerment of the poor, certainly relative to dispersed farmers of the 18th century. As
such, America’s low density may also have contributed to its stability and lack of
redistribution.26



24
   A particularly interesting example at the end of the 19th century was the role of women's organizations
in providing family assistance to mothers and children (Skocpol, 1992).
25
   The Civil War was, of course, fundamentally a rebellion of elites, who can be interpreted as fighting for
the right to take from the poor.
26
   It is also possible that density has a second effect on redistribution working through altruism. If
proximity creates empathy, then we might expect support for welfare to be higher in denser countries.


                                                    25
The absence of a large and cohesive socialist workers movement in the US is a critical
factor in shaping redistributive policies. Marx and Engels (especially the latter) were
already aware of the “American exceptionalism.” They attributed it to the lack of a feudal
period in American history, a missing phase that did not create the basis of clear-cut class
differences.27 Already in the 19th century worker’s movements, which could have been
the precursors of a socialist party, professed an “ideology that reflected the strong belief
of many Jacksonian Americans in equality of opportunity, rather than equality of results”
(Lipset and Marks (2001), page 21). In fact, workers’groups were “social Darwinist, not
Marxist” (Lipset and Marks (2001), page 20). Sombert (1905) (who was then a socialist)
argued that American capitalism may create inequality but offered opportunities to all.
He wrote that “Equality and Liberty ... [for the American workers] are not empty ideas
and vague dreams as they are for the European working class.” In other words, class
struggle was (and is) not “second nature” to the American workers. In Sombert’s (1905)
words: “In America there is not the stigma of being the class apart that almost all
European workers have about them.”

The fact that the American working class was formed by waves of immigration also
contributed to preventing the formation of a European style class consciousness. Ethnic
divisions within the working class (for instance old Protestant immigrants on one side,
new Catholic immigrants on the other) were as strongly felt as class-based cleavages.28
Even contemporary socialist leaders (including Engels) recognized the powerful effect of
ethnic fragmentation within the union movement.

The Great Depression could have galvanized socialist ideals. However, with the New
Deal, Roosevelt and the Democratic party managed to “co-opt” important fringes of the
left which might otherwise have strengthened the Socialist party. At the same time, the
Socialists persisted in not understanding and in not accommodating “distinctive elements
of American culture, anti-statism and individualism” (Lipset and Marks (2001)). These
cultural features were of course at odds with the Socialist emphasis on taxation and heavy
government intervention. American Socialists were systematically less successful in
“working with” these cultural characteristics, relative to their counterparts in other
Anglo-Saxon countries, like Canada, Australia or the UK. Finally, one should not forget
the role of repression of communism and socialism in post-Second World War America.

The electoral system also made it difficult for a third party to move into the political
arena, as emphasized for instance by Lipset (1996). This observation is consistent with
the econometric evidence described in the previous section on the importance of
proportional representation. However, the interpretation is different from those of the
models sketched above. The US electoral rules, by making it difficult for third parties to
enter, contributed to the failure of Socialist and Communist Parties in the US.

Additionally, the US evolved as federal system, as opposed to a unitary centralized
country like several European ones. To the extent that the redistributive role of the
27
   For an extensive review of the writing of Marx and Engels concerning the American case see Lipstet and
Marks (2001).
28
   See Lipset and Marks (2001) and the vast literature cited therein on this point.


                                                   26
central government is in part delegated to sub national level of government, geographic
mobility of individuals and tax competition might limit government size.29 Even though
the evidence on the relationship between fiscal decentralization and the size of
government across countries is inconclusive (after all Germany is a federal country!)30
the fact that many public goods in the US are locally provided may affect the size of
redistribution to the poor. Think, for instance, of people fleeing to wealthy suburbs to
escape the taxation needed to finance inner city schools. However, the choices
concerning these fiscal arrangements and the relationship between different levels of
government is clearly endogenous to preferences for redistribution.

As a final aside, it is worthwhile re-emphasizing that all of the political rules are in some
sense endogenous and the outcome of deeper features of the United States and Europe.
The writers of the constitution chose to have a federalist system with strong separation of
powers, a Bill of Rights, and proportional representation. It is very clear that the authors
of the constitution, in particular, James Madison, were focused on protecting American
citizens against the “encroaching spirit of power” (Hamilton et al., 1982) and “the
violence of faction.” The authors of the constitution make it clear in the Federalist papers
that they are disturbed by the possibility that in an unfettered democracy “measures are
too often decided, not according to the rules of justice, and the rights of the minor party;
but by the superior force of an interested and over-bearing majority.” As such, they tried
to design the constitution to protect “private rights” against factions, even if those
factions include the majority of the population.

Of course, the U.S. is not the only country which had a constitution designed to limit the
majority by protecting property. In the pre-modern era, electoral rules designed by elites
customarily attempted to protect property against majoritarian redistribution. However,
the big difference between the U.S. and most of Europe is greater American stability
which means that 18th century rules are still in effect in the US. Whereas European
monarchies were toppled by world wars and revolutions, the US has had an enormously
stable system of government. Indeed, across countries we see a significant relationship
between the date of the most recent constitution and redistribution. Across 16 OECD,
the correlation between social spending and the year of the most recent constitution is 52
percent.31 Indeed, America’s stability may be one of the true causes of the political
electoral rules that seem to limit redistribution.

Political factors which influence the US “exceptionalism” are deeper than differences in
electoral rules. It is highly unlikely that holding history constant (including the long-

29
   For a recent survey of the literature on this point see Oates (1999).
30
   In fact in many cases decentralization has led to an increase in spending and it is often a source of fiscal
imbalance.
31
   In this correlation, we have excluded both the Netherlands and Belgium. They are reported as having
their most recent constitutions in 1814 and 1830. However, the actual degree of change in these countries
has been quite dramatic, as they have moved away from monarchism towards republicanism over the past
200 years. If we include these countries, and weight by population, the correlation is also 58 percent.
The correlation is only 9.5 percent if we include Belgium and the Netherlands and do not use population
weights.


                                                      27
term stability of the US constitution, the Civil War, the waves of immigration, ethnic
fragmentation and the difficulty of establishing a unified socialist working class
movement), a change in the electoral rules for Congress would have turned the United
States welfare state into one like those of France or Sweden. In addition, Americans may
not have wanted a change in their electoral rules, precisely because they feared the
consequences of this change on policy outcomes.

4.3. Behavioral Explanations

The previous section explored reasons why political institutions could explain different
levels of redistribution in the US and Europe, even if the demand for redistribution was
the same in both places. Now we look at theories of why the demand for redistribution
might differ between Europe and the US, and in particular why the median voter in
Europe might be more positively disposed towards the poor than the median voter in the
US.

The economic literature on the determinants of altruism is limited. We know of two main
strands in the literature. First, there is a substantial body of work following Becker
(1957) and arguing that people like people of their own race more than they like people
of other races. Second, there is a smaller and more recent body of work on reciprocal
altruism. This literature argues that people feel altruistic towards people who are good to
them and vengeful towards people who take advantage of them. In the welfare context,
reciprocal altruism means that people would vehemently oppose welfare if they believe
that the poor who are on welfare are taking advantage of the system.

Racial Prejudice

Becker (1957) proposed a model where he assumed that people of one race dislike people
of another race, and that model started the modern economic literature on racial
discrimination.    There is, of course, a vast literature on different aspects of
discrimination. Allport (1952) is a classic sociology text describing the early work in this
area that shows discrimination in a wide array of settings. More modern work has shown
the impact of racial discrimination on markets ranging from baseball cards (Nardinelli
and Simon, 1990) to housing (Taueber and Taueber, 1965, is the classic text on housing
market segregation—Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor, 1999, show the evolution of
segregation in the housing market). Alesina and LaFerrara (2000) show that participation
in social activities involving direct contact between individuals is lower in racially
fragmented communities in the US. The same authors (2001) show that trust is higher in
more racially homogeneous communities. Glaeser, Laibson, Scheinkman and Soutter
(2000) document experimentally that people of different races are more likely to cheat
one another.

The importance of racial heterogeneity seems to be a significant part of the political
process. Alesina, Baqir and Hoxby (2000) show that individuals prefer to form racially
homogenous political jurisdictions. DiPasquale and Glaeser (1998) document that racial
heterogeneity is closely linked to riots. Other forms of heterogeneity (national origin


                                            28
and religion) appear as much less important. In other parts of the world, religious
cleavages for instance, may be much more hard felt than racial ones; in the US it appears
that the most salient dividing line is race.

We do not really know why interpersonal altruism seems linked to race. It is possible
that human beings are just hard-wired to dislike people with different skin colors. A
more reasonable theory is that human beings are genetically programmed to form in-
group-out-group associations and to prefer members of one’s own perceived group.
There is an extensive social psychology literature which documents individuals’
tendencies to favor members of their own group and documenting the malleability of
group definitions. A particularly famous experiment randomly allotted boys into
different teams and then documented how these boys become deeply hostile to members
of rival teams. According to this view, race may serve as a marker for in-group status,
but it need not be such a marker.

Other markers are available for group identification, but, again, in the US race seems to
be the strongest. In fact, political entrepreneurs regularly try to use race as an excuse for
expropriation. For example, D’Souza (1997) argues that modern racism came about as a
justification for the profitable slave trade.32 During reconstruction, southern political
leaders pushed a racist philosophy as an excuse for taking on the basis of race (and not
income). We do not know why altruism seems to be lower between the races than within
the races, but there is certainly a vast amount of evidence that suggests that racial
prejudice is a real and enduring feature of the American landscape.

The history of American welfare suggests that enemies of welfare often used race to
defeat attempts at redistribution in the post-bellum period. For example, during the
populist era in the late 19th century, the US first contemplated significant government
action to redistribute income towards poorer Americans (specifically farmers), other than
Civil War veterans. In the south, the political action against populists would frequently
take the form of racial politics. For example, Woodward (1955) describes how the
conservative Democrats in the South defeated the left-wing Readjuster movement by
using racial politics. The Poll Tax and Literacy Tests, which reduced voting by the poor
of both races in the South, were enacted because they disproportionately disenfranchised
African-Americans. A later example of how racial hatred was used to defeat left-wing
politics is George Wallace—the famous proponent of race-based policies in Alabama—
who originally ran for Governor in 1958 on a primarily anti-rich ticket. He was defeated,
in that first run, by a more racist candidate who was endorsed by the Klu Klux Klan. In
more recent times, national campaigns of relatively anti-welfare candidates have often
attempted to use the race card (some observers have alleged this about both the Reagan
and Bush campaigns).

A natural generalization of the race-based theory is that Americans think of the poor as
members of some different group while Europeans think of the poor as members of their

32
   In particular, he claims that the enlightenment had made slavery of one’s peers unacceptable. Therefore,
it became necessary to define blacks as an out-group which could “ethically” be enslaved.


                                                    29
own group. Racial differences between the poor and non-poor in the US will tend to
create the perception of the poor as “other” in the US, but geographic or social isolation
might do this as well. If the poor in the US are more geographically or socially isolated,
this might create a situation where non-poor Americans have little sympathy for the poor.
Furthermore, as Lipset (1996) noted, (page 133) several polls suggest that a large
majority of white American, believe that African Americans would be as wealthy as
whites if they tried hard enough.

Hard evidence on the importance of race and in-group status in the support for welfare
corroborates these anecdotes. Luttmer (2001) looks at support for welfare in the General
Social Survey in the US. He finds that support for welfare is higher among people who
live near to many welfare recipients who are of the same race. This confirms the idea
that geographic isolation from the poor may lead Americans to think of them as member
of some out-group.

Conversely, support for welfare is lower among people who live near welfare recipients
who are of a different race. The difference between within race and across race effects
seems to mean that people have a negative, hostile reaction when they see welfare
recipients who are of a different race and a sympathetic reaction when they see welfare
recipients who are of their own race. Alesina, Baqir and Easterly (1999) use data on
cities, metropolitan areas and counties to look at the effect of race on redistribution.
They find that states that are more ethnically fragmented spend a smaller fraction of their
budget on social services and productive public goods, and more on crime prevention
and (probably) on patronage.

This racial argument provides us with our first reason why tastes for redistribution might
be lower in the United States, a view shared by Lipset (1996) amongst others. The US
has significantly more racial heterogeneity than Europe, and importantly, American
minorities are disproportionately represented among the poor. It could be argued that
ethno-linguistic heterogeneity within some European countries (such as Belgium) is as
severe as racial heterogeneity in the US. Furthermore, it is at least possible that this
heterogeneity creates antipathy that is as robust as the race-based animosity in the US.
However, in no European country is there a minority that is as relatively poor as the
blacks. The poverty rate is 7.7 percent in the US among non-Hispanic whites. Among
blacks, the poverty rate is 23.6 percent. Across the US as a whole, in 1999, only 46.1
percent of people in poverty are non-Hispanic whites (70.5 percent of the population as a
whole are non-Hispanic whites during the same year), and in metropolitan areas, less
than 40 percent of the poor are non-Hispanic whites. As such, any income based transfer
scheme will disproportionately transfer income to African-Americans, Hispanics and
other minority races. If people dislike transferring money to people of a different color,
then this could possibly explain the US-Europe redistribution gap.33

33
  The closest European equivalent would be anti-Arab feeling among the French or anti-Gypsy sentiment
in Eastern Europe, where antipathy is aimed at extremely poor groups. The politics surrounding these
groups supports the importance of race, as right-wing leaders (such as LePen or Haider) emphasize their
hostility to these poor minorities.


                                                  30
We will have several methods of quantifying this hypothesis. First, we look at racial
heterogeneity across countries. Table 4.3 reports two regressions which start with the
Persson and Tabellini (2000) specifications and introduce fractionalization measures. In
column one we add the now standard measure of ethno-linguistic fractionalization widely
used in the literature.34 This variable gives the probability that two randomly drawn
individuals in the same country speak different languages. While the raw relationship
between this variable and redistribution is quite high (a correlation coefficient of 41
percent), with other controls, the coefficient of this variable is insignificant.

However, this variable does not capture racial heterogeneity. After all, it classifies
blacks and whites in the US as part of the same language group! In order to correct this
problem we constructed a new variable which captures differences in racial origin rather
than language. Of course in many cases the two coincide, but not always. For example,
Belgium would be classified as a very fragmented country in terms of language but more
uniform in terms of race. The US would be much less uniform in terms of race than in
terms of language. Latin America is less uniform racially than linguistically. We have
obtained information about racial composition from the sources detailed in Appendix II,
and created a new racial fragmentation variable. The correlation between this variable
and redistribution is 66 percent.

In column 2 we add this new variable which turns out to be significant at the 5 per cent
level. The majoritarian regime variable still has the expected negative sign. Figure 4.3
displays the relationship between the dependent variable and our measure of racial
fractionalization. The US is not far from the regression line. European countries are
very homogeneous and, as we know, have a large measure of social spending.35

We can also use micro-survey evidence on this topic using the General Social Survey.
This survey provides us with data on between 1200 and 2400 people annually from 1972
to the present. It is the data source used by Luttmer (2001) and Alesina and La Ferrara
(2001) to address related issues. We focus on the question “do you think that the state
should spend more on welfare?” People respond to this question by saying that they think
the state should spend more, spend less, or spend about the same amount. We have
quantified these answers by giving a score of 1 to spend more answers, a score of 0 to
spend less answers, and a score of .5 to respondents who say that spending should stay
about the same. This question is asked in most of the years and seems to be the best
thing that we have available on peoples’ desires for more welfare.

Significantly, this question is difficult to use across countries or even to make time series
comparisons within the US. Since the question asks people about ideal spending on
welfare relative to current spending, it is not appropriate for comparisons when the level
of current spending has changed. Cross-country comparisons are obviously impossible.
A Swede who opposes more spending on welfare in Sweden is not the same as a Texan
34
  This variable is the same one used by Easterly and Levine (1997). See Appendix for more details.
35
  Note that this strong inverse correlation displayed in Figure 4.3 is not an artifact of not controlling for
per capita income. In fact an even stronger correlation would appear if one plots the residual of a
regression of SSI against per capita income against our measure of racial fragmentation.


                                                     31
who opposes more spending on welfare in Texas. The Swede’s answer to the question
obviously reflects the already large level of welfare spending in that country.

However, we will present results using this question for the US in Table 4.4. Our first
regression shows the basic results for the entire sample and our results mirror those of
Luttmer (2001). There is a large negative income effect. The impact of education is non-
monotonic. High school dropouts want more welfare spending than high school
graduates, but people with graduate degrees favor welfare spending even more than high
school dropouts. The pro-welfare orientation of the highly educated is an interesting
phenomenon that fits with stereotypes but is still not really understood. People in big
cities appear to be much more pro-welfare, probably because people in those cities are
more likely to live around the poor. Finally, there are weak effects of age and marital
status. Gender doesn’t matter at all.

However, the single biggest coefficient in the regression is race. African-Americans are
much more likely to be pro-welfare than whites. The coefficient of 23.2 can be
interpreted as meaning that blacks are 23.2 percent more likely to say that welfare
spending should be increased relative to non-blacks. While we are not surprised that
blacks support welfare spending more than whites—for example, race could well be
correlated with permanent income—the magnitude of the coefficient suggests that race
has an impact on the desire for redistribution that is far greater than any income effect.
These results are very consistent with those of Alesina and La Ferrara (2001), who look
at a different GSS question concerning support for government redistribution to fight
income inequality. These authors also find that whites are much less likely to support
such redistribution, and this effect has an order of magnitude similar to that reported
above.

In the second regression, we look at support for welfare among whites only. Our goal is
to see whether patterns of support for welfare across whites further support the
importance of race. The second regression looks at the impact of percent black in
respondent’s state of residence. The theory suggests that whites in more heterogeneous
states should be less likely to support welfare. We find that this is the case, but the effect
is weak and not-statistically significant.

In the third regression, we look at whether whites who believe that blacks are lazy are
less likely to support welfare. A link between this measure of racial prejudice and
support for welfare is made by Gilens (1999). This survey question should be interpreted
as an attempt to get at both racial prejudice and, in particular, attitudes about why blacks
tend to be relatively poor. We again find an effect but it is weak, perhaps because people
don’t answer the question honestly.

In the fourth regression, we look at whether there is a correlation between knowing
blacks and support for welfare. We use the survey question—have you had a black
person for dinner in your home in the last few years. Only 27 percent of whites say that
they had. Naturally, this variable reflects both contact with blacks and an underlying lack
of hostility towards blacks. People who have had blacks over to dinner are indeed more


                                             32
likely to support increased welfare (there is also a weak connection where people who
have had a black over to dinner are less likely to think that they are lazy).

As a final check, we look at the relationship across states between racial heterogeneity
and the generosity of welfare payments. States have discretion in the way that they
structure their Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) payments, and there is
considerable heterogeneity in the generosity of these programs. To avoid problems
associated with welfare reform in the 1990s, we use data from 1990. Our dependent
variable is the maximum AFDC payment to a family of three. Our explanatory variable
is the share of the population that is black. If our theory is correct, states with more
African-America residents should have less generous programs.

Figure 4.4 shows that this is the case. There is a strong negative relationship between
the generosity of the program and the share of the state that is black—the raw correlation
is 49 percent. It is worth emphasizing that in all of these states, blacks are a minority of
the population, and they are disproportionately represented among the poor.             One
possible confound in this relationship is the average income of the state—states with
more blacks are poorer, and may have less generous payments for that reason. When
we regress the maximum AFDC payments on both median income and percent black in
the state, our primary result is still significant. The estimated regression is (standard
errors are in parentheses):

Maximum AFDC Payment= -149 - 692*Percent Black + .017*Median Income
                      (72) (131)                 (.002)

N=50, R-Squared=.71.

These coefficients mean that a one- percent change in percent black reduces the
maximum AFDC payment by six dollars and ninety-two cents. A $1,000 increase in
median income increases maximum AFDC payments by 17 dollars. These results
confirm the strong connection between racial homogeneity and redistribution.

Overall, the cross-country evidence, the cross-state evidence (of Alesina, Baqir and
Easterly, 1999, 2000, and the work presented here) and the survey evidence given here
(and of Luttmer, 2001 and in Alesina and LaFerrara, 2001) all suggest that hostility
between the races limits support for welfare. It is clear that racial heterogeneity within
the US is one of the most important reasons why the welfare state in America is small.


Reciprocal Altruism

A final explanation of the Europe-US difference in redistribution is reciprocal altruism.
This simple idea is generally credited to Robert Trivers (1971) who argued that animals




                                            33
evolved to respond in kind, i.e. a tit-for-tat policy is simple and generally optimal.36
Rabin (1994) presents an economic model showing reciprocal altruism in action. Romer
(1996) uses the taste for vengeance (a specific form of reciprocal altruism) to understand
the politics surrounding social security.

Reciprocal altruism relates to welfare because anti-welfare forces generally try to
emphasize the fact that welfare recipients are taking money from taxpayers, and generally
not working. A classic image of this type is Ronald Reagan’s apocryphal Welfare Queen
who was living high on taxpayer dollars. Since the 1960s, anti-welfare politics has
emphasized the claim that the poor are unworthy and cheating the system. It is easy to
see why the non-working poor who receive income from working taxpayers might
generate resentment and hostility. It is less easy to understand why this force might
differ between the US and Europe.

One thing, however, is clear. Opinions about the poor differ sharply between the US and
Europe. In Europe, the poor are generally thought to be unfortunate, but not personally
responsible for their own condition. For example, seventy percent of West Germans
believe that people are poor because of society, not laziness. However, 70 percent of
Americans in response to the same question said that people are poor because of laziness.
On another World Value Survey question respondents were asked whether poor people
could work their way out of poverty—71 percent of Americans said that this was
possible. Only 40 percent of Europeans thought that this type of social mobility existed
(shown in Table 4.7). Americans essentially believe that anyone can work their way out
of poverty by dint of hard work and that the poor only remain poor because they refuse to
put in this effort. Given these beliefs, we are not surprised that the Americans think that
the poor are undeserving because they are not trying hard enough and the Europeans
think that the poor are unfortunate but deserving. 37 We have also run the same cross
country regressions as in Table 4.3 adding the country mean belief that income
differences across individuals are driven by luck. This variable has a significant positive
coefficient, indicating that the more people believe that luck drives success the larger is
the share of social spending. This holds even after controlling for all the other right hand
side variables of Table 4.3, although the intersection of countries for which all these data
are available is of only 29.

Indirect evidence on American attitudes towards the poor can also be taken from Alesina,
DiTella and McCulloch (2000). This paper examines the determinants of happiness in
the US and Europe and finds that most individual characteristics influence happiness in
almost identical ways on the two sides of the Atlantic. However, while more Europeans
get unhappier as inequality in their country rises, American happiness is unrelated to
inequality in their state of residence.


36
   Obviously, simple tit-for-tat policies not going to dominate complete rationality—in the absence of
reputation concerns. However, for non-human primates (and perhaps even for humans) evolution may have
trouble creating complete rationality.
37
   Lipset (1996) reports results from various polls which all suggest an overwhelming beliefs that the poor
can lift themselves out of poverty if they tried hard enough.


                                                    34
What forces might be responsible for the cross-continent differences in these beliefs? We
can only speculate at this point, but there are a plethora of plausible explanations for the
US-Europe gap. First, there might be a reality underpinning the data. Indeed, as Table
4.5 shows, there is a strong positive correlation between earnings and hours worked in
the US. The median person in the top income quintile in the US works 45 hours per
week, the average being 48. Both of these numbers are significantly higher than
comparable numbers for all other income quintiles in the US. People in the bottom
quintile work 27 hours per week on average. This includes all males 25-34, but if we
include only full-time workers, it is still true that poorer workers in the US work much
fewer hours. These patterns are less common in Europe. For example, in Switzerland
and Italy, men in the bottom income quintile work more hours than men in the top
income quintile. In Sweden, median hours worked equals 39 in all income quintiles.
Other countries have patterns that are somewhat closer to that of the US.

The connection between effort and income in the US has deep historical roots. In the 19th
century, DeTocqueville described a connection between effort and wealth in the US
which contrasts strongly with a European connection between indolence and aristocracy.
For example, he wrote, “It is to escape this obligation of work that so many rich
Americans come to Europe; there they find the debris of aristocratic societies among
which idleness is still honored.” At the extreme, it is still true that while the richest
person in America is the self-made man, Bill Gates, the richest people in England are the
Queen and the Duke of Westminster.

Second, it is entirely possible that the US has an ethos of hard work coming from their
Puritan antecedents and Americans still seem to think that laziness is something of a sin.
The Congregationalists who settled New England were intellectual descendants of Calvin
and these views are still seen in the US. DeTocqueville describes the history of the
American work ethos: “[an American] would deem himself disreputable if he used his
life only for living.” Current survey evidence still supports this pro-work orientation. For
example, in the General Social Survey only 22 percent of respondents agreed that a job is
just a way of earning money. Conversely, 63 percent of respondents said that they would
enjoy a paying job even if they did not need the money.

A third factor is that the US might in general be more comfortable with punishing
miscreants than Europe, and as such Americans might be happier with the idea of
punishing welfare recipients by cutting back on welfare. The view that Americans are
more comfortable with punishment, and in particular punishing the less fortunate, than
Europeans, has some basis in fact. For example, the General Social Survey asked
whether respondents thought that the courts punished criminals too harshly or not harshly
enough. Eighty six percent of respondents say that the courts are not harsh enough. Four
percent of respondents said that courts were too harsh. Americans overwhelmingly
support the death penalty. Americans spend more on defense and are generally more
enthusiastic about wars (since WWII). Nisbet and Cohen (1996) suggest that an
American taste for retribution might have come from the frontier and the need to protect
goods when property rights are uncertain. Alternatively, it is possible that two disastrous



                                            35
world wars, and awful experiences with punitive fascist regimes, have discredited
vengeful punishment in Europe.

A fourth possibility is that the view of welfare recipients as lazy (or even cheaters) is
endogenous, and comes about because of the social isolation of the poor in the US. If
Europeans are more likely to know welfare recipients (both because of their relative
integration and because there are more of them), then they might react negatively to
aspersions on their integrity. In the US where welfare recipiency is rarer, we might
expect it to be easier for anti-welfare leadership to malign the character of the welfare
recipients. Naturally, this creates an increasing returns phenomenon, where the ability to
push a welfare state increases as the welfare state itself grows.

Our first evidence on mobility and support for welfare is shown in Table 4.6. In this
table we look at support for welfare in the General Social Survey. In the first regression,
we estimate the connection between occupational mobility and support for more spending
on welfare. Occupational mobility is defined as the mean difference in occupational
prestige between the respondent and his father in the occupation. We separate out the
races because it may well be that attitudes about mobility are formed only on the basis of
one’s own race. There is a significant negative effect of mobility on support for welfare.
This supports the idea that people who have themselves risen from poverty are more
likely to think that the poor can do it as well, and therefore are only on welfare because
they are cheating the system. Of course, this relationship might also occur because more
mobility is associated with higher future wage growth, a point investigated by Alesina
and La Ferrara (2001).

In the second column, we look at support for capital punishment and welfare. This
column tests the notion that people who are more comfortable with retribution are more
likely to oppose giving money to the poor. There is an extremely strong relationship
between supporting capital punishment and opposing welfare in the US. Indeed, the
correlation of these opinions (which is fairly high—16 percent in the US) is hardly
natural. However, it makes sense if opposition to welfare comes from a desire to punish
people who are seen as “stealing” from taxpayers.

Our third regression looks at the hypothesis that Protestantism is an important force in
driving beliefs about the poor and about welfare. Here, we regress support for increased
welfare on church attendance and on being a Protestant. In both cases, there is a
significant effect of the variables. More religious Americans and Protestant Americans
are more likely to oppose increased spending on welfare. Protestantism is also linked to
the belief that success results from effort.

To look at these issues further, we examine the distribution of opinions in Europe and the
US using the World Values Survey. As we argued earlier, support for the nation’s
current welfare policies makes little sense as a variable for cross-national comparisons.
Instead, we use left-wing political attitudes as our best proxy for attitudes towards the
poor. Within countries, the correlation between support for welfare and left-wing status



                                            36
is considerable. The mean difference in percent left-wing is 13 percent (30 percent of
Europeans vs. 17 percent of Americans say that they are left-wing).

In Table 4.7 we look at three questions about the poor: (1) whether the poor are trapped,
(2) whether luck determines income, and (3) whether the poor are lazy. As discussed
earlier, the first panel of Table 4.7 shows the large differences between the US and
Europe in the responses to these questions. For example, 54 percent of Europeans
believe that the poor are unlucky while only 30 percent of Americans share that belief.

The bottom panels of 4.7 show the connection between these variables and left-wing
status (which is our proxy for support for welfare). The connection between believing
that the poor are trapped and left-wing attitudes is strong in the US. 14 percent of those
who say that the poor are not trapped are left-wing in the US. 26 percent of those who
think that the poor are trapped are left-wing in the US. The difference in left-wing
orientation between the US and Europe drops from 13 percent to 8 percent within the
group that agrees that the poor are trapped. There is no drop among those who believe
that the poor are not trapped.

The connection between belief in luck and left-wing status is weaker in the US. Sixteen
percent of those who say that success is due to effort are left-wing in the US. Eighteen
percent of those say that success is due to luck are left-wing in the US. This is not much
of a difference. In Europe the comparable numbers are 25 percent and 35 percent. While
there is a huge difference in belief in luck between the US and Europe, it is not true that
holding belief in the role of effort constant eliminates the US-Europe difference in left-
wing attitudes.

The final panel looks at the belief in whether the poor are lazy. Again, there is a huge
difference between the US and Europe. Sixty percent of American respondents say that
the poor are lazy. Twenty-six percent of Europeans say that the poor are lazy. However,
at the individual level there is little connection between this variable and left-wing
attitudes. More specifically, holding constant belief in whether the poor are lazy causes
the Europe-US difference in attitudes towards left-wing status to drop from 13 percent to
9-12 percent. These effects are not all that large.

As a third test, we regress transfers divided by GDP on the share of the respondents in the
country who say that success is due to luck (rather than effort). In regression (3) of Table
4.3, we show this relationship controlling for our standard controls. The relationship is
quite significant. Visually, we show the relationship between this belief and transfers in
Figure 4.5.

Table 4.8 looks at the determinants of left-wing attitudes using data across countries from
the World Values Survey. We interpret this variable as reflecting something like beliefs
about welfare which should abstract from the effect of political institutions. In the first
column, we show the basic US dummy which is –.125, controlling for individual
characteristics: age, race, etc. There is no impact of these controls on the US dummy.
This corresponds to the roughly 13 percent difference in left-wing status that has been


                                            37
discussed earlier. Variables that can explain the US-Europe difference in attitudes
towards redistribution will cause this difference to drop.

The second regression controls for racial fractionalization in the country (the same racial
variable discussed earlier). This variable is available only at the country level, so we
control for grouped country specific error terms. This variable is quite significant
economically, but insignificant statistically. It also eliminates the US coefficient. The
meaning of this is that racial heterogeneity can possibly explain the entire US-Europe
difference in left-wing attitudes, but our statistical confidence in this claim is weak.

The third regression controls for belief that luck determines income. Because we are
quite wary about looking at the relationship between two individual specific variables
(left-wing status and beliefs about luck) that may really be the same thing, we have used
the occupation/country mean belief that luck determines income. The logic of this is that
this occupation group average may represent the outside influence that impact peoples’
beliefs but will not be quite as endogenous as the respondents’ own beliefs. This has a
sizable effect on the US dummy—reducing it by 20 percent. The fourth regression
includes both racial heterogeneity and beliefs about luck vs. effort. Race remains the
dominant variable, but opinions about luck stay significant.

Our conclusion from this section is that we are very confident that race is critically
important to understanding US-Europe differences. It is also true that Americans
generally think that income comes from effort, and that welfare recipients are not pulling
their weight. This opinion may itself be the outcome of racial factors.

5. CONCLUSION

Why is redistribution so much higher in Europe than in the US? We have examined three
sets of explanations that we labeled economic, political and behavioral. Overall, the
economic explanations do not explain much of the puzzle. Pre-tax income inequality is
higher in the US than in Europe and the income distribution appears to be more skewed
in the US. There does not appear to be more income uncertainty in Europe. There is no
evidence that the European tax system is more efficient. Perhaps there is more chance
for upward mobility among political powerful groups in the US. Overall, we think that
standard economic models of income redistribution do a poor job of explaining the
differences between the US and Europe.

On the other hand, political variables including the electoral system (in particular,
proportionality and the US two party system) and the role of the courts, are important.
The two party system, and the lack of proportionality, created obstacles that blocked the
formation of a strong and lasting Socialist party in the US. The upheaval in continental
Europe over the last century has meant that there were no durable institutions which
could protect property against popular demand for redistribution.              Monumental
differences in history such as the US Civil War and the open frontier with the West
contributed to create a different climate and attitudes toward the relationship between the
individual and the state.


                                            38
The behavioral explanations also seem very important. Racial fragmentation in the US
and the disproportionate representation of minorities among the poor has clearly played a
major role in stopping rich-poor redistribution within the US, and, indeed, across the
world racial cleavages seem to serve as a barrier to redistribution. This history of
American redistribution makes it quite clear that hostility to welfare comes in part from
the fact that welfare spending in the US goes disproportionately to minorities. Also
Americans dislike redistribution because they feel that people on welfare are lazy.
Europeans feel that people on welfare are unfortunate. Apart from the fact that in the US
ther is indeed a higher connection between effort and earnings than Europe, we don't
know what eplains these differences in beliefs.

Our bottom line is that Americans redistribute less than Europeans because (1) the
majority believes that redistribution favors racial minorities, (2) Americans believe that
they live in an open and fair society and that if someone is poor it is their own fault, and
(3) the political system is geared towards preventing redistribution. In fact the political
system is likely to be endogenous to these basic American beliefs.




                                            39
References

Acemoglu, D. and J. Robinson. (2000) Why did the West extend the franchise? Democracy,
    inequality, and growth in historical perspective. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115
    (4): 1167-1199.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir and C. Hoxby. (2000) Political jurisdictions in heterogeneous
    communities. NBER Working Paper No. 7859.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir and W. Easterly. (1999) Public goods and ethnic divisions. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 114(4): 1243-1284.
Alesina, A. and A. Drazen. (1991) Why are stabilizations delayed? American Economic
    Review 81(5): 1170-1188.
Alesina, A., R. Di Tella and R. MacCulloch. (2001) Inequality and happiness: Are
    Europeans and Americans different? NBER Working Paper No. 8198.
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara. (2000) Participation in heterogeneous communities. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 115(3): 847-904.
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara. (2001) Preferences for redistribution in the land of
    opportunities. NBER Working Paper No. 8267.
Alesina, A. and D. Rodrik. (1994) Distributive politics and economic growth. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 109(2): 465-490.
Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore. (1997) On the number and size of nations. Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 112(4): 1027-1056.
Alesina, A. and R. Wacziarg. (1998) Openness, country size and the government. Journal of
    Public Economics 69(3): 305-21.
Allport, G. (1954) The nature of prejudice. Cambridge: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.
Atkinson, A. (1995) Incomes and the welfare state: essays on Britain and Europe.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Becker, G. (1957) The economics of discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Benabou, R. (1996) Inequality and growth. In Bernanke, B. and J. Rotemberg (eds.) NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual 1996. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Benabou R. and E. Ok (2001) Social mobility and the demand for redistribution: The POUM
    hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Economics116(2): 447-487.
Blanchard, O. and P. Portugal. (2001) What hides behind an unemployment rate:
    Comparing Portuguese and US unemployment. American Economic Review 91(1): 187-
    207.
Boeri, T. (2000) Structural change, welfare systems and labour reallocation. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.
Cameron, D. (1978) The expansion of the public economy: A comparative analysis.
    American Political Science Review 72: 1243-1261.
Cutler, D., E. Glaeser and J. Vigdor. (1999) The rise and decline of the American ghetto.
    Journal of Political Economy 107(3): 455-506.
De Tocqueville, A. (1835) Democracy in America. London: Saunders and Otley.
DiPasquale, D. and E. Glaeser. (1998) The L.A. riots and the economics of urban unrest.
    Journal of Urban Economics 43(1): 52-78.
D’Souza, D. (1995) The end of racism: Principles for a multicultural society. New York:
    Free Press.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine. (1997) Africa’s growth tragedy: Policies and ethnic divisions.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1203-1250.


                                            40
Fields, G. and E. Ok. (1999) Measuring movement of incomes. Economica 66(264): 455-
    471.
Gavin, M. and R. Perotti. (1997) Fiscal policy in Latin America. In Bernanke, B. and J.
    Rotemberg (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gilens, M. (1999) Why Americans hate welfare: Race, media, and the politics of antipoverty
    policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Glaeser, E., D. Laibson, J. Scheinkman and C. Soutter. (2000) Measuring trust. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 115(3): 811-846.
Glaeser, E. and A. Shleifer (2000) Legal origins. NBER Working Paper No. 8272.
Glaeser, E. and A. Shleifer (2001) Not-for-profit entrepreneurs. Journal of Public
    Economics 81(1): 99-115.
Gottschalk, P. and E. Spolaore. On the evaluation of economic mobility. Boston College
    Working Paper No. 459.
Hamilton, A., Jay, J. and J. Madison (1982) The Federalist Papers. New York: Bantam
    Classic Books.
Kontopoulos, Y. and R. Perotti. (1999) Government fragmentation and fiscal policy
    outcomes: Evidence from OECD countries. In Poterba, J. and J. von Hagen (eds.) Fiscal
    Institutions and Fiscal Performance. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lindbeck, A. (1997) The Swedish experiment. Journal of Economic Literature 35(3): 1273-
    1319.
Lipset S. (1996) American Exceptionalism. Norton, New York
Lipset, S. and G. Marks. (2000) It didn’t happen here: Why socialism failed in the United
    States. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Luttmer, E. (2001) Group loyalty and the taste for redistribution. Journal of Political
    Economy 109(3): 500-528.
Meltzer, A. and S. Richard (1981) A rational theory of the size of government. Journal of
    Political Economy 89(5): 914-927.
Milesi Ferretti G. R. Perotti and M. Rostagno (2000) Electoral systems and public spending.
    IMF Working Paper No. 0122.
Nardinelli, C. and C. Simon. (1990) Customer racial discrimination in the market for
    memorabilia: The case of baseball. Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(3): 575-595.
Nickell, S. (1997) Unemployment and labor market rigidities: Europe versus North
    America. Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (3): 55-74.
Nickell, S. and R. Layard. (1999) Labor market institutions and economic performance.
    In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3B.
    Amsterdam: North Holland.
Nisbett, R. and D. Cohen. (1996) Culture of honor: The psychology of violence in the
    South. Boulder: Westview Press.
Oates, W. (1999) An essay on fiscal federalism. Journal of Economic Literature 37(3): 1120-
    1149.
Perotti, R. (1996) Growth, income distribution and democracy: What the data say.
    Journal of Economic Growth 1(2): 149-187.
Perotti, R. (2000) Fiscal policy in good times and bad. Quarterly Journal of Economics
    114(4): 1399-1436.
Persson, T. (2001) Do political institutions shape economic policy? NBER Working
    Paper No. 8214.
Persson, T., G. Roland and G. Tabellini. (2000) Comparative politics and public finance.


                                            41
    Journal of Political Economy 108(6): 1121-1161.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini. (1998) The size and scope of government: Comparative
    politics with rational politicians. NBER Working Paper No. 6848.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini. (1994) Is inequality harmful for growth? American
    Economic Review 84(3): 600-621.
Picketty, T. (1995) Social mobility and redistributive politics. Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 110(3): 551-584.
Putnam, R. (2000) Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community. New
    York: Simon & Schuster.
Rabin, M. (1993) Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics. American
    Economic Review 83(5): 1281-1302.
Rawls, J. (1971) A theory of justice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Rodrik, D. (1998) Why do more open economies have bigger governments? Journal of
    Political Economy 106(5): 997-1032.
Romer, P. (1996) Preferences, promises, and the politics of entitlement. In Fuchs, V. (ed.)
    Individual and social responsibility: Child care, education, medical care, and long-
    term care in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Roubini, N. and J. Sachs. (1989) Political and economic determinants of budget deficits in
    the industrial economies. European Economic Review 33(5):903-938.
Roubini, N. and J. Sachs. (1989) Government spending and budget deficits in the industrial
    economies. Economic Policy 8.
Skocpol, T. (1992) Protecting soldiers and mothers: The political origins of social policy in
    the United States. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Skocpol, T., M. Ganz and Z. Munson. (2000) A nation of organizers: The institutional
    origins of civic voluntarism in the United States. American Political Science Review
    94: 527-46.
Sombart, W. (1905)Socialism and the social movement. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr.
Sombart, W. (1976) Why is there no socialism in the United States? London: Macmillan.
Skowronek, S. (1982) Building a new American state: The expansion of national
    administrative capacities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tanzi, V. and L. Schuknecht. (2000) Public spending in the twentieth century: A global
    perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Taeuber, K. and A. Taeuber. (1965) Negroes in cities. Chicago: Aldine.
Tornell, A. and A. Velasco. (1995) Fiscal discipline and the choice of exchange rate
    regime. European Economic Review 39(3): 769-770.
Trivers, R. (1971) Natural selection and social behavior. Harvard University PhD.
    Dissertation.
Woodward, C. (1955) The strange career of Jim Crow. New York: Oxford University
    Press.




                                             42
Appendix I: Proofs of Propositions

Proof of Proposition 1: First, the impact of α and λ are clearly the same, so it is
sufficient to prove the redistribution is rising in α .

We use the notation: Q (Y0 ) = ∫ (δYˆ − Y (Y0 , ε ))U ′((1 − τ )Y (Y0 , ε ) + τδYˆ ) f (ε ) g (Y0 )dε .
                                                          ε

Taking the derivative of (4) yields:

               ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) =
               Y0
                           0           0

(A1)
                    ∂τ
               −       ∫  (α (Y0 ) + λ (Y0 )) ∫ (δYˆ − Y (Y0 , ε )) 2 U ′′((1 − τ )Y (Y0 , ε ) + τδYˆ ) f (ε ) g (Y0 )dε dY0
                    ∂α Y0                     ε



                       ∂τ
The term multiplying        is obviously negative, so it is sufficient to prove that the term
                       ∂α
on the left-hand side of the equality is positive.

We will prove this by contradiction, and we start by assuming that                                                      ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) < 0 ,
                                                                                                                        Y0
                                                                                                                                       0       0



which implies that                         ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) < − ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) .
                                                      0        0                       0          0         From equation (4), we know
                                       Y0 >δYˆ                         Y0 <δYˆ

that:

(A2)            ∫ (1 + α   0   + (Yˆ − Y0 )(1 + α + λ ))Q(Y0 ) = −                     ∫ (1 + α   0       + (Yˆ − Y0 )(1 + α + λ ))Q(Y0 ) ,
              Y0 >δYˆ                                                             Y0 <δYˆ



and both sides of this equation are positive since (1 + α 0 + (Yˆ − Y0 )(1 + α + λ )) > 0 , and
Q(Y ) > 0 for Y > δYˆ (which together imply that the left hand side is positive, when
          0                        0

then implies that the right hand side is positive as well).

Equation (A2) implies that                                ∫ Q(Y ) < − ∫ Q(Y ) (because (1 + α
                                                               0                   0                                0   + (Yˆ − Y0 )(1 + α + λ ))
                                                     Y0 >δYˆ           Y0 <δYˆ

is declining in Y0 ) which in turn implies (1 − δ )Yˆ                                       ∫ Q(Y ) < −(1 − δ )Yˆ ∫ Q(Y ) , and since
                                                                                                      0                                    0
                                                                                        Y0 >δYˆ                              Y0 <δYˆ

Yˆ − Y0 < (1 − δ )Yˆ for all Y0 > δYˆ and Yˆ − Y0 > (1 − δ )Yˆ for all Y0 < δYˆ , this implies that

  ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) < − (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) and this contradicts
                     0         0             ∫            0        0
Y0 >δYˆ                                    Y0 <δYˆ




                                                                             43
  ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) < − ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) .
                  0     0                      0        0   Thus it must be true that
Y0 >δYˆ                             Y0 <δYˆ

                                                                      ∂τ
  ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) < − ∫ (Yˆ − Y )Q(Y ) , and thus
                  0     0                      0        0
                                                                      ∂α
                                                                         is positive.
Y0 >δYˆ                             Y0 <δYˆ



Proof of Proposition 2: When θ = 0 , equation (4a) is positive if and only if δ > YMed / Yˆ .

Proof of Proposition 3: For any parameter “X” differentiation yields,

              ∂ ∫ (δYˆ − YMed (ε ))U ′((1 − τ )YMed (ε ) + τδYˆ ) f (ε )dε
                  ε
                                                                                 =
(A4)                                           ∂X
                  ∂τ
              −      ∫ (δYˆ − YMed (ε )) 2 U ′′((1 − τ )YMed (ε ) + τδYˆ ) f (ε )dε
                  ∂X ε

                                        ∂τ                                 ∂τ
Since the terms multiplying                  are positive, the sign of        will be determined by the
                                        ∂X                                 ∂X
              ∂ ∫ (δYˆ − YMed (ε ))U ′((1 − τ )YMed (ε ) + τδYˆ ) f (ε )dε
                  ε
sign of                                                                         .
                                                   ∂X

In the case of µ (YMed ) , this equals:


(A5)      ∫ (−θU ′(Y        N   (ε )) + (δYˆ − YMed (ε ))(1 − τ )θU ′′(YN (ε ))) f (ε )dε .
          ε



This can be rewritten as:


(A5’) − θ ∫ (U ′(YN (ε )) + YN (ε )U ′′(YN (ε ) − δYˆU ′′(YN (ε ))) f (ε )dε .
                  ε



Using the assumption that U ′(Y ) > −YU ′′(Y ) ,or U ′(Y ) + YU ′′(Y ) > 0 , we know that the
expression in the integral is strictly positive, and thus the overall term is negative. Thus,
the level of redistribution falls with µ (YMed ) .

In the case of δ the left hand side of equation (A4) equals:

(A6)      ∫ (YˆU ′(Y
          ε
                        N   (ε )) + (δYˆ − YMed (ε ))τYˆU ′′(YN (ε ))) f (ε )dε ,




                                                                44
which can be rewritten as:

(A7)    ∫ (Yˆ (U ′(Y
        ε
                       N   (ε )) + YˆU ′′(YN (ε )) − ((1 − τδ )Yˆ + τYMed (ε ))YˆU ′′(YN (ε ))) f (ε )dε


Again using U ′(Y ) + YU ′′(Y ) > 0 , this term is positive and thus redistribution will rise
with δ .

Finally, considering θ , the left-hand side of (A4) equals:

(A8)    ∫ (−(µ + ε )U ′(Y       N   (ε )) + (δYˆ − YMed (ε ))(1 − τ )( µ + ε )U ′′(YN (ε ))) f (ε )dε ,
        ε



where µ = µ (YMed ) − YMed . Rewriting this equation yields:

(A8’)       ∫ (µ + ε )(−(U ′(Y      N   (ε )) + YN (ε )U ′′(YN (ε ))) + δYˆU ′′(YN (ε ))) f (ε )dε
            ε



If the variance of epsilon equals zero, then this term is clearly negative as long as µ > 0 ,
so more uncertainty leads to decreases in redistribution. Likewise if µ is sufficiently
negative, then the term will be strictly positive and more variation will lead to more
redistribution. The problem is continuous, so these claims will continue to hold for as
long as the variance of epsilon is low. If µ ≤ 0 and δYˆ = YMed (ε ) , then the equation can
be rewritten:

(A8”) ∫ − ( µ + ε )U ′(YN (ε )) f (ε )dε ,
        ε



which from the concavity of U(.) is positive if epsilon is symmetrically distributed, and
thus more uncertainty leads to more redistribution.




                                                               45
Appendix II: Data Sources

Social Protection:

The comparative figures and descriptions of social security systems in Germany, Sweden
and the United States were provided by publications from the German and US Social
Security administrations, and by comparative charts published by both the US Social
Security Administration and the MISSOC, a EU administration gathering information on
the social security systems of the EU member countries. We report figures on family
benefits, health care, sickness benefits, unemployment benefits, disability benefits and
social assistance. Informations on old age and survivors pensions were also available but
left aside for the purpose of the paper.

Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Germany, Social Security at a Glance,
2001.

MISSOC (Mutual Information System on Social Protection in the EU Member States and
the EEA), Social Security and Social Integration, Comparative Tables on Social
Protection in the Member States, 2000.

Social Security Administration, Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics, Social
Security Programs in the United States, July 1997.

Social Security Administration, Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics, Social
Security Programs Throughout the World, 1999.

Minimum wages table:

The second and third columns of Table 2.5 report measures of minimum wages for
countries that have national or statutory minimum wages. The first column, reported from
Nickell and Layard (1999), adds minimum wages for Germany and Sweden, which have
sectoral minimum wages, but no minimum wage policy.

Eurostat, Minimum Wages in the European Union, 2001.

Nickell, Stephen, and Richard Layard, ''Labor Market Institutions and Economic
Performance'', Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3 (1999), 3029-3084.

OECD, Employment Outlook, 2000.

OECD, Main Economic Indicators, April 2001.

Tax rates figure:

The figure is based on comparative data published by the OECD. For each country, the
tax rate schedule is translated in terms of average production worker earnings. Only


                                           46
central government taxes are taken into account, regional or local taxes, as well as social
security contributions, are omitted.

OECD, Taxing Wages, 2001.

Pensions data:

Pension spending expressed as \% of GDP. The sample range is 1992-97 for OECD
countries, 1990-97 for Latin American countries, 1999 for Mauritius and 1990-96 for
Asian countries (Palacios and Pallares-Miralles, 2000). However, for Fiji, India,
Malaysia and Paraguay, an older database is used (World Bank, 1994) and the data
correspond to the 1985-93 period.

Palacios, Robert, and Montserrat Pallares-Miralles, ''International Patterns Of Pension
Provision'', World Bank Discussion Paper No. 0009, 2000.

World Bank, Averting the Old Age Crisis: Policies to Protect the Old and Promote
Growth. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).

Labor market chart:

The reported rigidity indices are all from Nickell (1997) and Nickell and Layard (1999),
and are interpreted as follows:

1. Labor standards: index produced by the OECD (OECD Employment Outlook, 1994,
and extended by Nickell and Layard, 1999) and referring to the strength of the legislation
on five different aspects of the labor markets (working hours, fixed-term contracts,
employment protection, minimum wages and employees' representation rights). Each
country is scored from 0 (no legislation) to 2 (strict legislation) for each measure.
Maximum score: 10.

2. Employment protection: OECD index (OECD Jobs Study, 1994) referring to the legal
framework concerning hiring and firing. Maximum value: 20, 20 being the value
attributed to the strictest legal provisions.

3. Minimum annual leave: (OECD Jobs Study, 1994), in addition to public holidays.

4. Benefit replacement ratio: (US Social Security Administration, Social Security
Programs Throughout the World, 1999), share of income replaced by unemployment
benefits.

5. Benefit duration: same sources.

Nickell, Stephen, ''Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe Versus North
America'', Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11 (1997), 55-74.



                                            47
Nickell, Stephen, and Richard Layard, ''Labor Market Institutions and Economic
Performance'', Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3 (1999), 3029-3084.

Racial index computations:


We used the most recent demographic measures whenever they were available from
national census bureaus (Australia, Canada, France, India, Israel, New Zealand,
Singapore and the United States). However, for most countries, we used Levinson (1998)
and the World Directory of Minorities (1997), that both provide detailed profiles of each
country, including reports about the racial, ethnic, linguistic and religious composition of
the population. The index is computed as the probability of randomly drawing out of the
country's population two individuals that do not belong to the same racial group.

Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2001 Projections, 2001 (available online).

INSEE, Recensement de la population 1999, 2000.

Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, 1995 Census of Population and Housing, 2001
(available online).

Levinson, David, Ethnic Groups Worldwide, A Ready Reference Handbook (Phoenix:
Oryx Press, 1998).

Minority Rights Group International, World Directory of Minorities, (London: Minority
Rights Group International, 1997).

Registrar General and Census Commissioner India, 1991 Census, 2001 (available online).

Singapore Department of Statistics, 2000 Census, 2001 (available online).

Statistics New Zealand, 1996 Census, 2001 (available online).

Statistics Canada, 1996 Census, 2001 (available online).

United States Census Bureau, 2000 Census, 2001 (available online).

Revenue and expenditure tables, including historical data and figure:

All reported measures are for general government. Historical data are provided by both
Tanzi and Schuknecht for the 1870-1960 period and the OECD Economic Outlook
Database (1999) for the 1960-1998 period.

OECD Economic Outlook Database, 1999.

OECD Economic Outlook Database, 2001.


                                            48
OECD Revenue Statistics 1965-1999, 2000.

OECD Social Expenditure Database 1980-1996, 1999.

Tanzi, V. and L. Schuknecht, Public Spending In The 20th Century, A Global
Perspective (Cambridge University Press, 2000).

Instability table:

The first four measures (GDP\growth, productivity, unemployment rate and
competitiveness) are OECD measures, while the terms of trade shocks are reported from
Rodrik's database (1998).

OECD, Statistical Compendium 1960-1999.

Rodrik, Dani, ''Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?'', Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 106 (1998), 997-1032.


World Values Survey Data:

We use World Values Survey data to measure how individual attitudes towards social
spending vary and how such attitudes correlate with beliefs about social mobility,
laziness of the poor, and own characteristics. We use data from the US, France, Britain,
German, Italy, Netherlands, Denmark, Belgium, Spain, Ireland, Norway, Sweden,
Finland, and Switzerland.

Our dependent variable is a 0-1 dummy for whether the respondent classifies herself as
being on the left side of the political spectrum. Specifically there is a 1-10 scale and we
take as a "lefty" anyone who reports a four or lower. (The exact question is: "In political
matters, people talk of "the left" and "the right." How would you place your views on this
scale, generally speaking?")

We use this rather than more direct questions on social spending because all of the latter
questions are asked about the appropriateness of the current level of spending in one's
own country. There are large differences across countries in the level of spending and
the level appears to affect how people respond to the question.

Our other variables of interest in the World Values Survey are responses to the following
questions:

Why, in your opinion, are there people in this country who live in need? Here are two
opinions: Which comes closest to your view?
0. They are poor because society treats them unfairly
1. They are poor because of laziness and lack of will power


                                            49
In your opinion, do most poor people in this country have a chance of escaping from
poverty, or is there very little chance of escaping?
0. They have a chance
1. There is very little chance

In the long run, hard work usually brings a better life. Hard work doesn't generally bring
success—it's more a matter of luck and connections. This is coded as a 1-10 with 10
indicating a strong belief in luck. We rescaled this to range between 0 and 1.




GSS Data:

The key dependent variable is a scale (normalized 0-1) for how much the respondent
supports increased spending on welfare. The question (called natfare) is asked as
follows: "We are faced with many problems in this country, none of which can be solved
easily or inexpensively. I'm going to name some of these problems and for each one I'd
like you to tell whether you think we're spending too much money on it, too little money,
or about the right amount."

Some of the key right-hand side variables in our analysis are percentage of blacks in own
state, the belief that black people are lazy, and whether or not the person has had a black
person over for dinner. In the laziness question, respondents are asked to report their
beliefs about people of various races and ethnicities. The laziness question asks "Do
people in this group tend to be hardworking or lazy?" and people respond on a 1-7 scale
with 7 being the most lazy.

To study mobility we use a GSS variable (occmobil) which compares your own
occupational prestige to that of your parents.




                                            50
                     Figure 2.1: Difference in marginal tax rates, in %, between the US and EU15 (excluding Denmark)
          The difference equals the US marginal tax rate minus the unweighted average European marginal rate for each income
                                                                      class.


 8
 6
 4
 2
 0
 -2
 -4
 -6
 -8
-10
-12
-14
      0               50                    100                   150                    200                    250            300
                                                  % of average production worker wage




                                                                 51
             Figure 2.2: Government expenditure on subsidies and transfers (% of GDP) 1870-1998
                                         (obtained from Table 2.4)
25




20




15




10




 5




 0
     1870a              1937                1960               1970                   1980        1998


                                    Difference     European Union     United States




                                                   52
               Figure 4.1
Transfers/GDP vs. (Imports + Exports/GDP)
                  OECD




              Figure 4.2a
 Transfers/GDP vs. Log (Proportionality)
                OECD




                   53
                Figure 4.2b
   Transfers/GDP vs. Log (Proportionality)
               Non-OECD




                 Figure 4.3
Social Spending/GDP vs. Race Fractionalization




                      54
                                                                           Figure 4.4
Maximum Monthly AFDC Benefit For 3 Person Family 1990     AFDC Monthly Maximum vs. Percent Black By State


                                                                        AK
                                                        800

                                                                             CA
                                                              VT              CT
                                                        600        HI
                                                                    RI                 NY
                                                                 MN MA
                                                              NH WA WI             MI
                                                              ME
                                                               UT OR KS    PA     NJ
                                                              ND IA                                     MD
                                                        400   SD NE CO NV            IL    VA
                                                              WY        OK   OH         DE
                                                              MT AZ
                                                                         IN MO FL                  NC         GA
                                                              ID NM
                                                                  WV    KT             AR                          SC
                                                        200                    TX      TN                           LA
                                                                                                         AL              MS


                                                         0
                                                              0                    .1           .2                 .3         .4
                                                                                        Percent Black 1990




                                                    Figure 4.5
                         Social Spending/GDP vs. Mean Belief That Luck Determines Income




                                                                                         55
                   Table 2.1: General government expenditure, as % of GDP (1999)


                       Total                              of which:                            of which:
                                           General government current disbursements              Gross
                                                                                              government
                                  Government      Government     Subsidies       Social       investment
                                                                                benefits
                                 consumption, consumption,                     and other
                                   excluding     wages                          current
                                     wages                                     transfers
France                 51.0           10.0        13.7              1.3           20.1            3.0
Germany                47.4           10.7         8.3              1.7           20.5            1.8
Sweden                 60.2           10.3        16.7              2.0           21.1            2.5
United Kingdom         38.3           11.0        7.4               0.6           15.7            1.0
European Union         47.9            8.4        12.0              1.5           18.1            2.8
(1)
United States(2)       35.5           5.2             9.2           0.2           11.0            3.1

Source: OECD Economic Outlook database, 2001.
1. Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden and United Kingdom.
2. Data for year 1998.


                      Table 2.2: Social public expenditure, as % of GDP (1995)

                       Total                           of which:
                                  Old age,        Family   Unemployment      Health      Others (1)
                                  disability                  and labor
                                     and                        market
                                  survivors                   programs

France                  30.1        14.1            2.6           3.1          8.0          2.3
Germany                 28.0        12.5            2.0           3.7          8.1          1.6
Sweden                  33.0        14.8            3.9           4.7          5.9          3.8
United Kingdom          22.5        10.6            2.4           1.3          5.7          2.5
European Union          25.4        12.4            2.1           3.2          5.9          1.8
(2)
United States           15.8         7.3            0.6           0.6          6.3          1.0

Source: OECD Social Expenditure database 1980-1996 (1999).
1. Others include occupational injury and disease benefits, sickness benefits,
housing benefits and other contingencies such as low income programs.
2. Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and United Kingdom.
                            Table 2.3: General government revenue, as % of GDP
                                                                  Tax revenue (1999)                                             Non-tax
                                                                                                                                 revenue
                                                                                                                                  (1997)
                          Total tax    Total direct   of which:        of which:   Social security   Property    Taxes on
                          revenue         taxes                                     contributions    income        goods
                                                      households       business          and                    and services
                                                                                   other transfers
 France                     50.4          12.2            9.5             2.7           19.3           2.8         16.0            4.9
 Germany                    44.5          12.0           10.3             1.5           19.6           0.7         12.2            9.9
 Sweden                     57.9          22.4           19.0             3.3           14.7           3.8         17.0            8.1
 United Kingdom             40.4          16.3           12.5             3.8            8.0           2.1         14.0            4.0
 European Union (1)         45.4          15.3           11.8             3.4           13.6           2.0         14.4            5.7
 United States              31.0          15.1           12.4             2.8           7.1            1.0          7.7            7.2


Source: OECD Economic Outlook database (2001), OECD Revenue Staistics 1965-1999 (2000).
1. Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden and United Kingdom.


    Table 2.4: Government expenditure on subsidies and transfers, 1870-1998 (% of GDP)
                                      1870 (1)         1937               1960           1970            1980             1998
        France                          1.1             7.2               14.1           14.8            18.2             21.6
        Germany                         0.5             7.0                7.0           15.4            20.4             22.0
        Sweden                          0.7             …                  8.6           12.4            21.6             23.4
        United Kingdom                  …              10.3                9.2            …               …               16.6
        European Union (2)              0.8             6.8               11.5           13.1            19.0             21.0
        United States                   0.3             2.1                5.0            7.5            10.4             11.0
        Difference                      0.5             4.7                6.5            5.6             8.7              9.9

Source: Compiled from Tanzi and Schuknecht (2000) and OECD Economic Outlook (1999).
1. Or closest year available for all columns
2. 10 countries only (Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, UK)




                                                                     57
                          Table 2.5: Minimum wages in the US and Europe

                                    Ratio of       Ratio to mean   Ratio tomean     Ratio to mean
                                    minimum            hourly         hourly           hourly
                                to average wage        pay in         pay in            pay in
                                                   manufacturing   manufacturing   manufacturing
                            (Percentages)          (Percentages)   (Percentages)    (Percentages)
            Source           OECD Jobs              OECD (2)        Eurostat (3)   Summary index
                           Study 1994 (1)                                                 (4)
            Year             1991-1994               end-1997          2001          1991-2001
            France              0.50                   0.68            0.63              0.63
            Germany             0.55                    …               …                0.55
            Sweden              0.52                    …               …                0.52
            United Kingdom      0.40                                   0.44              0.44
            European Union      0.53                   0.56            0.53              0.55
            United States       0.39                   0.36            0.34              0.34


1. Reported from Nickell and Layard (1999), using Dolado et al. (1996) and OECD Jobs Study (1994). European
Union average:
Austria, Belgium, Germany, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, UK.
2. Employment Outlook, 1999. European Union average: Belgium, France, Greece, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain.
3. European Union average: Belgium, France, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, UK.
4. This index reports the most recent measure.

                         Table 2.6: Labor markets in the US and in Europe

                         Labor       Employment       Minimum       Benefit      Benefit
                       standards                     annual leave replacement   duration
                        1985-93       protection    (weeks) 1992 ratio (%)    (years) 1989-
                                        1990                        1989-94        94
France                     6              14              5            57           3
Germany                    6              15              3            63           4
Sweden                     7              13              5            80          1.2
UK                         0              7               0            38           4
European Union (1)        4.8            13.5            3.8          58.7         2.6
US                         0               1              0            50          0.5

Source: Nickell and Layard (1999) and Nickell (1997)
1. Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and
UK.




                                                        58
          Table 4.1: Economic variability in the US and Europe (Standard deviations)

Series                                         Sample Range           US               EU15
GDP growth                                      1960-1997            0.020             0.017
Total manufacturing labor productivity          1980-1996            0.026             0.016
Unemployment rate (1)                           1970-2000            0.414             0.220
Competitiveness (2)                             1975-1999            0.057             0.046
Terms of trade shocks                           1971-1990            0.086             0.088
Terms of trade shocks x openness                1971-1990             1.65              7.01

Source: OECD Compendium 1999, Rodrik (1998).
1. Coefficients of variation reported
2. Index of Relative Export Price of Manufactured Goods. European average for 5 countries: France, Germany,
Italy, Spain, UK.




                                                      59
                                                Table 4.2
             Effect of Political Variables on Social Spending: Cross Country Regressions
The table contains cross country regressions using political variables from Persson and Tabellini and from Perotti. Log(proportionality)
is Perotti's measure of the percentage of a district's vote needed to capture a seat. Openness is (exports+imports)/GDP. Majoritarian
refers to a regime in which all seats in a district are awarded to a single party winning a majority or plurality in that district.

                                                            (1)                 (2)                      (3)                     (4)

                                           Transfers/GDP          Transfers/GDP          Transfers/GDP           Social spending
                                                                                                                           /GDP
   LSM: log(proportionality)                           2.150                 1.809                   1.021
                                                   (0.656)**              (0.728)*                (0.421)*

   GDP/capita                                             5.151              5.035                   1.823                  -0.876
                                                        (3.571)            (3.558)                 (1.519)                 (0.980)

   Openness                                                                  0.043                   0.032                   0.009
                                                                           (0.040)                 (0.027)                 (0.010)

   % 65+                                                  0.753              0.678                  1.096                   1.315
                                                        (0.478)            (0.481)              (0.298)**               (0.217)**

   % pop 15-64                                                                                                               0.140
                                                                                                                           (0.138)

   Majoritarian regime                                                                                                      -1.526
                                                                                                                           (0.994)

   Presidential regime                                                                                                      -0.207
                                                                                                                           (1.227)

   Caribbean                                                                                                                -0.095
                                                                                                                           (2.164)

   Asia                                                                                                                      2.047
                                                                                                                           (2.691)

   Latin America                                                                                    -0.791                   1.042
                                                                                                   (3.102)                 (1.776)

   Constant                                          -44.885               -44.376                 -17.779                  -4.597
                                                    (34.507)              (34.365)                (13.751)                 (9.225)

   Observations                                             20                   20                      38                      60
   R-squared                                              0.58                 0.61                    0.84                    0.82

T-statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level




                                                                  60
                                                   Table 4.3
                              Effect of Race Fractionalization on Social Spending
Race fractionalization is the probability that two randomly chose individuals are of a different race. Ethno-linguistic fractionalization
refers to the same concept for languages. The table contains two regressions using the Persson Tabellini (PT) cross country data. The
dependent variable is the level of social spending as a percentage of GDP. Column (1) takes the base PT specification to explain the level
of social spending and adds enthno-linguistic fractionalization. Column (2) adds race fractionalization.

                                                                           (1)                    (2)
                                                                        Social                 Social
                                                                spending/GDP           spending/GDP

                                Ethnolinguistic                             -1.864
                                fractionalization                          (2.863)

                                Race                                                             -7.538
                                fractionalization                                              (3.378)*



                                GDP/capita                                   0.402                1.918
                                                                           (1.351)              (1.289)

                                Majoritarian regime                         -1.381               -2.305
                                                                           (1.502)              (1.302)

                                % pop 15-64                                  0.628                0.327
                                                                         (0.210)**              (0.184)

                                Latin America                               -2.733               -2.416
                                                                           (1.812)              (1.847)

                                Caribbean                                   -4.508               -2.981
                                                                           (2.653)              (2.548)

                                Asia                                        -1.770               -0.092
                                                                           (3.273)              (4.221)

                                Constant                                -31.385                -25.000
                                                                     (11.465)**              (12.056)*

                                Observations                                   56                     55
                                R-squared                                    0.69                   0.69
                 T-statistics in parentheses
                 * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level




                                                                    61
                                                       Table 4.4
                                        Effect of Race And Beliefs About Race
This table uses data from the GSS. The dependent variable is a scale (normalized 0-1) for how much the respondent supports increased
spending on welfare. The three possible responses are that the US is currently spending too much, about right, or too little on welfare.
Column (1) shows the race effect on support for welfare. Columns (2)-(4) limit the sample to whites and show the connection between
support for welfare spending and percent black in own state, the belief that black people are lazy, and whether or not the person has had a
black person over for dinner.
                                                      (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                                              Support for       Support for       Support for       Support for
                                        increased welfare increased welfare increased welfare increased welfare
  Black                                               0.232
                                                  (28.55)**

  Income                                             -0.020                   -0.019                   -0.022                  -0.018
                                                  (19.78)**                (17.19)**                 (5.36)**               (13.54)**

  Female                                                0.007                   0.009                    0.032                    0.010
                                                       (1.35)                  (1.67)                   (1.94)                   (1.39)

  Married                                             -0.033                  -0.038                   -0.016                   -0.036
                                                    (5.82)**                (6.19)**                    (0.91)                (4.58)**

  Number of children                                   0.006                   0.006                     0.010                   0.007
                                                    (3.96)**                (3.38)**                    (1.77)                (3.04)**

  Education: less than HS                              0.042                   0.042                   -0.010                    0.048
                                                    (5.84)**                (5.56)**                    (0.38)                (5.08)**

  Education: some college                             -0.002                   -0.002                  -0.005                     0.003
                                                       (0.28)                   (0.28)                  (0.21)                   (0.26)

  Education: college graduate                          0.031                   0.030                     0.029                   0.025
                                                    (3.62)**                (3.40)**                    (1.16)                 (2.22)*

  Education: graduate level                            0.106                   0.107                    0.080                    0.133
                                                    (8.76)**                (8.65)**                  (2.47)*                 (8.20)**

  Log city size                                        0.010                   0.010                    0.011                    0.010
                                                    (7.77)**                (7.21)**                 (2.61)**                 (5.90)**

  Percent black in state                                                       -0.044
                                                                                (1.14)
  Believe that blacks are lazy                                                                         -0.030
                                                                                                     (4.27)**
  Black person home for                                                                                                          0.043
  dinner recent years                                                                                                         (5.38)**
  Constant                                            0.403                    0.395                    0.597                   0.362
                                                  (31.59)**                (27.32)**                 (9.85)**               (21.18)**
  Observations                                       20848                    18157                      1921                  11048
  R-squared                                            0.10                     0.04                      0.04                   0.05


                                                                   62
                                         Table 4.5
                        Median (mean) hours worked by income quintile

   Income        Switzerland     France    Germany          Italy   Netherlands   Sweden   USA
   Quintile
   1                      55          39          12          50              0       39     35
                        (62)        (38)        (26)        (50)           (16)     (35)   (27)
   2                      44          39          40          40             40       39     40
                        (50)        (41)        (39)        (41)           (35)     (38)   (42)
   3                      42          39          40          40             40       39     40
                        (46)        (41)        (41)        (40)           (40)     (39)   (44)
   4                      42          39          40          40             40       39     40
                        (46)        (42)        (42)        (40)           (41)     (39)   (45)
   5                      45          45          44          40             40       39     45
                        (50)        (47)        (45)        (42)           (44)     (40)   (48)
   Survey year         1992        1994        1994        1995           1994      1995   1997
Source: Luxembourg Income Study. Samples include males age 25-54.




                                                   63
                                        Table 4.6: GSS Data
            Effects of Mobility, Support for Capital Punishment, Protestant Work Ethic
                                                             (1)                           (2)                   (3)
                                                     Support for                   Support for           Support for
                                               increased welfare             increased welfare     increased welfare

Black                                                        0.260                        0.202               0.245
                                                         (25.39)**                    (22.89)**           (29.25)**

Income                                                      -0.016                       -0.018              -0.020
                                                         (11.74)**                    (17.17)**           (19.85)**

Female                                                        0.001                      -0.001                0.012
                                                             (0.19)                      (0.10)              (2.30)*

Married                                                     -0.034                       -0.031              -0.030
                                                          (4.55)**                     (5.16)**            (5.19)**

Number of children                                           0.005                        0.006               0.007
                                                          (2.83)**                     (3.49)**            (4.23)**

Education: less than HS                                      0.038                        0.036               0.040
                                                          (4.41)**                     (4.75)**            (5.57)**

Education: some college                                      0.012                       -0.008              -0.002
                                                             (1.37)                       (1.03)             (0.23)

Education: college graduate                                  0.050                        0.015               0.032
                                                          (4.13)**                       (1.65)            (3.84)**

Education: graduate level                                    0.144                        0.082               0.106
                                                          (7.87)**                     (6.43)**            (8.74)**

Log city size                                                0.009                        0.008               0.008
                                                          (7.04)**                     (6.29)**            (6.48)**

Average occupational mobility                               -0.002
in race, occupation group                                 (6.44)**

Supports capital punishment                                                              -0.096
                                                                                      (15.13)**
Church attendance                                                                                            -0.041
(times per week)                                                                                           (5.08)**
Protestant                                                                                                   -0.025
                                                                                                           (4.43)**
Constant                                                     0.373                        0.485               0.443
                                                         (24.20)**                    (33.48)**           (31.52)**
Observations                                                14912                        18509               20718
R-squared                                                     0.10                         0.11                0.11
Robust t-statistics in parentheses. Regressions include dummies for age categories.



                                                                   64
                                                   Table 4.7
                                          World Values Survey Data
                                   Decomposition of Belief in Redistribution
                            Beliefs in: Mobility, Luck in Success, Laziness of Poor
These matrices show the relationship between being left on the political spectrum and beliefs. The first panel shows the means and
sample sizes of the four variables in Europe and the US. The second panel shows the percentage who are "left" by Europe versus US and
by the belief that the poor are trapped. The third panel does the same breakdown for the belief that income differences are determined by
luck. The fourth panel is for the belief that the poor are lazy.
                                                     Means and Sample Sizes
                                                                                          Europe            US

                         Percentage who are "left" on political spectrum                     0.30         0.17
                                                                                           38,205        5,029
                         Percentage who believe that poor are trapped                        0.60         0.29
                                                                                            6,100        1,471

                         Percentage who believe luck determines income                       0.54         0.30
                                                                                           28,587        3,288

                         Percentage who believe that poor are lazy                           0.26         0.60
                                                                                            5,188        1,188


                             Percentage Who Are "Left" By Belief That Poor Are Trapped
                                                                          Europe       US

                         Do not believe poor are trapped                                      0.27        0.14

                         Believe poor are trapped                                             0.34        0.26


                        Percentage Who Are "Left" By Belief That Luck Determines Income
                                                                       Europe        US

                         Do not believe luck determines income                                0.25        0.16

                         Believe luck determines income                                       0.35        0.18


                               Percentage Who Are "Left" By Belief That Poor Are Lazy
                                                                          Europe      US

                         Do not believe poor are lazy                                         0.34        0.25

                         Believe poor are lazy                                                0.23        0.11




                                                                   65
                                                         Table 4.8
                                          Regressions from World Values Survey
This table uses data from the World Values Survey to examine the US-Europe difference in describing oneself as being left on the political
spectrum. "Left" is a dummy which equals one when the respondent reported a number strictly less than 5 on a 1-10 scale (1= far left and
10=far right) of political affiliation. Column (1) shows the raw US-Europe difference. Column (2) adds demographic controls. Column (3)
adds the race fractionalization measure at the country level (see the data appendix). Columns (4)-(6) add the mean belief that luck (more
than effort) determines income and the mean (region level) desire for increased gov't ownership in the economy.
                                                            (1)                     (2)                      (3)                      (4)
                                              Left on political       Left on political        Left on political        Left on political
                                                     spectrum                spectrum                 spectrum                 spectrum

   US dummy                                              -0.125                   -0.007                   -0.096                    0.047
                                                      (12.14)**                   (0.02)                 (3.31)**                   (0.25)

   Income                                                -0.010                   -0.010                   -0.009                  -0.010
                                                       (7.20)**                  (2.38)*                 (3.78)**                (4.00)**

   Years of education                                    -0.004                   -0.004                   -0.002                   -0.001
                                                       (3.79)**                   (1.09)                   (0.74)                   (0.34)

   City population                                        0.010                    0.010                    0.010                   0.010
                                                       (7.43)**                  (2.36)*                 (4.29)**                (4.13)**

   White                                                  0.036                     0.029                   0.051                    0.041
                                                       (4.83)**                    (1.45)                (3.13)**                  (2.57)*

   Married                                               -0.026                   -0.025                   -0.030                  -0.029
                                                       (3.22)**                  (2.29)*                 (2.97)**                (2.79)**

   Number of children                                    -0.009                   -0.010                   -0.010                  -0.011
                                                       (3.63)**                   (1.82)                 (3.09)**                (3.08)**

   Female                                                -0.044                   -0.042                   -0.043                  -0.041
                                                       (6.93)**                 (3.57)**                 (3.43)**                (3.28)**

   Race fractionalization                                                         -0.275                                            -0.298
                                                                                  (0.33)                                            (0.73)

   Mean belief that luck                                                                                    0.541                   0.655
   determines income (mean in                                                                            (3.69)**                (3.74)**
   country occupation group)

   Constant                                               0.347                    0.368                     0.045                   0.005
                                                      (16.15)**                 (3.74)**                    (0.62)                  (0.07)

   Observations                                           20269                    19265                   16478                    15489
   R-squared                                                0.03                     0.03                    0.03                     0.03
 Absolute value of robust t-statistics in parentheses * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level. Regressions also include dummies
 for five age categories.




                                                                      66
