                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                INFORMATION, DECISIONS, AND PRODUCTIVITY:
         ON-BOARD COMPUTERS AND CAPACITY UTILIZATION IN TRUCKING


                                           Thomas N. Hubbard


                                          Working Paper 8525
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8525


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




I would like to thank Ann Merchant for excellent research assistance and many individuals at trucking firms
for useful discussions. I also thank Dietmar Harhoff, Scott Stern, Jack Triplett, and seminar participants at
Brookings, NBER, Stanford, and the ZEW for comments. I gratefully acknowledge support from NSF grant
SES-9975413. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Thomas N. Hubbard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Information, Decisions, and Productivity:
On-Board Computers and Capacity Utilization in Trucking
Thomas N. Hubbard
NBER Working Paper No. 8525
October 2001
JEL No. E23, D24, L92, O33



                                              ABSTRACT


        Productivity reflects not only how efficiently inputs are transformed into outputs, but also how
well information is brought to bear on resource allocation decisions. This paper examines this empirically
by looking at how on-board computer (OBC) adoption has affected capacity utilization in the trucking
industry. Estimates using 1997 data indicate that capacity utilization has increased by an average of 13%
among trucks for which advanced OBCs have been adopted. The average benefits to adopters are higher
in 1997 than 1992, suggesting lags to the returns to adoption, and are highly skewed across hauls. The
1997 estimates imply that OBC-enabled improvements in communications and resource allocation
decisions have led to a 3% increase in capacity utilization in the industry, which translates to billions of
dollars of annual benefits. The commercialization of other wireless networking applications has the
potential to generate analogous benefits in other contexts.




Thomas N. Hubbard
University of Chicago - GSB
1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.hubbard@gsb.uchicago.edu
1.      Introduction
        Theoretical links between economic performance and the use of information, such as those
in Hayek’s (1945) famous analysis of economic organization, are at the core of a recurring theme
in the productivity literature: the premise that information technology (IT) offers opportunities for
large productivity gains. Empirical evidence showing links between IT diffusion and productivity
has been scarce until recently, however.1 Researchers in the field refer to this as “the productivity
paradox.” The difficulty of finding relationships between IT use and productivity using aggregate
data is well-summarized by Solow’s oft-cited observation: “You can see the computer age
everywhere except in the productivity statistics.”
        This paper examines micro-level empirical relationships between IT use and productivity in
the trucking industry in the 1990s. Productivity in this industry, as elsewhere in the economy,
depends critically on how well information is brought to bear on resource allocation decisions.2
Supply and demand conditions change constantly; forecasting exactly when and where trucks will
be available and exactly when and where shippers will demand service is difficult more than a few
hours in advance. Information about trucks’ availability and value in different uses is highly
dispersed, and communication costs create situations where the individuals deciding how individual
trucks should be used – usually, dispatchers – do not have good information about trucks’
availability. Trucks are not always allocated to their most valuable use as a consequence. Poor
matches between capacity and demands lead to underutilization in the form of idle trucks and
partially-full or empty trailers.
        In particular, I examine how on-board computer (OBC) use has affected capacity utilization.
OBCs help managers at trucking firms or divisions monitor trucks and drivers. Low-end devices –
trip recorders – make truck drivers’ activities more contractible and help mechanics diagnose engine



        1
        Athey and Stern (2000), Brynjolffson and Hitt (1996), Lehr and Lichtenberg (1998),
Lichtenberg (1995), Oliner and Sichel (2000). See Brynjolffson and Hitt (2000) and
Brynjolffson and Yang (1996) for surveys of the evidence.
        2
          That firms pay thousands of dollars for supply chain management software that provides
managers up-to-date information about the status of production processes and inventories
testifies that information about capacity is valuable and costly to obtain in other contexts.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                       1
problems. High-end devices – electronic vehicle management systems (EVMS) – also provide
dispatchers real-time information about trucks’ location and an efficient means of communicating
with distant drivers. These additional capabilities let dispatchers make and implement better
resource allocation decisions: they can allocate trucks across existing orders and market excess
capacity better than they otherwise could. This, in turn, can lead to better matches between truck
capacity and demands within and across firms. Better matches boost capacity utilization and
productivity in the industry.
       I find that OBC use has increased capacity utilization significantly in the industry. Estimates
using 1997 data indicate average increases in capacity utilization of 13% among adopters of
advanced OBCs. These increases appear to be almost entirely due to EVMS’ advanced features,
which lower communication costs and improve resource allocation decisions. There is little
evidence of truck utilization increases due to incentive improvements. The average benefits to
adopters are higher in 1997 than 1992, suggesting lags to the returns to adoption, and are highly
skewed across hauls. About three-quarters of the capacity utilization benefits are on trucks that haul
goods long distances in non-specialized trailers. The 1997 estimates imply that OBC-enabled
improvements in decision-making have led to 3% higher capacity utilization in the industry, which
translates to about $16 billion in annual benefits. These benefits are likely to increase as
complementary economic institutions such as centralized markets develop in the industry and as
diffusion becomes more widespread.
       This study stands at the intersection of the productivity, economics of technology, and
economics of organizations literatures, and is important for several reasons. First, it provides strong
evidence of productivity gains from IT adoption. There is no “productivity paradox” in trucking.
This study adds to a growing set of studies that document relationships between productivity and IT
use, some of which are cited above. Second, as the Hayek cite indicates, understanding relationships
between informational and resource allocation improvements is central for understanding the
performance of economic organizations and how decreases in information costs lead to increases in
welfare. This is one of the first empirical studies to examine these relationships in detail. An
advantage of this paper’s micro-level industry study approach (shared by Athey and Stern (2000))
is that one can understand exactly how and why IT use leads to productivity gains. Third, truck-


DRAFT – September 17, 2001                        2
tracking is one of the first commercially-important wireless networking applications. Wireless
networking applications are expected to diffuse more broadly in the economy in the near future; this
study helps researchers understand their economic implications. The conclusion that OBCs have
generated large benefits in trucking suggests that new networking applications have the potential to
generate large welfare gains elsewhere.3 Last, few individual applications have the potential for as
significant a macroeconomic effect as OBC-enabled truck-tracking. OBCs fundamentally changed
how resource allocation decisions were made in an industry that interacts with most sectors of the
economy and amounts to about 6% of GDP (including the value-added produced by private fleets).
OBC diffusion and related logistical improvements were non-trivial contributors to economic growth
in the U.S. during the 1990s.
       An outline of the rest of the paper follows. The next section describes the institutional setting
and depicts how OBCs improve resource allocation decisions in trucking. Section 3 presents the
data and the basic empirical patterns. Section 4 outlines the empirical framework. Section 5
discusses the estimation results. Section 6 concludes.


2.     Information and Capacity Utilization in Trucking
       The physical part of the production process in trucking is simple. Cargo is loaded onto a
truck, or a truck’s trailer. An individual – a driver – drives the truck to its destination, where the
cargo is unloaded. The output of the production process is the movement of cargo.
       All else equal, costs per unit of output fall with capacity utilization. The per-unit cost of
moving cargo on a truck increases less than proportionately with the weight of the cargo, and firms
bear opportunity costs when trucks are idle, especially when idle trucks imply idle drivers. Truck
capacity is lumpy and location- and time-specific. Capacity utilization is high when trucks haul a
series of full loads, each of which starts close to and soon after the previous one finished.
       Achieving high levels of capacity utilization is easy in some circumstances, but hard in
others. When shippers have consistent demands to transport full loads of cargo back and forth
between two points, high utilization rates can be achieved by dedicating trucks and drivers to a



       3
        See Gordon (2000) for a skeptic’s view.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                        3
shipper and route. Most situations are not like this, however. Individual shippers usually do not
have demands for both legs of a round trip and shipments often do not fill trailers. In such situations,
high capacity utilization requires trucks to haul different shippers’ cargo on the same run.
       Capacity utilization thus depends largely on how well individuals can identify and
agglomerate complementary demands onto individual trucks. Higher quality matches increase
capacity utilization by keeping trucks on the road and loaded more, and therefore raise truck drivers’
productivity.4
       It follows that understanding the link between information and capacity utilization requires
some understanding of the institutions that facilitate matching, individuals’ role within these
institutions, and how informational improvements lead to better matches both directly and through
organizational changes. This is the topic of the next subsection.
Institutions and Market Clearing
       Market clearing in trucking is unlike that in textbook economics models. It does not take
place in centralized markets in which participants simply observe prices and decide how much
capacity to sell to or buy from the market. Centralized markets have traditionally been unimportant
in trucking, in large part because capacity and demands are highly differentiated in terms of time,
location, and equipment characteristics. Organizing centralized markets that are so narrowly-defined
is costly relative to the benefits such markets would generate.5 Instead, capacity and demand are
matched in a highly decentralized manner in which buyers, sellers, and intermediaries engage in
costly search. These parties identify trading opportunities by contacting each other directly rather
than through markets.
       One way complementary demands are identified is that shippers themselves search for other
shippers with complementary demands. For example, a shipper with one-way demands between
Chicago and St. Louis will search for a shipper with one-way demands between St. Louis and


       4
         Links between productivity and the efficiency of the market clearing process exist in
many markets, particularly those like trucking in which supply and demand are highly
differentiated. Labor markets are good examples.
       5
       Narrowly-defined markets tend to be illiquid, and matches in such markets may not
improve much upon those achieved through decentralized matching.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         4
Chicago. However, much of the time complementary demands are identified by intermediaries, who
add value by lowering search costs.
        There are two main classes of intermediaries in trucking: for-hire carriers and brokers. They
differ in whether they own trucks; for-hire carriers control truck fleets but brokers do not. As
explained in Baker and Hubbard (2000b), truck ownership enhances intermediaries’ incentives to
find complementary hauls because it allows them to appropriate a greater share of the surplus. Most
intermediaries in the industry are for-hire carriers. Shippers tend to use for-hire carriers when
identifying complementary demands is important, such as for long or less-than-truckload hauls, and
private fleets when it is not.
        Shippers and carriers sometimes contract ahead for service. These contracts usually cover
a series of recurring hauls. Arrangements of this sort reduce search costs by eliminating the need
to search for trading partners recurrently, but tend to lower the short-term efficiency of the match
between trucks and hauls.6 Hubbard (2001) shows that contracting becomes more prevalent relative
to simple spot arrangements as local markets become thinner, particularly for long hauls. Shippers
and carriers tend to rely on short term arrangements when they use non-specialized equipment for
hauls on thick shipping lanes, but longer-term arrangements when they use specialized equipment
or operate on thin shipping lanes. Capacity and demands tend to be matched over longer horizons
for hauls involving specialized equipment than non-specialized equipment.
        Both the presence of intermediaries and the fact that most intermediaries own trucks thus can
be interpreted as institutional responses to the matching problem. The presence of intermediaries
lowers search costs; truck ownership provides intermediaries strong incentives to find good matches.
These institutional features increase capacity utilization and thus raise truck drivers’ productivity.


Dispatch and Information
        Operationally, the people most directly involved in matching capacity to demand are
dispatchers. Dispatchers assign trucks and drivers to hauls. Dispatchers who manage shippers’
private fleets primarily assign trucks to their internal customer’s hauls. Those who manage for-hire


        6
       They may also serve to lower hold-up risks, by protecting relationship-specific
informational investments. See Hubbard (2001).

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                        5
carriers’ fleets assign trucks to external customers’ (shippers’) hauls. Dispatchers sometimes
actively search for additional hauls when doing so would increase capacity utilization, contacting
shippers either directly or through brokers.7 For example, they try to find good “backhauls” (return
trips) or, when trucks are partly empty, identify other hauls along the same route that would fill
trucks. Such activities are more common for dispatchers managing for-hire than private fleets. But
they are not unusual within private fleets, particularly in cases where shippers use private fleets for
long hauls.
       Dispatchers work in a highly dynamic environment. Assignments and schedules are not set
far in advance, in large part because it is often hard to forecast exactly when individual shippers will
demand service and exactly when particular trucks will come free. In practice, dispatchers assign
trucks and drivers to a series of hauls at the beginning of the day or a shift. This is often a
provisional schedule. They then update schedules throughout the day as situations warrant,
rearranging assignments in response to unexpected delays and new service orders (some of which
they may have actively solicited to fill capacity). Dispatchers who do this well increase the
productivity of the trucks and drivers they manage.
       Information is a critical input to dispatchers’ decisions. In particular, knowing where trucks
are and how full their trailers are lets dispatchers forecast better the time and location capacity will
become available. Better forecasts, in turn, allow them to allocate trucks across existing orders and
market spare capacity more efficiently. They also can provide customers better information about
arrival times.
       Information processing and communication capabilities are important as well, because they
help dispatchers make good decisions and redirect drivers. Most dispatchers use route-planning
software packages to help develop schedules. Many of these packages are relatively inexpensive and
PC-based. Dispatchers commonly use the software to draft schedules, which they then revise to
account for factors not accounted for by the software.
       Communicating with drivers has traditionally been difficult when trucks operate outside radio


       7
         At larger firms, different individuals assign trucks to hauls and solicit business. I will
abstract from the fact that individuals specialize, assuming that they work closely enough
together so that they can be considered one decision-making unit.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         6
range (about 25 miles). Dispatchers and drivers relied on a “check and call” system in which drivers
stopped and called in every three to four hours. During the 1990s, declines in the price of long-
distance cellular communication have led many dispatchers and drivers to abandon this system and
communicate with cellular phones. This has significant advantages over the previous system
because it allows dispatchers to initiate contact with distant drivers just like they do with those close
by. Dispatchers no longer have wait until drivers call in to give them instructions, and drivers do
not have to find a pay phone just to provide status reports and ask if there are schedule changes.
Using cell phones alone has drawbacks, however. In particular, there remain significant coverage
gaps, and information about trucks’ location takes time to collect and is neither verifiable nor in
electronically-processable form.
On-Board Computers
          Two classes of OBCs began to diffuse in the trucking industry in the late 1980s: trip
recorders and electronic vehicle management systems (EVMS).
          Trip recorders are devices that monitor how drivers operate trucks. They record when trucks
were turned on and off, trucks’ speed over time, and incidents of hard braking. Trip recorders collect
data onto a storage device. Dispatchers upload these data once drivers return to their base. The data
trip recorders collect provide dispatchers verifiable information regarding drivers’ activities,
including whether they were speeding or took unauthorized breaks. Trip recorders also track how
trucks’ engines perform; for example, they track fault codes that result when engines work
improperly. This information is useful to mechanics because it helps them diagnose engine problems
better.
          Trip recorders are thus useful for improving drivers’ incentives and mechanics’ maintenance
decisions. They are not particularly useful for improving dispatchers’ resource allocation decisions
because they do not provide dispatchers information in a timely enough fashion.
          EVMS are more advanced than trip recorders. They contain all trip recorders’ capabilities.
In addition, they record trucks’ geographic location (for example, using satellite tracking) and
provide a close-to-real time data connection between dispatchers and trucks. These additional
capabilities help dispatchers make better scheduling decisions and communicate them quickly to
drivers. Knowing exactly where trucks are helps dispatchers allocate trucks across existing service


DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         7
orders and market excess capacity better. The communication link helps them notify drivers of
schedule changes quickly and effectively.
        There is an important economic distinction between trip recorders and EVMS. Both classes
of devices are useful for improving incentives and maintenance decisions. EVMS, however, is also
useful for improving resource allocation decisions (“coordination”).
        This paper focuses primarily on the impact of OBCs’ coordination-improving capabilities
on capacity utilization.8 There are two reasons for this.
        First, evidence from the trade press and plant visits indicates that OBCs primarily affect
capacity utilization though better dispatch, not through improvements in drivers’ incentives or
maintenance decisions. One exception to this is when drivers’ jobs involve cargo handling as well
as driving; some firms attribute productivity gains to the ability to track how long drivers spend at
stops. Trucks can be utilized more intensively when drivers load and unload cargo faster. (See
Baker and Hubbard (2000b).) OBC adoption also may have led some firms to provide drivers
stronger fuel economy-based incentives, and this may have led to productivity gains, but there is
little indication that these increases are substantial.
        Second, it is difficult to isolate the impact of OBCs’ incentive-improving capabilities,
because all OBCs have both incentive- and maintenance-improving capabilities.


3.      Data
        The data are from the Bureau of the Census’ 1992 and 1997 Truck Inventory and Use
Surveys (TIUS).9 The TIUS is a mail-out survey taken every five years as part of the Census of
Transportation. The Census takes a random sample of trucks from vehicle registration records, and
sends their owners a questionnaire that asks them about the characteristics and use of their trucks.
For example, questions ask respondents their trucks’ make and model. Importantly for this study,
the Survey asks whether trucks have trip recorders or EVMS installed. It also asks many questions


        8
        Other papers (Baker and Hubbard (2000a, 2000b)) have examined the organizational
implications of OBCs’ incentive-improving capabilities.
        9
        The 1997 Survey is actually called the Vehicle Inventory and Use Survey. See Bureau of
the Census (1995, 2000) and Hubbard (2000) for more details about these Surveys.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                          8
about how trucks were used during the previous year, including such things as whether it was owned
by its driver, whether it operated within a private or for-hire fleet, how far from home it generally
operated, what kind of trailer was attached, what classes of products it carried, and the state in which
it was based. Although the TIUS contains observations of a wide variety of truck types, all of the
analysis in this paper uses only observations of truck-tractors, the front halves of tractor-trailer
combinations.
        The Survey also asks several questions that elicit information regarding how intensively
individual trucks were utilized. Answers to these questions provide the variables used to evaluate
productivity. One question asks how many miles the truck was driven during the previous year.
Other questions ask what fraction of miles the truck was driven without a trailer, and what fraction
of miles it was driven empty. Combined with the number of miles the truck was driven, answers to
these questions indicate the number of miles the truck was driven with cargo (“loaded miles”). The
Survey also asks the weight of the truck when empty and the average weight of the truck plus cargo
during a typical haul in the previous year. The difference between these figures is the average weight
of the cargo the truck hauled (“cargo weight”). Multiplying loaded miles by cargo weight and
dividing by 2000 gives an estimate of the truck’s output during the previous year in ton-miles.
Finally, these Surveys ask owners how many weeks out of the year trucks were in use. This is an
important control variable. Its absence from previous Surveys is the reason I use only the 1992 and
1997 Surveys.
        Responses to these questions likely overstate trucks’ output and capacity utilization
somewhat, although probably in a similar fashion from year to year. Cargo weight is probably
overstated because respondents likely report cargo weight when trucks leave terminals, which is not
the average amount of cargo in trucks’ trailers while loaded when trucks deliver to multiple points.10
Respondents likely understate empty miles, particularly when trucks haul trailers for which
backhauls are unlikely such as auto trailers. This is because respondents who do not try to find



        10
          Mileage estimates from the VIUS are consistent with those from other sources, but ton-
mile estimates are not. This indicates that the cargo weight data in the VIUS are not very
reliable. I therefore use loaded miles rather ton-miles as my main output measure in the analysis
below.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         9
backhauls may not include backhaul capacity in the denominator of this fraction. But this bias works
against finding relationships between OBC adoption and productivity increases if adoption leads
firms to reconsider what they think of as unused capacity: for example, if it leads them to newly
consider empty backhauls as empty miles.
       The Survey therefore provides detailed information about production at the individual truck
level. This level of disaggregation is rare, and provides a significant advantage in studying
technology adoption, organizational structure, and productivity issues.11 The Survey does not,
however, allow one to identify trucks’ owners. It is therefore impossible to determine the for-hire
or private fleet in which individual trucks operated. Although one can aggregate up to the industry
or industry segment level, the data cannot be used to investigate productivity at the firm level.
       The following subsection summarizes some basic patterns in the data.
Simple Patterns
       Table 1 presents simple trends in several output measures. The top panel indicates that
capacity utilization increased between 1992 and 1997. On average, miles per truck increased by
7.5%, and loaded miles increased by 10.1%. Although the cargo weight data in the VIUS are not
very reliable, there is no indication that average cargo weight decreased during this time. Reports
from these data indicate that it increased by 2.5%, leading to a 12.5% increase in ton-miles per truck.
       The bottom panel reports similar figures, averaging only over trucks that were in use at least
48 weeks out of the year. Comparing trends in these figures to those in the top panel indicates the
extent to which increases in capacity utilization were due to increases in the number of weeks in
service rather than increases in how intensively trucks were used conditional on weeks in service.
The table indicates that ton-miles per truck actually increased slightly more within this subsample
than among trucks at large. Loaded miles increased by 8.3% – somewhat less than the 10.1%
increase within the full sample, but still a large increase. These figures do not suggest that increases
in capacity utilization during this period were entirely due to the fact that economic growth led trucks
to be in service more weeks out of the year in 1997 than 1992. Capacity utilization increased during
this time even among the most-intensively-used trucks.


       11
         The manufacturing equivalent perhaps would be to have data at the level of the
production line rather than the establishment or firm.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                        10
       Figure 1 provides further evidence. This plots average weeks in use, by truck age, for the
1992 and 1997 samples. If increases in loaded miles reflect increases in the utilization of
infrequently-used trucks, older trucks should be used more weeks in 1997 than 1992. Figure 1
indicates that while weeks in use declines steadily with truck age in both years, the plots track each
other very closely.12 There is no evidence that older trucks were used more weeks per year in 1997
than 1992.
       Figure 2 relates loaded miles per week to net EVMS adoption. The lines plot loaded miles
per week as a function of age; the bars report net EVMS adoption between 1992 and 1997. There
are three important facts. First, old trucks are used less intensively than new ones, even conditional
on weeks in use. Second, the gap between 1997 and 1992 trucks is greater when comparing new
trucks than old trucks. Once again the greatest increase in capacity utilization is for the trucks that
are already utilized intensively. Third, the gap between the 1997 and 1992 trucks is widest where
net adoption is highest – for one to five year old trucks. 1992-1996 model year trucks had much
higher EVMS use rates in 1997 than 1987-1991 model year trucks did in 1992. Capacity utilization
rates also appear to increase more for trucks in this range than younger or older trucks.
       Combined, these tables provide evidence consistent with the hypothesis that EVMS adoption
contributed to increases in capacity utilization. Capacity utilization increased the most for already-
intensively-used trucks, and trucks for which EVMS tended to be adopted most had the greatest
increases in capacity utilization.
       Furthermore, additional evidence indicates that capacity utilization increases during this time
also represent increases in labor productivity. Increases in loaded miles per truck would not reflect
increases in labor productivity if the ratio between drivers and trucks changed, as would be the case
if firms were using trucks (but not drivers) for double shifts more in 1997 than 1992. However, data
from the October CPS indicates that the number of truck drivers increased by 26.8% between 1992
and 1997; the 1997 VIUS indicates that the number of heavy duty trucks increased by 25.7%. The
change in the driver-truck ratio was negligible during this time.
       The next section presents the empirical framework that I use to estimate OBCs’ effect on


       12
        The low figure for brand-new trucks reflects that many were put into service in the
middle of the survey year.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                        11
capacity utilization. Traditionally, information problems have limited how intensively trucks have
been utilized, conditional on being in use during a period (e.g., a day or shift); hence, by mitigating
these problems, OBCs can shift out trucks’ per-period production frontier. Estimating this effect
requires controlling for differences in the number of periods trucks with and without OBCs are used.
One of the patterns in Figure 2 indicates that doing so is not a trivial exercise. All else equal, trucks’
per-period frontier should not vary across vintages: conditional on being in use during a period, old
trucks can be used about as intensively as new ones. Thus, the fact that loaded miles per week is
lower for old trucks than new ones implies that simply normalizing loaded miles by how many weeks
trucks are in use does not completely control for differences in how many periods trucks are in use.13
Much of the next section focuses on developing a more sophisticated way to utilize data on weeks
in use to control for differences in periods in use.


4.      Empirical Framework
        Let yitf equal the frontier production level, in loaded miles, of truck i in period t. Let kit be
a dummy variable that equals one if truck i is in use in period t and zero otherwise. Assume that
conditional on being in use, trucks are used at their frontier. The realized level of loaded miles of
truck i over the course of T periods is thus:
                                                  T
                                            yi1 = å yitf kit                                          (1)
                                                  t =1



Assume for simplicity that conditional on being in use, trucks’ frontier production level is constant
across periods, perhaps because they are used in similar ways from period to period, conditional on
being in use. Then,

                                              yi1 = yif si                                            (2)

where si is the share of periods that truck i is in use.
        yif, truck i’s frontier utilization rate, is influenced by many factors, including the
characteristics of the hauls for which the truck is used, the characteristics of the shipper and carrier,


        13
       Although Table 2 shows unconditional differences, these differences remain
economically and statistically significant when including controls for how trucks are used.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                            12
and the informational environment. Whether trucks have OBCs may affect yif by improving drivers’
incentives or by improving dispatchers’ knowledge and communication capabilities. The latter may
facilitate better matches between trucks and hauls. I specify ln yif as:

                                    ln yi f = X i b + d 1 Di + e1i                                  (3)

where Xi includes observable haul and firm characteristics that affect trucks’ frontier and Di is a
vector of dummies that reflect whether and what kind of OBCs are installed on truck i. ,1i captures
the effect of unobserved haul, truck, and firm characteristics.
       I next discuss si. Suppose that at the start of each period, dispatchers observe some
information about the level and composition of demand, and match trucks to hauls (at least
provisionally) on the basis of this information. When capacity exceeds forecasted demand levels,
not all trucks will be put into service. kit will thus vary with demand and with truck characteristics.
It will be more likely to be one when demand is high. If dispatchers choose to use their best trucks
when capacity exceeds demand, it will tend to be higher for newer, better-equipped trucks
conditional on demand levels; thus, it will be more likely to equal one when trucks are new or have
OBCs installed. kit may also vary with firm characteristics. All else equal, if a firm is less able to
find hauls for a truck, the truck will be more likely to be idled. If firms lease their marginal trucks,
however, this will mitigate the correlation between firm characteristics and kit.
       I assume that si is related to demand, truck, and firm characteristics by the following reduced-
form equation.

                                    ln si = Z ig + d 2 Di + e 2 i                                   (4)

Zi includes demand and firm characteristics that are correlated with the share of periods trucks are
in use. These may include variables that are also in Xi. One variable that I will assume to be part
of Zi but not Xi is truck age: truck age influences whether dispatchers choose to use them when
capacity exceeds demand, but does not affect how intensively they can be used in any particular
period. Di is as above. *2 captures correlations between OBC use and the share of periods truck i
is in use. Such correlations could arise either because OBC use causes the share of periods to be
higher (dispatchers idle trucks with OBCs less) or because when firm or demand characteristics
cause si to be high, OBC use is higher (the returns to adoption are higher when demand is


DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         13
consistently high). ,2i is a residual, and represents relationships between si and unobserved factors
that are orthogonal to both Zi and Di. Since this is a reduced form, by construction, E(e2i|Zi, Di) =
0.
        Taking logs of equation (2) and substituting in equations (3) and (4), I obtain:

                          ln yi1 = X i b + Z ig + (d 1 + d 2 ) Di + e1i + e 2 i                     (5)

This equation relates loaded miles to OBC use. The empirical goal is to estimate OBCs’ effect on
capacity utilization, *1. However, as this equation shows, even if the orthogonality condition
E(,1i|Di) holds, OLS estimates of loaded miles on OBC use reflect both OBCs’ effect on capacity
utilization and correlations between OBC use and the share of periods trucks are in use. I next
discuss a method to estimate *1 that exploits the fact that the data contain information on the share
of weeks trucks are in use. Thereafter I discuss the orthogonality condition, and interpretations of
the OLS estimate when OBCs’ effect on yif differs across hauls.
        Let yi2 equal the share of weeks truck i is in use over the course of T periods, and specify:

                                               yi2 = sil hi                                         (6)

8 is the elasticity between the share of weeks in use and the share of shifts in use. Trucks that are
used a higher fraction of shifts will also tend to be used more weeks per year. hi includes factors that
affect the number of weeks in use, conditional on the number of shifts in use. hi would be higher
when demands for the truck are more cyclical: for example, trucks that primarily haul agricultural
goods tend to be used a low number of weeks relative to shifts because demand comes in spurts.
Assuming that ln hi = Wi" + ,3i, I therefore have the following:
                            ln yi1 = X i b + Z ig + (d1 + d 2 ) Di + e1i + e 2i
                                                                                                    (7)
                            ln yi2 = Wia + l Z ig + ld 2 Di + e 3i + le 2i

        *1 and *2 are now separately identified. The logic is that if trucks with OBCs are used more
weeks than those without them, this should reflect differences in the number of periods trucks with
and without OBCs are used, but not differences in per-period production frontiers. One can thus use
this information to back out how much relationships between loaded miles and OBC use reflect
differences in production frontiers. Doing so is simple if increasing the number of periods trucks are


DRAFT – September 17, 2001                            14
used increases loaded miles and weeks in use by the same percentage: if 8 = 1, subtracting the
second equation from the first differences out *2Di. Alternatively, one can estimate 8; this requires
having at least one variable that is related to the share of periods trucks operate but does not affect
per-period production frontiers. I assume this to be the case for vehicle age, and estimate 8 from the
ratio of the relationships between age and the two dependent variables.
        The intuition is the following. Suppose there are two truck vintages: young and old.
Suppose young trucks are used 10% more weeks, but have 20% more loaded miles, than old ones.
Suppose that trucks with OBCs are used 10% more weeks then those without them, but have 25%
more loaded miles. Then the estimate of *1 will indicate that OBCs caused capacity utilization to
increase by 5%.
        The orthogonality condition E(,1i|Di) implies that unobserved haul characteristics that affect
trucks’ per-period frontier are independent of OBC use. This would be violated if, for example,
some shippers are more sophisticated than others, and sophisticated shippers both are able to unload
trucks faster because of better handling methods and value using carriers with OBC-equipped trucks.
If so, then cross-sectional correlations between OBC use and loaded miles per week may reflect this
omitted factor – shipper sophistication – rather than a causal relationship. Unlike the class of
problems described above, this omitted factor is unlikely to affect how many weeks trucks are used
so the correction procedure above does not apply.
        One can examine this factor’s relevance in a simple manner. Shippers’ organizational
sophistication likely differs across products – it tends to be higher for goods delivered to
manufacturing or warehouse facilities than for those delivered to raw input processors or retail
outlets. If this is true, the OBC coefficients should decrease when including a set of dummy
variables indicating the product trucks haul. If the OBC coefficients are similar with and without
this additional vector of controls, this is evidence against the relevance of this alternative hypothesis.
        An alternative way of accounting for the prospect that the coefficients from cross-sectional
regressions reflect omitted variables correlated with both OBC use and frontier is to exploit the time
series dimension of the data. I have multiple cross-sections of data, and can examine relationships
between changes in loaded miles and changes in OBC use using truck cohorts rather than trucks as
the unit of observation. However, this would require restricting OBCs’ effect on capacity utilization


DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         15
to be the same across years. The cross-sectional results presented below strongly suggest that such
a restriction would be inappropriate. I therefore rely on identification strategies that exploit cross-
sectional rather than time variation in the data.14
       As noted above, equation (3) assumes away unobserved heterogeneity in OBCs’ impact on
capacity utilization. In fact, OBCs are likely to affect yif differently across different hauls. A more
general specification is:

                                 ln yif = X i b + d1i Di + e1i
                                                                                                   (8)
                                        = X i b + (d1 + y i ) Di + e1i


Here the marginal impact of OBCs on capacity utilization varies with omitted factors. Standard
selection issues arise. OLS estimates of *1, OBCs’ average effect on capacity utilization across the
entire sample, are biased.

                                    dˆ1,ols = d 1 + E (y i | Di = 1)                               (9)

This equation illuminates the information contained in the OLS estimate of *. The OLS estimate
overstates the average effect of OBCs across the entire sample (assuming a positive correlation
between OBC use and Ri). But it captures the average effect of OBCs among adopters – the average
effect of treatment on the treated. In an environment where selection of this sort is a problem,
positive estimates of the OBC coefficients do provide evidence that OBCs increase capacity
utilization for adopters – and are thus evidence of relationships between IT adoption and productivity
increases.
       The goal of the empirical work is to estimate OBCs’ realized impact on capacity utilization,
rather than what its impact would be if OBCs were installed on all trucks. Thus, the results section
emphasizes estimates of the effect of the treatment on the treated rather than trucks in general. The




       14
         Furthermore, using a cohort-based strategy has the drawback of sharply reducing the
number of observations in the data from the number of trucks to the number of cohorts. I have
estimated cohort-based specifications of the basic model, and have found the coefficient
estimates to be very noisy.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                          16
results do, however, shed some indirect evidence on OBCs’ impact on the average truck as of 1997.15
The estimates will indicate considerable heterogeneity in the returns to adoption among adopters;
in fact, I will find no evidence that the average capacity utilization benefits among adopters are
positive within some segments. The fact that these benefits appear small or non-existent among
many adopters suggests that they were probably very small among non-adopters as well, especially
inframarginal non-adopters. Only about 35% of trucks had OBCs as of 1997; hence, OBCs’ capacity
utilization benefits were probably close to zero for the average truck at this time.
5.     Results
Simple Cross-Sectional Regressions
       Table 2 presents results from univariate cross-sectional regressions that take the form of
equation (5).16 I present these as preliminary to the main results below. The dependent variable is
loaded miles. The vector Xit contains a set of dummy variables that indicate how far from home the
truck operated, a set of dummies that indicate what class of trailer was commonly attached to the
truck, and dummies that indicate whether trucks were part of private fleets, used for contract
carriage, were driven by owner-operators (and if so whether they were operating under long-term
arrangements with larger trucking firms), and whether trucks were used to haul “less-than-truckload”
shipments. The vector Zit consists of a vector of dummy variables that characterize the truck’s
vintage. The coefficients of interest are those on OBC and EVMS, which correspond to (*1 + *2).
OBC is the coefficient on a dummy that equals one if the truck had either a trip recorder or EVMS
installed and zero otherwise; EVMS is that on a dummy that equals one if the truck had EVMS
installed and zero otherwise. OBC reflects the correlation between trip recorder use and loaded
miles; EVMS reflects the difference in loaded miles for trucks with EVMS and trucks with trip
recorders. Thus, OBC picks up relationships between loaded miles and OBCs’ incentive- and


       15
         Attempts to estimate the average benefits across all trucks using standard sample
selection procedures have produced noisy, non-robust estimates. While variables that affect
OBCs’ value in satisfying regulatory requirements but not the frontier – for example, proxies for
how frequently trucks cross state boundaries – are generally statistically significant, they do not
shift adoption strongly enough to identify OBCs’ average effect on loaded miles.
       16
        The sample size is lower here than in the previous tables because some observations
have missing values for weeks in use.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                       17
maintenance-improving capabilities and EVMS picks up those between loaded miles and OBCs’
coordination-improving capabilities.
        The upper panel contains results using the 1992 data. The first two columns use the entire
sample; the first restricts all coefficients other than OBC and EVMS to zero, the second estimates
the Xit coefficients but not the Zit coefficients, and the third estimates all of the coefficients. From
the first column, trucks with trip recorders had 45% more loaded miles than those without any IT.
Trucks with EVMS had about 29% more than those with trip recorders. These estimates decrease
sharply when including the controls, and the r-squared increases from 0.04 to 0.48. OBC remains
positive and significant, and indicates that controlling for trucks’ age and haul characteristics, trucks
with trip recorders had 13.3% more loaded miles than those without them, and trucks with EVMS
had 7.8% fewer loaded miles than those with trip recorders.
        The lower panel reports analogous estimates using the 1997 data. The general patterns are
similar to the 1992 data. The estimates in the third column imply that trucks with trip recorders had
7.6% more loaded miles than those without them, and that there is no significant difference in loaded
miles between trucks with trip recorders and trucks with EVMS.
        Estimates from these simple specifications indicate relationships between OBC use and
loaded miles, but do not distinguish between OBCs’ effect on capacity utilization and correlations
that are due to differences in the share of periods trucks are used. The next subsection reports
estimates from multivariate regressions that do so.
Multivariate Regressions
        Table 3 presents GLS estimates of equations (7). Xit is the same as above. Zit includes all
of the variables in Xit, plus a full set of truck vintage dummies: if newer trucks are used more weeks
per year than older trucks, this reflects dispatchers’ (or the market’s) choice of which trucks to use
when demand is low.17 Wit includes other variables that correlate with the cyclicality of individual
trucks’ use: dummies that indicate whether the truck was primarily used to haul fresh farm products



        17
         Estimates of *1 are robust to excluding variables in Xit from Zit, in large part doing so
does not change which variables are included as controls in the loaded miles equation. See Table
A1 in the Appendix for the full set of coefficients from the specifications reported in the first two
columns of Tables 3.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         18
and live animals. Trucks used to haul these goods are used far fewer weeks per year than other
goods.18
         The first column of Table 3 contains results using the 1997 data. OBC1 and EVMS1 are
estimates of *1, and reflect relationships between OBC use and yif. OBC1 is small and not
statistically significantly different from zero; this estimate provides no evidence that OBCs’
incentive-improving capabilities affect capacity utilization. EVMS1 is positive and significant,
indicating that OBCs’ coordination-improving capabilities do so. The point estimate indicates that,
controlling for differences in the number of periods differently-equipped trucks are used, trucks with
EVMS have 10.4% greater loaded miles per week than those with trip recorders. This is an estimate
of the average impact of EVMS’ coordination-improving capabilities on capacity utilization among
adopters as of 1997. The sum of OBC1 and EVMS1 is 0.127 with a standard error of 0.018. This
gives a point estimate of EVMS’ total impact on capacity utilization, averaged across adopters:
12.7%.
         Moving down the table, OBC2 and EVMS2 are estimates of *2. These reflect relationships
between OBC use and periods in use.19 OBC2 is positive and EVMS2 is negative. The former is
statistically significantly different from zero using a t-test of size 0.15; the latter is significant using
one of size 0.05. The point estimates indicate that, holding constant truck vintage and other controls,
trucks with trip recorders are used 5.6% more periods than trucks without OBCs and 7.8% more
weeks than trucks with EVMS. One interpretation of this is that trip recorders tend to be used for
hauls with regular schedules, and these hauls tend not to be cyclical. The sum of OBC2 and EVMS2
is not significantly different from zero, implying that trucks with EVMS are used almost exactly the
same number of weeks on the average as trucks without OBCs. While usage rates appear high for


         18
         Preliminary regressions indicated that these variables were correlated with number of
weeks in use. The fact that these variables have explanatory power at all is interesting,
considering that the unit of observation is a truck-tractor, and truck-tractors are highly mobile
and are not specific to firms, trailers, or products outside of the short run. That haul
characteristics are significant is evidence of frictions in shifting trucks across uses when demand
is low for what they generally haul.
         19
       Multiplying these by the estimate of lambda provides estimates of relationships between
OBC use and weeks in use.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                          19
trucks with trip recorders, they are not for trucks with EVMS. The correction procedure therefore
mostly adjusts for differences in usage rates between trucks with trip recorders and the other
categories, not between trucks without OBCs and with EVMS.
        The estimate of 8 indicates that doubling the share of periods a truck is in use increases the
share of weeks it is in use by about 40%. In specifications not shown here, I have estimated the
model holding 8 constant at values between 0.3 and 0.5 – a range 20 times the standard error – and
find that the estimates of OBC1 and EVMS1 are stable within this range.
         The bottom of the table reports estimates of OBC1 and EVMS1 from univariate regressions
that do not use information from the weeks in use regression. Comparing these results to those in
the multivariate specifications allows one to observe the effect of the correction. The coefficient
on OBC1 is much higher and statistically significant; that on EVMS2 is much lower and not
statistically significant. Ignoring the fact that the trucks with trip recorders are used more periods
than other trucks leads one to overstate OBCs’ incentive benefits and understate their coordination
benefits.
        The second column analogous results using the 1992 data. The estimates of OBC1, EVMS1,
and (OBC1 + EVMS1) are all small and not statistically significant. These estimates provide no
evidence that OBCs increased capacity utilization among adopters as of 1992. The estimates of
OBC2 and EVMS2 show similar patterns to 1997, but are greater in absolute value. They indicate
that trucks with trip recorders were used 14.4% more periods than those without OBCs and 10.0%
more than those with EVMS. As before, the estimates at the bottom of the table indicate that, as in
1992, ignoring differences in usage rates leads one to overstate relationships between trip recorder
use and loaded miles per week, and thus understate OBCs’ coordination-related effect on capacity
utilization.20
        The other two columns report estimates from specifications that include a full set of product
dummies in Xit. The coefficients on the product dummies themselves, not reported here, are jointly




        20
         See Table A1 in the Appendix for the full set of coefficients from the specifications
reported in the first columns of Tables 4 and 5.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                       20
significant; this provides evidence that trucks’ frontier varies with the products they haul.21
However, the estimates of OBC1 and EVMS1 are almost exactly the same as in columns on the left.
This comparison suggests that the OBC1 and EVMS1 estimates in the left column do not reflect the
effect of omitted variables such as shipper sophistication that could affect both OBC use and trucks’
frontier independently. If they did, one would expect OBC1 and EVMS1 to decrease when including
the product dummies.
       Together, these regressions provide evidence that OBC adoption has increased capacity
utilization in trucking through better resource allocation decisions. Taking the coefficients as point
estimates of the benefits to adopters, EVMS increased capacity utilization among adopters by an
average of 12.7%. Using the means in Table 1, this translates to about 8200 more loaded miles per
truck per year: about one more medium-distance haul per week. Alternatively, one can think of this
as about five fewer hours per 40-hour week of empty or idle time. Most of this increase was due to
EVMS’ coordination-improving capabilities; point estimates indicate that they increased capacity
utilization among adopters by an average of 10%. There is no evidence of OBC-related capacity
utilization increases as of 1992. The fact that the average returns among adopters increase over time
is inconsistent with a simple “moving down the demand curve” diffusion story where the highest
return adopters adopt first and appropriate the benefits instantaneously, but consistent with
interpretations where the benefits of adoption come with a lag. One possible reason for this lag is
that dispatching software improved throughout the 1990s. OBCs may have enabled greater capacity
utilization gains as this software became more refined and integrated with carriers’ operations.22
       In contrast, Table 3 provides no evidence that OBCs’ incentive- and maintenance-improving
capabilities have enabled adopters to achieve higher capacity utilization. Trucks with trip recorders
do have higher loaded miles per week than those without them, but this appears to be due mainly to
differences in their usage rates – possibly due to the regularity of the hauls – rather than the effects
of technology.


       21
          In general, they tend to be higher for raw materials than manufactured goods, possibly
reflecting differences in the speed with which cargo can be loaded and unloaded.
       22
        See Bresnahan and Greenstein (1996) for a general discussion of lags in the returns to
adoption and complementary technological change.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                        21
Heterogeneity in the Returns to Adoption
        Table 4 reports 1997 estimates from analogous specifications that allow the OBC and EVMS
coefficients to vary across twelve cells.         These cells are distance/trailer/contractual form
permutations; each coefficient therefore reflects a three-way interaction. Short haul trucks include
those that generally operate less than 50 miles from their base; long hauls trucks are those that
generally operate more than 50 miles from home.23 These estimates provide evidence regarding
whether the returns to adopters vary in the sample according to variables I observe. The left panel
reports a specification where I estimate all of the model’s coefficients; the right panel reports results
when I restrict all of the OBC1 coefficients to zero.
        The table shows two general patterns. First, with the possible exception of the common/not
van/long cell, there is little evidence that OBCs’ incentive-improving capabilities lead to increases
in capacity utilization. None of the OBC1 coefficients are statistically significantly different from
zero. Furthermore, one can reject the null that the OBC1 coefficients are jointly equal to zero using
a likelihood ratio test of size 0.05.
        Second, the estimates indicate considerable heterogeneity in the extent to which OBCs’
coordination-improving capabilities increase capacity utilization. The EVMS1 coefficients are
statistically significantly different across cells, indicating heterogeneity in the average returns to
adopters. In the right panel, the coefficient on EVMS1 is positive and significant for all of the
common carriage cells except for the short/not van one. The coefficient in the common/van/long
cell indicates that, controlling for differences in periods in use, the average adopter in this cell has
22.8% more loaded miles than the average non-adopter. The point estimate for the average return
to adopters is even higher in the common/van/short cell (36.4%), and lower in the common/not
van/long cell (11.6%), though the differences are not statistically significant.24 The cross-cell



        23
          I have estimated the models dividing the long haul cells more finely. The results are
similar to those below.
        24
         One should attribute this latter result to coordination-related gains with caution, since
the OBC1 coefficient in the left panel is nearly statistically significant for this cell. This is the
cell in which there is the strongest evidence that capacity utilization increases reflect incentive
improvements.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         22
patterns are similar when considering the private carriage cells, and one cannot reject the null
hypothesis that the coefficients in the private carriage cells are the same as their counterparts in the
common carriage cells. This suggests that the adopters in these different governance forms face
similar short-run problems in utilizing their fleets’ capacity.25 In contrast, there is less evidence of
capacity utilization increases in the contract carriage cells. The coefficient on EVMS1 is positive
and significant only in the contract/van/long cell, and the coefficient in this cell is statistically
significantly lower than its counterpart in the common/van/long cell. This is unsurprising; contract
carriage arrangements tend to be used when shippers have demands for a series of regularly-
scheduled hauls. Backhauls can be arranged far in advance for the bulk of these hauls, and knowing
where trucks are in real time may not improve matches much. Adoption takes place in these cells,
but more of the benefits probably come in ways other than truck utilization; for example, it may
enable shippers’ customers to allocate resources better by helping them track and anticipate
deliveries.
       Table 5 explores the distribution of EVMS-related capacity utilization increases. The first
row reports the estimate of (OBC1+EVMS1) from the first column in Table 3 (0.127), followed by
several calculations. Reading across, the “all trucks” cell is 100% of the industry, EVMS adoption
in this cell is 25.6%, and adopters in this cell make up 25.6% of the industry. Taking 12.7% as the
average capacity utilization increase among adopters in the industry, these imply that EVMS use by
adopters in this (universal) cell increased capacity utilization by 3.3% in the industry. This is an
estimate of advanced OBCs’ effect on capacity utilization in the industry as of 1997.
       The rest of the rows use the estimates from the right panel of Table 5 to investigate how the
3.3% capacity utilization increase splits across trailer/distance/contractual form cells. For example,
the EVMS1 coefficient in the private/van/short cell is 0.404. This cell made up 2.7% of the industry
and adoption was 15.1% in this cell. Thus adopters in this cell made up 0.4% of the industry and on
the average increased capacity utilization by 40.4%. Adoption within this cell increased capacity


       25
         The fact that the average returns to private fleet adopters are similar to those of
“common carriage” adopters does not imply anything about the relative returns to non-adopters.
The returns to adoption among non-adopting private fleets may be lower than non-adopting for-
hire ones, as would be the case if non-adopting private fleets tend to be those that are restricted to
serve only internal customers.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                        23
utilization in the industry by 0.17% (0.404*0.004), which is 4.8% of the industry total. Although
the average returns among adopters are high within this cell, there are so few adopters in this cell that
it contributes a small amount to the overall capacity utilization increase.
        The main result from this table is that the distribution of IT-related productivity increases
appears highly skewed. Only 5.5% of the trucks in the industry – adopters in the common/van/long
cell – account for about 36% of the capacity utilization increase.26 Approximately another 37%
comes from the other two long haul van cells. Thus, about 15% of the U.S. fleet accounts for about
73% of the benefit. More than half of the rest comes from adopters in the long haul non-van cells.
How Much of the Increase in Capacity Utilization Between 1992 and 1997 Was EVMS-Related?
        The estimates in Table 3 imply that EVMS enabled increases in capacity utilization of the
U.S. tractor-trailer fleet of 3.3% in 1997. In contrast, there is no evidence that they led to significant
increases in capacity utilization as of 1992. Table 1 reported that loaded miles per truck increased
by 10.1% between 1992 and 1997. The point estimates in this paper suggest that about 33% of this
increase (3.3%/10.1%) was related to the growing use of on-board computers to achieve better
matches between trucks and hauls. A substantial part of the rest is likely due to the expansion of the
economy during this time.
        This estimate of 33% should probably be considered an upper bound, because EVMS use
may have led to capacity utilization increases within certain segments as of 1992. Table A2 in the
Appendix shows 1992 results from specifications analogous to Table 5. In the right panel, the
estimates of EVMS1 are positive and significant for the private/not van/long and common/van/long
cells. These point estimates indicate that adoption within these cells increased capacity utilization
fleetwide by 0.4%.27 If one assumes that capacity utilization increases are zero in the rest of the
cells, this would imply that about 29% ((3.3%-0.4%)/10.1%) of the capacity utilization increase



        26
          For all rows save the first, column 6 equals column 5 divided by 3.48%, which is the
sum of the column 5 entries from the cells. This differs from 3.25%, the estimate of industry
capacity utilization gains from Table 4, because the coefficient estimates in column 1 are from a
different specification.
        27
        Adopters within these two cells made up 0.88% and 4.01% of the fleet, respectively.
0.4% = (0.88%*0.160 + 4.01%*0.097)

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         24
between 1992 and 1997 was due to EVMS-related improvements in resource allocation.
What Are the IT-Enabled Increases in Capacity Utilization Worth?
        Trucking makes up a significant part of economy; thus, even small proportional increases in
productivity imply large benefits in absolute terms. The American Trucking Associations estimates
that trucking (including private fleets) was a $486 billion industry in 1998, or 6.1% of GDP.28
Operating margins are small in trucking; therefore, this is a rough approximation of costs.
Multiplying $486 billion by 3.3% gives a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the value of OBC-related
increases in capacity utilization: $16 billion per year. This estimate does not account for productivity
benefits other than in truck utilization, such as any benefits that accrue to shippers and receivers from
being better able to anticipate trucks’ arrivals. $16 billion in annual benefits therefore may well be
a conservative estimate for the general productivity gains associated with OBC use as of 1997.
        These increases in capacity utilization have involved costs, but the costs are probably very
small relative to the benefits. Although there are depreciation and labor costs from using trucks more
intensively, these are probably quite small in many cases. For example, running trucks loaded rather
than empty causes little extra depreciation, and does not require drivers to work more hours.
Furthermore, the OBCs themselves are very inexpensive; the most popular EVMS costs users only
$100 per month per truck to lease, including messaging costs. While my point estimate of the
average capacity utilization increase among adopters is 13%, EVMS hardware and messaging costs
increase operating costs by less than 1%.29 Finally, while using OBCs effectively usually requires
some complementary investments in human capital and back-office IT, it generally does not involve
changes in dispatchers’ or drivers’ jobs that require significant amounts of training, and backoffice
hardware and software is usually PC based and supplied by competitive firms. The net benefits


        28
          American Trucking Associations (2000). I quote the estimate for 1998 because
methodological changes and new data led this and other publications to substantially increase
their estimate of the size of the industry, starting first with estimates for 1998. These
methodological changes account for the fact, for example, that much of “rail” and “air” freight
travels by truck for all or part of the way.
        29
        Assuming operating costs of $2/mile (American Trucking Associations (2000)) and
6,000 miles per truck per month, average monthly operating costs are on the order of $12,000 per
month.

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                         25
would be very high even if the amortized cost per truck of these complementary investments were
five times hardware and messaging costs, and there is no indication from interviews and the trade
press that the costs associated with such investments are nearly this large.


6.     Conclusion
       Technologies that collect and disseminate information play a unique role in the economy.
As Hayek stated more than fifty years ago, such technologies increase productivity by improving
decisions, in particular resource allocation decisions. This paper examines the impact of one such
technology – on-board computers – on capacity utilization in the trucking industry. Preliminary
evidence indicates that on-board computer use has increased capacity utilization significantly: in
1997, EVMS increased capacity utilization by 13% on adopting trucks. This increase appears to be
mostly due to advanced capabilities that let dispatchers determine trucks' position in real time, and
allow dispatchers and drivers to communicate while drivers are in their truck. These capabilities
enable dispatchers and drivers to keep trucks on the road and loaded more.
       On-board computers in trucking are among the first commercially-important applications of
wireless networking technologies. Many other such applications are likely to follow in the near
future, as companies are currently attempting to develop and commercialize wireless applications
that work off a diverse set of hardware platforms, including cellular phones and handheld computers.
The economic value of these applications is based on the same principle as OBCs: information
improves decisions; communication enables decisions to be executed. This allows dispersed
individuals to identify and avail themselves of economic opportunities. The estimates in this paper
indicate that the productivity gains from such applications can be quite large.




DRAFT – September 17, 2001                       26
References

American Trucking Associations, American Trucking Trends 2000, Alexandria, Transport Topics
Press, 2000.

Athey, Susan and Scott Stern, “The Impact of Information Technology on Emergency Health
Outcomes,” MIT, 2000.

Baker, George F., and Thomas N. Hubbard, “Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board
Computers and Governance in U.S. Trucking,” NBER Working Paper #7634, April 2000(a).

Baker, George F., and Thomas N. Hubbard, “Make Versus Buy in Trucking: Asset Ownership, Job
Design, and Information,” September 2000(b).

Bresnahan, Timothy and Shane Greenstein, “Technical Progress and Co-invention in Computing and
the Use of Computers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 1996, 1-77.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin Hitt, “Paradox Lost? Firm-Level Evidence on the Returns to
Information Systems Spending,” Management Science, April 1996, 541-58.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin Hitt, “Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational
Transformation and Business Performance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2000, 23-48.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Shinku Yang, “Information Technology and Productivity: A Review of the
Literature,” in Advances in Computers, Volume 43, Marvin Zelkowitz ed., Academic Press, 1996.

Bureau of the Census, Truck Inventory and Use Survey: 1992, G.P.O, Washington, 1995.

Bureau of the Census, Vehicle Inventory and Use Survey: 1997, G.P.O, Washington, 2000.

David, Paul A., “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern
Productivity Paradox,” American Economic Review, May 2000, 355-361.

Gordon, Robert J., “Does the ‘New Economy’ Measure Up to the Great Inventions of the Past?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2000, 49-74.

Hayek, F. A., “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American Economic Review, September 1945,
519-530.

Hubbard, Thomas N., “The Demand for Monitoring Technologies: The Case of Trucking,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 2000, 533-560.

Hubbard, Thomas N., “Contractual Form and Market Thickness in Trucking,” Rand Journal of

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                    27
Economics, Summer 2001.

Lehr, William and Frank R. Lichtenberg, “Computer Use and Productivity Growth in U.S. Federal
Government Agencies,” Journal of Industrial Economics, June 1998, 257-279.

Lichtenberg, Frank R., “The Output Contribution of Computer Equipment and Personnel: A Firm-
Level Analysis,” Economics of Innovation and Technology, 3(1995), 201-217.

Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel E. Sichel, “The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is
Information Technology the Story?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2000, 3-22.




DRAFT – September 17, 2001                   28
Table 1
Truck Utilization – 1992, 1997

All Trucks                           Loaded   Fraction   Cargo
                             Miles    Miles   w/Load     Weight   Ton-Miles    N

                 1992        65451   58559     0.882     38190      1178      36082
                 1997        70351   64500     0.904     39223      1325      23183

             Change          7.5%    10.1%     2.5%      2.7%      12.5%

Trucks in use > 48 weeks

                 1992        77764   69993     0.893     37890      1399      18683
                 1997        82488   75836     0.915     39602      1592      11376

             Change          6.1%    8.3%      2.5%      4.5%      13.8%




DRAFT – September 17, 2001                          29
                                        Figure 1
                                 Average Weeks In Use
      50
      48
      46
      44
      42
      40
      38
      36
      34
               0       1     2     3   4   5   6          7   8   9   10+
                                       Truck Age

                                        1992       1997
DRAFT – September 17, 2001                   30
                                     Figure 2
                  Loaded Miles/Week, Net EVMS Adoption
      2200                                                          35
      2000                                                          30
      1800                                                          25
      1600                                                          20
      1400                                                          15
      1200                                                          10
      1000                                                          5
        800                                                         0
                  0      1   2   3   4 5 6          7   8   9 10+
                                     Truck Age

                                     1992        1997

DRAFT – September 17, 2001                  31
 Table 2
 Cross-Sectional Regressions
 Dependent Variable: ln(loaded miles)


 1992 Sample

 OBC1                 0.450         0.203          0.133
                     (0.023)       (0.018)        (0.017)

 EVMS1                0.291        -0.072         -0.078
                     (0.028)       (0.023)        (0.022)

 Controls?            None        X Vector     X, Z Vectors


 R-squared           0.044          0.408          0.476

 N = 35766


 1997 Sample

 OBC1                 0.643         0.207          0.076
                     (0.027)       (0.022)        (0.021)

 EVMS1                0.189         0.098          0.024
                     (0.029)       (0.023)        (0.022)

 Controls?            None        X Vector     X, Z Vectors

 R-squared           0.102          0.440          0.495

 N = 22206

 X vector includes distance dummies, trailer dummies, private carriage, contract carriage, independent
 owner-operator, subcontracted owner-operator, LTL, and LTL*short haul dummies.

 Z vector includes truck vintage dummies.




DRAFT – September 17, 2001                          32
Table 3
Coefficient Estimates – Multivariate Regressions
Dependent Variables: ln(loaded miles), ln(weeks in use)

Year                      1997       1992                    1997        1992


OBC1                     0.023      -0.011                   0.024      -0.009
                        (0.026)     (0.022)                 (0.026)     (0.022)

EVMS1                    0.104       0.022                   0.102       0.027
                        (0.027)     (0.027)                 (0.028)     (0.026)

OBC2                     0.056       0.144                   0.047       0.137
                        (0.031)     (0.025)                 (0.030)     (0.024)

EVMS2                   -0.078      -0.100                  -0.071      -0.096
                        (0.032)     (0.031)                 (0.032)     (0.030)


Lambda                   0.406       0.431                   0.410       0.436
                        (0.010)     (0.008)                 (0.011)     (0.008)


Dependent Variable: ln(loaded miles)

OBC1                     0.076       0.133                   0.067       0.128
                        (0.021)     (0.017)                 (0.021)     (0.017)

EVMS1                    0.024      -0.078                   0.028      -0.066
                        (0.022)     (0.022)                 (0.022)     (0.022)

N                        22206       35766                  22206       35766


Includes Product           N           N                       Y              Y
Dummies in X?

Bold indicates rejection of a two-tailed t-test of size 0.05 of H0: beta=0.




DRAFT – September 17, 2001                    33
Table 4
Cross-Sectional Interactions – 1997
                                    Unrestricted Specification                            OBC1 = 0

                                             Length of Haul                             Length of Haul
OBC1                               Short                       Long           Short                       Long

           Private, Van            -0.062                      0.055
                                   (0.154)                    (0.058)
           Private, Not Van         0.124                     -0.054
                                   (0.130)                    (0.068)

           Contract, Van           -0.149                      0.001
                                   (0.447)                    (0.068)
           Contract, Not Van       -0.019                      0.119
                                   (0.335)                    (0.075)

           Common, Van              0.600                     -0.064
                                   (0.420)                    (0.061)
           Common, Not Van         -0.415                      0.152
                                   (0.284)                    (0.098)

EVMS1

           Private, Van             0.462                      0.116           0.404                      0.161
                                   (0.183)                    (0.063)         (0.123)                    (0.041)
           Private, Not Van        -0.081                      0.147           0.028                      0.094
                                   (0.151)                    (0.076)         (0.088)                    (0.048)

           Contract, Van            0.375                      0.097           0.225                      0.097
                                   (0.502)                    (0.071)         (0.258)                    (0.041)
           Contract, Not Van        0.422                     -0.103           0.398                     -0.001
                                   (0.386)                    (0.081)         (0.238)                    (0.054)

           Common, Van             -0.223                      0.280           0.364                      0.228
                                   (0.438)                    (0.062)         (0.151)                    (0.038)
           Common, Not Van          0.556                     -0.020           0.152                      0.116
                                   (0.330)                    (0.106)         (0.191)                    (0.056)

           Log of likelihood fn.                -40009                                     -40015

Specifications are analogous to those in Table 3.
Bold indicates rejection of a two-tailed t-test of size 0.05 of H0: beta=0.




DRAFT – September 17, 2001                               34
Table 5
Distribution of EVMS-Related Capacity Utilization Increases, 1997

Column                                (1)                (2)                  (3)            (4)                (5)           (6)

Label                             Coefficient         Share of            EVMS         Industry Share of   Industry CU      Share of
                                  Estimate            Industry           Adoption     of Adopters in Cell Gains from Cell   CU Gains

Formula                                                                                    (2)*(3)          (1)*(2)*(3)


All Trucks                          0.127              100.0%             25.6%            25.6%              3.25%         100.0%

Private, Van, Short                 0.404               2.7%              15.1%             0.4%              0.17%          4.8%
Private, Not Van, Short             0.028              11.8%               7.0%             0.8%              0.02%          0.7%
Contract, Van, Short                0.225               0.9%              10.0%             0.1%              0.02%          0.6%
Contract, Not Van, Short            0.398               0.7%              15.8%             0.1%              0.04%          1.3%
Common, Van, Short                  0.364               1.9%              14.6%             0.3%              0.10%          2.9%
Common, Not Van, Short              0.152               1.7%               9.4%             0.2%              0.02%          0.7%

Private, Van, Long                  0.161              14.6%              31.0%             4.5%             0.73%           20.9%
Private, Not Van, Long              0.094              18.2%              16.6%             3.0%             0.28%            8.1%
Contract, Van, Long                 0.097              13.5%              44.4%             6.0%             0.58%           16.6%
Contract, Not Van, Long             -0.001              8.6%              29.4%             2.5%             -0.00%          -0.1%
Common, Van, Long                   0.228              16.1%              34.3%             5.5%             1.26%           36.1%
Common, Not Van, Long               0.116               9.4%              23.7%             2.2%             0.26%            7.4%

"All Trucks" coefficient estimate is (OBC1+EVMS1) from the first column in Table 3.
Cell coefficient estimates are from the right panel of Table 4.




DRAFT – September 17, 2001                                               35
Table A1
Coefficient Estimates – Multivariate Regressions
Dependent Variables: ln(loaded miles), ln(weeks in use)                             1997                1992
                                                                             Estimate Std.Err.   Estimate Std.Err.

Delta Vector      OBC1                                                        0.023     0.027     -0.011    0.022
                  EVMS1                                                       0.104     0.028     0.022     0.027
                  OBC2                                                        0.056     0.031     0.144     0.025
                  EVMS2                                                       -0.078    0.032     -0.100    0.030

Beta Vector       C                                                           10.037    0.029     10.008    0.024
                  Area: 50-100 Miles                                           0.178    0.028      0.264    0.020
                  Area: 100-200 Miles                                          0.454    0.031      0.527    0.023
                  Area: 200-500 Miles                                          0.753    0.031      0.778    0.022
                  Area: >500 Miles                                             1.009    0.030      0.993    0.022
                  Private Carriage                                            -0.118    0.021     -0.134    0.017
                  Contract Carriage                                            0.086    0.020      0.091    0.017
                  Owner-Operator: Independent                                  0.216    0.036      0.117    0.028
                  Owner-Operator: Subcontractor                                0.264    0.032      0.239    0.025
                  Trailer: Lowboy                                              0.023    0.040      0.029    0.031
                  Trailer: Platform                                            0.031    0.023      0.023    0.019
                  Trailer: Refrigerated Van                                   -0.021    0.025      0.002    0.020
                  Trailer: Logging                                             0.474    0.054      0.277    0.039
                  Trailer: Grain Body                                          0.533    0.052      0.475    0.040
                  Trailer: Dump                                                0.363    0.033      0.359    0.026
                  Trailer: Tank                                                0.034    0.032      0.011    0.024
                  Trailer: Other                                              -0.113    0.024     -0.208    0.019
                  LTL                                                         -0.091    0.025     -0.082    0.023
                  LTL*(Area < 50)                                             -0.161    0.059     -0.405    0.042

Gamma Vector      C                                                              -        -          -        -
                  Area: 50-100 Miles                                          0.467     0.031     0.316     0.022
                  Area: 100-200 Miles                                         0.486     0.034     0.339     0.025
                  Area: 200-500 Miles                                         0.444     0.034     0.300     0.025
                  Area: >500 Miles                                            0.305     0.033     0.196     0.025
                  Private Carriage                                            -0.176    0.024     -0.230    0.019
                  Contract Carriage                                           -0.027    0.023     -0.063    0.018
                  Owner-Operator: Independent                                 -0.298    0.040     -0.114    0.031
                  Owner-Operator: Subcontractor                               -0.231    0.037     -0.164    0.027
                  Trailer: Lowboy                                             -0.512    0.045     -0.656    0.034
                  Trailer: Platform                                           -0.147    0.026     -0.159    0.021
                  Trailer: Refrigerated Van                                   0.097     0.028     0.077     0.022
                  Trailer: Logging                                            -0.264    0.062     -0.091    0.044
                  Trailer: Grain Body                                         -0.958    0.056     -0.790    0.044
                  Trailer: Dump                                               -0.138    0.038     -0.214    0.028
                  Trailer: Tank                                               0.013     0.036     0.011     0.027
                  Trailer: Other                                              -0.051    0.027     0.006     0.021
                  LTL                                                         0.024     0.029     -0.015    0.025
                  LTL*(Area < 50)                                             0.599     0.067     0.463     0.047
                  Model Year 1996 (1991 for 1992 specification)               0.229     0.024     0.375     0.022
                  Model Year 1995 (1990 for 1992 specification)               0.202     0.023     0.415     0.021
                  Model Year 1994 (1989 for 1992 specification)               0.154     0.025     0.339     0.020
                  Model Year 1993 (1988 for 1992 specification)               0.118     0.026     0.288     0.021
                  Model Year 1992 (1987 for 1992 specification)               0.114     0.030     0.241     0.022
                  Model Year 1991 (1986 for 1992 specification)               0.029     0.031     0.146     0.023
                  Model Year 1990 (1985 for 1992 specification)               -0.070    0.029     0.094     0.023
                  Model Year 1989 (1984 for 1992 specification)               -0.076    0.029     0.044     0.022
                  Model Year 1988 (1983 for 1992 specification)               -0.190    0.030     0.006     0.029
                  Model Year 1987 or before (1982 for 1992 specification)     -0.643    0.023     -0.529    0.018

Alpha Vector      Farm Products                                               -0.174    0.011     -0.185    0.009
                  Live Animals                                                -0.190    0.019     -0.179    0.016

Lambda                                                                        0.406     0.010     0.431     0.008

Bold indicates rejection of a two-tailed t-test of size 0.05 of H0: beta=0


DRAFT – September 17, 2001                                              36
Table A2
Cross-Sectional Interactions – 1992

                                             Length of Haul                            Length of Haul
OBC1                                Short                      Long          Short                       Long

           Private, Van             0.674                     -0.145
                                   (0.135)                    (0.041)
           Private, Not Van        -0.004                      0.007
                                   (0.085)                    (0.052)

           Contract, Van            0.015                     -0.085
                                   (0.331)                    (0.066)
           Contract, Not Van       -0.356                     -0.112
                                   (0.236)                    (0.074)

           Common, Van              0.426                     -0.100
                                   (0.237)                    (0.067)
           Common, Not Van         -0.266                      0.323
                                   (0.178)                    (0.070)

EVMS1

           Private, Van            -0.673                      0.158         -0.048                      0.043
                                   (0.227)                    (0.058)        (0.189)                    (0.048)
           Private, Not Van        -0.385                      0.153         -0.390                      0.160
                                   (0.131)                    (0.079)        (0.104)                    (0.063)

           Contract, Van           -0.271                      0.108         -0.256                      0.031
                                   (0.655)                    (0.076)        (0.573)                    (0.046)
           Contract, Not Van        0.443                     -0.057          0.104                     -0.158
                                   (0.441)                    (0.092)        (0.380)                    (0.063)

           Common, Van             -0.120                      0.189          0.296                      0.097
                                   (0.368)                    (0.070)        (0.286)                    (0.035)
           Common, Not Van          0.247                     -0.499         -0.002                     -0.201
                                   (0.284)                    (0.087)        (0.231)                    (0.059)

           Log of likelihood fn.                -68183                                    -68219

Specifications are analogous to those in Table 3.
Bold indicates rejection of a two-tailed t-test of size 0.05 of H0: beta=0




DRAFT – September 17, 2001                                37
