NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDICARE POLICY IN THE 1990s
Joseph P. Newhouse
Working Paper 8531
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8531
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001
This paper was originally prepared for a conference at the Kennedy School of Government on American
Economic Policy in the 1990s, and a modified version of the paper will appear in a book by the same name
to be published by MIT Press in 2002. My vantage point on Medicare comes from serving on the various
Commissions the Congress created to advise it with respect to Medicare. I was a Commissioner of the
Physician Payment Review Commission from 1993 to 1996 and the chair of the Prospective Payment
Assessment Commission in 1996 and 1997. The Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997 combined these two
Commissions into the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC), and I have served on that
Commission from 1997 to the present. As a result of this experience, my viewpoint likely gives a larger role
to the Congress and a lesser role to the Executive Branch than might a chapter written by someone who
served in the Executive Branch. I wish to thank David Cutler, NancyAnn DeParle, Victor Fuchs, Michael
O’Grady, Jon Gruber, Mark McClellan, Peter Orszag, Robert Reischauer, and Bruce Vladeck for comments.
Any errors are my responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2001 by Joseph P. Newhouse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Medicare Policy in the 1990s
Joseph P. Newhouse
NBER Working Paper No. 8531
October 2001
JEL No. H5, I1

ABSTRACT
I describe several changes to Medicare in the 1990s, their rationale, and their likely effects. I
focus principally on issues in the administered price systems Medicare uses to pay medical providers,
especially those used for post-acute care providers, Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs), and
physicians. The changes to these systems in the 1990s, although directed at important problems, have
introduced new and serious problems of their own. For example, the post-acute care system now pays
different amounts for the same service, depending on the site of care, and the HMO system is on a
trajectory to pay substantially less than traditional Medicare in high rate areas and more in low rate areas,
thereby unbalancing local medical markets. I consider future directions for the program, including its
long-term financing and a prescription drug benefit.

Joseph P. Newhouse
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
newhouse@hcp.med.harvard.edu

