                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         BAD POLITICIANS


                                           Francesco Caselli
                                           Massimo Morelli


                                          Working Paper 8532
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8532


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




We thank Alberto Alesina, Jim Alt, Scott Ashworth, Abhijit Banerjee, Marco Bassetto, Je .Campbell,
Andrew Ching, Harold Cole, Rafael Di Tella, Sven Feldmann, Giunia Gatta, Joao Gomes, Tim Groseclose,
Catherine Hafer, Robert Inman, Pat Kehoe, Michael Kremer, Laurent Ledoux, Antonio Merlo, Rebecca
Morton, Casey Mulligan, Canice Prendergast, Antonio Rangel, Ken Shepsle, Enrico Spolaore, Michele
Tertilt, Mariano Tommasi and Alwyn Young for comments. Support from NSF for this project is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Francesco Caselli and Massimo Morelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Bad Politicians
Francesco Caselli and Massimo Morelli
NBER Working Paper No. 8532
October 2001
JEL No. H0, K0



                                              ABSTRACT


        We present a simple theory of the quality (competence and honesty) of elected officials. Our
theory offers four main insights. Low-quality citizens have a “comparative advantage” in pursuing
elective office, because their market wages are lower than those of high-quality citizens (competence),
and/or because they reap higher returns from holding office (honesty). Hence, voters may find themselves
supply constrained of high-quality candidates. Second, bad politicians generate negative externalities for
good ones, making their rewards from office increasing in the average quality of office holders. This leads
to multiple equilibria in quality. Third, incumbent policymakers can influence the rewards of future
policymakers, leading to path dependence in quality: bad governments saw the seeds for more bad
governments. Fourth, quality-constrained voters look for the optimal mix of honesty and ability, and this
may lead to a negative correlation between these two qualities across political entities.




Francesco Caselli                                        Massimo Morelli
Harvard University                                       Ohio State University
Department of Economics                                  and Institute for Advanced Studies, Princeton
Littauer Building
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and CEPR
caselli@harvard.edu
         The truth is that the city where those who rule are least eager to do so will
      be the best governed.
         Plato.


1    Introduction

This is a study of the quality of elected public oﬃcials. The quality of public oﬃcials has
at leat two dimensions: competence and honesty. Competence is the skill to identify the
appropriate policy objectives and achieving them at minimum social cost. To make this
notion concrete we will model competence as the ability to provide an indispensable public
good with minimum tax revenues. Honesty is the character trait that leads an oﬃcial to
perform his duties without harassing private citizens for bribes or other kickbacks.
    We take it as self-evident that both dimensions of quality vary enormously across coun-
tries, and that indeed in some countries quality is dismally low. For honesty, this assertion
is easily backed by a variety of data sources. For example, the International Country Risk
Guide publishes a government corruption index for a sample of 126 countries. The index
takes values between 0 (highest corruption) and 10 (lowest), has a minimum of 0.18 and a
maximum of 10, and a standard deviation of 2.3 (the mean is 5.7). For competence it is
diﬃcult to point to direct measures. Nevertheless, the recent empirical growth literature has
uncovered and emphasized wide disparities in the quality of economic policy across countries.
We think it is reasonable to suppose that these diﬀerences in the quality of policies reflect at
least in part diﬀerences in the competence of the political leadership.
    So why are some countries’ politicians so much better than those of other countries? And,
in particular, how can it be that democracy — a system that allows citizens maximum choice
and control over their public decision makers — sometimes generates such bad politicians?
We use a simple model of democratic political representation to illustrate four ideas that
we hope may shed light on these questions. The first idea is that low-quality citizens have a
comparative advantage in seeking oﬃce. Under the reasonable assumption that policy-making
competence is correlated with market skills, incompetent citizens have a lower opportunity
cost of choosing a life in politics. And dishonest citizens will steal more, so they will extract
greater rewards from public oﬃce. Conversely candidates of higher quality are the ones who

                                               1
have more to lose from giving up private life and/or less to gain from holding oﬃce. This
comparative advantage tends to lower the quality of the pool of candidates from which voters
can choose.
   Low-quality citizens’ comparative advantage for politics is partially counter-balanced,
however, by the fact that voters prefer good and clean policies, so candidates of higher
quality have higher chances of election than candidates of lower quality. The degree of
goodness or badness of politicians will then depend on the relative strength of these two
eﬀects. In particular, when the (legitimate) returns from holding oﬃce are suﬃciently large,
the comparative-advantage eﬀect is weak, and high-quality citizens run for, and tend to win,
oﬃce. However, when these returns are low, high-quality citizens choose to lead private lives,
and voters are forced to make do with low-quality candidates. In other words, bad politicians
win because rewards from oﬃce are too low to induce potentially good politicians to run.
   As we detail below, the rewards from elective oﬃce are a composite package of financial
and psychological rewards (ego rents). Both these components are in part endogenous to the
political process itself, so it would be unsatisfactory to leave things at that. This observation
leads us to advance our second idea: there can be multiple equilibria in the quality of the
governing class. This is because low-quality oﬃce holders generate a negative externality
for high-quality ones. For example, the social status enjoyed by politicians is influenced by
the perceived quality of the political class as a whole, so individual ego rents are negatively
aﬀected by a preponderance of low-quality oﬃce holders. Because of this externality there
can be “good” equilibria in which — many oﬃce holders being of high quality — it pays for
high-quality citizens to stand for election; and “bad” equilibria in which — many oﬃce holders
being of low-quality — high-quality citizens are discouraged from running for oﬃce. Besides
social status, we discuss additional sources of multiplicity-inducing externalities, such as
opportunities for financial gain after leaving oﬃce, which may depend on the expected (and
hence average) quality of the oﬃce holders who are stepping down, and the collegial nature
of policymaking, which implies that bad politicians reduce the eﬀectiveness of good ones.
   Endogenizing the rewards from oﬃce also leads to our third idea: there can be path
dependence in the quality of elected oﬃce holders. Here the key observation is that today’s
politicians can manipulate the rewards of tomorrow’s ones. Most simply, the current elected



                                               2
body may determine the compensation package received by the next. More subtly, they
can take policy actions, such as hiring more or less able bureaucrats, that will aﬀect the
performance, and hence, possibly, the utility, of future oﬃce holders. High-quality oﬃce
holders will generally vote for policies that maximize the eﬀectiveness and the rewards of
future policymakers. But low-quality oﬃce holders are concerned with the eﬀect such policies
will have on their future chances of re-election. Relatively low rewards from holding oﬃce will
discourage high-quality citizens from seeking oﬃce, thereby making it easier for low-quality
ones to be elected. If this incentive is suﬃciently strong, low-quality oﬃce-holders will keep
future political payoﬀs low. Hence path dependence: if historical accident delivers an initial
high-quality majority, the high-quality will tend to persist. But if initially low-quality citizens
are in a majority in the elective body, this low-quality will also tend to persist.
   The discussion so far may suggest that increases in the rewards from holding oﬃce should
be accompanied by increases in quality in all dimensions, so that, in particular, honesty
and competence should be positively correlated across polities. However, the fourth idea we
set out in the paper is that — under certain circumstances — increases in average honesty
may require declines in average competence (and vice versa), so that it may be possible to
observe a negative correlation between honesty and competence. In particular, if rewards
for oﬃce are low enough, citizens who are both competent and honest — the ones who need
the greatest inducement to embrace a life of public service — will all shun politics, and voters
must choose between candidates who are honest but incompetent or competent but dishonest.
Local increases in rewards may help achieving a better balance between these two groups,
but they do imply that as one desirable quality increases the other must fall. Instead, for
suﬃciently high levels of the rewards from oﬃce, further increases trigger the entry into
politics of additional citizens who are both honest and competent, so that in this range the
two qualities increase in tandem.
   Since the rewards from elective oﬃce play a key role in the paper, it is important to be
clear about the nature of such rewards. These are both psychological and financial. There can
be little doubt of the importance of psychological gratification in motivating individuals to
seek public oﬃce. Elected public oﬃcials have power over other people, they are famous, and
they feel that they can shape the World (their country, their city) more to resemble their ideal.



                                                3
To most people, at least one of these conditions (and often all three) is appealing in itself,
and it often plays a crucial role in motivating a candidacy. But political careers also aﬀord
several sources of financial reward. First there is the oﬃcial compensation (current salary
plus pension benefits), inclusive of perks of various kinds in the form of free or discounted
transportation and lodgings, oﬃcial trips, ceremonies and receptions, etc. Second there
are the improved earning opportunities after leaving oﬃce. Former elected oﬃcials have
heightened access to careers in lobbying, public speaking, teaching, diplomacy, and law, or at
any rate they can be more eﬀective at any of these activities thanks to the contacts developed
during their time in oﬃce. When we talk about the (legitimate) rewards from oﬃce, therefore,
we have in mind the combined utility value of all these gains, psychological and financial.1
We stress that none of the results in the paper depends on whether the former or the latter
is the main motivation for seeking oﬃce. To be clear: all our results go through even if ego
rents are the only motivation for seeking oﬃce.2
       There is extremely little previous work that applies formal economic methods to investi-
gating the determinants of the quality of the political elite. Exceptions are represented by
Myerson (1993), for corruption, and Besley and Coate (1997, 1998), for competence. In these
contributions low-quality candidates can be elected if voters who share their preferences
cannot concentrate their votes on a higher-quality candidate, either because of coordina-
tion failures (band-wagon eﬀect), or because preferences and ability are perfectly correlated.
These arguments, therefore, focus on voting behavior. In our model, instead, no coordination
failures or heterogeneity of preferences among voters need to be invoked: all voters prefer
high-quality candidates, and yet low-quality candidates can be elected, simply because high-
quality citizens choose to stay out of politics.3 Rather than voting behavior, our focus is on
the self-selection of individuals of diﬀerent quality into the pool of candidates.4
   1
       Adam Smith thought that men seeking public “distinction” were driven by a combination of “avarice”
and “ambition.” Max Weber spoke of politicians living “oﬀ politics” as well as “for politics.”
   2
     Or, more precisely, the only “legitimate” motivation. Of course, dishonest citizens must be motivated by
the possibility of collecting bribes.
   3
       Heterogeneous policy preferences are perfectly admissible, though, as we discuss below.
   4
       Dal Bó and Di Tella (1999) go to the opposite extreme and ask under what conditions a honest policymaker
will pursue a corrupt policy. The answer is that he might be threatened with various forms of harassment by
pressure groups. Another paper that is somewhat related is by La Porta et al. (1998), but it focuses on the



                                                        4
    For the same reason, low-quality equilibria may exist even if voters have perfect infor-
mation on the candidates’ types. Voters have no illusions as to the intrinsic qualities of the
candidates, but may elect bad candidates because they are “rationed” in high-quality ones.
In this sense, our paper oﬀers a rebuttal to Wittman (1989), who states that “behind every
model of government failure is an assumption of extreme voter stupidity, serious lack of com-
petition, or excessively high negotiation/transfer costs” (p. 1421), and argues that none of
these assumptions is more likely to apply to democratic governments than to markets. Our
model shows, in sharp contrast, that lack of competition can arise in the political arena in
a way that it does not in the market — namely, rewards do not adjust to elicit an increased
supply of the scarce resource (high-quality politicians). Indeed, rewards may be manipulated
by bad politicians exactly with the purpose of keeping good citizens out of politics.5
    Section 2 presents the general setup of the electoral game. We then present three models
of politicians’ quality: a model of competence (Section 3), a model of honesty (Section 4),
and a model where quality varies along both dimensions (Section 5). In Section 6 we tackle a
number of questions of generality, robustness, and empirical relevance. Section 7 concludes.


2     General Setup

The population is constituted by a continuum of individuals of measure 1 +p. A measure p of
the population holds public oﬃce, while the rest (of measure 1) are private citizens. Citizens
in this economy play a citizen-candidate game as in Osborne and Slivinski (1996) and Besley

quality of institutions rather than on the intrinsic quality of the members of the political leadership.
   5
     This is also the key diﬀerence between our contribution and the large literature on corruption in public
bureaucracies, and particularly Besley and McLaren (1993), who, like us, examine the selection eﬀect of
rewards on quality but, unlike us, assume that such rewards are set by a benevolent politician who aims
for the second best. We think that corruption of elected oﬃcials (the principal) is at least as important as
corruption of civil servants (the agents). Elected oﬃcials are the ultimate depositary of power and — if honest
— they can decide to minimize corruption in the civil service. We find it diﬃcult to imagine a country in
which elected oﬃcials are consistently of high quality and the civil servants are consistently of low quality.
Indeed, other authors have argued that corruption of the bureaucracy is simply the system through which the
kleptocratic political leader extracts his rents from the private sector (e.g., Charam and Harm, 1999). See
Ades and Di Tella (1997) and Bardhan (1997) for surveys of the corruption literature.




                                                      5
and Coate (1997). The game has three stages. In the first stage, each citizen decides whether
or not to run for public oﬃce. If yes, she makes her candidacy publicly known. Running for
oﬃce requires the expenditure of a utility cost, φ. In the second stage all citizens vote. Each
citizen can vote for at most one candidate, and the votes to non-candidates are void. The
measure p of candidates receiving the most votes are elected to oﬃce. When necessary, ties
are broken with a random draw. In the third stage elected oﬃce holders and private citizens
(i.e., the non-candidates as well as the candidates who fail to win the election) collect payoﬀs,
to be specified below. In some instances the payoﬀs depend on some further action to be
taken after the election.6
       For most people φ is a finite constant. However, in order to eliminate a trivial equilibrium
were the entire population runs for oﬃce, we assume that there is a measure v (v ∈ [p, 1]) of
citizens who have an infinite cost of candidacy. Similarly, to eliminate equilibria in which some
oﬃces go unfilled, we assume that φ is paid by a candidate only if the measure of candidates
is greater than p (otherwise there is no competition, and hence no point in campaigning).
       Citizens possess rational expectations at all times. Individuals take candidacy and policy-
making decisions so as to maximize their own expected utility. For voting behavior we adopt
Alesina and Rosenthal’s (1995) notion of conditional sincerity: in an equilibrium there must
be no voter who would be better oﬀ if the measure of votes obtained by the candidate he has
voted for declined. In other words voters vote as if they were pivotal. If a voter is indiﬀerent
among candidates in this conditionally-sincere sense, we assume that she randomizes among
them.7 The equilibrium is computed by backward induction, so that it is subgame perfect.8
   6
       We think of p as the measure of all elective oﬃces in the polity, including all levels (local, state, and
national) and functions (judiciary, executive, and legislative) of government. Of course, there is a tremendous
amount of simplification as we assume that all these elective oﬃces confer the same rewards and are assigned
in a unique election.
   7
     The assumption of conditional sincerity gets us around the well-known problem that, because of the
large number of voters, each citizen has no chance of individually aﬀecting the electoral outcome, and should
therefore be indiﬀerent as to whether and for which type she votes. Solving the long-standing puzzle of why
people bother to vote is beyond the scope of this paper.
   8
     The formal definition of a political equilibrium is as follows. Denote by di (equal to r (run) or n (don’t
run)) the decision of citizen i at the candidacy stage and denote by d the profile of candidacy decisions. Let
C(d) be the set of candidates given the candidacy profile d. Let Ωi (d) ⊆ C(d) denote the subset of the
candidates within which player i picks the candidate she will vote for (with a uniform draw). A political


                                                        6
3        Competence

In this section we assume that the population is heterogeneous in ability (i.e., for now we
abstract from corruption). A fraction s of the population is of type s, or high ability, while
a fraction (1 − s) is of type s, or low ability. The fraction of oﬃce holders who have high
ability is ps . The role of oﬃce holders is to provide an indispensable public good, without
which society could not function (say, the rule of law). The key assumption is that, once in
oﬃce, high-ability citizens are more competent than low-ability ones, in the sense that they
are able to provide the indispensable public good at lower tax costs. In particular, we assume
that the amount of taxes that need to be raised to finance the public good is decreasing in
the percentage of high-ability oﬃce-holders, ps . Denoting by t the per-capita tax burden, we
have t = t(ps ), where ∂t/∂ps < 0. Our goal in this section is a theory of the determination
of ps .9
        A private citizen’s utility is his consumption. Consumption is market income less taxes, if
the citizen has not run for election, and the same, less campaigning costs, if he run for oﬃce
but lost. Market income depends on the citizen’s type: high ability citizens receive income
y s = λ, while low-ability citizens receive income y s = 1, where λ > 1.10 To simplify matters
we also assume that taxes are lump-sum, so that each citizen’s tax burden is t(ps ). Hence a
private citizen of type i’s utility is yi − t(ps ) if he did not run for oﬃce, and yi − t(ps ) − φ if
he did but lost. It is clear, then, that private citizens always prefer more high-ability oﬃce
holders.
equilibrium is a profile {d∗ , Ω∗ (·)} such that

    1. Ω∗i (d) is a “conditionally sincere” best response to Ω∗−i (d), ∀d, ∀i;

    2. d∗ is Nash given Ω∗ (·);

    3. Weakly dominated strategies are eliminated.

    9
        Our notion of an elected oﬃcials’ competence is reminiscent of the one used in opportunistic models of the
political cycle, such as Cukierman and Meltzer (1986), Rogoﬀ and Sibert (1988), Rogoﬀ (1990), and Persson
and Tabellini (1990) (surveyed in Alesina, Roubini, and Cohen, 1997). However, these studies focus on a very
diﬀerent set of questions.
  10
     Hence we assume perfect correlation between market income and policymaking skills. We argue in Section
6 that all the results go through if the correlation is imperfect, as long as it is positive.




                                                          7
       A citizen who holds public oﬃce receives a payoﬀ of π, which summarizes the utility value
of all rewards from public oﬃce, both financial and psychological. Hence, an oﬃce-holding
citizen’s utility is π − t(ps ) − φ.11 In order to insure that oﬃce holders always choose to
provide the public good (and collect the corresponding taxes) we assume that collection of
the payoﬀ π is contingent on such provision, and that oﬃce holders’ utilities are 0 if they
don’t provide the good. The reader can think of the consequences of not enforcing the rule of
law as so severe that it is impossible for oﬃce holders to collect any payoﬀ, material or moral.
In order to simplify things, without loss of generality, we assume that π − φ ≥ 1 always.
       Voters have incomplete information on the types of the various candidates. They observe
a signal, s or s, for each of the candidates. The unconditional probability that the signal
is “correct” is σ > 0.5, i.e., a fraction σ of the citizens of type i will emit signal i if they
run for oﬃce. All citizens observe the same signal about each of the candidates. Candidates
have no control over the signal they emit, but know in advance what it will be if they run
for oﬃce. The interpretation is that it is diﬃcult, but not impossible, to use the electoral
campaign to “fool” voters. In particular, a fraction (1 − σ) of type-s citizens have the ability
to convince the electorate that they are, in fact, type s.12 Candidates know in advance their
own campaigning skills. In order to avoid trivial results we assume, realistically, that for
either type and for any σ the measure of potential candidates whose signal reveals the true
type is greater than the measure of oﬃces. Defining µ = (1 + p − v), this can be insured by
requiring that sµ > 2p and (1 − s)µ > 2p.13 For brevity, in what follows we will occasionally
refer to candidates who emit signal−s (s) as high-signal (low-signal) candidates.


3.1       Comparative Advantage and Occupational Choice

Under the assumptions stated above we obtain
  11
       We treat π as independent of the oﬃce holder’s type, but we should point out that all our results still go
through if π is type dependent, as long as πs − πs < λ − 1, which seems entirely realistic. Also, none of the
substantive results in the paper is altered if we assume that oﬃce holders do not pay taxes.
  12
     Conversely, a fraction (1 − σ) of type-s citizens are such lousy campaigners that they are mistakenly taken
to be type s. σ could diﬀer among the two types with no change in results.
  13
     Implicit in this statement is the further assumption that the measure v of citizens who never run for oﬃce
is representative of the population.




                                                         8
Result 1. The competence of the elected body ps is (weakly)
(i) increasing in the political rewards π,
(ii) decreasing in the opportunity cost λ,
(iii) decreasing in the cost of campaigning φ,
(iv) increasing in the information content of the signal σ,
(v) increasing in the quality of the population s,
(vi) increasing in the size of the elective body p.

The formal proof is in Appendix 1. Here we provide an informal overview.
   As discussed in the Introduction, there are two key forces. Voters prefer high-ability
politicians, and in this economy they manifest this preference by always voting for candidates
who emit a high signal, since these are the ones who are more likely to be of type s. One
implication is that, whenever the measure of high-signal candidates exceeds the number of
oﬃces p, low-signal candidates have no chances of being elected. Another implication is that,
since some low-ability candidates emit signal s, there is a group of low-ability citizens who
enjoy the same probability of election as the citizens who are of high-ability (and emit a high
signal). Define Ps such a probability, and consider now the candidacy decision. A high-signal
individual of type s will stand for oﬃce if and only if

                   Ps [π − t(ps ) − φ] + (1 − Ps ) [λ − t(ps ) − φ] ≥ λ − t(ps )            (1)

The left-hand side is the expected return from running for oﬃce, which takes into account the
possibility of losing and having to return to private life. The right-hand side is the (certain)
return from not running. This equation can be rearranged to yield

                                         Ps [π − λ] ≥ φ,                                    (2)

which says that the (probability-weighted) premium from public life over private life must
at least pay for the cost of campaigning. A low-quality individual with a high-quality signal
shares the same probability of election Ps , but has a lower opportunity cost (1 instead of λ).
This is the comparative advantage we referred to. Hence, a key observation is that whenever
high-quality individuals (weakly) prefer to run for oﬃce, all the members of the low-quality,
high-signal group strictly prefer to do so as well.

                                                 9
      Result 1 can then be illustrated with the help of Figure 1, which plots the equilibrium
value of ps against the quantity θ = (π − λ)/φ. The ”running condition” is then Ps θ = 1.
The flat portion of ps to the right corresponds to values of the premium from politics so
high that all citizens who have a high signal — and hence a nonzero chance of election —
decide to run. When this happens the fraction of skilled citizens in the elected body is at
                                  µs
its maximum, pmax
              s   ≡            (µs +µs̄ ) ,   where µi denotes the measure of high-signal citizens of type
i in the population. At the same time, the probability of election is at it minimum value,
                p
Psmin ≡     (µs +µs̄ ) .
                        14

      Moving to the left, there is an intermediate set of values of θ that are not high enough to
induce all high-ability, high-signal citizens to simultaneously run for oﬃce — Psmin θ < 1 — but
high enough that they are willing to run if there is a reasonable chance Ps of being elected.
Clearly this implies that in equilibrium high-ability, high-signal citizens are indiﬀerent be-
tween running and not running, or Ps θ = 1. It also implies that low-quality, high-signal
citizens all run. Defining Cs as the number of high-quality candidates we therefore have
           p
Ps =    Cs +µs̄ ) ,   and Cs must fall with θ. Declines in the relative rewards from oﬃce are there-
fore compensated by increases in the probability of winning oﬃce brought about by declines
                                                                          Cs
in the number of (high-quality) candidates. Hence, ps =                (Cs +µs̄ )   also falls as θ falls.
      For θ = 1 high-ability, high-signal citizens can be induced to run as long as Ps = 1, i.e., as
long as there are fewer high-signal candidates than oﬃces. In that case µs oﬃces are “taken”
by low-ability, high-signal candidates, and high-ability candidates will be certain of election
as long as their number Cs is less than p − µs . We therefore have a continuum of equilibria,
one for every number of type-s candidates Cs in this range. Finally, for θ < 1 no high-quality
candidate can be induced to run for oﬃce, and ps = 0.15
      The above discussion illustrates parts (i)-(iii) of Result 1, but Figure 1 can also be used to
comment on parts (iv)-(vi). An increase in the informativeness of the signal, σ, shifts up the
flat portion as well as the upward sloping part of the ps curve. The first eﬀect captures the
fact that, with larger σ, when all high-signal candidates run for oﬃce the proportion of truly
good types in the candidate pool increases (µs falls so pmax
                                                         s   increases). The second eﬀect
 14
      µs = σsµ and µs̄ = (1 − σ)(1 − s)µ.
 15
      Figure 1, and the associated commentary, change somewhat if µs > p, instead of <, as here we implicitly
assume. See the Appendix.


                                                           10
is because a larger σ implies that there are fewer low-ability candidates “stealing” votes, so
that the probability of election for a high-quality candidate increases. For any given θ, this
encourages high-quality candidates to run for oﬃce in greater numbers. In the limit case
σ = 1 the upward sloping part of the ps function becomes vertical through θ = 1, i.e. we
have ps = 0 if θ < 1 and ps = 1 if θ > 1 (and a continuum between 0 and 1 if θ = 1). Hence,
parts (i)-(iii) of Result 1 still apply if there is perfect information.
       An increase in the quality of the population, s, is formally, graphically and intuitively
isomorphic to an increase in σ. An increase in p shifts up the sloping part of ps , and shifts
to the left the value of θ such that ps takes its maximum value. The intuition is that — given
the size of the pool of low-ability citizens who take away votes from the high-ability ones —
a larger p allows to better dilute them, and increases the chance of election for high-ability
types.
       If we stopped here we would be attributing diﬀerences in policy-making quality among
countries to exogenous diﬀerences in parameters. Countries with high-quality policymakers
are countries that have “better” parameters, in the sense of Result 1. We think these results
are interesting in their own right, but they naturally beg the question of why these param-
eters vary across countries. In particular, one suspects that the rewards from oﬃce, π, are
themselves endogenous to the political process. In the remainder of this section, therefore, we
explore this question, and show that when π is endogenous there can be multiple equilibrium
levels of ps , as well as path dependence in the equilibrium value of ps . Hence, countries that
are identical in all respects may experience diﬀerent levels of policymaking competence if
they are at diﬀerent equilibria or if they had diﬀerent initial conditions.16


3.2       Multiple Equilibria

In this sub-section we argue that the rewards from oﬃce depend positively on the average
quality of the policy-making class. Formally, we make the case that π is an increasing function
of ps . Given this, we show that there are multiple equilibria in the quality of elective-oﬃce
holders, ps .
  16
       Technically, for θ = 1 we have multiple equilibria even with exogenous π. But with exogenous parameters
this is a “measure zero” case.



                                                       11
       There are many reasons why π is increasing in ps . First, suppose that people derive utility
from their social status. A person’s social standing depends on other people’s assessment of
their quality. In the context of the present model, a politician’s social prestige clearly depends
on the public’s assessment of the probability that she is of type s. How do members of the
public assess this probability? Simple: the higher is ps , the higher the probability that a
member of the political class is of type s.17
       Second, after-oﬃce earnings opportunities are likely to depend on the average quality
of the political class. Politicians have to worry about their sources of income after their
political career ends. Expected rewards from oﬃce are obviously higher if they can count on
being hired as partners, directors, public speakers, college professors, etc. Their chances of
obtaining such appointments obviously depend on prospective employers’ assessment of their
likely abilities, and hence once again on ps .
       Third, ego rents will probably also derive from the gratification of serving one’s country,
and from the satisfaction for doing a good job at it. Being part of an incompetent policy-
making body must be frustrating and must lead one to feel that one’s talents are not well
spent. This is because of the highly inter-dependent nature of the policymaking process,
where checks and balances and the need for compromise generate large production external-
ities. By a similar token, in highly collaborative activities — such as policymaking — there
is a consumption externality to interacting with high quality colleagues, which also would
tend to confer a positive slope to the relationship between π and ps . Note that this third
set of arguments for a positive dependence of π on ps does not depend on the existence of
uncertainty.
       We summarize the discussion above by stating that π is an increasing function of ps ,
π(ps ). Then, the analysis of the previous section readily implies

Result 2. There can be multiple equilibrium values of the competence of the elected body, ps .

       To see this, simply notice that we can plot the (inverted) function θ(ps ) = [π(ps ) − λ] /φ
in Figure 1. Essentially, there is an equilibrium for each intersection of the θ(ps ) function with
  17
       Formally, if the political class is constituted exclusively by high-signal people, then the probability that
an elected oﬃcer is of type s is exactly ps . If there are low-signal citizens in oﬃce, then the probability that
a politician with a high-signal is of type s is pps / [pps + µs̄ ].



                                                           12
the curve describing ps as a function of θ, which we derived in the previous sub-section. Figure
2 provides a set of examples, all of which assume, probably realistically, that θ(ps ) satisfies
the Inada conditions θ0 (0) = ∞, θ0 (1) = 0, and θ00 (ps ) < 0. In the example corresponding to
curve A, θ(ps ) is always quite low, and the unique equilibrium has ps = 0. Curve C shows a
case in which public oﬃce is always quite rewarding. The only equilibrium features ps at its
maximum possible value. The most interesting case is the intermediate one corresponding to
curve B, where there are three equilibria, with ps = 0, ps at its maximum, and an interior
one. It should be clear that, depending on how one draws the curves, interior equilibria can
lie both on the vertical and on the upward sloping part of ps , and that there can be more
than one interior equilibrium. Finally, it should be clear that, as long as π(ps ) is upward
sloping, there can be multiple equilibria even if there is certainty.


3.3   Path Dependence

The current policy-making class has the power to aﬀect the rewards of future oﬃce holders,
i.e., π is in part determined by decisions taken by the elective body in oﬃce in the previous
term. Since ps depends, in turn, on π, this gives the initial policymaking body influence
over the composition of subsequent elective assemblies. Since policymakers of diﬀerent types
have diﬀerent preferences over the composition of future elective bodies, we reach a path-
dependence result whereby ps today depends on ps yesterday.
   There are several ways in which current oﬃce holders aﬀect future oﬃce holders’ utilities.
The obvious way is that they set their financial compensation. Assuming that wages, pen-
sions, and perks for a newly elected political body are set by the outgoing chamber before it
leaves oﬃce, and before elections take place, seems to broadly reflect standard practice around
the World. More subtly, the outgoing elective-body can influence the incoming one’s per-
formance, thereby aﬀecting the utility they derive from their achievements (or lack thereof)
while in oﬃce. Ways in which the current government aﬀects the future government’s per-
formance are countless. Examples include the quality of the bureaucracy it bequeaths to its
successors; the size of the public debt; the constraints imposed on the government’s actions
inscribed in the laws and in the constitution, etc.
   To formalize these dynamic interactions we add one stage at the beginning of the citizen-


                                               13
candidate game we have studied so far. In this initial stage, the outgoing assembly sets (by
majority rule) the incoming one’s payoﬀ, π. It should be clear that the results carry over
to the case in which they influence π indirectly, for example by hiring more or less able
bureaucrats. The composition of the outgoing chamber is exogenously given and determined
by historical accident. We denote the proportion of competent oﬃcials in this body as ps0 .
Once the outgoing body has set π, the rest of the game is played exactly as before, with
the three remaining stages of candidacy, voting, and policy-making. We are interested in the
dependence of the quality of the newly-elected body — which we continue to label ps — on the
quality of the outgoing body, ps0 .
       The subgame comprising the three stages after the choice of π is clearly identical to the
game analyzed in the previous sections. In particular, the equilibrium level of ps as a function
of θ = (π −λ)/φ can still be read from Figure 1. We treat λ and φ as constants, so choosing π
is equivalent to choosing θ. Since θ is set by majority rule it will reflect the preferences of the
median voter in the initial policy-making body. That body is constituted by (at most) four
groups of citizens, depending on signal and type. Oﬃcials of the same group have identical
payoﬀ functions and will, therefore, all vote for the same level of θ. Furthermore, since tenure
in oﬃce for those voting on θ is at an end, the payoﬀ function that an oﬃce-holder seeks to
maximize coincides with the payoﬀ function of any citizen who shares the same characteristics
of type and signal.18 The preferred choice of θ could diﬀer, however, between the various
groups.
       Define θ the highest feasible level of θ.19 In Appendix 3 we construct an example in
which all high-competence members of the initial elective body, as well as all low-signal,
low-competence members, prefer to set θ = θ, while high-signal, low-competence members
prefer θ < θ. It follows that, if the initial policymaking body has a majority of high-signal,
low-competence citizens, the median voter chooses θ < θ, while if these citizens are a minority
  18
       It is also possible to enrich the model to provide an incumbency advantage to the members of the outgoing
chamber, in running for re-election. Examples (available upon request) can still be constructed that feature
path dependence in ps . However, the model becomes much more complicated.
  19
     θ could easily be endogenized, for example by taking into explicit consideration the direct tax costs of
raising policy-makers’ salaries. Incidentally, in developing this section we have chosen to ignore such costs
mainly in order to be able to continue to refer to Figure 1.




                                                        14
we will have θ = θ. Because ps is increasing in θ, it follows that ps is lower if low-type citizens
were in a majority in the previous period’s assembly than if they were in a minority.20 This
is our

Result 3. The competence of the elected body, ps , can be increasing in the competence of the
outgoing body, ps0 .

         Hence, when historical accident determines that a country’s initial political leadership
is composed of high-ability citizens, this “luck” tends to persist as the initial policymakers
(and all their successors) set rewards so as to insure that subsequent participants in the
political process continue to be of high quality. Instead, if initially policymakers are of low
quality, then this bad luck tends to persist, as low-quality policymakers set rewards so as to
discourage competition for oﬃce from high-quality ones.


4         Corruption

A set of results analogous to the ones we have developed for the model of policy-making
competence can be derived in the context of a model of corruption. As before, we assume
that there are two types of citizens, honest, or h, and dishonest, or h. Type h is present in
the population with measure h(1 + p) and type h with measure (1 − h)(1 + p). We denote
by ph the fraction of oﬃce holders who are of type h. All citizens have the same ability, so
that their market income is always λ. As before, when a citizen runs for oﬃce, voters have
a probability σ > 0.5 to discern his true type. Again we assume hµ > 2p and (1 − h)µ > 2p.
Since competence is the same for all policymakers, we normalize taxes to 0.
         Relative to the model of competence one slight complication is that with corruption the
payoﬀs from holding public oﬃce are endogenous, and depend on a decentralized decision
by each individual oﬃce holder. We assume that the payoﬀ function for a politician i of
type j is π + η j bi . π continues to represent the rewards — material or psychological — that
    20
         This is not the only admissible scenario with path dependence. As we show in the Appendix, in another
scenario low-skill, low-signal members also prefer to set θ < θ, though typically not at the same level as the
low-skill, high-signal members. In particular, they may choose θ = 1 − ε, in which case ps = 0. Hence, if these
low-skill, low-signal members are in a majority, again we have that a low-quality majority is followed by a
low-quality assembly.


                                                        15
the individual policymaker takes as exogenous. bi represents the gains obtained by harassing
citizens and requiring kickbacks and bribes. ηj is the exogenous parameter by which we
introduce heterogeneity in this model. Our assumption is that η h = 0, while η h = 1. In other
words, type-h citizens are high-quality because they are honest: they derive no utility benefit
from collecting bribes. Instead, oﬃce holders of type h are dishonest: they derive the same
utility benefits from resources obtained by legitimate and illegitimate means.21 This gives
them a comparative advantage and means that, whenever some signal−h honest citizens run
for oﬃce, all signal-h dishonest ones do so too.
       A tractable way to analyze the decentralized decision of politicians is to assume that each
citizen i must interact with one oﬃce holder, and the oﬃce holder can exploit this interaction
to extract bribes. If citizen i is required to pay a kickback ki his utility is then: λ−ki . Denote
the maximum bribe a politician can collect from a citizen by k̄. To interpret this maximum,
one can think of a politician as facing a “Laﬀer curve” by which the returns from bribe-taking
are first increasing and then decreasing. Once in oﬃce, the optimal bribe taking of a type h
politician is 0.22 As long as π does not depend on the bribe-taking activity of any individual
oﬃce holder, on the other hand, a dishonest oﬃce holder will always maximize her revenues
by setting ki = k̄ for each citizen i he gets to victimize — and her illegal gains will amount
to k̄p . Then a private citizen always prefers to be paired with a honest politician, and since
the chance of this happening is increasing in ph , non-candidate voters will always give their
preference, if given a chance, to honest-looking candidates.23 We conclude that, as in the
previous section, high-signal candidates have an electoral advantage.24
  21
       The qualitative results don’t change if one changes the assumptions on the parameter η j , as long as
ηh < ηh .
  22
       We are implicitly assuming that bribe collection involves a transaction cost ε to be borne by the politician.
  23
       It is easy to extend this model to one in which dishonest citizens prefer dishonest oﬃce-holders. As long
as the diﬀerence between a dishonest and a honest citizen’s utilities is small relative to the diﬀerence between
a dishonest and a honest oﬃce-holder’s utility, nothing changes in our results. We do not emphasize this
extension because we do not think it is very realistic. If the number of voters who would potentially prefer
a dishonest oﬃce-holder is large enough to matter for electoral outcomes, then it is likely that competition
among these dishonest citizens will result in oﬃce-holders capturing all the rents from the corruption activity.
But this contradicts the assumption that dishonest citizens prefer dishonest policymakers. For discussions of
the industrial organization of corruption see Rose-Ackerman (1978) and Shleifer and Vishny (1993).
  24
     In a dynamic version of this model, wouldn’t there be an incentive for dishonest politicians to behave


                                                         16
    Appendix 2 proves the following

Result 1’ The honesty of the elected body ph is
(i) increasing in the political rewards π,
(ii) decreasing in the opportunity cost λ,
(iii) decreasing in the cost of campaigning φ,
(iv) increasing in the information content of the signal σ,
(v) increasing in the quality of the population h,
(vi) increasing in the size of the elective body p,
(vii) increasing in the cost of corruption k.

    The result lends itself to being illustrated with the help of a figure analogous to Figure
1. We omit the discussion because it would closely follow the lines of the discussion in the
previous section. The intuition for parts (i)-(vi) also follows closely the intuition for the
corresponding parts of Result 1. The new result in part (vii) has a straightforward intuition:
an increase in the size of bribes lowers private utilities, thereby reducing the opportunity cost
of running for oﬃce for honest citizens. Similarly, we omit to reiterate — because it closely
follows the corresponding ones in the previous section — the reasoning that leads to

Result 2’. There can be multiple equilibrium values of the honesty of the elected body, ph .

    and

Result 3’. The honesty of the elected body, ph , can be increasing in the honesty of the
outgoing body, ph0 .



5     Competence and Honesty Together

In this section we extend the analysis to the case in which the population is heterogeneous
in both ability and honesty. The population continues to have measure 1 + p, with p the
measure holding oﬃce. A proportion s of the population has high ability and the rest has
honestly in order to insure re-election? No, because behaving honestly brings their utility down to the level of
honest politicians, and these are indiﬀerent between public and private life. In other words, insuring re-election
is never worth it if it requires giving up the bribes.



                                                         17
low ability, in the sense of Section 3. In each ability group, a fraction h is honest and the rest
is dishonest, in the sense of Section 4. A fraction phs of the oﬃce holders has high ability
and is honest. A fraction phs is honest but of low ability. A fraction phs is dishonest and
skilled, and a fraction phs is dishonest and has low ability. The full model with uncertainty
takes unmanageable proportions: we would have to study the decisions of 16 types of people,
one for each combination of true type and signal. Hence, here we limit ourselves to the case
in which voters have perfect information on candidates’ types, or σ = 1. We assume that
phs = 1, phs = 1, phs = 1 and phs = 1 are all feasible.25
      Define ph ≡ phs + phs the fraction of politicians who are honest and ps = phs + phs the
                                                                    k̄
fraction with high ability. Under the restriction that              p    > λ − 1, in Appendix 4 we prove
             00
Result 1 : The competence of the elected body, ps , is
(i) increasing in the political rewards π for low and high values of π, but decreasing in π in
an intermediate range,
(ii) decreasing in the opportunity cost λ,
(iii) decreasing in the cost of campaigning φ for low and high values of π, but increasing in φ
in an intermediate range,
(iv) increasing in the cost of corruption k for low and high values of k, but decreasing in k
in an intermediate range.
The honesty of the elected body, ph is
(i) increasing in the political rewards π,
(ii) decreasing in the opportunity cost λ,
(iii) decreasing in the cost of campaigning φ,
(iv) increasing in the cost of corruption k.

      The “box” in Figure 3 represents the feasible values of the pair (ph , ps ). Clearly both
ph and ps have a maximum at 1, and they are both 1 only when all politicians are of type
hs. The figure also depicts the line ps + ph = 1, to which we will refer to as the “diagonal.”
The significance of this line is that points above the diagonal can only be reached if there
are oﬃce holders of type hs. In other words, the line shows the best the economy can do
when its best citizens are not in politics. Conversely, points below the diagonal can only be
 25
      Formally, this requires hs(1 + p) > p, (1 − h)s(1 + p) > p, h(1 − s)(1 + p) > p, and (1 − h)(1 − s)(1 + p) > p.


                                                         18
reached if there are in oﬃce some citizens of type hs.
   Within the box, we can also draw a family of indiﬀerence curves, representing voters’
preferences vis-a-vis honesty and ability. Higher indiﬀerence curves (more honesty and more
competence) correspond to higher levels of utility. Finally, we plot the curve that connects all
points at which the indiﬀerence curves have a slope of -45 degrees, which we call the 45 curve.
We show that if in equilibrium (ph , ps ) is above the diagonal, then it must necessarily lie on
this 45 curve. The intuition is as follows. Because we are above the diagonal, some competent
and honest citizens are holding oﬃce, and are therefore at least indiﬀerent between public
and private life. But, then, all other types of citizens must strictly prefer to hold oﬃce,
so honest but incompetent, and competent but dishonest citizens are in “excess supply”.
Holding constant phs , voters can therefore choose the optimal combination of phs and phs , by
moving along a “budget constraint”, which has slope of -45 degrees: a unit increase in ph (the
election of a phs type) “costs” a unit decrease in ps (the non-election of a phs type). Clearly
this optimal choice will lie on the highest indiﬀerence curve consistent with this constraint,
i.e. where the indiﬀerence curve has slope -45 degrees.
   For π large enough, the best citizens, of type hs, are induced to run for election in
suﬃciently large numbers that they fill all oﬃces, so that the economy achieves ph = 1 and
ps = 1. As π falls, fewer and fewer positions are filled by hs citizens, and more and more
are taken by honest, but incompetent, and competent, but dishonest: we move down along
the 45 line. When π has fallen enough that all hs types have dropped out of politics, we
have reached the intersection between the 45 line and the diagonal. There is then a range
of values of π such that the equilibrium “remains” at this point, as both “not-so-bad” types
still strictly prefer to run for oﬃce, and are therefore plentiful. Eventually, π is low enough
that some of the honest, but competent citizens (type hs) start dropping out of politics,
and voters start being rationed in this particular type of candidate. When this happens the
equilibrium starts moving up and to the left along the diagonal, with ph gradually falling,
and ps increasing. As ph falls due to increased rationing of hs candidates, voters substitute
by electing more hs candidates, who occupy the seats “vacated” by the hs ones. When all
honest types have dropped out we have reached point (0, 1). Again, there is next a range
of values of π such that there are no changes in the equilibrium composition of the elected



                                              19
body, but as π continues to fall we then see the retreat of the last “not so bad” holdouts: the
equilibrium moves down to the point (0, 0), at which politics is entirely dominated by “all
bad” types.
       The other comparative static results can be understood along similar lines. We don’t have
results concerning variations in σ, s, and p because there is no uncertainty. The significance
                             k̄
of the assumption            p    > λ − 1 is that honesty becomes “scarce” before competence. This is
                                                                    00
the source of the non-monotonicities in ps in Result 1 . Had we assumed the opposite, then
voters would have become rationed in competence first, and the non-monotonicities would
have concerned ph .26
       As usual, we next consider endogenizing π, and making it a function of quality, π =
π(ps , ph ). With generic π(ps , ph ) there can be any number of equilibria on the locus con-
stituted by the 45 line, the diagonal, and the vertical axis. However, the Inada conditions
π1 (0, ph ) = π2 (ps , 0) = ∞ and π1 (1, ph ) = π2 (ps , 1) = 0, which seem reasonable, allow to
reduce somewhat the indeterminacy, because they imply that there can be at most one equi-
librium on the 45 line, one on the diagonal, and one on the vertical axis. We therefore
state

Result 2”. There is a maximum of three equilibria in the quality of the elected body, (ph , ps ).
Across diﬀerent equilibria, ph and ps can be both positively and negatively correlated.

       The second part of the result is perhaps the most surprising, as introspection would lead
one to expect that — across equilibria — quality and honesty fall or raise together. This is
indeed possible, and the intuition is that a higher degree of honesty increases job satisfaction
for every high quality politician, both honest and competent, thereby attracting to political
life all types of good politicians. However, recall that in any “interior” equilibrium there
are some high quality politicians who must be indiﬀerent between being in oﬃce and not.
Suppose that we increase honesty in the political class from a very low level. For the Inada
  26                    k̄
       Note also that   p    > λ − 1 is an assumption about who has a greater comparative advantage for politics
among hs and hs citizens: λ − 1 is a measure of the comparative advantage — through lower opportunity cost —
                                                                     k̄
of low-competence citizens over high-competence citizens, while      p    — the rewards from stealing — is a measure
of the comparative advantage of dishonest citizens. We are assuming that the extra benefits a dishonest citizen
can reap from oﬃce relative to a honest one exceed the extra market compensation a competent individual
receives over an incompetent one. This seems realistic to us.


                                                          20
conditions this increases π by a lot, and indeed it might increase π more than it increases
the utility of private citizens. In order to keep quality citizens indiﬀerent between the two
occupations it is then necessary to lower ps , so as to moderate the increase in π.
    Finally, we state without proving

Result 3”. There can be path dependence in the quality of the elected body, (ph , ps ).

    It should by now be obvious that an example proving this can easily be developed.


6     Frequently Asked Questions

In this section we tie a number of loose ends.


6.1   Are Bad Politicians a Bad Thing?

We have essentially assumed that competence and honesty are both desirable characteristics
of the policymaking class. Of course there is a tradition in economics arguing that in some
circumstances corruption might allow attainment of a second-best outcome when the first-
best is precluded by institutional constraints. However, there is by now a large body of
empirical work that unambiguously documents that corruption has large negative eﬀects on
economic performance. See, among others, Mauro (1995), Hines (1995), Kaufman (1997),
Tanzi (1997) and Wei (1997). Furthermore, Myrdal (1968), Bardhan (1997), and Kaufman
and Wei (1999) point out that the institutional constraints that make corruption possible are
themselves designed to suit the interests of a corrupt political elite. Kaufman and Wei (1999)
also present empirical evidence against what they call the “eﬃcient grease” hypothesis.


6.2   Quality: People or Institutions?

We have conceived of quality in terms of the characteristics of the individuals who run the
polity. Alternative approaches to explain cross-country diﬀerences in outcomes might focus
on diﬀerences in institutions. There are two possible versions of this argument. One is that
the intrinsic quality of oﬃce holders is the same across countries, but diﬀerent institutions
lead to diﬀerent constraints and incentives in the policymaking process, and this in turn
generates diﬀerent outcomes. The other is that the quality of oﬃce holders itself varies

                                              21
because institutions, such as the electoral system, vary. We prefer our approach because the
rules of the game are themselves endogenous and the political elite has the power to set or
modify them. We think that bad rules are as likely to be the consequence, as the cause,
of bad politicians. In a country in which a majority of oﬃce holders is of high-quality, we
would expect institutions leading to bad policies, or to bad future quality, to be removed.
As we have shown here, however, low-quality majorities might have incentives to keep “bad
institutions” in place.
   A related point concerns our choice of modelling corruptibility as an intrinsic character-
istic. It is common to assume that individuals are homogeneous in their propensity to act
illegally, and that the extent of corruption depends on the institutional structure. But since
institutions are designed by politicians, if politicians were homogeneous so would be institu-
tions, and outcomes (at least in the long run) would be the same across countries. Perhaps
more importantly, the homogeneity assumption is patently incorrect. The popular saying
that “everyone has a price” at which he will accept or solicit a kickback implicitly acknowl-
edges the fact that this price is generally diﬀerent from individual to individual. We model
this heterogeneity especially starkly, by making this price infinity for the “honest” citizens
(those who will never take a bribe) and 0 for the “dishonest” ones, but it should be clear
that all our qualitative results would go through if we had a smoother form of heterogeneity
in the propensity to take illegal payments.


6.3   Do Cooperation and Political Parties Solve the Problem?

One might expect cooperation among high-quality types to allow the polity to escape “bad
politician” equilibria. In the static framework we work with, the following scheme may
work: a number of high-quality citizens agree to run for oﬃce despite low π, and a large
number of high-ability citizens pledge side payments to these volunteers. It seems to us
that this scenario is easily dismissed by noting the enormous incentives to free ride on the
side payments. A somewhat more realistic role for cooperation would emerge, however, in
a multi-period version of the model with endogenous rewards. Here we could envision a
group of high-quality citizens coordinating on a joint run for oﬃce despite a low initial wage,
with the goal of sizing a majority and set a new high payoﬀ for future policymaking bodies,


                                              22
thereby permanently shifting the economy to a “good politician” equilibrium. This scenario
is more realistic because it does not necessarily require side payments from private citizens.
It requires, however, time discount rates that may be unrealistically low. It also still requires
low coordination costs (note that the scheme only works if at least p/2 individuals take part).
   Political parties may perhaps be seen as mechanisms to reduce such coordination costs.
Note, however, that the eﬀect of political parties is potentially ambiguous. For, parties come
(usually) in numbers greater than one. It would seem, therefore, that the scenario in which
coordination eliminates the bad equilibrium requires each party to come up with at least p/2
high-quality candidates. In other words, parties may lower coordination costs per-candidate,
but they might increase the total number of high-quality citizens required to implement the
coordination scheme. Their eﬀect is therefore ambiguous.
   On a related note, we emphasize that our results do not depend at all on the assumption
that all citizens prefer the same policy. Imagine that there where several diﬀerent preferred
policies in the population, say as to the size of the public sector. There would then be lists of
candidates (parties!) representing each of the policy positions. But within each of these lists
and parties the question of the quality of candidates would re-present itself all over again:
the same size of the public sector can be pursued competently or incompetently, honestly or
dishonestly. Our model would then be a model of within-party candidacy, and would lead to
the exact same insights on the overall quality of the political elite.


6.4   What if Competence and Ability are Imperfectly Correlated?

We have assumed in the paper that there is a perfect correlation between a citizen’s produc-
tivity in the market, y i , and his competence in oﬃce. What if the correlation is imperfect,
and some low opportunity-cost citizens are potentially good politicians, capable of deliver-
ing low taxes despite their modest market potential? The following reinterpretation of the
model allows for such imperfect correlation, showing that the results do not depend at all
on our simplifying assumption. Reinterpret what we have called a citizen’s true type as his
competence as a policymaker. Further, reinterpret what we have called the signal as the
citizen’s market income. Then, most high-income citizens would make good politicians, and
most low-income ones would make bad ones, but there are minorities in the two groups who


                                               23
would perform relatively worse (better) in politics than in the market. Finally, suppose that
market incomes are observable by everyone. This reproduces the basic tension that drives
the model: high-income individuals, a majority of which has high competence, have an elec-
toral advantage, as voters use their market incomes as a signal of their competence. But
low-income citizens, a majority of which has low competence, have greater incentives to seek
oﬃce. While the details change, all our results follow.


6.5    Do Financial Rewards Matter?

Are salaries and other financial incentives important in a citizen’s choice to join the political
arena? For the purposes of this paper this question is not crucial, as all of our results apply
even if ego rents are the only (legal) motivation to seek oﬃce. However, since the question
keeps coming up, here is a review of some empirical evidence. To anticipate, the answer is:
yes.
   The relative importance of ego rents and financial incentives may well change depending
on the level of government. One would probably expect financial incentives to play their
smallest relative role at the national-government level — which undoubtedly provides very
large ego rents — and a larger relative role at the local level. However, the evidence is
that compensation is quite important a determinant of candidacy even in the US congress,
probably one of the places in the World where one would less expect it to matter, so it should
a fortiori be important at all other levels of government as well.
   There is of course no systematic citizen-level evidence on the determinants of candidacy
decisions. But direct evidence on the role of the prospects for financial gain can be gleaned at
the level of the elected oﬃcials from the decision that is exactly symmetric to the decision of
running for oﬃce, namely the decision to retire. Groseclose and Krehbiel (1994) and Hall and
Houweling (1995) do just that, exploiting two natural experiments that occurred in the 1992
congressional election. First, in 1990, the outgoing congress approved a 35% pay increase to
be phased in over the next three years (38% over five years). Because of the mechanism that
determines congressmen’s pension benefits, this provision implied a median 45% increase in
the present value of pensions, but only for those members who were still in oﬃce at the




                                               24
end of 1992.27 Hall and Houweling estimate that a significant number of congressmen who
would otherwise have retired in 1990 decided instead to re-run for oﬃce (and postpone their
retirement to 1992) in order to make themselves eligible for the pension windfall. This shows
that salaries and pensions are an important determinant of candidacy decisions. Second,
1992 was the last year in which congressmen were allowed to convert campaign war chests
into personal wealth upon retirement, implying that a congressman who run for re-election
in 1992 would face a substantial financial loss (some of these warchests run in the millions of
dollars). Groseclose and Krehbiel estimate that this opportunity cost of seeking re-election
accounts for more than one third of retirements from congress in 1992.28 This shows that the
opportunity cost of candidacy (λ) is also an important determinant of candidacy decisions.
Finally, both sets of authors provide ample evidence that the decision to re-run was aﬀected
by the probability of election, as our model implies, and of course by indicators of the power
and prestige congressmen were likely to enjoy if re-elected.
       Additional evidence on the role of compensation and opportunity cost in the candidacy
decision at the level of US state lower houses is provided by Fiorina (1994). He notes that
in post-World War II America there has been a marked long-term decline in the electoral
fortunes of the Republican party at the level of lower house State assemblies,29 and shows the
process of professionalization of state legislatures to be one leading cause of this phenomenon.
At the beginning of the period he considers, most legislatures met for only a handful of days
per year (and several of them only biannually), and legislators were awarded token compen-
sation. By the end of the period, almost all legislatures had switched to a model requiring a
full time commitment by legislators, with a corresponding vast increase in compensation.30
To see how this explains the decline of the Republican party in state houses note that Re-
publican elected oﬃcials are usually recruited from categories (businessman, lawyer, farmer,
  27
       This is because congressmen pensions depend on a member’s three highest annual salaries, so it is necessary
to be in oﬃce for at least three years after 1990 in order to collect the full present value of benefits from the
pay increase.
  28
     This might be somewhat overstated, though, since these authors do not control for the role of the
pay/pension increase. On this episode, see also Groseclose and Milyo (1999).
  29
       Republicans have lost legislatures in the non-South at a rate of almost 2% per election.
  30
       Average compensation of state legislators was well below national per capita disposable income in 1946,
and well above by 1990.



                                                         25
the independently wealthy...) that allow considerable flexibility in the allocation of time,
while the bulk of Democratic oﬃcials are predominantly salaried employees with essentially
no flexibility in their work schedule.31 Hence, the argument goes, if being a state legislator
is an amateur job, flexible Republican businessmen and lawyers face little opportunity cost
of attending a handful of sessions, while inflexible Democratic workers would have to forego
wage income, if not their jobs altogether, leading to a large opportunity cost. When being
a state legislator becomes a full time job, on the other hand, the opportunity cost for the
average Republican skyrockets. For Democrats the opportunity cost is unchanged (giving up
their salaried jobs), but — because of the vast increase in compensation — the returns from
oﬃce increase, making them much more willing to stand for election. The upshot is that the
professionalization of state legislatures made it relatively harder (easier) for the Republican
(Democratic) Party to recruit high quality candidates to run for state legislative oﬃce.32,33
       Less systematic but more direct evidence comes from McClure and Fowler (1989)’s grip-
ping tale of the candidacy game that took place in New York state’s 30th congressional
district upon the announcement of long-standing incumbent Barber Conable’s retirement in
1984. McClure and Fowler identify a large cast of individuals (state legislators, local admin-
istrators, party oﬃcials, businesspeople and professionals) who could credibly have mounted
a run for the vacant seat. One by one, however, these mainstream “invisible candidates” de-
cided to forgo a run, leaving the seat wide open to an extremist candidate whom they would
probably have beaten, had they decided to run. McClure and Fowler’s interviews uncover
a wide range of reasons why these high-quality might-have-beens renounced congressional
oﬃce, and in some of the cases the low levels of congressional salaries (relative of course to
opportunity cost), combined with the high costs of life in Washington, seem to have played
a significant role. This study is especially notable for our purposes because it shows not only
specific cases of individuals who decide to forego a run to congress based on a comparison of
rewards from oﬃce and market opportunities but also because this self-selection out of the
  31
       These occupational patterns of Democrats and Republicans are extremely robustly established in the
political science literature. Fiorina’s paper provides ample citations.
  32
     Of course, this argument makes a relative statement within each party, while nothing can be inferred
about the “absolute” quality comparison between the candidates of the two parties.
  33
     No similar decline in Republican electoral fortunes can be seen at the level of governorships, where the
job has remained full time throughout, and no large pay increase took place.


                                                     26
race seems to have led to a relatively “low-quality” outcome.34


6.6       Is this Empirically Relevant?

Some of the evidence reviewed in the previous sub-section can definitely be read as indirectly
supportive of our Results 1 — or at least of some of their building blocks — in that it shows
us candidacy decisions responding to material and immaterial rewards, π, and opportunity
costs, λ, as well as at least one anecdote where such considerations seem to have lead to the
election of a low-quality politician. More systematic testing of Results 1 faces at least one
very serious hurdle, i.e., coming up with a comprehensive measure of π, which is a composite
of material and immaterial benefits. One can in principle measure current compensation and
the present value of pensions; much harder is to measure other financial rewards, such as those
the politician has access to, quo former oﬃce holder, after leaving oﬃce; hardest of all is to
measure psychological rewards and ego rents. A second major hurdle is to find an instrument
for such rewards: a simple regression of ps or ph on π would suﬀer from glaring identification
problems. We are currently pursuing these goals, but they are suﬃciently challenging to
remain outside of the scope of the present paper.
       Results 2 propose a simple answer to the question “why are some countries’ political
elites so much better than others?” the answer being that some countries are stuck at bad
equilibria where — politics being crowded with bad politicians — potentially good candidates
stay away from public life. As all explanations based on multiple-equilibria this idea is
hard to test. Nevertheless we obviously think that the idea has enormous empirical appeal.
Consider, for example, the countries that form the European Union. From within this set of
relatively homogeneous countries the lowest values of the International Country Risk Guide’s
corruption index are below the World average, while of course the highest values are the
highest values in the World. Anecdotally, of course, the prestige of the political class follows
these rankings closely, and plummets to dismal levels in some of the very corrupt countries,
where politicians are positively reviled. In these countries it is obvious that a young man
  34
       In subsequent writings Fowler (1993) muses that “For too long, we have taken ambition as a given in
American politics and encouraged citizens to do likewise. It is time to recognize that candidates are a precious
resource that our democracy cannot aﬀord to take for granted or squander” (p. 187). Our feelings exactly.




                                                      27
or woman of talent and integrity who contemplates a life in politics can look forward to ego
rents that are meager indeed, and it is equally obvious that many choose alternative paths in
order to avoid contact (and being confused) with the unsavory and mediocre characters that
populate the corridors of political power.
         Results 3 suggest that some of these mechanisms are indeed consciously exploited — and
hence reinforced — by low-quality politicians in order to discourage entry by high-quality ones.
One seemingly puzzling fact that is consistent with this idea is that the (legitimate) com-
pensation of elected oﬃcials is often quite low, and adjusts sluggishly. More generally, this
mechanism might explain, in part, why elective bodies are often so reluctant to introduce re-
forms whose goal is to expedite and make more eﬀective the operation of future governments.
Only time series evidence, however, could provide a formal empirical check.35


7         Conclusions

We have investigated the mechanisms that lead to the selection of citizens of varying quality
into political life. Low-quality citizens have a comparative advantage in holding oﬃce. Coun-
tries may find themselves stuck in bad equilibria such that high-quality citizens avoid public
oﬃce because so do other high-quality citizens. Also, countries may experience persistent low
quality of the policymaking class, whereby low-quality policymakers in one period set up next
period’s incentives so as to keep high-quality ones from seeking oﬃce. As a result, otherwise
identical countries can experience diﬀerent average levels of competence and/or honesty of
the political class.




    35
         Result 4 implies that honesty and competence are not necessarily positively correlated. One can certainly
think of highly eﬃcient but very corrupt countries, as well as ineﬃcient but relatively clean ones.


                                                          28
   References
   Ades, A. and R. Di Tella (1997): “The New Economics of Corruption: a Survey and some
New Results,” Political Studies, XLV, 496-515.
   Alesina, A. and H. Rosenthal (1995): Partisan Politics, Divided Government, and the
Economy, Cambridge University Press.
   Alesina, A. and H. Rosenthal (1996): “A Theory of Divided Government,” Econometrica,
64, 1311-41.
   Alesina, A., N. Roubini, and G. Cohen (1997): Political Cycles and the Macroeconomy,
MIT Press.
   Alesina, A., and S. Spear (1988): “An Overlapping Generations Model of Electoral Com-
petition,” Journal of Public Economics, 37, 359-379.
   Andvig, J.C., and K. Moene (1990): “How Corruption May Corrupt,” Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior & Organization, 13, 63-76.
   Bardhan, P. (1997): “Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues,” Journal of
Economic Literature, XXXV, 1320-1346.
   Becker, G. and C. Mulligan (1998): “Deadweight Costs and the Size of Government,”
NBER Working Paper No. 6789.
   Besley, T.J.. and S. Coate (1997): “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII, 85-114.
   Besley, T.J.. and S. Coate (1998): “Sources of Ineﬃciency in a Representative Democracy:
A Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review, 88, 139-156.
   Besley, T.J. and J. McLaren (1993): “Taxes and Bribery: The Role of Wage Incentives,”
Economic Journal, 103, 119-141.
   Cadot, O. (1987): “Corruption as a Gamble,” Journal of Public Economics, 32, 223-44.
   Charap, J. and C. Harm (1999): “Institutionalized Corruption and the Kleptocratic
State,” IMF Working Paper.
   Cukierman, A. and A. Meltzer (1986): “A Positive Theory of Discretionary Policy, the
Cost of Democratic Government, and the Benefits of a Constitution,” Economic Inquiry, 24,
367-388.
   Dal Bó, E. and R. Di Tella (1999): “Democracy under Pressure: Political Parties vs.



                                            29
“Nasty” Interest Groups,” unpublished, Harvard University.
   Fiorina, Morris P. (1994): “Divided Government in the American States: A Byproduct
of Legislative Professionalism?” American Political Science Review, 88, 2, June, 304-316.
   Fowler, Linda L. and McClure, Robert D. Political Ambition. Who Decides to Run for
Congress. Yale University Press, 1989.
   Fowler, Linda L. Candidates, Congress, and the American Democracy. The University of
Michigan Press, 1993.
   Hines, J. (1995): “Forbidden Payment: Foreign Bribery and American Business Since
1977,” NBER Working Paper No. 5266.
   Groseclose, Tim, and Jeﬀ Milyo (1999): “Buying the Bums Out: What’s the Dollar
Value of a Seat in Congress?” Research Paper No. 1601, July, Graduate School of Business,
Stanford University.
   Groseclose, Tim, and Keith Krehbiel: “Golden Parachutes, Rubber Checks, and Strategic
Retirements from the 102d House,” American Journal of Political Science, 38, 1, February
1994, 75-99.
   Hall, Richard L. and Robert P. Van Houweling: “Avarice and Ambition in Congress:
Representatives’ Decisions to Run or Retire from the U.S. House,” American Political Science
Review, 89, 1, March 1995, 121-136.
   Kaufmann, D. (1997): “Some Myths and Facts,” Foreign Policy, Summer, 114-131.
   Kaufmann, D. and S. Wei (1999): “Does “Grease Money” Speed Up the Wheels of
Commerce?” NBER Working Paper No. 7093.
   La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998): “The Quality of
Government,” NBER Working Paper 6727.
   Mauro, P. (1995): “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI,
681-712.
   Myerson, R.B. (1993): “Eﬀectiveness of Electoral Systems for Reducing Government
Corruption, a Game-Theoretic Analysis,” Games and Economic Behavior 5, 118-132.
   Myrdal, G. (1968): “Asian Drama: An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations,” Pantheon
Books.
   Osborne, M.J. and A. Slivinski (1996): “A Model of Political Competition with Citizen



                                            30
Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, 65-96.
   Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (1990), Macroeconomic Policy, Credibility, and Politics,
Harwood Academic Publishers.
   Rogoﬀ, K. and A. Sibert (1988), “Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles,” Review
of Economic Studies, 55, 1-16.
   Rogoﬀ, K. (1990), “Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles,” American Economic Review,
80, 21-36.
   Rose-Ackerman, S. (1978): Corruption: A Study in Political Economy, Academic Press.
   Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1993): “Corruption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108,
599-617.
   Tanzi, V. (1997), “Corruption around the World,” IMF Staﬀ Papers, 45, 559-594.
   Tirole, J. (1996): “A Theory of Collective Reputations,” Review of Economic Studies, 63,
1-22.
   Wei, S. (1997), “How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?” NBER Working
Paper No. 6030.
   Wittman, D. (1989): “Why Democracies Produce Eﬃcient Results,” Journal of Political
Economy, 97(6), December, 1395-1424.




                                            31
   Appendix 1: Proof of Result 1.
   It is obvious that each candidate votes for himself. It is also obvious that non-candidates
can only condition their vote on the signal the candidates emit. Hence, a candidate’s proba-
bility of election depends only on his signal. Call Pi the probability of election of a candidate
who emits signal i = s, s. A candidate of type j and signal i will run for oﬃce if and only if
                                         h       i
                                      Pi π − y j − φ ≥ 0.

Observe that whenever a type-s, signal-s citizen (weakly) prefers to run for oﬃce, then a
type-s, signal-s citizen strictly prefers to run for oﬃce. Similarly, whenever a type-s, signal-s
citizen (weakly) prefers to run for oﬃce, then a type-s, signal-s citizen strictly prefers to run
for oﬃce.
   Call C̃i the measure of candidates with signal i = s, s. If C̃s is nonempty, a voter who
is not a candidate always votes for a (uniformly drawn) element of C̃s over an element of
C̃s . If voters believe that the ratio of s to s types is (weakly) higher in C̃i than in C̃j , then
voting for a member of C̃i is weakly dominant. But voters cannot believe that the ratio of
s to s types is higher in C̃s . For, if they do, it means that some s−type, s-signal citizens
are candidates, and, therefore, all low-ability, low-signal citizens are candidates. Given the
assumption (1 − s)µ > 2p, we then have C̃s > p. If voters vote according to their beliefs,
this further implies that Ps = 0, so C̃s is empty: a contradiction. When C̃s is empty non-
candidates vote for a random member of C̃s .
                                                                                    ³       ´
   Given this voting behavior it follows that if C̃s ≤ p, then Ps = 1 and Ps = p − C̃s /C̃s ;
while if C̃s > p, then Ps = p/C̃s and Ps = 0.
   Define µs = σsµ, and µs = (1 − σ)(1 − s)µ. Further, define Ci the measure of candidates
of true type i = s, s. Finally, define the following objects:

                                                        p
                                       Psmin =
                                                     µs + µs
                                                        µs
                                       pmax
                                        s   =                .
                                                     µs + µs

Psmin is the probability that a signal-s candidate will be elected when all signal-s candidates
run for oﬃce. It is the minimum value Ps can take. pmax
                                                    s   is the value taken by ps when all
signal-s candidates run for oﬃce, and the maximum value that ps can take. We now argue

                                                32
that if Psmin (π − λ) − φ ≥ 0, then Cs = µs and Cs = µs , so that ps = pmax
                                                                        s   . Suppose not.
Then, there are some s-type, s-signal citizens who are not candidates. If these non-candidates
deviated and run for oﬃce their probability of election would be min[1, p/C̃s ], which is strictly
greater than Psmin . But, then, these citizens would strictly prefer to run for oﬃce, which is a
contradiction.
    The rest of the analysis depends on the relative size of µs and p. Suppose first µs ≤ p.
Then, consider parameter values such that Psmin (π − λ) − φ < 0, but π − λ − φ > 0. In
this region type-s, signal-s citizens must be indiﬀerent between running and not running. If
they strictly preferred running, they would all run; but then Ps = Psmin , which leads to a
contradiction. If they all preferred not running, then we would have Ps = 1, which also leads
to a contradiction. We must therefore have

                                       p
                                            [π − λ] − φ = 0.                                  (3)
                                    Cs + µs

This condition determines Cs . Note that Cs falls from µs when Psmin (π − λ) − φ = 0 to p − µs
when π − λ − φ = 0. In this interval we also have C̃s ≥ p, so ps = Cs /C̃s , or

                                                     µs
                                          ps = 1 −      .                                     (4)
                                                     θp

    For π − λ − φ = 0 Cs can take any value in the interval [0, p − µs ]. For any value of Cs
in this interval we have Ps = 1. Correspondingly, there is a continuum of equilibria in ps ,
ps ∈ [0, 1 − µs /p].
    For π − λ − φ < 0 running for oﬃce is not worth the cost for a type-s person even if
Ps = 1, so we have Cs = 0. As long as π − 1 − φ > 0, however, we have Cs ≥ p. Hence,
ps = 0. These observations allow one to draw Figure 1 and verify the claims in Result 1 for
the µs ≤ p case.
    Suppose instead that µs > p. Then equations (3) and (4) determine Cs and ps in the
region defined by Psmin (π − λ) − φ < 0 and p/µs (π − λ) − φ > 0. For expected net rewards
below this value we have ps = 0. Graphically the upward sloping curve hits the horizontal
axis at µs /p, and there no longer is a value of π −λ−φ such that there are multiple equilibria.
All the claims in Result 1 still follow, though.
    Appendix 2: Proof of Result 1’.


                                               33
   A candidate’s probability of election depends only on his signal (Appendix 1). Call Pi
the probability of election of a candidate who emits signal i = h, h. A politician can expect
1/p bribe-collecting opportunities so if he is dishonest he will collect b̄ = k̄/p. A candidate
of type j and signal i will run for oﬃce if and only if
                               h                          i
                            Pi π − λ + (1 − ph + η j /p)k̄ − φ ≥ 0.

Whenever a type-h, signal-h citizen (weakly) prefers to run for oﬃce, then a type-h, signal-h
citizen strictly prefers to run for oﬃce. Similarly, whenever a type-h, signal-h citizen (weakly)
prefers to run for oﬃce, then a type-h, signal-h citizen strictly prefers to run for oﬃce.
   Call C̃i the measure of candidates with signal i = h, h. If C̃h is nonempty a voter who is
not a candidate always votes for a (uniformly drawn) element of C̃h over an element of C̃h .
When C̃h is empty non-candidates vote for a random member of C̃h (Appendix 1). Given
                                                                           ³     ´
this voting behavior it follows that if C̃h ≤ p, then Ph = 1 and Ph = p − C̃h /C̃h ; while if
C̃h > p, then Ph = p/C̃h and Ph = 0.
   Define µh = σhµ, and µh = (1 − σ)(1 − h)µ. Further, define Ci the measure of candidates
of true type i = h, h. Finally, define the following objects:

                                                  p
                                     Phmin =           ,
                                               µh + µh
                                                 µh
                                      pmax
                                       h     =         .
                                               µh + µh
        h                     i
If Phmin π − λ + (1 − pmax                                                    max
                       h )k − φ ≥ 0, then Ch = µh and Ch = µh , so that ph = ph
(Appendix 1).
                                                                       h                     i
   Suppose µh ≤ p. Then, consider parameter values such that Phmin π − λ + (1 − pmax
                                                                                 h )k −
φ < 0, but π − λ + (1 − p∗h )k − φ ≥ 0, where p∗h = 1 − µh /p, or the incidence of honest types
when C̃h = p. In this region type-h, signal-h citizens must be indiﬀerent between running
and not running. If they strictly preferred running, they would all run; but then Ph = Phmin
and ph = pmax
          h , which leads to a contradiction. If they all preferred not running, then we
would have Ph = 1, and ph = 0, which also leads to a contradiction (since p∗h > 0). We must
therefore have                       "                    #
                               p           µh
                                    π−λ+         k − φ = 0.                                  (5)
                            Ch + µh      Ch + µh


                                               34
This condition determines Ch . Note that we are using the fact that in this interval we have
C̃h ≥ p, so ph = Ch /C̃h . When this condition holds Ch , and hence ph , have al the properties
stated in Result 1’.
     The next relevant interval is the one in which π−λ+(1−p∗h )k−φ < 0 but π−λ+k−φ ≥ 0.
Here we still have an indiﬀerence condition, and ph is determined by

                                   π − λ + (1 − ph )k − φ = 0,

or
                                           1³       ´
                                    ph =     π−λ+k−φ
                                           k
     For π − λ + k − φ < 0 running for oﬃce is not worth the cost for a type-h person even
if Ph = 1, and ph = 0, so we have Ch = 0. As long as π − 1 + k − φ > 0, however, we have
Ch ≥ p. Hence, ph = 0. These observations allow one to verify the claims in Results 1’ for
the µh ≤ p case.
     Suppose instead that µh > p. Then equation (5) determine Ch (and hence ph ) in the
                        h                      i                    ³          ´
region defined by Phmin π − λ + (1 − pmax
                                      h )k − φ < 0, but p/µh π − λ + k − φ ≥ 0, and for
lower net rewards we have ph = 0. All the claims in Result 1’ still follow.
     Appendix 3: Proof of Result 2
     Note first that for θ < 1 all high-ability citizens choose private life so their utility is
λ − t(0). For 1 ≤ θ ≤ (µs + µs ) /p low-signal, high-ability citizens still prefer private life,
while high-signal, high-ability citizens are indiﬀerent between private and public life. Hence,
they all enjoy utility λ − t(ps ). Since in this range ps is increasing in π, it is clear that the
utility of all high-ability members of the initial assembly is increasing in θ. If θ is in this
range this completes the argument. If θ is above (µs + µs ) /p the utility of signal-s, type-s
citizens continues to be strictly increasing for θ between (µs + µs ) /p and θ, while the utility
of signal-s, type-s citizens is constant, leading them to side with the signal-s, type-s citizens
and go along with θ.
     Next, we turn to the preferred choice by signal-s, type-s citizens. Clearly they will never
prefer θ < 1. For θ = 1 these citizens all run for election and are assured of winning a seat,
so their utility is π − t(ps ) − φ = λ − t(ps ), which — since ps is indeterminate — varies between
π − t (1 − µs /p) − φ and π − t(0) − φ. Hence, they receive at least λ − t(0). For θ > 1 their


                                                   35
utility is
                    Ps π + (1 − Ps ) − t(ps ) − φ = Ps (π − 1) + 1 − t(ps ) − φ

where ps is (weakly) increasing in θ, and Ps is determined by the condition

                                             Ps θ = 1.

Hence, in this interval high-signal, low-competence citizens receive utility
                                     (λ − 1)
                                             + 1 − t [ps (θ)]                                  (6)
                                        θ
Depending on the function t, it is completely possible for the value of θ that maximizes this
function to be strictly less than θ. Furthermore, whatever the value of θ that maximizes (6),
it may still very well be the case that the maximized value is less than λ − t(0), in which case
low-signal, low-competence citizens’ preferred choice for θ is θ = 1.
    Finally, we have to discuss the preferred value of θ for low-signal, low-competence citizens.
Suppose that there are no values of θ such that the entire signal-s, type-s population runs
for oﬃce. Then these citizens’ utility is always 1 − t(ps ) so they clearly prefer θ = θ. The
case mentioned in footnote 20 arises, instead, if there are values of θ such that the entire
low-signal, low-ability population runs for oﬃce. The maximum number of candidates with
low-signal and low-ability occurs when ps = 0 and θ = 1. If they all run they get
                    µ        ¶
                           p           p                  p
                        1−    (λ + φ) + λ − t(0) − φ = λ − φ − t(0).
                           µs          µs                 µs
If one of them deviates then he receives 1 − t(0), which may well be less. Assume this is the
case. These citizens’ utility when θ = θ is 1 − t[ps (θ)]. Again, this could easily be less than
the utility at θ = 1.
    Appendix 4: Proof or Result 1”.
    The utility experienced by a private citizen i is:

                                  U i = y i − t(ps ) − (1 − ph )k.                             (7)

The utility experienced by an elected public oﬃcer of type hj is π(ps , ph ) − φ − t(ps ). The
utility experienced by an elected public oﬃcer of type hj is π(ps , ph ) − φ + k/p − t(ps ).
    The utility functions U i can be represented in the space (ph , ps ) by indiﬀerence curves,
one set for each of the two ability types. These indiﬀerence curves are downward sloping

                                                36
and, if t(ps ) is convex, they are convex (the linear and concave cases lead to similar results).
We also note that the indiﬀerence curves of skilled and honest citizens coincide with those
of skilled and dishonest; so do the indiﬀerence curves of unskilled citizens. Notice that the
indiﬀerence curves of skilled and unskilled are parallel. Honest citizens will be indiﬀerent
between public and private life if

                                 π(ph , ps ) − φ = y i − (1 − ph )k.                             (8)

This equation defines, in the (ph , ps ) space, a “occupational indiﬀerence curve” (henceforth
OIC), which indicates the locus of pairs (ph , ps ) such that citizen i is indiﬀerent between
private and political life. In the special case in which π is a constant, the OICs are vertical lines
               ³    ´³                  ´
through ph = 1/k       π − φ − y i + k . In the general case, the OICs are upward (downward)
sloping if δπ/δph < k (δπ/δph > k). The intuition is as follows: δπ/δph is the marginal
increase in social status associated with an increase in ph , while k is the marginal increase
in private utility. If social status increases with ph by less than private utility, in order to
keep a citizen indiﬀerent between the two occupations in the face of an increase in ph it is
necessary to further increase status through an increase in ps . We think that a realistic case
is that δπ/δph > k for low ph , and δπ/δph < k for high ph . The Inada conditions stated in
the text assure this. Hence, OICs for honest citizens are (weakly) downward sloping for low
ph , and upward sloping for high ph .
   OICs for dishonest individuals can be analogously introduced as the locus satisfying:

                              π(ph , ps ) − φ + k̄/p = y i − (1 − ph )k.                         (9)
                                                                           ³   ´h                       i
For π constant these OICs are again verticals, though now through 1/k           π − φ − y i + k(1 + p)/p .
In the general case, they are also weakly downward first and weakly upward sloping for high
values of ph . For pairs (ph , ps ) above her OIC, a citizen prefers oﬃce, while for points to
below she prefers to be a private citizen.
   Clearly there are four OICs: for honest and competent citizens (hs), dishonest but com-
petent (hs), honest but incompetent (hs), and dishonest and incompetent (hs). A crucial
property of the two-dimensional model is that these OICs do not intersect. For by now fa-
miliar reasons, honest-skilled individuals have the most to lose and the least to gain from
political careers, so the region of the space (ph , ps ) in which they prefer private life must be

                                                 37
the largest. In other words, theirs is the leftmost (upmost) OIC. Whenever (ph , ps ) are such
that an hs type (weakly) prefers to be in oﬃce, then all other types strictly prefer to be in
oﬃce. The relative sizes of the regions in which types hs and hs prefer public oﬃce is in
general ambiguous. Under our assumption that k/p > λ − 1, whenever (ph , ps ) is such that
hs individuals (weakly) prefer to hold oﬃce then all hs and hs individuals strictly prefer to
hold public oﬃce. In other words, the OIC for hs types is above the OICs for hs and hs
types. Finally, the OIC of hs types is above the one of the hs.
   Some equilibrium properties are immediate. First, non-candidate voters strictly prefer
candidates of type hs to all other types. Hence, in any equilibrium featuring phs < 1 we must
have (extending the notation from the previous sections) Phs = 1 and Chs = phs p. Similarly,
if phs = 1 we must have Pij = Cij = 0, ∀ij 6= hs. Also, candidates of type hs will receive
only their own vote whenever candidates of other types are in the running.
   In Figure 4 the map of indiﬀerence curves is drawn under the assumption that these have
slope steeper than 45 degrees when they hit the top side of the feasible set and slope less
than 45 degrees when they hit the right side of the set (the two alternative cases can be easily
dealt with along the same lines we’ll use here). Then, the 45 curve is continuous and upward
sloping. We claim that the set of potential equilibria is restricted to the solid locus in the
figure, namely the point (1, 1), the part of the 45 curve to the right of the diagonal, the part
of the diagonal to the left of the 45 curve, and the vertical axis.
   Let us first discuss candidate equilibria above the diagonal, such as, for example, point
(p∗h , p∗s ) in Figure 4. First, for this to be an equilibrium it must necessarily feature phs > 0, as
points in this region are unattainable without hs types in oﬃce. Then, the OIC for hs types
would pass for this point, as an equilibrium (other than (1, 1)) in this region requires these
types to be certain of election and therefore indiﬀerent between public and private jobs. But
if the hs types are indiﬀerent between private and public jobs then all other types strictly
prefer being oﬃce holders. Given this strict preference, the point under consideration can
be an equilibrium only if such types are uncertain of election. In particular, the measure
of candidates of these two types will be determined by a condition stating that — given the
probability of being elected (itself a function of the measure of candidates) and the cost of
running φ — such individuals strictly prefer or are indiﬀerent between running for oﬃce or not.



                                                 38
In other words, there is “excess supply” of hs and hs types. In turn, this implies that there
cannot be citizens of type hs holding oﬃce. Given our assumption of conditionally sincere
voting, non-candidates will always vote in a way that all positions are filled by candidates
with at least one quality. For example, there cannot be an equilibrium in which all non-
candidates vote for types hs, and all other types have therefore equal probability of being
elected. For, in this case, some of the non-candidates have a dominating voting deviation in
which instead of voting for an hs type they vote for a hs or a hs type.
   In summary, any candidate equilibrium above the diagonal features phs = Phs = Chs = 0.
Then, point (p∗h , p∗s ) is supported by a unique combination of shares of citizens of the various
types holding oﬃce. For a point (p∗h , p∗s ) this combination is the solution to the system of
three equations in three unknowns: phs + phs = p∗h , phs + phs = p∗s , and phs + phs + phs = 1.
   We can now argue that if (p∗h , p∗s ) is outside of the 45 curve it cannot be part of an
equilibrium. Recall that outside of the 45 curve the UICs have slope diﬀerent from -45
degrees. Suppose it is steeper. Then there must necessarily be at least one non-candidate
who could deviate from his voting strategy and transfer his vote from a winning candidate
of type hs to a losing candidate of type hs. Should this deviation prove pivotal, this voter
would have moved the equilibrium down and to the right along a -45 degree line. But
such a move would determine an increase in utility for the voter, as it would take him to
a higher indiﬀerence curve. Hence, this voting deviation is profitable (in the conditionally
sincere sense) and the equilibrium is broken. Of course, if at a point above the diagonal the
indiﬀerence curve is flatter than -45 degrees, the equilibrium breaking deviation is to vote for
a candidate of type hs over a candidate of type hs.
   Now let us focus on candidate equilibria below the diagonal. For such a point to be an
equilibrium, at least one of the three types having at least one quality must strictly prefer to
hold oﬃce. If none did, then types hs and hs would for sure strictly prefer private life. But
then no point with ph > 0 would be feasible. This strict preference for oﬃce implies that
at least one of the three desirable types is in “excess supply,” in the sense that some of the
candidates of this type do not get elected. But at the same time we have ph + ps < 1, as we
are below the diagonal, so there must be some hs types in oﬃce. This is inconsistent with
our equilibrium concept as voters would then deviate in such a way as to replace some of the



                                               39
hs oﬃce holders with candidates of more desirable type.
   Next, we consider points on the diagonal to the right of the 45 line. If a point in this
region were an equilibrium, and it featured hs types in oﬃce, then it would also have to
feature some hs in oﬃce, otherwise the shares of the four types holding oﬃce could not add
up to 1. But if some hs citizen is in oﬃce then types hs and hs must strictly prefer to hold
oﬃce, so voters once again have a dominating conditionally sincere deviation. Hence, this
equilibrium could never feature phs > 0, and since we must have ph + ps = 1 this means there
can be no hs types in oﬃce. Next note that for this to be an equilibrium, citizens of type
hs must weakly prefer being oﬃce holders (otherwise ph = 0), which implies that citizens of
type hs strictly prefer to hold public oﬃce (recall our assumption on the ranking of OICs).
Hence, candidates of type hs are in excess supply, and voters have access to a voting deviation
moving up and to the left on the diagonal. By definition of the 45 curve such a deviation
dominates in “conditionally sincere” sense the point under consideration, and this cannot be
an equilibrium. A very similar argument can be used to rule out points on the horizontal
axis, where we have ps = 0, the hs types have a strict preference for holding oﬃce, and the
UIC has slope less than 45 degrees.
   Up to now we have eliminated all points not on the solid locus in Figure 4. We now
discuss the conditions under which points on the solid locus are equilibria. Points on the 45
curve above the diagonal are equilibria if and only if they also lie on the OIC of hs types. If
they do not (only if) then either the hs types strictly prefer oﬃce (in which case we would
jump to (1, 1)), or they strictly prefer private life (in which case the point is unfeasible). If
they do (if) citizens of type hs are indiﬀerent between holding oﬃce and living private lives,
and those who are candidates are all elected and have no incentive to deviate. The other two
“one-quality” types strictly prefer oﬃce and are in excess supply: their participation to the
elections determined by the condition that — given the probability of election and the cost of
running — they weakly prefer to be candidates. Citizens of type hs are non-candidates. And
non-candidates have no dominating conditionally sincere voting deviation as the indiﬀerence
curve lies entirely above the 45 degree line through this point.
   Consider now the diagonal above the 45 curve. The claim is that points in this region are
equilibria if and only if they also lie on the OIC of type hs citizens. By the same argument



                                               40
used for the section of the diagonal below the 45 curve, equilibria on this locus must feature
phs = phs = 0. Then we must have that citizens hs weakly prefer being in oﬃce (otherwise
ph = 0), which implies that citizens hs have a strict preference for public service. Now if
the hs’s preference were strict, so that candidates of this type were in excess supply, then a
voting deviation down and to the right on the diagonal would be feasible. But by definition
of the 45 curve such a deviation weakly dominates the point under consideration. This shows
that hs citizens must be indiﬀerent between private and public life, i.e., the only if part of
our claim. Now if the hs are exactly indiﬀerent between private and public life the number of
candidates is equal to the number of elected individuals of this type, and a voting deviation
down and to the right (the only one attractive) is unfeasible. This proves the if part of the
claim.
   We are left with the vertical axis. Points on the vertical axis are equilibria if and only if
they also lie on the OIC of citizens of type hs. If they are above it they are unfeasible, as no
person of high ability would agree to stay in oﬃce. If they are below it, then hs candidates
would be in excess supply, and it would be possible to replace some of the hs oﬃce holders
(who necessarily hold oﬃce in this region). On points on the hs’s OIC, instead, the number
of hs candidates is equal to the number of hs winners. The other types with at least one
quality strictly prefer private life (and are not candidate) and the types with no quality are
rationed on political jobs. No dominating conditionally sincere voting deviation exists.
            00
   Result 1 can be verified by examining how the relevant vertical OICS shift as the pa-
rameters change.




                                              41
   Figure 1




     ps




 psmax

                  1-m-/(pq)


1-m-/p



              1           Psmin   q
   Figure 2




     ps

                  A
                          B
                              C

 psmax




1-m-/p



              1   Psmin       q
               ps

           1

           ps*




                    45




                         ph*   1   ph

Figure 3
