                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               WHAT HURTS MOST?
                  G-3 EXCHANGE RATE OR INTEREST RATE VOLATILITY


                                         Carmen M. Reinhart
                                      Vincent Raymond Reinhart


                                          Working Paper 8535
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8535


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




This paper was prepared for the NBER’s Currency Crisis Conference held on March 29-31, 2001 in
Monterrey, California. We have benefitted from helpful comments from Joshua Aizenman, Olivier
Blanchard, Guillermo Calvo, Michael Dooley, Eduardo Fernandez-Arias, Jeffrey Frankel, and Ernesto Talvi.
Jane Cooley provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Carmen M. Reinhart and Vincent Raymond Reinhart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Hurts Most? G-3 Exchange Rate or Interest Rate Volatility
Carmen M. Reinhart and Vincent Raymond Reinhart
NBER Working Paper No. 8535
October 2001
JEL No. F21, F32, F34, F36



                                             ABSTRACT


        With many emerging market currencies tied to the U.S. dollar either implicitly or explicitly,
movements in the exchange values of the currencies of major countries have the potential to influence
the competitive position of many developing countries. According to some analysts, establishing target
bands to reduce the variability of the G-3 currencies would limit those destabilizing shocks emanating
from abroad. This paper examines the argument for such a target zone strictly from an emerging market
perspective. Given that sterilized intervention by industrial economies tends to be ineffective and that
policy makers show no appetite to return to the controls on international capital flows that helped keep
exchange rates stable over the Bretton Woods era, a commitment to damping G-3 exchange rate
fluctuations requires a willingness on the part of G-3 authorities to use domestic monetary policy to that
end. Under a system of target zones, then, relative prices for emerging market economies may become
more stable, but debt-servicing costs may become less predictable. We use a simple trade model to show
that the resulting consequences for welfare are ambiguous. Our empirical work supplements the
traditional literature on North-South links by examining the importance of the volatilities of G-3
exchange-rates, and U.S. interest rate and consumption on capital flows and economic growth in
developing countries over the past thirty years.




Carmen M. Reinhart                                       Vincent R. Reinhart
Department of Economics and                              Division of International Finance
School of Public Affairs                                 Board of Governors of the
University of Maryland                                   Federal Reserve System
College Park, MD 20742                                   Washington, DC 20551
and NBER                                                 Tel: 202-452-2007
Tel: 301-405-7006                                        Email: vreinhart@frb.gov
Email: reinhart@econ.umd.edu
Web: http://www.puaf.umd.edu/faculty/papers
reinhart/reinhart.htm
                                           I. Introduction

        While fashions concerning appropriate exchange rate arrangements have shifted over the

years, advocacy of establishing a target zone surrounding the world’s three major currencies has

remained a hardy perennial. Work on target zones (pioneered by McKinnon, 1984 and 1997,

and Williamson, 1986, and recently summarized by Clarida, 2000) has mostly emphasized the

benefits of exchange rate stability for industrial countries. More recently, though, analysts have

apportioned some of the blame for financial crises in emerging markets back on the shoulders of

the volatile bilateral exchange rates of industrial countries (as in the dissenting opinions

registered in Goldstein, 1999, for instance). With many emerging market currencies tied to the

U.S. dollar either implicitly or explicitly, movements in the exchange values of the currencies of

major countries–in particular the prolonged appreciation of the U.S. dollar vis-a-vis the yen and

the deutsche mark in advance of Asia’s troubles–is argued to have worsened the competitive

position of many emerging market economies. One solution to reducing destabilizing shocks

emanating from abroad, the argument runs, would be to reduce the variability of the G-3

currencies by establishing target bands.1 This paper examines the argument for such a target

zone strictly from an emerging market perspective but will be silent on the costs and benefits for

industrial countries.2


        1
           Of course, since European monetary union, the G-3 currencies cover at least fourteen
industrial countries–the United States, Japan, and the twelve nations that have adopted the euro. In
what follows, we splice together the pre-single-currency data on the deutsche mark with the post-1999
data on the exchange value of the euro.
        2
           For a cost-benefit analysis from a developed country perspective of the effects of limiting G-3
exchange rate volatility or adopting a common currency, see Rogoff (2001). Of particular relevance here
is Rogoff’s argument that the strongest case for stabilizing major currency exchange rates may well rest on

                                                     1
        Given the reality that sterilized intervention by industrial economies tends to be

ineffective and that policy makers show no appetite to return to the kinds of controls on

international capital flows that helped keep exchange rates stable over the Bretton Woods era, a

commitment to damping G-3 exchange rate fluctuations requires a willingness on the part of G-3

authorities to use domestic monetary policy to that end. This, in turn, may require tolerating

more variability in interest rates and potentially spending. Under a system of target zones, then,

relative prices for emerging market economies may become more stable in an environment of

predictable G-3 exchange rates, but greater interest rate volatility may make debt-servicing costs

less predictable and greater G-3 income volatility may make demands for the products of

emerging market economies more uncertain. The welfare consequences to an emerging market

economy, therefore, are ambiguous, depending on initial conditions, the specification of behavior,

and the dynamic nature of the tradeoff between lower G-3 exchange rate volatility and higher

G-3 interest rate variability.

        The consequences for the developing “South” of interest rate, exchange rate, and income

volatility in the “North” is only one particular aspect of myriad North-South links. As such,

issues related to G-3 exchange rate variability should be viewed within the much larger panorama

(and related literature) of how economic outcomes in developed countries influence those in less

developed economies. In this paper, we review and revisit the “traditional” North-South links

via trade, commodity markets, and capital flows, and add transmission channels in the form of

interest-rate and exchange-rate volatilities.




the way that their volatility influences developing countries.

                                                      2
       In Section II, we discuss the various channels of North-South transmission and use the

example of a simple trade model to establish that, for a small open economy with outstanding

debt, the welfare effect of damping variations in the exchange rate by making international

interest rates more volatile is ambiguous. Section III presents stylized evidence on how the

monetary policy and economic cycle in the United States influence capital flows to emerging

markets as well as growth. In Section IV, we first examine the contribution of G-3 exchange rate

volatility to fluctuations in the exchange rates of emerging markets and proceed to analyze the

link between G-3 interest rate and exchange rate volatility and capital flows and economic

growth in developing countries. The final section summarizes our main findings and discusses

some of the policy implications of our analysis.




                              Section II. North-South Links

       In this section, we discuss the various channels through which economic developments in

the major developed economies can potentially affect developing countries. On the developed

side, we examine how the exchange-rate arrangements among industrial countries influence the

mix of interest-rate and exchange-rate volatility on world financial markets. On the emerging

markets side, our focus is on capital flows--their level and composition--and on economic

performance, as measured by GDP growth.

1.     The Winds from the North: The Role of G-3 Exchange Rate Arrangements in
       Determining the Mix of Interest-Rate and Exchange-Rate Volatilities

       In principle, G-3 exchange rates could be induced to stay within a target bands through

some combination of three tools. First, national authorities could rely on sterilized intervention


                                                   3
to enforce some corridor on bilateral exchange rates. However, except to the extent that such

intervention tends to signal future changes in domestic monetary policy, researchers have found

little empirical support that sterilized intervention in industrial countries is effective.3 Second,

national authorities could impose some form of exchange or capital control, presumably in the

form of a transactions tax or framed as prudential reserve requirements. Opponents of such

efforts generally argue that capital controls generate financial innovation that undercuts them

over time, implying that the controls either become increasingly complicated or irrelevant.

Third, monetary policy makers in the major countries could alter domestic market conditions to

keep the foreign exchange value of their currencies in a desired range. This could take the form

of allowing intervention in the currency market to affect domestic reserves–that is, not sterilizing

intervention–or more directly keying the domestic policy rate to the exchange value of the

currency (as discussed in McKinnon, 1997, and Williamson, 1986).

       Given the lack of evidence finding any independent effect of sterilized intervention (over

and beyond what subsequently happens to domestic monetary policy) and the consensus

supporting the free mobility of capital internationally, it would seem that the only instrument

available to enforce a target zone would be domestic monetary policy of the G-3 central banks.

But this implies some tradeoff, in that G-3 domestic short-term interest rates would have to

become more variable to make G-3 exchange rates smoother.

       The nature of this tradeoff, of course, depends on many factors, importantly including the

width of the target zone. Wider bands would presumably reduce the need of G-3 central banks to


       3
         The signaling channel is addressed by Kaminsky and Lewis (1996); Dominguez and Frankel
(1993) examine whether there are any portfolio effects of sterilized intervention.

                                                   4
move their interest rates in response to exchange rate changes. At the same time, though, wider

bands would imply a smaller reduction in the volatility of G-3 exchange rates.4 In addition, it

might not be just G-3 interest rates that are affected by the exchange rate policy. Central bank

actions taken to damp G-3 exchange rate volatility may also leave their imprint on income in the

G-3 countries. Wider swings in industrial country interest rates would presumably make

spending in those countries more variable, even as the split of that spending on domestic versus

foreign goods and services becomes more predictable under more stable G-3 exchange rates.

        To understand the effects of these tradeoffs from an emerging markets perspective, it is

important to remember that most developing countries are net debtors to the industrial world

and that typically that debt is short-term and denominated in one of the G-3 currencies. As a

result, the welfare consequences for an emerging-market economy of G-3 target zones depends on

exactly how those zones are enforced and the particulars of the small country’s mix of output,

trading partners, and debt structure.

2.      A Stylized Model of an Emerging Market Economy

        The effects of trading interest-rate for exchange rate volatility can be seen in a basic

single-period, two-good model of trade for a small open economy, as in Figure 1. This figure is

drawn for a country taking as given the relative price of the two traded goods and receiving an

endowment in terms of good A. For simplicity, we assume that its external debt is also



        4
          Some might argue that if G-3 target zones anchor inflation expectations in developed countries,
both exchange rates and interest rates could become more stable. However, many industrial countries in
the past decade have adopted some form of inflation targeting, either explicitly or implicitly, which has
worked to stabilize inflation expectations and which would make achieving a credibility bonus from
adopting a G-3 target zone less likely.

                                                   5
denominated in terms of good A and its currency is pegged to that of country A.5 Volatility of

the relative price of the traded goods–which might stem solely from nominal changes in exchange

rates between the industrial countries if the small country fixes its exchange rate or if it prices to

the industrial country market–pivots the budget line and thus alters the desired consumption

combination in the small country. Suppose, for instance, that the currency of country A

depreciates relative to that of country B, rotating the budget line from EF to GF. All else equal,

welfare would decline, representing a cost associated with developments on the foreign exchange

market for this small country.

       Target zones for the large countries, if effective, would be able to prevent the budget line

from rotating as the result of influences emanating from the developed world. However, this

reduced major-country exchange rate volatility will only be accomplished if the major central

banks change short-term interest rates in response to incipient changes in cross rates. For most

emerging-market economies, which are debtors, such coordination of G-3 monetary policy could

deliver more stable terms of trade at the expense of a more variable interest service. In this

particular case, the central bank of country A would presumably have to raise its domestic short-

term interest rate in defense of the currency. So, while the slope of the budget line would be

unchanged, its location would shift in, as labeled HI. Regardless of whether the effects of the

initial shock were felt through the exchange rate of the interest rate, welfare in this small country

would decline. Whether they decline more or less if the large countries allow the cross exchange


       5
           Behind the scenes of this model in the larger industrial world, it is simplest to think of
two large countries, A and B, specialized in the production of their namesake good. The net
effect of our assumption about the small economy’s endowment and debt structure is that the
intercept of the budget line depends on the interest rate in country A.

                                                   6
rate or their interest rates to adjust will depend on many factors.

3.     Going Beyond the Stylized Model

       In reality, many developing countries send primary commodities onto the world market,

there is some substitutability in world demand for those countries that produce manufactured

products, and capital markets are far from perfect. In this section, we review the literature on

North-South linkages to broaden our understanding of the issues related to G-3 exchange rate

arrangements.

       As opposed to the simple example, most emerging-market economies face some slope to

the demand curve for their exports. As a result, any changes in G-3 income induced by changes

in their interest rates will be reflected in the demand for the exports of its trading partners to the

extent that imports in the developed economy have a positive income elasticity.6 The higher the

share of exports that are destined for the developed country, the more sizable the consequences

for the emerging market economy. On the basis of this channel, for example, Mexico and

Canada would be far more affected by an economic downturn in the United States than

Argentina. This follows because in 1999 about 88 percent of all Canadian and Mexican exports

were shipped to the U.S. market, while only about 11 of Argentina’s exports were destined for the

United States.7 Other things equal, the higher the income elasticity of imports in the developed

country, the more pronounced will be the contraction in the country’s exports when the

developed country slows. In this regard, developing countries that export predominantly


       6
          Note that this channel, as it relies on the behavior of the large partner, is present
irrespective of the level of development of the smaller trading partners.
       7
           The stylized evidence on patterns of trade is discussed in the next session.

                                                   7
manufactured goods (which typically are more sensitive to income) may fare worse that their

counterparts exporting primary commodities, which tend to be relatively income-inelastic.8 The

heterogeneity in export structure across developing countries are sufficiently significant to expect,

a priori, highly differentiated outcomes. For instance, the contrast between the export structure

of East Asian countries (which are heavily weighed to manufactured goods) to that of most

African countries (which are predominantly skewed to primary commodities) is particularly

striking.9

        As opposed to the simple example, emerging market economies generally produce a

different mix of goods than those of industrial countries. In that case, the business cycle in the

world’s largest economies may itself exert a significant influence on the terms of trade of their

smaller developing trading partners. Perhaps the clearest example of such a North-South link

comes from international commodity markets, as argued in Dornbusch (1985). Beginning with

that work, the literature on commodity price determination has consistently accorded a

significant role to the growth performance of the major industrial countries. 10 In particular,

recessions in industrial economies, especially the United States, have historically been associated




        8
         See, for example, Reinhart (1996), who estimates industrial countries’ import demand
function for various regions and countries with varying degrees of export diversification and
primary commodity content.

        For example, manufactures account for only 10 percent in Côte D’Ivoire but account for
        9

more than 65 percent of Thai exports.
        10
          Dornbusch (1985) stresses the role of the demand side in commodity price
determination. Borensztein and Reinhart (1995), who incorporate supply-side developments in
their analysis, also find a significant and positive relationship between growth in the major
economies and world commodity prices.

                                                  8
with weakness in real commodity prices. In our simple example, if the small country’s

endowment was made up of a commodity, the effects of G-3 monetary policy actions on overall

demand for those primary goods could induce a sizable shift in the position and rotation of the

budget line.

       Yet, the impacts of fluctuations in the business cycle on developing economies is likely not

limited just to income and relative price effects. There is a well-established, endogenous and

countercyclical “monetary policy cycle” in the major developed economies. To damp the

amplitude of the business cycle, central banks ease monetary conditions and reduce interest rates

during economic downturns and hike interest rates when signs of overheating develop. Calvo,

Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993) stressed the importance of U.S. interest rates in driving the

international capital flow cycle. They present evidence that, in periods of low interest rates in

the United States, central banks in developing countries in Latin America systematically

accumulate foreign exchange reserves and the real exchange rate appreciates. Subsequent

studies that examined net capital flows and extended the analysis to a variety of their

components over various sample periods and that extended the analysis to developing countries

in other regions found similar evidence.

       This link between the interest rate and capital flow cycle may arise for a variety of

reasons. Investors in the developed economies faced with lower interest rates may be inclined to

seek higher returns elsewhere (i.e., the demand for developing country assets increases). It also

might be the case that the decline in international interest rates makes borrowing less costly for

emerging markets and increases the supply of emerging market debt. In that case, the decline in

the cost of borrowing for emerging-market countries may be even greater than the decline in

                                                 9
international interest rates if the country risk premia is itself a positive function of international

interest rates. The evidence presented in Fernandez-Arias (1996), Frankel et. al. (2000), and

Kaminsky and Schmukler (2001) support the notion that country-risk premia in many emerging

markets indeed move with international interest rates in a manner that amplifies the interest rate

cycle of industrial countries. Thus, a change in G-3 interest rates shifts the budget line by more

than given in our simple example, as procyclical capital flows imply that the change in the

industrial country interest rate changes the developing country’s interest-rate risk premium in the

same direction. Moreover, one could posit nonlinearities in the response if large increases in

borrowing costs--by inducing balance-sheet strains and credit rationing--have more substantial

effects on income prospects than do similar size reductions in borrowing costs.

        Table 1 provides a summary of the channels of transmission of how developments in the

major industrial countries may influence growth in emerging markets. Taken together, the

various cells of the table would suggest that the trade and finance effects that arise from the

growth and interest rate cycles, respectively, in developed economies tend to, at least partially

offset. However, G-3 exchange rate and interest rate volatility would seem a priori to have a

negative effect on economic growth in the developing world. Higher interest rate volatility may

hamper investment, while higher G-3 exchange rate volatility may retard emerging market

trade.11 While the literature on the impacts on trade of exchange rate volatility for developed

economies is inconclusive, the comparable analysis of this issue for emerging markets seems much

more convincing in reaching the conclusion that exchange rate volatility tends to reduce trade.


        11
        Of course, G-3 interest rate volatility may also complicate significantly emerging market debt
management strategies or make systemic strains more likely.

                                                   10
                      II. The Role of the North’s Business and
                      Monetary Policy Cycles: The Stylized Facts

       In this section, we present stylized evidence on the “North-South” links that were

discussed in the preceding section. For emerging markets, we examine international capital flows

and growth around various measures of the United States growth and interest rate cycle and

contrast periods of high interest rate and exchange rate volatility to those where volatility was

relatively subdued. We present evidence of the direction of “North-South” trade and on the

impact of G-3 developments on international commodity markets.

       Our data is annual and spans 1970 to 1999, and the country groupings are those reported

in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (WEO).12 For capital flows, these

groupings include: All emerging markets, Africa, Asia crisis countries, other Asian emerging

markets, Middle East and Europe, and the Western Hemisphere. In reporting aggregate real

GDP, the WEO groups the Asian countries somewhat differently; the two reported subgroupings

are newly industrialized Asia and Asia; all other categories remain the same. We examine the

cyclical behavior of net private capital flows and its components: net private direct investment

(FDI), private portfolio investment (PI), other net private capital flows (OTF)--which is heavily

weighed toward bank lending, and net official flows (OFF).

1.     The growth cycle, capital flows, and emerging market growth

       Given its prominent position in the world economy, the United States business cycle (not

surprisingly) has important repercussions for the rest of the world. Economic developments in



       12
         The developing country classification in the WEO is comprised on 128 countries. See the
WEO for details on the regional breakdown.

                                                 11
the United States echo loudly in many developed economies--most notably Canada; the same

holds true for developing economies, especially so those in the Western Hemisphere and newly-

industrialized Asia. To examine the behavior of growth and various types of capital flows to

emerging markets, we first split the sample into two states of nature according to two criteria.

The first parsing separates the sample into recessions and expansions according to the National

Bureau of Economic Research’s dating of U.S. business cycle turning points. The second cut of

the data divides the sample into those periods in which U.S. real GDP growth is above the

median growth rate for the sample and those in which growth is below the median.

       Figure 2 depicts capital flows to emerging markets (in billions of U.S. dollars in 1970

terms) in recession years versus recovery years for the 1970-1999 period. As is evident, net flows

to emerging markets are considerably larger in real terms when the United States is in expansion

as when the United States is in recession. Furthermore, this gap between recession and

expansion owes primarily to a surge in FDI flows (which nearly go up threefold from recession to

expansion) and to portfolio flows (which go up almost fivefold from recession to expansion). The

key offsetting category is other net inflows to emerging markets, which evaporate when the

United States is in an expansion rather than recession. This disparate behavior between FDI and

portfolio flows importantly owes to bank lending, which accounts for a significant part of other

flows. Apparently, banks tend to seek lending opportunities abroad when the domestic demand

for loans weakens and interest rates fall, as usually occur during recessions. The U.S. bank

lending boom to Latin America in the late 1970s and early 1980s and the surge in Japanese bank

lending to emerging Asia in the mid-1990s are two clear examples of this phenomena.

       However, the surge in FDI flows from the mid-1990s to the present is a significant

                                                 12
departure from FDI’s historical behavior that is, no doubt, heavily influenced by the wave of

privatization and mergers and acquisitions that took hold in many emerging markets during

recent years. It is possible that because this period of privatizations and surging FDI is coincident

with the longest economic expansion in U.S. history, the results may be skewed toward finding an

exaggerated role for U.S. growth in driving FDI and total net flows. When we ended our sample

in 1992 in an exercise not shown, capital flows to emerging markets still diminished during

economic downturns in the United States. While FDI flows and portfolio flows continue to be

higher in expansions than in recessions, the drop in other flows during expansions more than

offsets this.

        In sum, from the vantage point of the volume of capital flows to emerging markets--U.S.

recessions are not a bad thing. From a compositional standpoint, however, the more stable

component of capital flows, FDI, does seem to contract during downturns--suggesting that

emerging markets may wind up during these periods relying more heavily on less stable sources of

financing--short-term flows.13

        The analogous exercise was performed for emerging market average annual GDP growth.

As shown in Table 2, for all developing countries, growth is somewhat slower during U.S.

recessions, averaging 4.8 percent per annum versus 5.2 percent average growth during expansion

years. However, the pattern is uneven across regions. For the countries in transition, Asia

(including the newly-industrialized economies), and the Middle East and Europe growth tend to

slow during U.S. recessions while for Africa and Western Hemisphere, the opposite is true.



        13
             Other flows are mostly short-term.

                                                  13
However, in most instances the differences across regimes are not markedly different--an issue we

will explore further later.

2.      The growth cycle and trade

        If economic downturns in the United States are not necessarily a bad thing from the

vantage point of the availability of international lending to emerging markets, slowdowns are

likely to have adverse consequences for countries that rely heavily on exports to the United

States. Table 3 reports the percentage of total exports (as of 1999) of various emerging markets

in Africa, Asia, and Western Hemisphere that are destined for the United States market. It is

evident that bilateral trade links between the United States and the developing world are

strongest for Latin America, although there is considerable variation within the region with

Mexico and Argentina sitting at the opposite ends of the spectrum. However, trade between the

United States and the Asian countries shown in this table is, by no means, trivial, especially if

one considers that (as shown in Table 4) the income elasticity in developed economies for Asian

exports typically is estimated to be more than twice as large as the income elasticity for African

exports; more generally, the income elasticity of the exports of developing countries that are

major exporters of manufactured goods is well above that of those whose exports have a higher

primary commodity content.

        As noted earlier, swings in the economic cycle in the United States and other major

industrialized economies typically influence the terms of trade of primary-commodity exporters.

According to the various studies reviewed in Table 5, a one percentage point drop in industrial

production growth in the developed economies results in a drop in real commodity prices of

roughly 0.77 to about 2 percent, depending on the study.

                                                 14
3. The interest rate-monetary policy cycle

        In a world of countercyclical monetary policy in industrial countries, an economic cycle

goes hand in hand with an interest-rate cycle. As with the growth cycle, we proceed to describe

the stylized evidence by breaking up the sample in two ways. First, we subdivide the 1970-1999

sample into two subsamples, one where monetary policy was “easing”--that is to say that the

monetary policy interest rate in the United States, the federal funds rate, was declining--and

periods of tightening, where the federal funds rate was rising.14

        Figure 3 reports the results of this exercise. In years when U.S. monetary policy was

easing, emerging markets in all regions (with the exception of Africa, which is almost entirely

shut out of international capital markets) receive a markedly higher volume of capital inflows.

While FDI and portfolio flows do not change much, other (short-term) flows respond markedly to

the interest rate cycle. As shown in the third and fourth columns of Table 2, by and large,

average annual GDP growth rates are lower during easings of U.S. monetary policy than during

tightening episodes--which may simply attest to the fact that Federal Reserve easings most often

coincide with a U.S. economic slowdown. It may also suggest that, to the extent that capital

inflows have positive consequences for economic activity (an important issue that has not

received much attention in the literature), these effects may not be contemporaneous.



        14
           More specifically, a year was denoted as one of tightening (easing) if the average level of the
federal funds rate in December was higher (lower) than that of twelve months earlier. Recognize that this
cut of the data does not discriminate between a modest and marked policy changes, as a 50 basis point
drop in the federal funds rate during a given year would be lumped together with a 400 basis point drop.
To get at this issue, we also broke the sample into periods where real interest rates are above the sample
median and those years in which rates are below the median. (Real ex post interest rates are calculated as
the nominal yield on a three-month Treasury bill less the annual consumer price inflation rate.) Those
results, which are not reported to conserve on space, about match those in the main text.

                                                   15
4.     Stylized evidence on the twin cycles

       Given the synchronization of the economic growth and policy cycles, a finer reading of

the data is probably warranted. Table 6 cuts the sample into four states of nature for the United

States: recession accompanied by monetary policy tightening, recession accompanied by easing,

expansion and tightening, and expansion and monetary policy easing. The role of the business

cycle is quite evident in the results. The worst outcome for emerging markets is when the United

States is in a deep-enough recession that monetary policy is being systematically eased (the upper

left cell in each regional entry). In general, entries along the minor diagonal–representing either

a U.S. economy weak enough to be in recession but not so weak as to preclude Federal Reserve

tightening or an expansion facilitated by policy easing–contain fast rates of growth in economic

activity. But the fastest rates of growth are invariably recorded in the lower right cell, which

includes those years in which the U.S. economy is expanding and monetary policy tightening.

That is, historically foreign economies grow the fastest in the latter stages of the U.S. business

cycle when fast U.S. growth is creating pressures on resources that trigger Federal Reserve

tightening.

       As to capital flows, the priors are less well defined. On the one hand, the Calvo,

Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993) hypothesis would suggest that tighter monetary policy (i.e.,

rising interest rates) would lead to (other things equal) lower capital flows to emerging markets.

On the other hand, while recessions in the North may dampen FDI flows (as these are often

linked to trade), economic slowdowns tend to be accompanied by a weakening in the domestic




                                                 16
demand for loans--which, in the past, has often led bank to seek lending opportunities abroad.15

       The lower panel of Table 6 presents net capital flows and its components to all emerging

markets during these four states of nature. For net private flows, the largesty entry falls in the

lower left cell, suggesting that both lower interest rates and faster growth in the United States are

a potential catalyst for capital flows into emerging markets. However, this feature is not even

across categories: FDI and portfolio flows thrive when expansions are coupled with falling

interest rates. Other flows, which are largely comprised of bank lending do not. Like other flows,

these tend to increase in period of falling interest rates but contract during expansions; other

flows are highest when the U.S. is in recession and interest rates are falling.

5.     The repercussions of the twin cycles: Basic tests

       The preceding discussion does not shed light on the relative statistical significance of the

twin cycles. To address that issue, we next run a variety of simple regressions that attempt to

explain capital flows and growth in emerging markets through developments in the developed

economies, particularly the United States. Our sample spans 1970-1999 for all regions.

       In examining real private flows to all emerging market economies, we use four different

measures of real private capital flows: Net capital flows, net direct investment, net portfolio flows,

and other capital flows. The regressors in the first set of equations are real U.S. GDP growth and

the U.S. short-term nominal interest rate (the yield on the three-month Treasury bill). As

neither of these variables pose a potential endogeneity problem, our estimation method is simple

ordinary least squares. Table 7 reports the results of this regression for all emerging market



       15
            See Kaminsky and Reinhart (2001).

                                                  17
economies; (Appendix Table 1 reports results for particular regions).

        When examining the results for the emerging market aggregate, as well as for most of the

regional subgroups, U.S. nominal interest rates seem to play a more dominant and systematic role

in explaining capital flows to emerging markets than U.S. economic growth. As a general rule,

rising U.S. interest rates are associated with falling capital flows to emerging markets. In effect, in

many of the regressions, the coefficient on growth is negative--suggesting that when the U.S. is

enjoying rapid growth--capital stays at home. This effect is most pronounced in Other Net

Flows, which largely consists of bank lending. Both FDI flows and portfolio flows are consistently

interest rate sensitive.16

        There are, however, various regional differences worth highlighting. First, U.S. nominal

interest rates are significant in explaining portfolio and FDI flows in all regions--but the impacts

are greatest in Western Hemisphere and lowest in Africa. This result may simply highlight that,

among the emerging markets with some extent of access to international capital markets (Asia

and Latin America), the latter are more heavily indebted and interconnected with the United

States. Second, growth in the United States has a significant and positive influence in explaining

FDI to Western Hemisphere--which is not the case for other regions. Third, as the descriptive

analysis anticipated, the other capital flow category behaves very differently from FDI and

portfolio flows.

        We next perform a comparable exercise for growth similar to Dornbusch (1985), who

focused on the links between developing debtor countries and their developed counterparts.


        16
          Similar results obtain but are not reported to save space, when developed-country real GDP
growth rates are used in lieu of the U.S. growth rate.

                                                  18
Dornbusch regressed developing country GDP growth on a measure of OECD growth and found

the coefficient on the OECD growth measure to be statistically significant and in the 0.28-0.76

range.17 More recently, Frankel and Roubini (2000) regress developing country growth for

various regional groupings against the G-7 real interest rate; they found that the coefficients on

real interest rates were negative and in most cases statistically significant--with the greatest

interest sensitivity in the Western Hemisphere.18

       Our exercise here combines these two approaches. As shown in Table 8, when GDP

growth for the various country groupings is regressed against U.S. growth and the short-term real

interest rate, the results tend to be quite intuitive. The sensitivity of growth to U.S. growth is

highest (and statistically significant) for the newly industrialized Asian Economies, which depend

importantly on trade with the United States and lowest for the remainder of Asia. For all

developing countries, both of the regressors have the anticipated signs and are statistically

significant. A one percentage point decline in U.S. growth rates reduces GDP growth for the

developing countries by 0.2 percent while a one percent increase in U.S. real interest rates

reduces it by 0.24 percent. Despite strong trade links with the United States for most countries

in the region, U.S. growth is only marginally statistically significant for Western Hemisphere,

although the coefficient is positively signed. U.S. growth is also significant for the Middle East

and European developing countries. Given its history of relatively high levels of indebtedness and



       17
          Dornbusch used industrial production, real GDP growth, and import volume
alternatively; the sample was 1961-84.
       18
         The coefficient for Western Hemisphere was -0.77 compared to -0.39 for all market
borrowers.

                                                  19
periodic debt-servicing difficulties, it is not surprising that the U.S. real interest rate is significant

and growth is the most sensitive to interest rate fluctuations in Western Hemisphere; the

coefficient (-0.71) is almost four times as large--in absolute terms--as for all developing countries.

Indeed, one cannot reject the hypothesis that a one percent increase in U.S. real interest rates

leads to a one percent decline in growth in the region. Real U.S. interest rates are also

statistically significant for the Middle East and Europe. At the other end, the newly industrialized

Asian economies, with low levels of external debt and considerable access to private capital

markets, U.S. interest rates are not significant, although the coefficient has the (expected)

negative sign. As far as these regressions are concerned, U.S. developments have no systematic

relationship with the rest of developing Asia.19




                  Section IV. The Consequences of Exchange Rate
                       and Interest Rate Volatility in the North

        To examine the issue of whether the volatility of interest rates and G-3 exchange rates

have adverse consequences for cross-border capital flows to emerging markets and growth, we

split our sample into periods in which volatility is high and periods in which it is low and conduct

a comparable set of exercises as those discussed in the preceeding section.

1.      Background on exchange rate variability in emerging markets

        The argument that excessive volatility of G-3 exchange rates imposes significant costs on


        19
            An elegant model that broadly supports this pattern of coefficients is provided by Gertler and
Rogoff (1990). They offer a framework in which a country’s level of wealth influences the extent of
agency problems in lending and, therefore, the degree of integration with the world capital market. As a
general rule in Table 8, wealthier regions (in per capita terms) tend to be more tightly linked to U.S.
interest rates.

                                                    20
emerging markets seems to rely mostly on a spending channel. A large swing in the dollar’s value

on the foreign exchange market in terms of the yen and the euro translates directly into changes

in the competitiveness of countries that link their currencies to the dollar–either through a hard

peg or a highly managed float. The evidence in Calvo and Reinhart (2000) suggests many

developing countries fall into that group. They report a widespread “fear of floating,” in that

many emerging market currencies tend to track the dollar or the euro closely, even in cases that

are officially classified as floating.

        Some sense of the stakes for emerging-market economies can be gotten from Figures 4

through 6 and Table 9. We calculated simple annual averages of the absolute value of the

monthly changes in the logarithms of the real deutsche mark/dollar and real yen/dollar exchange

rates from 1970 to 1999, of the percentage point change in the real U.S Treasury bill rate (on the

rationale that most developing country borrowing is denominated in U.S. dollars) from 1973 to

1999, and of the monthly changes in the logarithm of U.S. real personal consumption

expenditure from 1970 to 1999.

        The three figures split the sample into two states of nature, those in which G-3 exchange

rate volatility is above and below is sample median (in Figure 4), those in which U.S. interest rate

volatility is above and below the sample median (in Figure 5), and those in which the average

annual volatility of U.S. personal consumption expenditure is above and below the median (in

Figure 6). As before, we report the volume of real capital flows by country grouping and type

across the sample split. As is evident from Figure 4, the volatility of G-3 exchange rates has little

discernible effect on net real private capital flows to emerging market economies or on any of the

major regions reported. Beneath that total, though, there are important compositional effects, in

                                                 21
that both portfolio and other net capital flows step lower when G-3 exchange rate volatility is

higher. The unchanged total owes to the fact that private direct investment moves in the

opposite direction–from 1970 to 1999, FDI tended to be higher in those years when G-3

exchange rate volatility was on the high side of the median.

        Similar offsetting movements of FDI and portfolio and other capital flows are evident

when the sample is split according to the volatility of the U.S. short-term real interest rates, as in

Figure 5. In this case, on net, real private capital flows are somewhat higher when U.S. rates

move more from month to month. This follows because the expansion of portfolio and other

flows when interest rates are volatile more than makes up for a contraction in FDI. Apparently,

the short-term financial transactions in portfolio and other flows are energized by interest rate

volatility even as the longer-term transactions in FDI flag.

        The total and major components of private capital flows respond more similarly when the

sample is split according to the volatility of U.S. consumption spending, as seen in Exhibit 6.

Relatively stable PCE growth in the United States is associated with larger capital flows, on net,

to emerging market economies, especially those taking the form of foreign direct and portfolio

investment. To an important extent, this may owe to the combination of a secular decline in

U.S. consumption volatility and a secular increase in the volume of capital flows. Simply, low-

consumption-volatility years predominate later in the sample, when capital flows are also larger.20

        Table 9 reports the average annual growth rates of real GDP in developing countries for

different splits of the data determined by the volatilities, in turn, of G-3 exchange rates, U.S.


        20
          Two-thirds of the observations on PCE variability in the first half of the sample lie above the
median calculated over the entire sample.

                                                    22
interest rates, and U.S. consumption. As a general rule, neither G-3 exchange rate volatility nor

U.S. consumption volatility appear harmful to growth prospects in emerging market economies.

By both cuts of the data, high volatility (when comparing columns 1 and 2 for G-3 exchange

rates or columns 5 and 6 for U.S. consumption) is associated with about ½ to ¾ percentage point

faster growth in developing countries. For some regions, particularly newly industrialized Asian

economies, the difference is quite large. What is also apparent is that U.S. short-term interest

rates, on average, are linked to slower economic growth in the developing world, with differences

in growth across the two regimes ranging from 3/8 to nearly 2 percentage points.

        The insight from the simple model is that enforcing target zones in the G-3 currencies

involves choosing a point along the tradeoff between lower exchange rate volatility and higher

interest rate volatility. And, to the extent that G-3 spending is sensitive to interest rates, there

will be a corresponding tradeoff between lower exchange rate volatility and higher consumption

volatility. We parsed our sample along the dimensions of that tradeoff, examining capital flows

and GDP growth according to the joint behavior of the relevant volatilities. Table 10 records

those results. From an emerging market perspective, G-3 target zones imply moving from the

upper right cell of each panel (where G-3 currency volatility is high but U.S. interest rate of PCE

volatility is low) to the lower left cell (where G-3 currency volatility is low but U.S. interest rate

or PCE volatility is high).

        With regard to the upper four panels of the table looking at the comovement of G-3

exchange rate and U.S. interest rate volatility, net private capital flows were almost $5 billion

higher, on average, in those years in which G-3 exchange rates were not volatile and U.S. interest

rates were. However, bu considering the minor diagonals on the other three panels it become

                                                  23
clear that this holds because a sizable decline in FDI across the two periods was offset by increases

in hotter-money flows–portfolio investment and other private flows. Moreover, it would have

been a bad bet in emerging market economies over the past twenty-seven years to trade times

when G-3 exchange rates were volatile but U.S. PCE growth was stable for times when G-3

exchange rates were stable but U.S. PCE growth was volatile. Across the bottom four panels of

Table 10, real private flows uniformly fall in moving from the upper right cell to the bottom right

cell. Taken together, Table 10 provides no evidence that the flow of private capital to emerging

market economies would benefit from a G-3 target zone.

       But attracting financial capital is an intermediate goal relative to the ultimate

responsibility of national authorities to foster economic growth. Table 11 presents averages of

real GDP growth from 1973 to 1999 for major country groups split according to the joint

behavior of G-3 exchange rates and either U.S. interest rates or personal consumption

expenditure. Here, the evidence does suggest that trading higher for lower G-3 exchange rate

volatility, even at the cost of more volatility in either U.S. interest rates or consumption, would

benefit growth.

       Table 12 addresses the possibility of nonlinearities in the responses of developing

countries by using an indicator approach. In the two left panels, data on the number of currency

crises in developing countries by year (out of the total number of years) are sorted according to

G-3 exchange rate and U.S. interest rate and PCE volatility (with the crisis indicator defined

according to the methodology in Frankel and Rose, 1996, as recently updated and extended to a




                                                 24
larger country set by Reinhart, 2000).21 The right panels report similar calculations using the

number of banking crises from the same source. As can be seen in moving along the minor

diagonals of the four panels, years in which G-3 exchange rate volatility was above its median and

interest-rate volatility in the United States was below its median over the past eighteen years

were associated with relatively more crises in developing countries, especially compared to those

years when G-3 currency volatility was low but U.S. interest rate volatility was high. In that

sense, advocates of target zones are correct in nothing that crises are more frequent when G-3

exchange rates are more volatile. Moreover, that historical record suggests that the situation can

be improved from there by reducing that volatility bu incurring more interest rate of PCE

volatility in the United States.

2.     Basic Tests

       The difficulty in interpreting these data, whether on capital flows or GDP growth, is that

some of the regularities observed in moving between the cells of these contingency tables may

owe to systematic macroeconomic changes rather than unique effects from the various

volatilities. But in earlier section, we offered simple regression that helped to explain emerging

market economies’ capital flows and GDP growth using variables that could be treated as

exogenous to the South–U.S. interest rates and economic growth. We now ask whether G-3

indicator variables have any ability to explain the residuals to those “fundamental” regressions,

and thereby put confidence bands about the estimates of the effects of interest-rate and

exchange-rate volatility on capital flows and GDP growth.



       21
            The results are similar using the methodology of Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).

                                                25
        Each block of Table 13 corresponds to a specification in which the residual from the

equation explaining the capital flow concept in the column head is regressed against two G-3

dummies (with no constant terms, as the dummies are exhaustive). Those dummies are the same

we have used to split the data in the various exercises already reported and capture: the U.S.

business cycle; U.S. monetary policy; the volatilities of U.S. real short-term rates, G-3 exchange

rates, and U.S consumption growth; currency crises; and banking crises.22 In general, a

statistically significant coefficient would indicate that a G-3 factor exerted an additional influence

beyond that contained in U.S. interest rates and income. In the event, there are none to be had.

As to G-3 target zones in particular, there appears to be no significant effect on average of

episodes of higher volatilities by either measure for topline net capital flows. Taken literally--no

doubt too literally–this would indicate there is no particular cost to making real interest rates

more volatile, but there is also no particular benefit in damping G-3 exchange rate volatility. This

statistical evidence comes out not much different than the theoretical analysis: From the

perspective of emerging market economies, the case for limiting G-3 exchange rate volatility is

not proven. A similar analysis across regional aggregates, not shown to conserve on space,

provides no reason to question that judgment.

        We performed a similar exercise to see if either episodes of volatile G-3 exchanges rates or

U.S. real interest rates exerted a systematic influence on the growth of output in major emerging

market areas. Those results, reported in Table 14, tell a similar story. Across the six areas

examined, none of the dummy variables related to the various volatilities differed significantly


        22
             Thus, there are twenty-eight regressions reported in the table corresponding to four measures
of capital flows and seven different sets of states of nature.

                                                    26
from zero. Taken together, the evidence suggests that advocates of G-3 target zones have to

identify another mechanism by which financial market volatility in the industrial countries

impinges on their neighbors to the South beyond that expected through the flows of trade (with

their associated effects on income) or capital.




                                  V. Concluding Remarks

       In this paper, we have attempted to analyze and quantify how developments the exchange

rate arrangements of the G-3 countries influence emerging markets economies. The debate on

G-3 target zones should be put into the broader perspective of the ongoing debate on

exchange–rate arrangements in emerging market economies, which often hinge on credibility.

The advocates for dollarization, for instance, argue that a nation with an uneven history of

showing a commitment to low inflation can import the reputation of the central bank of the

anchor currency. For the issue at hand, however, there are no obvious bonuses to smaller

countries should G-3 central banks damp the fluctuations of their currencies–and, as

discussed in Rogoff (2001), the benefits to developed countries are limited at best. This also

implies that the direct benefits to emerging market economies should stem only from the

lessened volatility of their trade-weighted currencies. But as Rose (1999) points out, the

benefits of reduced exchange rate variability on trade flows, at least, are small compared to

adopting a common currency.

       This is also the place to discuss the limitations to our analysis. In particular, our use

of linear–or nearly linear models–may understate the consequences of variability in interest


                                                  27
rates and exchange rates. To the extent that high world interest rates trigger balance sheet

problems in emerging markets, the consequences of the tradeoff implied by a target zone

may be considerable. Indeed, one repeated message of this paper is that emerging market

economies, which have already surrendered a high degree of autonomy in their monetary

policies, often price their goods in foreign–not local–currencies, and can be shut out of

world financial markets suddenly, are different from their industrial brethren.




                                              28
                                           References

Borensztein, Eduardo, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1994. “The Macroeconomic Determinants of
       Commodity Prices,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 41 No. 2, June, 236-260.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1993. “Capital Inflows and
       the Real Exchange Rate in Latin Amrica: The Role of External Factors,” ” IMF Staff
       Papers, Vol. 40 No. 1, March, 108-150.

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2000. “Fear of Floating,” NBER Working Paper
       Number.

Chu, Ke-Young, and Thomas K. Morrison, 1984. “The 1981-82 Recession and Non-Oil Primary
      Commodity Prices,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 31 No. 1, March, 93-140.

Clarida, Richard H., 2000 “G3 Exchange Rate Relationships: A Recap of the Record and a
       Review of Proposals for Change,” Princeton Essays in International Economics, no. 219,
       September.

Dominguez, Kathryn M. and Jeffrey A. Frankel. “Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Matter?
     The Portfolio Effect,” American Economic Review 83, (1993), pp. 1356-1359.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1995. “Policy and Performance Links Between LDC Debtors and Industrial
      Nations,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 2, 303-356.

Fernandez-Arias, Eduardo, 1996. “The New Wave of Private Capital Inflows: Push or Pull?”
      Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 48, 389-418.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew Rose, 1996. “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
       Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics 41, 351-366.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., Sergio Schmukler, and Luis Servén, 2001. “Verifiability and the Vanishing
       Intermediate Exchange Rate Regime,” in S. Collins and D. Rodrik, eds., Policy
       Challenges in the Next Millenium, forthcoming, (Washington, DC: Brookings
       Institution).

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Nouriel Roubini, 2000. “The Role of Industrial Country Policies in
       Emerging Market Crises,” paper prepared for the NBE Conference on Economic and
       Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies, Woodstock.

Gertler, Mark and Kenneth Rogoff, 1990. “North-South Lending and Endogenous Domestic
        Capital Market Inefficiences,” Journal of Monetary Economics 26, (1990) pp. 245-266.


                                               29
Goldstein, Morris, 1999. Safeguarding Prosperity in a Global Financial System: Report of an
       Independent Task Force of the Council on Foreign Relations. (New York: Council on Foreign
       Relations).

Holtham, G.H., 1988. “Modeling Commodity Prices in a World Macroeconomic Model,” in O.
      Guvenen, ed., International Commodity Market Models and Policy Analysis, (Kluwer
      Academic Press), 221-258.

International Monetary Fund, 1999. Direction of Trade Statistics, (Washington, DC: International
       Monetary Fund).

International Monetary Fund. International Financial Statistics. (Washington, DC: International
       Monetary Fund), 2000.

International Monetary Fund, 2000. World Economic Outlook Database, www.imf.org.

Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Karen K. Lewis. “ Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Signal Future
      Monetary Policy?” Journal of Monetary Economics 37, (1996) pp. 285-312.

Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
      Balance-of-Payments Problems.” American Economic Review 89, (1999) pp. 473-500.

Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Sergio Schmukler. “Emerging Market Instability: Do Sovereign
      Ratings Affect Country Risk and Stock Returns?” mimeograph, The World Bank, (March
      2001).

Marquez, Jaime, 1990. “Bilateral Trade Elasticities,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
      72 No. 1, 70-77.

McKinnon, Ronald, 1984. An International Standard for Monetary Stabilization. (Washington,
     DC: Institute for International Economics).

McKinnon, Ronald, 1997. The Rules of the Game. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

.Reinhart, Carmen M., 1995, “Devaluation, Relative Prices, and Trade,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 42
       No. 2, June, 290-310.

Reinhart, Carmen M., 2000. “Sovereign Credit Ratings Before and After Financial Crises,”
      mimeograph, University of Maryland (October).

Rogoff, Kenneth, 2001. “On Why Not a Global Currency,” American Economic Review,
        forthcoming.

Williamson, John, 1986. “Target Zones and the Management of the Dollar.” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity.

                                                 30
  Good B


    E

    H

    G




                            I     F         Good A

Figure 1: Welfare in a Small Open Economy
Figure 2
U.S. business cycle and capital flows to emerging market economies
Billions of 1970 U.S. dollars

   Net real private capital flows                                                              Net real private direct investment
           Western Hemisphere
                                                                                                         Western Hemisphere
        Middle East and Europe
                                                                                                      Middle East and Europe
  Other Asian emerging markets                                      expansion     recession                                                                          expansion       recession
                                                                                                Other Asian emerging markets
           Asia, crisis countries
                                                                                                         Asia, crisis countries
                          Africa                                                                                          Africa

Total emerging market economies                                                               Total emerging market economies

                   -5                0       5                 10            15        20                             -2            0      2         4           6         8     10        12
                                         billions, $1970                                                                                       billions, $1970




 Net real private portfolio investment                                                         Other net real private capital flows


            Western Hemisphere                                                                            Western Hemisphere

        Middle East and Europe                                                                         Middle East and Europe
                                                                    expansion     recession                                                                          expansion        recession
  Other Asian emerging markets                                                                   Other Asian emerging markets

            Asia, crisis countries                                                                        Asia, crisis countries

                           Africa                                                                                          Africa

Total emerging market economies                                                               Total emerging market economies

                         -1          0   1         2           3         4        5     6                -4          -2             0          2          4            6         8         10
                                             billions, $1970                                                                            billions, $1970


Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Figure 3
U.S. monetary policy and capital flows to emerging market economies
Billions of 1970 U.S. dollars

   Net real private capital flows                                                          Net real private direct investment

                                                                                                         Western Hemisphere
           Western Hemisphere

        Middle East and Europe                                                                       Middle East and Europe
                                                                  tightening     easing                                                                                tightening        easing
  Other Asian emerging markets                                                                  Other Asian emerging markets

           Asia, crisis countries
                                                                                                         Asia, crisis countries
                             Africa
                                                                                                                         Africa
Total emerging market economies
                                                                                           Total emerging market economies
                   -5                 0        5             10         15          20
                                          billions, $1970                                                                          0         2       4         6            8       10      12
                                                                                                                                                     billions, $1970


 Net real private portfolio investment                                                     Other net real private capital flows

                                                                                                        Western Hemisphere
           Western Hemisphere

                                                                                                             Middle East and
        Middle East and Europe                                                                                  Europe
                                                                   tightening     easing                                                                      tightening        easing
                                                                                                       Other Asian emerging
  Other Asian emerging markets
                                                                                                             markets

            Asia, crisis countries
                                                                                                         Asia, crisis countries

                             Africa
                                                                                                                         Africa

Total emerging market economies
                                                                                                       Total emerging market
                                                                                                             economies
                        -1            0    1           2          3          4       5
                                           billions, $1970                                 -3          -2           -1             0             1       2              3       4            5
                                                                                                                                  billions, $1970

Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Figure 4
G-3 real exchange rate volatility and capital flows to emerging market economies
Billions of 1970 U.S. dollars, 1970 to 1999

  Net real private capital flows                                                                        Net real private direct investment

            Western Hemisphere                                                                                          Western Hemisphere

        Middle East and Europe                                                                                    Middle East and Europe
                                                                                 high     low                                                                                                    high       low
  Other Asian emerging markets                                                                               Other Asian emerging markets

            Asia, crisis countries                                                                                      Asia, crisis countries

                           Africa                                                                                                       Africa

Total emerging market economies                                                                         Total emerging market economies

                               -2    0   2       4        6     8      10   12       14   16    18                                                 0         2          4           6        8          10        12
                                                     billions, $1970                                                                                                    billions, $1970




Net real private portfolio investment                                                                   Other net real private capital flows


           Western Hemisphere                                                                                     Western Hemisphere

                                                                                                                        Middle East and
        Middle East and Europe
                                                                                                                           Europe
                                                                                  high        low                Other Asian emerging                                                     high      low
  Other Asian emerging markets
                                                                                                                       markets

           Asia, crisis countries                                                                                 Asia, crisis countries

                          Africa                                                                                                     Africa

Total emerging market economies                                                                                 Total emerging market
                                                                                                                      economies

                          -1         0       1        2        3        4        5        6         7   -2         -1           -1            0          1          1           2           2           3         3
                                                 billions, $1970                                                                                  billions, $1970


Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Figure 5
U.S. real short-term interest volatility and capital flows to emerging market economies
Billions of 1970 U.S. dollars, 1973 to 1999

   Net real private capital flows                                                            Net real private direct investment

           Western Hemisphere                                                                             Western Hemisphere

        Middle East and Europe                                                                       Middle East and Europe
                                                                    high       low                                                                                             high       low
  Other Asian emerging markets                                                                 Other Asian emerging markets

           Asia, crisis countries                                                                         Asia, crisis countries

                          Africa                                                                                         Africa

Total emerging market economies                                                              Total emerging market economies

                   -5                0       5                 10       15           20                                  -2         0      2       4      6      8       10     12       14     16
                                         billions, $1970                                                                                           billions, $1970




 Net real private portfolio investment                                                       Other net real private capital flows


            Western Hemisphere                                                                             Western Hemisphere

        Middle East and Europe                                                                          Middle East and Europe
                                                                        high       low                                                                                        high       low
  Other Asian emerging markets                                                                  Other Asian emerging markets

            Asia, crisis countries                                                                         Asia, crisis countries

                           Africa                                                                                         Africa

Total emerging market economies                                                               Total emerging market economies

                         -1          0   1         2           3    4          5         6         -4              -2               0               2                4               6           8
                                             billions, $1970                                                                            billions, $1970


Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Figure 6
U.S. real consumption volatility and capital flows to emerging market economies
Billions of 1970 U.S. dollars, 1970 to 1999

   Net real private capital flows                                                                    Net real private direct investment

           Western Hemisphere                                                                                      Western Hemisphere

        Middle East and Europe                                                                                 Middle East and Europe
                                                                            high       low                                                                                                 high        low
  Other Asian emerging markets                                                                            Other Asian emerging markets

           Asia, crisis countries                                                                                  Asia, crisis countries

                           Africa                                                                                                 Africa

Total emerging market economies                                                                      Total emerging market economies

                      -5             0       5          10         15             20         25                                              0       2        4         6       8          10          12    14
                                             billions, $1970                                                                                                      billions, $1970




 Net real private portfolio investment                                                               Other net real private capital flows


            Western Hemisphere                                                                                                 Western Hemisphere


        Middle East and Europe                                                                                             Middle East and Europe
                                                                              high         low                                                                                      high         low
   Other Asian emerging markets                                                                                     Other Asian emerging markets

            Asia, crisis countries                                                                                             Asia, crisis countries

                           Africa                                                                                                                Africa

Total emerging market economies                                                                                   Total emerging market economies

                            -1       0   1       2      3      4        5     6        7         8   -3              -2               -1                  0                 1                2               3
                                                 billions, $1970                                                                            billions, $1970


Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Table 1
Developed and Developing Country Links

                                                                                                Expected growth
Type of shock                 Transmission channel               Amplifiers                     consequences
The growth cycle: Recessions in the G-3
 Income effects               Trade: Lower exports to G-3        High trade exposure            Negative
                              Negative                           High G-3 income
                                                                 elasticities
 Relative price effects       Trade: Decline in the terms        High primary commodity         Negative
                              of trade for                       content in exports
                              developing countries               High exposure to cyclical
                                                                 industries in exports
 International capital flows Finance: Higher capital flows       Large declines in the domestic Positive
                              (primarily bank lending)           demand for bank loans
                              to emerging markets
The interest rate cycle:
Monetary easings
International capital flows   Finance: Higher portfolio         Developed bond and equity       Positive
                              capital flows to emerging markets markets. High interest-rate
                                                                sensitivity of flows.
Debt servicing                Finance: Lower cost               High levels of debt             Positive
                                                                Sensitive risk premia to
                                                                 international interest rates
Interest earnings             Finance: Declining interest       High level of reserves relative Not obvious
                              income                            to debt
High volatility in G-3:
Interest rates                Finance: Complicates               High levels of short term debt Not obvious
                              debt management                    Large new financing needs
                              Investment: Uncertainty tends to   An initially high level of FDI Negative
                              reduce investment consequences
Bilateral exchange rate       Trade: Reduces trade               Pegging to a G-3 currency      Negative?
Table 2
The condition of the U.S. economy and foreign real GDP growth
Percent, annual rate, 1970 to 1999
                                                                        When the U.S.                    When U.S.
                                                                        economy is in:                   monetary policy is:
                                                                         expansion recession              tightening   easing

NEWLY INDUSTRIALIZED ASIAN ECONOMIES                                            7.92        7.11               8.79      6.93
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES                                                            5.19        4.82               5.17      5.02
AFRICA                                                                          2.75        3.29               2.63      3.10
ASIA                                                                            6.70        6.25               6.72      6.46
MIDDLE EAST AND EUROPE                                                          4.47        4.31               3.87      4.80
WESTERN HEMISPHERE                                                              3.63        3.81               4.21      3.34


Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Table 3
North-South trade patterns, 1999
percent
                        Exports to the   Imports from the
Region/Country          United States    United States
                        (as a share of   (as a share of
                        total exports)   total imports)
Latin America
Argentina                      11.3             19.6
Brazil                         22.5             23.8
Chile                          19.4             22.9
Colombia                       50.3             32.1
Peru                           29.3             31.6
Mexico                         88.3             74.1
Venezuela                      55.4               42


Asia
China Mainland                 21.5             11.8
Indonesia                      16.1              7.3
Korea                          20.6             20.8
Malaysia                       21.9             17.4
Philippines                    29.6             20.3
Singapore                      19.2             17.1
Thailand                       21.5             11.5

Africa
Chad                             7.2             2.1
Congo, Rep of                     19             3.5
Ethiopia                         8.4             4.9
Kenya                            4.6             6.7
Mozambique                       4.8             3.7
South Africa                     8.2            13.3
Uganda                           5.4             3.3
Zimbabwe                         5.8             4.8


Source: International Monetary Fund,
Direction of Trade Statistics (2000).
Table 4
Industrial country demand for developing country exports

Study and Sample PImporting country Exporting country                  Income Elasticity
Dornbusch (1985),                    All non-oil developing                         1.74
1960 to 1983                         Major exporters of manufactures                2.67
Marquez (1990)      Canada           Non OPEC developing                            2.83
                    Germany          Non OPEC developing                            2.29
                    Japan            Non OPEC developing                            1.22
                    United Kingdom   Non OPEC developing                            1.45
                    United States    Non OPEC developing                            3.04
                    Rest of OECD     Non OPEC developing                            2.61
Reinhart (1995),    All developed    All developing                                 2.05
1970 to 1991                            Africa                                      1.25
                                        Asia                                        2.49
                                        Latin America                               2.07
Table 5
Commodity prices and economic cycles: a review

Study                             Dependent variable/        Measure of developed-      Coefficient
                                  sample period              country growth rate used
Borensztein and Reinhart (1994)   All commodity index/       Industrial production                1.4
                                  1971:1-1992:3, quarterly   for developed economies
                                  All commodity index/       Industrial production for           1.54
                                  1971:1-1992:3, quarterly   developed economies plus
                                                             GDP for the Former
                                                             Soviet Union
Chu and Morrison (1984)           All commodity index/       GDP weighted industrial             1.66
                                  1958-1982, quarterly       production-G-7 countries
Dornbusch (1985)                  All commodity index/       OECD industrial production          2.07
                                  1970:2-1985:1, quarterly
Holtham (1988)                    All commodity index/     GDP growth for the                    0.51
                                  1967:2-1982:2,           G-7 economies
                                  semiannual               Industrial production for the         0.77
                                                           G-7 economies
Table 6
Emerging market economies and U.S. economic and policy cycles

Real GDP growth
Average annual real GDP growth, percent

NEWLY INDUSTRIALIZED ASIAN ECONOMIES                                  DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
U.S.              U.S. monetary policy is:                            U.S.              U.S. monetary policy is:
economy              Easing    Tightening                             economy              Easing    Tightening
is in:  Recession         6.81         8.16                           is in:  Recession         4.44        6.13
        Expansion         7.01         8.92                                   Expansion         5.39        4.98

ASIA                                                                  WESTERN HEMISPHERE
U.S.                        U.S. monetary policy is:                  U.S.              U.S. monetary policy is:
economy                        Easing    Tightening                   economy              Easing    Tightening
is in:  Recession                   6.02         7.07                 is in:  Recession         2.78        7.41
        Expansion                   6.75         6.65                         Expansion         3.69        3.57

Net private capital flows
Average, billions $1970

Net private capital flows                                             Net private direct investment
U.S.                      U.S. monetary policy is:                    U.S.                     U.S. monetary policy is:
economy                      Easing    Tightening                     economy                     Easing    Tightening
is in:    Recession              13.86         8.58                   is in:    Recession              4.24        3.42
          Expansion              19.35       13.21                              Expansion             11.50       11.03

Net private portfolio investment                                      Other net private capital flows
U.S.                     U.S. monetary policy is:                     U.S.                    U.S. monetary policy is:
economy                     Easing    Tightening                      economy                      Easing    Tightening
is in:    Recession              1.48         0.19                    is in:    Recession               8.38       4.98
          Expansion              6.61         3.95                              Expansion               1.24      -1.78


Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Table 7
Determinants of real private capital flows to emerging market economies

Estimated using annual data from 1970 to 1999
                                                      U.S.
                                              nominal      Real GDP
                                   constant interest rate   growth        R2
Net private capital flows              34.21         -2.32      -1.09      0.18
                                        8.38         0.96        1.11

Net private direct investment         18.80         -1.57       0.26       0.16
                                       6.61         0.76        0.88

Net private portfolio investment      13.55         -1.26       -0.33      0.19
                                       4.33         0.50        0.57

Other net private capital flows        2.11         0.50        -1.06      0.09
                                       6.16         0.71        0.82

Source:   Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund
          World Economic Outlook (October 2000) and Council of Economic
          Advisers Economic Report to the President (2001).
Note:     Standard errors are in italics.
Table 8
Determinants of real GDP growth in emerging market economies

Estimated using annual data from 1970 to 1999
                                                                        U.S.
                                                                 short real Real GDP
                                                      constant interest rate growth      R2
NEWLY INDUSTRIALIZED ASIAN ECONOMIES                      6.25         -0.21     0.56     0.16
                                                          0.94          0.23     0.25

DEVELOPING COUNTRIES                                      4.83        -0.24      0.20         0.23
                                                          0.40        0.10       0.11

AFRICA                                                    2.95        -0.14      0.05         0.03
                                                          0.60        0.15       0.16

ASIA                                                      6.30        0.16       0.01         0.04
                                                          0.67        0.16       0.18

MIDDLE EAST AND EUROPE                                    3.84        -0.52      0.43         0.17
                                                          1.04        0.26       0.28

WESTERN HEMISPHERE                                        3.73        -0.71      0.32         0.43
                                                          0.66        0.16       0.17

Source:                       Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund
                              World Economic Outlook (October 2000) and Council of Economic
                              Advisers Economic Report to the President (2001).
Note:                         Standard errors are in italics.
Table 9
Volatility and foreign real GDP growth
Percent, annual rate, 1970 to 1999
                                                    When:
                                                    G-3 currency volatility is:   U.S. rate volatility is:          U.S. consumption volatility is:
                                                          high             low           high                low           high           low


NEWLY INDUSTRIALIZED ASIAN ECONOMIES                      7.95            7.02           6.96                8.49          8.94          6.23
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES                                      5.33            4.56           4.68                5.54          5.25          4.88
AFRICA                                                    2.42            2.75           2.73                3.12          3.44          2.30
ASIA                                                      6.53            6.89           6.30                6.87          6.64          6.48
MIDDLE EAST AND EUROPE                                    4.33            3.37           3.55                5.42          4.90          3.89
WESTERN HEMISPHERE                                        4.90            1.98           3.33                4.09          3.87          3.47



Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Note: Sample period for U.S. rate volatility is 1973 to 1999.
Table 10
Net private capital flows to emerging market economies and G-3 volatilities
Average, billions $1970, 1973 to 1999

U.S. interest rate and G-3 exchange rate volatilities

Net private capital flows                                              Net private direct investment
U.S.                      G-3 currency volatility is:                  U.S.                    G-3 currency volatility is:
rate vol.                     Low          High                        rate vol.                   Low           High
is:         Low                 13.44          15.01                   is:       Low                  10.01           14.83
            High                19.91          14.85                             High                   7.68            4.25

Net private portfolio investment                                       Other net private capital flows
U.S.                      G-3 currency volatility is:                  U.S.                   G-3 currency volatility is:
rate vol.                     Low          High                        rate vol.                    Low         High
is:         Low                   5.09           3.01                  is:       Low                   -1.65         -2.83
            High                  9.03           1.39                            High                   3.19           9.21

U.S. PCE and G-3 exchange rate volatilies

Net private capital flows                                              Net private direct investment
U.S.                      G-3 currency volatility is:                  U.S.                    G-3 currency volatility is:
PCE vol.                      Low          High                        PCE vol.                    Low           High
is:         Low                 28.46          16.20                   is:       Low                  13.02           12.00
            High                  4.47         13.70                             High                   3.14            9.74

Net private portfolio investment                                       Other net private capital flows
U.S.                      G-3 currency volatility is:                  U.S.                   G-3 currency volatility is:
PCE vol.                      Low          High                        PCE vol.                     Low         High
is:         Low                  13.50           2.76                  is:       Low                    1.94           1.44
            High                  0.51           2.04                            High                   0.82           1.93

Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Table 11
Real GDP growth in emerging market economies and G-3 volatilities
Average annual rate, percent, 1973 to 1999

U.S. interest rate and G-3 exchange rate volatilities

NEWLY INDUSTRIALIZED ASIAN ECONOMIES                                  DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
U.S.            G-3 currency volatility is:                           U.S.           G-3 currency volatility is:
rate vol.           Low         High                                  rate vol.          Low         High
is:       Low           8.46          6.44                            is:       Low          4.93         4.42
          High          8.06          7.83                                      High         5.51         5.11

ASIA                                                                  WESTERN HEMISPHERE
U.S.                       G-3 currency volatility is:                U.S.            G-3 currency volatility is:
rate vol.                      Low         High                       rate vol.           Low         High
is:         Low                    8.10          6.41                 is:       Low           9.04         9.93
            High                   6.89          6.12                           High          7.37         6.20

U.S. PCE and G-3 exchange rate volatilies

NEWLY INDUSTRIALIZED ASIAN ECONOMIES                                  DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
U.S.            G-3 currency volatility is:                           U.S.           G-3 currency volatility is:
PCE vol.            Low         High                                  PCE vol.           Low         High
is:      Low            7.44          5.32                            is:      Low           5.92         4.10
         High           9.13          8.60                                     High          4.56         5.25

ASIA                                                                  WESTERN HEMISPHERE
U.S.                       G-3 currency volatility is:                U.S.            G-3 currency volatility is:
PCE vol.                       Low         High                       PCE vol.            Low         High
is:      Low                       7.91          5.41                 is:      Low            6.08         6.04
         High                      6.63          7.19                          High           4.51         5.44

Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Table 12
Likelihood of the twin crises and G-3 volatilities
Percent of the sample of above-the-median crises, 1980 to 1998

Currency crises                                                        Banking crises
U.S.                        G-3 currency volatility is:                U.S.                       G-3 currency volatility is:
rate vol.                       Low          High                      rate vol.                      Low           High
is:        Low                      0.10          0.25                 is:       Low                      0.05            0.20
           High                     0.10          0.10                           High                     0.10            0.15

Currency crises                                                        Currency crises
U.S.                        G-3 currency volatility is:                U.S.                       G-3 currency volatility is:
PCE vol.                        Low          High                      PCE vol.                       Low           High
is:        Low                      0.10          0.25                 is:       Low                      0.10            0.20
           High                     0.10          0.10                           High                     0.05            0.15

Source: Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (October 2000).
Table 13
Can "excess" real capital flows be explained by G-3 factors?

Relationship of the residual from the capital flow fundamentals equations
to G-3 dummy variables from 1970 to 1999.
                                      Net private capital flows
                                                       Direct
                                      Total            investment Portfolio     Other
U.S. business cycle
Expansion                                      0.44             0.69     0.61           -0.88
                                               2.72             2.14    1.39            1.98
Recession                                      -1.03         -1.61      -1.41           2.06
                                               4.16             2.14    2.13            1.98
U.S. monetary policy
Tightening                                     -1.78            0.42    -0.44           -1.78
                                               3.58             2.85    1.86            2.62
Easing                                         1.19          -0.28       0.29           1.18
                                               2.92             2.32    1.52            2.14
Volatility of U.S. real short-term rates (1)
High                                           2.40          -2.53       1.58           3.28
                                               3.49             2.51    1.77            2.37
Low                                            0.02             4.47    -0.18           -4.30
                                               3.36             2.42    1.71            2.29
Volatility of G-3 exchange rates
High                                            0.85          3.04      -0.92           -1.34
                                               3.11          2.32       1.59            2.27
Low                                            -0.97         -3.47       1.05            1.53
                                               3.33          2.48       1.70            2.42
Volatility of U.S. consumption
High                                           -4.93         -3.15      -2.76            1.06
                                               2.81          2.31       1.42            2.28
Low                                             5.63          3.61       3.16           -1.21
                                               3.00          2.47       1.52            2.44
Currency crises (2)
High                                           1.44             1.66    3.34            -3.61
                                               4.37             2.76    2.04            2.55
Low                                            5.25             4.22    1.38            -3.61
                                               5.12             3.23    2.39            2.99
Banking crises (3)
High                                          2.34         1.99      3.82               -3.55
                                              4.62        2.91       2.11               2.69
Low                                           3.83         3.57      1.07               -0.84
                                              4.87        3.07       2.22               2.83
Source:      Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund
             World Economic Outlook (October 2000) and Council of Economic
             Advisers Economic Report to the President (2001).
Note:        Standard errors are in italics.
             (1) Estimated from 1973 to 1999.
             (2) Estimated from 1980 to 1998.
             (3) Estimated from 1980 to 1998.
Table 14
Can "excess" real GDP growth be explained by G-3 factors?

Relationship of the residual from the real GDP growth fundamentals equations
to G-3 dummy variables from 1970 to 1999.
                                      Newly                                                                 Middle
                                      Industr.          Developing                                          East &           Western
                                      Asia              countries           Africa           Asia           Europe           Hemisphere
U.S. business cycle
Expansion                                        8.24                6.07            2.42           -6.82            -0.23             0.69
                                               3.02                 2.26             1.53           1.97             0.68              0.69
Recession                                        6.54               -0.17            -0.86          1.46             0.54              0.87
                                               4.62                 3.45             2.34           3.01             1.04              1.06
U.S. monetary policy
Tightening                                       4.12                4.37            0.29           -7.14            -1.23             -0.47
                                               3.91                 3.11             2.06           2.76             0.85              0.87
Easing                                         10.14                 4.08            2.20           -2.47            0.82              1.55
                                               3.19                 2.54             1.68           2.25             0.70              0.71
Volatility of U.S. real short-term rates (1)
High                                             9.74                0.66            2.36           -0.30            -0.85             -0.50
                                               4.01                 2.86             2.07           2.51             0.77              0.77
Low                                              7.06                8.76            0.93           -9.37            -0.26             0.88
                                               3.87                 2.76             1.99           2.42             0.74              0.74
Volatility of G-3 exchange rates
High                                           7.67                 6.03             -0.40          -4.98            -0.34             0.46
                                               3.47                 2.64             1.73           2.46             0.78              0.79
Low                                              7.80                2.10            3.54           -3.60            0.39              1.05
                                               3.71                 2.82             1.84           2.63             0.83              0.85
Volatility of U.S. consumption
High                                            2.12                1.31             -1.24          -3.83             0.19             0.98
                                                3.10                2.57             1.64           2.46             0.78              0.79
Low                                            14.15                7.50              4.50          -4.92            -0.22             0.46
                                                3.32                2.75             1.75           2.63             0.84              0.85
Currency crises (2)
High                                            6.44                 3.83            3.03           -7.35            -0.89             0.09
                                                4.93                 3.10            2.49           2.95             0.76              0.83
Low                                            15.99                10.33            4.23           -5.47            -0.48             0.40
                                                5.78                 3.64            2.92           3.46             0.89              0.97
Banking crises (3)
High                                          9.30           4.70    4.24                           -6.76            -0.71             0.12
                                              5.39          3.36     2.61                           3.11             0.80              0.87
Low                                          11.75           8.64    2.76                           -6.33            -0.73             0.34
                                              5.68          3.55     2.75                           3.28             0.84              0.92
Source:      Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund
             World Economic Outlook (October 2000) and Council of Economic
             Advisers Economic Report to the President (2001).
Note:        Standard errors are in italics.
             (1) Estimated from 1973 to 1999.
             (2) Estimated from 1980 to 1998.
             (3) Estimated from 1980 to 1998.
Appendix Table 1
Determinants of real private capital flows
to emerging market economies

Estimated using annual data from 1970 to 1999
                                                       U.S.
                                                 nominal Real GDP
                                               interest rate growth         R2
Africa
            Net private capital flows                 0.21         0.04      0.06
                                                      0.17        0.19
            Net private direct investment            -0.07         0.00      0.15
                                                      0.03        0.04
            Net private portfolio investment         -0.09         0.04      0.21
                                                      0.04        0.05
            Other net private capital flows           0.37         0.00      0.15
                                                      0.18        0.20
Asia, crisis countries
            Net private capital flows                 0.05        -0.42      0.05
                                                      0.34        0.39
            Net private direct investment            -0.12        -0.02      0.15
                                                      0.06        0.06
            Net private portfolio investment         -0.25        -0.05      0.13
                                                     0.13         0.15
            Other net private capital flows           0.43        -0.35      0.18
                                                     0.25         0.29
Other Asian emerging markets
           Net private capital flows                 -0.26        -0.06      0.03
                                                     0.27         0.31
            Net private direct investment            -0.64         0.07      0.19
                                                     0.27         0.31
            Net private portfolio investment         -0.04        -0.04      0.03
                                                     0.05         0.06
            Other net private capital flows           0.42        -0.09      0.11
                                                     0.25         0.28
Middle East and Europe
           Net private capital flows                 -1.68        -0.25      0.33
                                                     0.46         0.54
            Net private direct investment            -0.08         0.08      0.11
                                                     0.07         0.08
            Net private portfolio investment          0.02        -0.06      0.01
                                                     0.12         0.14
            Other net private capital flows          -1.63        -0.27      0.39
                                                     0.40         0.46
Western Hemisphere
          Net private capital flows                   0.04        -0.29      0.01
                                                     0.47         0.54
            Net private direct investment            -0.41         0.10      0.09
                                                     0.27         0.32
            Net private portfolio investment         -0.73        -0.21      0.20
                                                     0.28         0.32
            Other net private capital flows           1.18        -0.21      0.27
                                                     0.40         0.46

Source:     Authors' calculations using International Monetary Fund
            World Economic Outlook (October 2000) and Council of Economic
            Advisers Economic Report to the President (2001).
Note:       Standard errors are in italics.
