NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PHYSICIAN INCOME EXPECTATIONS AND SPECIALTY CHOICE
Sean Nicholson
Nicholas S. Souleles
Working Paper 8536
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8536
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2001 by Sean Nicholson and Nicholas S. Souleles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Physician Income Expectations and Specialty Choice
Sean Nicholson and Nicholas S. Souleles
NBER Working Paper No. 8536
October 2001

ABSTRACT
In spite of the important role of income expectations in economics, economists know little about
how people actually form these expectations. We use a unique data set that contains the explicit income
expectations of medical students over a 25-year time period to examine how students form income
expectations. We examine whether students condition their expectations on their own ability,
contemporaneous physician income, and the ex post income of physicians in their medical school cohort.
We then test whether a model that uses the students’ explicit income expectations to predict their
specialty choices has a better fit than a model that assumes income expectations are formed statically, and
a model that bases income expectations on ex post income.

Sean Nicholson
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
nicholss@wharton.upenn.edu

Nicholas S. Souleles
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
and NBER
souleles@wharton.upenn.edu

2
I.

Introduction
Income expectations play a central role in many economic studies, particularly studies of

schooling decisions and occupational choice. Economists rarely observe peoples’ income expectations
and therefore must make assumptions about how individuals form these expectations. There is little
agreement among economists regarding whether income expectations are formed fully rationally or not,
and what information people use when forming income expectations (Manski, 1993). In his “cobweb”
model of occupational labor supply, Freeman (1971) assumes that income expectations are static, or
adaptive. College students expect to earn the contemporaneous mean income of individuals who are
already in the contemplated profession. Sloan (1970) also assumes expectations are static in his study of
physician specialty choice by deriving medical students’ expected income associated with each specialty
based on contemporaneous physician income. By contrast, Willis and Rosen (1979) assume that income
expectations are rational; high school graduates understand the process that will generate their future
income. Students compare the expected earnings associated with attending college versus completing
high school, and select the utility-maximizing schooling level. Hay (1991), who also assumes that
medical students have rational income expectations, extends the Willis and Rosen (1979) model to allow
medical students to choose from among three possible specialties (rather than two schooling levels).
Willis and Rosen (1979) and Hay (1991) test their models by instrumenting for individuals’ ex-post
income with information known at the time of the schooling decision, such as gender and ability.
In all four of the studies cited above, the authors find that students are more likely to choose a
particular occupation or a schooling level if they have a relatively large difference in expected income
between that occupation/schooling level and its alternative. However, as Manski (1993) points out,
without any evidence of how people form income expectations, “the most that one can do is infer the
decision rule conditional on maintained assumptions on expectations.” Manski (1993) has shown that
misspecifying how income expectations are formed can lead to incorrect parameter estimates, such as the

3
responsiveness of enrollment to the rate of return to schooling.
This paper directly examines how medical students form income expectations. Specifically, to
what extent does a medical student condition his own expected income on the mean income of physicians
who are currently practicing, the ex post income of physicians in the specialty in which he plans to
practice, measures of his ability, and other individual characteristics such as age, gender, and race? Are
students’ expectations forward-looking, in that they correctly anticipate future trends in specialty
income?1 Medical students are some of the brightest people in the country, so if we find that their income
expectations are not forward-looking, it would be hard to imagine that other students have forwardlooking expectations. We then test whether students’ explicit income expectations help predict their
specialty choices, decisions for which expectations of future returns should be critical. We separately
compare the fit of a specialty choice model that uses the students’ explicit income expectations with a
model that assumes students form income expectations statically, and a model that uses ex post income.
We use a unique data set that contains direct measures of medical students’ subjective income
expectations and a rich set of demographic and ability measures. The Jefferson Longitudinal Study
contains information on all 7,433 medical students who graduated from Jefferson Medical College, a
large medical school in Philadelphia, between 1968 and 1998. The students were surveyed in their fourth
year of medical school and asked to predict the following: the specialty in which they will practice, their
income five, 10, and 20 years after completing residency training (i.e., their income with five, 10, and 20
years of post-residency experience), peak career income, and characteristics of their medical practice.
There have been a few studies of subjective income expectations available in other surveys. Most

1

Some papers indirectly test the rationality of occupational choice without observing peoples’ subjective
income expectations. Zarkin (1985) examines whether prospective teachers incorporate forecastable
demand conditions into their decision to enter the occupation. He finds that future student enrollment
rationally affects the occupational decisions of secondary school teachers, but not elementary school
teachers. Siow (1984) assumes that prospective lawyers form income expectations rationally and expect
future cohorts of students to arbitrage away any rents that would otherwise occur from a wage shock. He
finds evidence consistent with his model.

4
of these studies focus on testing the rationality of the expectations (e.g., Das and van Soest, 1997;
Dominitz, 1998; Nicholson and Souleles, 2000). There has been little analysis, however, of the
determinants of expectations and of whether expectations help predict people's behavior. Souleles (1999)
analyzes the time series and cross-sectional variation in expectations in the Michigan Surveys of
Consumer Attitudes and Behavior, regarding variables like household income and financial position,
inflation and aggregate economic activity. He shows that such questions help predict households’
consumption and precautionary saving, as well as their portfolio allocations (Souleles, 2000).
Most surveys of expectations like the Michigan Surveys ask about expectations over a one-year
horizon, so they cannot be used to analyze low frequency life-cycle behavior. Also, the answers to the
expectational questions are often constrained to be discrete (e.g., Will your income increase, decrease, or
stay the same over the next year?). The Jefferson Longitudinal Study is well suited to examine how
students form income expectations and whether income expectations help predict specialty choice. The
Jefferson survey solicits open-ended, quantitative income expectations. The database also includes
information on student performance during medical school, including scores on national board exams.
Furthermore, the sample period spans a 30-year time period during which there were tremendous changes
in the health care market. This provides a large amount of variation in factors that should affect income
expectations. With long-horizon income expectations we can analyze a person’s occupational choice, a
decision with substantial welfare implications.
We find that medical students do condition their expected income on their own ability and the
contemporaneous income of physicians in the students’ intended specialty. However, expectations are
also forward-looking; students incorporate future trends in specialty income into their own expectations.
We also find that the students’ explicit income expectations are useful in predicting their behavior. The
specialty choice model that uses students’ explicit income expectations fits the data better than models
that assume students form income expectations statically or that expectations match ex post income.
The paper is organized as follows. The two data sets used in this paper – the Jefferson

5
Longitudinal Study data set and the American Medical Association annual survey on physician income –
are described in the following section. Section III presents the empirical model we use to analyze how
medical students form income expectations and how those expectations affect their choice of specialty.
Results are reported in Section IV and concluding comments in Section V.

II. Data
In 1968 Jefferson Medical College began surveying its medical students in their fourth year of
school. Students were asked to predict various aspects of their future medical practice and career: the
specialty in which they will practice, the number of hours per week they will work, the proportion of time
they will devote to research and teaching, the percentage of their patients who will be low income, and
the age at which they will retire. Between 1968 and 1979, students were also asked to state the income,
after medical expenses and before taxes, that they expected to receive 5, 10, and 20 years after completing
residency training, and the peak income they expected to receive during their career. Students who
graduated after 1979 have been asked to predict their peak income only. Students were asked to report
their income in real terms rather than trying to guess the inflation rate.2 The Jefferson Longitudinal Study
now contains information on 7,433 individuals, most of whom are now practicing physicians. Sample
means are presented in Table 1.
Information on student performance has been added to the Jefferson Longitudinal Study.
Medical students must pass three national exams before they can receive a license to practice medicine in
the United States. Part 1 of the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) test is administered after
the second year of medical school and covers the classroom material taught during the first two years
(e.g., anatomy, physiology, pharmacology). Jefferson students received an average score of 204.4 on Part
2

For example, the 1970 survey question was worded as follows: “In answering the following questions
relating to income, please assume that dollars maintain their 1970 value. What do you think your own
gross personal income (after professional expenses, but before income taxes) will be 5 years after

6
1 of the NBME, slightly below the national average of 210.3
Many economists who study occupational choice and schooling decisions assume that individuals
base their income expectations on the contemporaneous mean income of earlier cohorts of students who
are now employed in the occupation of interest. We use data from American Medical Association (AMA)
surveys to characterize the information that was available to the Jefferson students.4 The AMA reports
the mean and median medical practice income (income after professional expenses but before taxes) by
specialty for physicians in the following age groups: under 36 years old, between 36 and 45, between 46
and 55, between 56 and 65, and over 65 years old. We assume that the mean income for an age group
corresponds to physicians at the midpoint of the age range (e.g., the mean income of a 40-year-old
physician is assumed to be the mean income reported for the 36-45 year old group). We linearly
interpolate between age-specific observations to estimate the national, cross-section age-income profile
for each specialty in each year.5 Most students complete medical school between the ages of 26 and 28,
so the age-income profile closely approximates the experience-income profile. The income expectations
of the Jefferson students are then matched with the corresponding national mean income of physicians
who are currently practicing in the specialty in which each medical student intends to enter. For example,
consider a student who graduates from medical school in 1977, plans to become a surgeon, and expects
his income with five years of experience to be $185,000.6 In 1976 the mean income of surgeons with five
years of experience from the AMA survey was $172,000, measured in 1996 dollars. When analyzing the
completing residency training?”
3
The second part of the NBME exam is administered in the fourth year of medical school and the third
part is administered in the first year of the students’ residency program. We focus on the Part 1 score as a
measure of student ability and performance because for some students the second and third parts occurred
after they stated their income expectations.
4
Each year the AMA surveys a nationally representative, random sample of about 4,000 practicing
physicians.
5

Specifically, we assume that physicians complete medical school at age 26, spend the number of years
as a resident as required by their specialty, and begin practicing medicine immediately after completing
residency training.

7
determinants of income expectations, we compare this person’s expected income with the mean
contemporaneous income of surgeons in 1976 who had five years of experience (YN5, where the
superscript refers to “national” and the subscript refers to years of post-residency experience). We lag the
national data by one year because the AMA survey is published one year after the survey is conducted.
The same procedure is used to assign a corresponding national mean income for students’ expected
income with 10 and 20 years of experience. The peak contemporaneous income in a specialty is the
maximum age-specific mean in the national cross-section experience-income profile.
By 1987 the student described above should have completed his five-year surgery residency
program and have been practicing medicine for five years. In 1986 the mean income of surgeons with
five years of experience from the AMA survey was $205,000, also measured in 1996 dollars. The mean
income of surgeons with five years of experience increased by $33,000 ($205,000 - $172,000) from the
time the student formed his expectation to the time the student had five years of experience. In some of
the analysis that follows, we examine whether students correctly anticipated the future change in income
and incorporated this change into their own expectations.
Betts (1996) and Nicholson (1999) have shown that there is substantial variation among college
and medical students in how much they know about wages. Similarly, Souleles (1999) even found
variation in peoples’ forecasts of aggregate variables like inflation and economic activity. We refer to
another series of questions on the Jefferson survey to incorporate heterogeneity of market information.
Jefferson medical students were asked to estimate the practice income currently being earned by
physicians in six different specialties: family practice, internal medicine, surgery, pediatrics,
obstetrics/gynecology, and psychiatry. We calculate the accuracy of each student’s market information
by taking the difference between the student’s estimate of the current income in the specialty in which
they plan to enter and the median income of physicians already practicing in that specialty, as reported in

6

All expected and realized income in this paper are converted to 1996 dollars using the urban CPI.

8
the AMA surveys.7 Jefferson students under predict the prevailing median income in their preferred
specialty by $17,400, on average, as reported in the last row of Table 1.

III. Empirical Method
a. Income Expectations
We begin by examining how students form income expectations. Let EYi,j,t=0 represent the
income that student i in his fourth-year of medical school (t=0) expects to receive when he has j years of
post-residency experience. We allow a student’s information set to consist of personal characteristics
(Xi); the contemporaneous mean national income of physicians with j years of experience who are
practicing in year 0 in the specialty the student intends to enter (YNj,t=0, where “N” refers to “national”);
an indicator variable for the specialty the student expects to enter (S); an indicator variable for the
student’s graduation year (T); a measure of how accurately the student estimates the prevailing income of
physicians in the specialty he plans to enter (YN,est - YN); and the future growth of physician income in the
student’s specialty (YNj,t=j - YNj,t=0):

N
N
N
(1) EY i, j,t=0 = α 1 X i + α 2 Y Nj,t=0 + α 3 S + α 4 T + α 5 ( Y i,N,t=est
0 - Y t = 0 ) + α 6 ( Y j,t = j - Y j,t = 0 ) + u 1

Through a series of ordinary least squares regressions of form (1), we test whether and to what extent
students’ condition their expected income on the above information.
Our measure of contemporaneous physician income (YNj,t=0) is conditioned only on specialty and
experience level. If medical students only observe the specialty and experience level of practicing
physicians and expectations are static, α2 will equal one and the other coefficients in equation (1) will be
7

About three-quarters of the Jefferson students expected to enter one of these six specialties.

9
zero. Non-zero α1 coefficients are consistent with either rational expectations or static expectations where
students observe characteristics other than just specialty and experience level (e.g., ability, race, gender).
When the specialty and year indicators are excluded from the regression, α2 is identified by variation in
physician income between specialties at a point in time, and variation over time in all specialty incomes.
When the specialty and year indicators are included, α2 is identified by within-specialty income variation
over time. Therefore, a positive coefficient on α2 in the latter specification indicates that students are
quite knowledgeable about relative changes in specialty incomes.
The coefficient α5 measures the extent to which students’ misinformation about contemporaneous
physicians’ income is incorporated into their own income expectations. The final variable in equation (1)
measures the future growth rate of physician income in the student’s specialty. If students had perfect
foresight, α6 would be close to one.8 More generally, α6 measures the proportion of future income growth
that is forecasted by students. For example, if students anticipate that the demand for surgical services
will increase in the future, they might expect their future income to be higher than that of previous cohorts
of surgeons. A positive coefficient on α6 would be the strongest indication that students are forwardlooking when forming their income expectations.

b. Specialty Choice
Some economists question the value of survey questions such as those asking students to state
their expected income. It is worth noting, however, that most variables in household datasets are based on
self-reported information. Instead of repeating the well-known advantages and disadvantages of survey
questions, we formally test whether subjective income expectations help predict people’s behavior.

8

The physician’s own income realization Yi,j is not in his information set at time t=0. By contrast, YNj,t=j
is the average income in his specialty in year j. Because YNj,t=j can be interpreted as the projection of Yi,j
on time and specialty dummies, it can be interpreted as a rational expectations forecast of Yi,j, and so is a
valid regressor in equation (1).

10
Specifically, we analyze the specialty choice decisions of medical students using three different
assumptions about how students form income expectations. We compare the fit of a model that uses
students’ subjective income expectations to the fit of models where medical students are assumed to have
static income expectations – they expect to receive the contemporaneous mean income of practicing
physicians -- or forward-looking expectations – medical students expect their income with 10 years of
experience, for example, to equal the mean income that was actually received by their cohort 10 years
later. If students’ specialty choices can be predicted more accurately in the former model relative to the
latter two models, this provides evidence that subjective income expectations can help explain
individuals’ behavior.
Ninety-seven percent of U.S. medical school graduates enter a residency training program after
completing school. Residency positions are available in 26 different specialties, which range in length
from three years for primary care specialties (family practice, internal medicine, and pediatrics) to five
years for surgical specialties (e.g., orthopedic surgery and general surgery). In 1997 the mean income of
primary care physicians was $155,000, considerably lower than non-primary care physicians ($230,000).
However, due to the apparently favorable non-monetary attributes of the primary care specialties and
barriers to entry into some non-primary care specialties, each year a majority of the graduating medical
students enter primary care residency programs (Nicholson, 1999).9
Our model of specialty choice and income expectations is based on those of Hay (1991) and
Willis and Rosen (1979). Medical students consider the monetary and non-monetary attributes of each
specialty and choose the specialty that maximizes their expected lifetime utility. For simplicity, we
consider the choice between a primary care (S=0) and a non-primary care specialty (S=1).10 The

9

Many students who begin primary care residency programs sub-specialize after completing their initial
program (e.g., internal medicine residents receiving further training in cardiology), so that the majority of
physicians in the U.S. practice in a non-primary care specialty.
10

We group psychiatry with the three traditional primary care specialties for this analysis because the

11
difference in the expected utility of entering a non-primary care versus a primary care specialty, I, is
defined as a function of individual characteristics, Z:

(2) I i = γ Zi + u i
Pr (choose S = 1) = Pr (I ≥ 0) = Φ ( γ Z),
Pr (choose S = 0) = Pr (I < 0) = 1 - Φ ( γ Z) ,

where u is has a standard normal distribution. One component of the net benefit of choosing a nonprimary care specialty is the income a student expects to receive in a non-primary care specialty relative
to the income they expect to receive in a primary care specialty. Students who actually enter a nonprimary care specialty expect to receive income Y1, and students who actually enter a primary care
specialty expect to receive income Y0:

(3) Y i1 = β 1 Xi + ε i1
Yi0 = β 0 Xi + ε i0 ,
where X is a subset of Z. We assume that a student’s debt, race, and age affect their choice of specialty
but have no effect on the income they expect to receive in each specialty. If students expect to retire at
the same age, relatively young medical students will tend to prefer non-primary care specialties because
they have more working years over which to recoup their investment in the relatively long non-primary
care residency programs. With liquidity constraints, students with substantial debt might prefer a primary
care specialty because this allows them to begin paying off their loans more quickly. Finally, it is
conceivable that the distribution of equalizing differences between primary and non-primary care differs
between whites and non-whites. Bhattacharya (2000) also assumes that debt influences specialty choice

mean income of psychiatrists and the length of psychiatric residency training programs are more similar
to the primary than non-primary care specialties.

12
but not income.
We assume that u and ε1 have a bivariate normal distribution with means of zero, standard
deviations of one and σ1, respectively, and correlation ρ1; u and ε0 are assumed to have a bivariate normal
distribution with means of zero, standard deviations of one and σ0, respectively, and correlation ρ0. In the
empirical application of this model, Y will either refer to a medical student’s expected peak income over
the course of their career, or their income with 10 years of experience.
The Jefferson survey records a student’s expected income in their chosen specialty only. That is,
we observe Y1 when I > 0 and Y0 when I < 0. The expected income of students who enter a non-primary
care specialty is truncated on a positive expected net benefit of choosing such a specialty, and the
expected income of students who enter a primary care specialty is truncated on a negative expected net

(4) E [ Y 1 | Y 1 observed ] = E [ Y 1 | I ≥ 0]
= β 1′ X + E [ε 1 | I ≥ 0]
= β 1′ X + ρ 1 σ 1 λ1
= β 1′ X + β λ1 λ1 ,

φ (γZ)
)
Φ (γZ)
(5) E [Y0 | Y0 observed ] = E [Y0 | I < 0]
= β 0′ X + E [ε 0 | I < 0]
= β 0′ X + ρ 0 σ 0 λ 0
= β 0′ X + β λ 0 λ 0 ,
φ (γZ)
where λ 0 = - (
)
1 - Φ (γZ)
where λ1 = (

benefit of choosing a non-primary care specialty:

If selection into specialties is non-random, an ordinary least squares regression of students’ expected
income on student characteristics would yield inconsistent estimates of β1 and β0. Consistent estimates

13
can be obtained if one includes the Mills ratios, or selection-correction terms, λ1 and λ0.
λ1 is non-negative, so a positive coefficient βλ1 would indicate that the observed expected income
of students who enter a non-primary care specialty is greater than the income that students who chose a
primary care specialty would expect to earn if they instead chose a non-primary care specialty. Since λ0 is
non-positive, a negative coefficient βλ0 would indicate that the expected income of students who chose a
primary care specialty is also biased upward relative to the population expected income, where the
population includes students who enter both specialties. If, on the other hand, βλ1 and βλ0 were both
positive, students who enter non-primary care specialties would have an absolute advantage, in terms of
expected income, relative to students who enter primary care specialties.
Following Hay (1991) and Willis and Rosen (1979), our estimation strategy consists of three
steps. First, we estimate equation (2) with a probit model to obtain the reduced-form estimates of γ. We
then compute λ1 for students who actually enter a non-primary care specialty and λ0 for students who
actually enter a primary care specialty. In the second step we estimate β1 and βλ1 by regressing the
expected income of students who chose a non-primary care specialty on observed characteristics and λ1.
Likewise, we estimate β0 and βλ0 by regressing the expected income of students who chose a primary care
specialty on observed characteristics and λ0.
In order to estimate the responsiveness of specialty choice to expected income, we need to
estimate the income a student would expect to receive in the specialty they decided not to enter.
According to our model, a student who chose a primary care specialty would have the following expected

(6) E [ Y 1 | Y 0 observed ] = Y *1 = E [ Y 1 | I < 0]
= β 1X + E [ε 1 | I < 0]
= β 1X + β λ 1 λ 0
income in a non-primary care specialty:

14
A similar approach is used to predict the counterfactual expected income (Y0*) for students who actually
entered a non-primary care specialty. For each student we calculate the difference in expected income
between a non-primary and primary care specialty as Y1 - Y0* for students who chose a non-primary care
specialty, and Y1* - Y0 for students who chose a primary care specialty.
In the third step of the empirical model we re-estimate the probit equation (2) after including for
each student the difference in expected income between non-primary and primary care specialties.
Variables that are assumed to influence expected income but not directly affect the non-monetary value of
a specialty, such as a student’s board score, are excluded from the final specialty choice regression. We
estimate the standard errors of this final probit by jointly bootstrapping all three steps.
We assess the usefulness of subjective income expectations in three ways. First, we compare the
log likelihood of the model where students are assumed to make specialty choices based on their unique
subjective expected income to the log likelihood of the models where students’ income expectations are
assumed to be static or to match ex post income. Second, in each model we predict the specialty that each
student will choose, and then compare the percentage of choices correctly predicted by each of the three
models. The coefficients from the probit specialty choice regression yield a predicted latent utility for
each student, which can be translated into a predicted probability of choosing non-primary care. If the
predicted probability for a particular student is greater than the proportion of the sample that actually
chose a non-primary care specialty, we predict that this particular student will choose a non-primary care
specialty. Third, we estimate a specialty choice probit that includes both the subjective income
expectation and a new variable defined as the difference between the student’s static income expectation
and their subjective income expectation. If the coefficient on latter coefficient is insignificant, then
information on contemporaneous physicians’ income does not provide incremental predictive power for
specialty choice, beyond the information available in the expectations variables. We perform the same
procedure for ex post income as well.

15
IV. Results
a. Income Expectations
We begin with an analysis of how medical students form expectations of their peak income.
Every fourth-year medical student at Jefferson Medical College since 1968 has been asked to predict the
peak income they will receive during their career, so our sample is large and covers a time period when
the health care market has undergone profound change. The mean expected peak income for each cohort
of Jefferson students between 1974 and 1998, measured in 1996 dollars, is depicted in Figure 1 for
students entering family practice, and in Figure 2 for students entering surgery. These are two of the most
popular specialties among the Jefferson students and therefore provide large sample sizes. The
corresponding contemporaneous national peak incomes of practicing physicians, from the AMA crosssection surveys, are also depicted in these two figures (the AMA data are also reported in 1996 dollars).11
For instance, for fourth-year medical students graduating in 1987 and entering family practice, the
contemporaneous national peak income is the peak income of family practice physicians from the 1986
AMA survey.
Between 1974 and 1987 the expected peak income of students entering family practice
corresponded very closely with the peak incomes of practicing physicians (Figure 1). At the start of this
time period the income of family practitioners fell substantially and the Jefferson students adjusted their
own expectations accordingly. The two lines in Figure 1 diverge in 1987; family practice income has
increased in real terms while the students’ expectations have remained fairly constant. Nonetheless, the
two time series remain correlated. Medical students entering surgery after 1983 expected their peak
income to be less than that of practicing surgeons (Figure 2). As surgeons’ incomes increased in the late
1980s and early 1990s, the students’ expectations likewise increased. In 1993 the students’ mean

11

The AMA did not conduct a physician survey in 1977, 1980, and 1981 so contemporaneous peak
income by specialty is not available for those years.

16
expected peak income decreased by 25 percent from the previous year, probably in response to the
Clinton administration’s intent to reform the health care system. This drop occurred even though the
income of practicing surgeons nationally changed very little in 1993. It appears that when the Clinton
reform plan failed the medical students entering surgery in 1994 increased their expectations sharply.
One possible explanation for the divergence of expected from contemporaneous income in the
mid 1980s is that Jefferson Medical College, like most medical schools, began accepting more female
students in the 1980s. The population of practicing physicians, however, was still predominantly male
until the 1990s. Since female medical students have lower income expectations than their male
colleagues, as we demonstrate below, an increase in the proportion of medical students who are female
will reduce the mean expected income, all else equal. An alternative explanation is that over time the
ability of the Jefferson students might have fallen relative to the national average.12 In both specialties the
expected peak income decreased substantially between 1978 and 1981. This temporary decline might
have occurred because it took students several years to incorporate the unusually high inflation rates into
their own forecasts of real income.13
We perform a series of regressions of equation (1) in order to examine the determinants of
income expectations. In the first column of Table 2, a student’s expected peak income is regressed on
personal characteristics only in order to examine the role of ability. Ability can affect expected income in
two ways. A person of relatively high ability might be more likely to choose and be admitted into a highpaying specialty; and/or there might be returns to ability within a specialty. When indicator variables for
a student’s intended specialty are omitted, the coefficient on ability will capture both of these effects.
Students who received a score on Part 1 of the NBME in the top quartile among Jefferson students are

12

Nationally, the failure rate on Part 1 of the NBME has fallen from about 16 percent to 5 percent
between 1990 and 1997, while the percentage of Jefferson students failing the exam has remained fairly
constant at about three to five percent during this period.
13
Souleles (1999) also finds in the Michigan surveys that inflation expectations were lower than actual
inflation at this time.

17
assigned a value of one for the high board score variable; students who scored in the bottom quartile are
assigned a value of one for the low board score variable. The coefficient on the high board score variable
is significantly positive but small in magnitude; ability has a relatively minor effect on income
expectations. Students who perform well on the board exam after their second year of medical school
expect their peak career income to be about $10,000 higher than students with average performance. This
represents a 5.7 percent premium for people with relatively high scores. Women expect their peak
income to be $50,000 less than men. However, female physicians generally work fewer hours than male
physicians. One advantage of the Jefferson data set is that students were asked to report the number of
hours they expect to work. Controlling for expected hours reduces the coefficient on the female indicator
by 50 percent, but it remains negative and statistically significant (Table 4 below).
We now address the question of whether students adjust their expected income by the
contemporaneous difference in mean incomes between specialties. In the second regression of Table 2
we include the contemporaneous national peak income of practicing physicians (YNpeak,t=0) in the specialty
the student intends to enter in the year in which the student states his expectation. The estimated
coefficient on this variable is 0.67; a one-dollar increase in the peak income of physicians in a particular
specialty is associated with a 0.67 dollar increase in the expected peak income of a medical student who
plans to enter that specialty. The significance of this coefficient and the increase in R2 from 0.07 to 0.25
suggests that students do condition their expectations on the contemporaneous income in the specialty
they plan to enter. This result is not inconsistent with rational expectations, however. If income is serially
correlated across cohorts, rational expectations should be partly correlated with contemporaneous income.
Since the coefficient is less than one, expectations are not strictly adaptive; they do not depend only on
contemporaneous income. The female coefficient decreases in absolute value because women are more
likely to enter a low-paying specialty than men.
Indicator variables for the specialty a medical student intends to enter and their graduation year
are added to the third regression of Table 2. We begin by assuming specialty choice is exogenous, or at

18
least predetermined. The next section models the specialty choice directly. The specialty coefficients
measure the average difference in expected income, relative to family practice, over the entire 1974-1997
time period. The coefficient on the national peak income (YNpeak,t=0) of 0.22 is still statistically different
from zero although smaller than in the previous specification. This coefficient is now identified by
income variation within a specialty over time. The peak incomes of physicians in the six different
specialties between 1973 and 1996 are plotted in Figure 3. Specialty incomes did not always move
together during this time period. For example, the incomes of surgeons and obstetricians increased in the
late 1980s relative to the other four specialties, and decreased relative to the other specialties in 1993 and
1994. These results suggest that students do incorporate relative changes in specialty income into their
own expectations, but not on a dollar for dollar basis.
Four of the five specialty coefficients are positive and statistically significant in the third
regression, and the coefficients for surgery and obstetrics are large. Thus, students condition their
expectations on more than just the current income in their intended specialty. Consider the coefficient of
$73,000 on the surgery indicator variable. Conditioning on the contemporaneous income of physicians,
students who intended to become surgeons expect their peak income to be $73,000 higher than students
who intend to become family practitioners (the omitted specialty indicator), on average. This implies that
prospective surgeons were forward-looking; they expected income to grow in the future relative to family
practice. In fact, over the 1973 to 1996 period, the real peak income of surgeons and obstetricians
increased by 32 percent and 18 percent, respectively, while the peak income of family practitioners
decreased by 18 percent (see Figure 3).
In the fourth regression of Table 2 we add a variable that measures a student’s knowledge of
current physician income. The “information accuracy” variable is the difference between a student’s
assessment of the current income of physicians in the specialty he plans to enter and the contemporaneous
national median income of physicians in that specialty, as measured by the AMA surveys. The estimated
coefficient on this variable is 0.84; a student’s market misinformation is incorporated almost dollar for

19
dollar into their own income expectations. If, for example, a student who plans to become a pediatrician
believes that pediatricians currently make $10,000 more than they actually do, his expected peak income
will be $8,400 higher than a similar person who perfectly predicts a pediatrician’s income. Adding the
information accuracy variable increases the R2 from 0.30 to 0.45. Hence, a considerable amount of the
variation in income expectations is due to heterogeneity of information regarding the physician market.
The coefficient on the contemporaneous national peak income is substantially higher in the fourth
specification relative to the third specification, and the coefficients on the surgery and obstetrics indicator
variables are substantially lower. This latter result suggests that part of the reason students entering
surgery and obstetrics expected their income to grow in the future relative to other specialties was that
they overestimated the current income of physicians in those specialties.
The disadvantage of using the expected peak income variable is that we do not know when in
their career a student expects his peak income to occur. By contrast, expected income information for 5,
10, and 20 years of experience are available for about two-thirds of the 2,300 students who graduated
from Jefferson Medical College before 1980.14 This more detailed information allows us to analyze the
lifetime profile of expected income, and to test whether students were able to anticipate the future growth
rate of specialty income. In Table 3 we pool each student’s expected income observations for 5 and 10
years of experience and include a variable that measures the future growth rate of specialty income (the
variable (YNj,t=j - YNj,t=0) in equation (1)).15 Standard errors have been corrected to allow for correlation in
the error terms between the multiple observations for an individual, and an indicator variable is included
for observations with 10 years of experience (five years is omitted).
The coefficient of 0.27 on the income growth variable in Table 3 indicates that students do
incorporate future changes in specialty income into their own expectations. This is strong evidence that
14

Beginning in 1980, students were asked to state their expected peak income only.

15

Expected income with 20 years of experience is omitted because the AMA data for physicians with 20

20
income expectations are forward-looking, and not entirely adaptive. The second regression in Table 3
omits the income growth variable for purposes of comparison with the regressions in Table 2. Other than
the contemporaneous mean income, the coefficient estimates do not change substantially when the
income growth variable is included.
In Table 4 we pool the four expected income observations for each student (income with 5, 10,
and 20 years of experience, and peak income). We also include expected characteristics of the students’
medical practices. Students who expect to spend more time on teaching and research expect to make less.
Controlling for the number of hours per week a student expects to work, women still expect an annual
income $25,000 lower than men. Students expect their income to increase by $35,000 between the 5th
and 10th years of experience, but only by $24,000 between the 10th and 20th years of experience. The peak
income is expected to be $12,000 higher than their income with 20 years of experience, on average. The
students’ responses imply a compound, annual real growth rate in income of 6.1 percent between years 5
and 10, but only 1.6 percent between years 10 and 20.

b. Specialty Choice
In order to examine whether subjective income expectations data help predict behavior, we
analyze the decision by medical students to enter a primary or non-primary care specialty after graduating
from medical school. We first analyze the specialty choice decision under the assumption that income
expectations are static or adaptive; i.e., that students expect their peak lifetime income in primary and
non-primary care to be equal to the contemporaneous peak incomes of practicing physicians in these two
specialty groups. The peak contemporaneous incomes are taken from the American Medical Association
annual surveys.16 Since we do not have the individual-level AMA data, in this first model we do not

years of experience is not yet available for most of the Jefferson graduates.
16

We weight the peak incomes in surgery and obstetrics to derive a contemporaneous non-primary care

21
control for non-random selection into the various specialties.
The first column of Table 5 presents coefficient estimates from a probit model of the specialty
choices of 2,458 medical students who graduated between 1971 and 1997 under the assumption that
students have static income expectations. The dependent variable is one if a student chooses a nonprimary care specialty, and a zero otherwise. Of greatest interest is the variable measuring the difference
between the contemporaneous peak income of non-primary care and primary care physicians. Its
estimated coefficient is 0.00389, and significant. A $10,000 increase in the contemporaneous income of
non-primary relative to primary care physicians is associated with an increase of 0.014 (from 0.36 to
0.374) in the probability that a medical student will choose a non-primary care specialty. Men and nonwhite students are more likely to choose a non-primary care specialty relative to their peers. We correctly
predict the specialty choices of 57.3 percent of the students in this first model.
We compare the fit of this model where students are assumed to have static income expectations
to a model that uses the students’ explicit income expectations. The latter model is estimated in three
steps to control for the possibility of non-random selection into the specialties. We first estimate a
reduced-form probit model as specified by equation (2). Coefficient estimates from this model are
reported in the second column of Table 5. The coefficients on gender, age, and race have the same sign
and a similar magnitude as in the specification where students are assumed to have static income
expectations. Board scores and the students’ knowledge of contemporaneous physician income (income
information accuracy) have been shown in the previous section to affect income expectations.17 We

peak income. The weights are based on the number of practicing physicians in each of these two nonprimary care specialties. Likewise, we weight the peak incomes in family practice, internal medicine,
pediatrics, and psychiatry to derive a contemporaneous primary care peak income.
17

The difference in a student’s income information accuracy is the difference between their perception of
the mean contemporaneous non-primary care income and the actual contemporaneous mean non-primary
care income, minus the difference between their perception of the mean contemporaneous primary care
income and the actual contemporaneous mean primary care income.

22
assume that these two variables affect specialty choice through income expectations only, and they are
therefore included in the reduced-form probit but not the probit regressions that include income
expectations. The percentage of choices correctly predicted (58.3) is slightly higher than in the model
with static income expectations. The coefficients from the reduced-form probit regression are used to
derive a Mills ratio for each student, as specified in equations (4) and (5).
For students entering non-primary care and primary care specialties, we separately regress the
students’ subjective expected income on personal characteristics and the Mills ratios. The coefficient on
the Mills ratio (8) is positive and significant in the non-primary care regression, and negative and
insignificant in the primary care regressions (Table 6). This indicates that the students who actually chose
non-primary care expect to earn more in that specialty than would students who actually chose primary
care. Women expect to earn substantially less than men in both specialties, but particularly in the nonprimary care specialties.
The coefficients from the first two columns of Table 6 are used to estimate each student’s
counterfactual expected income, as outlined in equation (6). We then re-estimate the probit specialty
choice equation after including the difference in the expected peak income between non-primary and
primary care for each student. Coefficient estimates for the selection-corrected probit model are reported
in the fifth column of Table 5, and the standard errors in the sixth column are estimated by jointly
bootstrapping the three equations. The coefficient on the difference in students’ income expectations is
positive, significant, and four-times larger than the income coefficient from the model with static income
expectations. A $10,000 increase in a student’s expected income in non-primary relative to primary care
is associated with an increase of 0.057 in the probability of entering non-primary care (from 0.360 to
0.417).
One way to measure the usefulness of information on students’ subjective income expectations is
to compare the log likelihood of the specification with the subjective expectations to the model with static

23
income expectations. The log likelihood of the model with subjective income expectations (-819) is
considerably larger than the log likelihood of the model where students expect to earn the
contemporaneous peak income (-1,561). Furthermore, we correctly predict the specialty choice for 85.6
percent of the sample in the model with subjective income expectations, versus 57.3 percent in the model
with static expectations. Students’ explicit income expectations appear to be much more useful for
predicting specialty choice than static expectations.
The final column of Table 5 includes both the students’ subjective income expectations and a
variable defined as the difference between the static and subjective income expectations. The coefficient
on the former variable is positive and significant as before. The coefficient on the former variable, which
represents information in contemporaneous physician incomes that is not present in the students’
subjective income expectations, is insignificant. Including information on contemporaneous income
hardly changes the fit of the model as measured by the log likelihood or the percent of choices correctly
predicted. Results from the previous section showed that subjective income expectations are based, in
part, on the contemporaneous income of practicing physicians. These new results demonstrate that
conditional on subjective income expectations, contemporaneous incomes are no longer informative about
specialty choices.
We have also estimated a version of the specialty choice model (results not shown) that contains
indicator variables for the year a student completed medical school in order to allow for changes over
time in the non-monetary attributes of the specialties. The coefficient of the difference in subjective
expected income, which is now identified by variations between students within a cohort, is slightly larger
in magnitude (0.0189 versus 0.0165) than the model without the year indicators, and the other results are
essentially unchanged.
As a further test of the usefulness of subjective income expectations data for predicting revealed
preferences, we compare the results of the model that uses subjective income expectations with a model
that assumes medical students’ income expectations fully match ex post income. Specifically, we assume

24
that when fourth-year medical students were choosing a specialty, they expected their income with 10
years of experience to equal the mean income that was actually received by their cohort 10 years later.
We use 10 years of experience because it is sufficiently far into a physician’s career that it should
correlate closely with a person’s peak income (which we use in the subjective income expectation model),
and yet it still allows us to analyze a reasonably large sample of students. We omit from the analysis
students who graduated after 1986 because we do not observe the actual income with 10 years of
experience for their cohort.
Consider a student who is completing medical school in 1980 and forming expectations regarding
their income in family practice. After completing a three-year family practice residency program, her 10th
year of experience would occur in 1993. In the model where expectations are based on ex post income,
we assume that this student’s expected income in family practice is equal to the mean income of family
practitioners with 10 years of experience in 1993. Data on physician incomes are taken from the
American Medical Association (AMA) annual surveys. As before, we weight expected incomes in the
various specialties to derive an overall expected income for primary and non-primary care. Since we do
not have the individual-level AMA data, in the ex post income expectations model we do not control for
non-random selection into the various specialties. The sample for this specification of the model consists
of 1,149 students who graduated from Jefferson Medical College between 1971 and 1986.
In the first column of Table 7 we present the coefficient estimates from the specialty choice probit
when expectations are based on ex post income. The variable of greatest interest is the difference
between the actual mean income of non-primary and primary care physicians with 10 years of experience
for physicians in a student’s cohort. This coefficient is negative and insignificant. The model correctly
predicts the specialty choice for 50.6 percent of the students.
For purposes of comparison, we re-estimate the subjective income expectation model with this
smaller sample of students. The results are reported in the remaining columns of Table 7. In the fifth
column, the coefficient on the difference in students’ subjective income expectations (0.0112) is slightly

25
smaller than in the previous specification (0.0165 in Table 5) and is not significantly different from zero.
Our estimation method is identical to that of Table 5, so the lack of significance on the subjective income
expectations variable is due to the smaller sample size. The model correctly predicts the specialty choices
for 72.8 percent of the students.
In seventh column of Table 7 we estimate a probit model that includes students’ subjective
income expectations as well as the difference between the ex post income of the students’ cohorts and the
students’ explicit income expectations. The coefficients on both expectation variables are positive,
although neither is significant. Therefore, we reject the hypothesis that ex post income provides
additional predictive power for specialty choice. Including ex post income increases the log likelihood
slightly and improves the percentage of correct specialty choice predictions by about one percentage
point. When entered individually, however, the ex post income variable has a negative coefficient
whereas the coefficient on the subjective income expectation variable is positive.

V. Conclusion
This paper analyzed the determinants of medical school student’s income expectations. While
medical students condition their income expectations on the contemporaneous income of physicians in the
specialty they plan to enter, their expectations are not strictly static. Students who enter specialties that
subsequently experience income growth relative to other specialties report income expectations that are
relatively high. Female medical students expect to earn substantially less than male medical students,
even after controlling for the number of hours per week they expect to work. Students who perform
relatively well on a national board exam taken during medical school expect income that is slightly higher
than their colleagues. Students’ misinformation about physicians’ contemporaneous income affects their
own expectations almost dollar for dollar.
We also find that subjective income expectations help explain medical students’ specialty choice

26
decisions. A $10,000 increase in a student’s expected income in non-primary relative to primary care
specialties is associated with an increase of 0.057 in the probability of entering a non-primary care
specialty. Subjective income expectations are more useful in predicting specialty choice than the adaptive
expectations often used in the literature, and subjective income expectations summarize most of the
explanatory power of the ex-post income of a student’s cohort. More generally, these results suggest that
subjective expectational questions can help predict people's behavior, including their investment in human
capital.
Acknowledgments
Funding for this study was provided by the University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation, Jefferson
Medical College, and the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research. Dean Joseph S. Gonnella, Jon
Veloski, Mary Robeson and other members of the Center for Research in Medical Education and Health
Care at Jefferson Medical College provided access to and assistance with the Jefferson Longitudinal
Study. Patricia Danzon, Mark Pauly, Rob Lemke, Dan Polsky, and members of the Applied Economics
workshop at The Wharton School have provided helpful suggestions. Valuable contributions were
provided by our research assistants: Josh Beer, Matt Cinque, Hanli Mangun, and Peter Margetis.

27
References
Betts, Julian R., 1996, “What Do Students Know About Wages?,” Journal of Human Resources 31(1):
27-56.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta, 2000, “Lifetime Returns to Specialization in Medicine,” mimeo.
Das, Marcel and Arthur van Soest, 1997, “Expected and Realized Income Changes: Evidence From the
Dutch Socio-economic Panel,” Journal of Public Economics 32: 137-154.
Dominitz, Jeff, 1998, “Earnings Expectations, Revisions, and Realizations,” The Review of Economics
and Statistics: 374-388.
Freeman, Richard, 1971. The Market for College-Trained Manpower. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Manski, Charles F., 1993, “Adolescent Econometricians: How do Youth Infer the Returns to Schooling?,”
in Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education, eds. C. Clotfelter and M. Rothschild, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press: 43-57.
Nicholson, Sean and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2000, “Physician Income Expectations, Income Realizations,
and Practice Behavior,” mimeo.
Nicholson, Sean, 1999, “Physician Specialty Choice Under Uncertainty,” mimeo.
Nicholson, Sean, 1999, “Medical Students Perceptions of Physician Income,” mimeo.
Siow, Aloysius, 1984, “Occupational Choice Under Uncertainty,” Econometrica 52(3): 631-645.
Sloan, Frank A., 1970, “Lifetime Earnings and Physicians’ Choice of Specialty,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 24: 47-56.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999, “Consumer Sentiment: Its Rationality and Usefulness in Forecasting
Expenditure,” mimeo.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 2000, “Household Portfolio Choice, Hedging Motives, and Transactions Costs,”
mimeo.
Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen, 1979, “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political Economy
87(5): S7-S36.
Zarkin, Gary A., “Occupational Choice: An Application to the Market for Public School Teachers,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 100(2): 409-446.

28
Table 1: Sample Means and Standard Deviations18
Variable
Age at graduation
Female
White
Part 1 NBME board exam score
Debt ($000)
Expected income, in 1996 dollars ($000)
5 years of experience: EY5
10 years of experience: EY10
20 years of experience: EY20
Peak income: EYpeak
Expected hours worked/week
Expected percentage of time will
devote to treating poor patients
Expected percentage of time will
devote to teaching and research
Chosen specialty
- internal medicine
- family practice
- pediatrics
- surgery
- ob/gyn
- radiology
- anesthesiology
- psychiatry
- pathology
- other

18

Mean
26.9
0.245
0.862
204.4

Standard
Deviation
2.93
0.430
0.345
17.9

101.9
153.8
189.4
185.5
61.5
22.6

61.5
77.0
92.4
109.9
12.0
16.0

22.3

18.3

0.199
0.118
0.053
0.191
0.046
0.031
0.023
0.026
0.016
0.297

0.399
0.323
0.225
0.393
0.210
0.174
0.151
0.158
0.127
0.457

Students who graduated after 1979 were not asked to predict their income 5, 10, and 20 years after
completing residency training, nor asked to predict the number of hours they would work and how they
would allocate those hours. Sample means for these variables reflect the responses from students who
graduated before 1980.

29
Table 2: Determinants of Expected Peak Income ($000)
Coefficient

S.E.

Female

-49.7*

3.17

White

-9.73

High board score
Low board score

S.E.

Coeff.

- 37.6*

2.83

-30.2*

5.16

10.0*

4.80

10.5*

4.38

5.02

-1.76

3.91

4.22

National peak income, YNpeak ($000)

Coeff.

Coeff.

S.E.

3.01

-27.3*

2.74

1.77

4.82

1.55

4.34

3.93

7.96*

3.85

7.77*

3.47

3.53

3.60

3.42

2.98

3.07

0.218*

0.0861

0.587*

0.077

0.837*

0.0467

0.670* 0.0302

S.E.

Accuracy of income information ($000)
(YN,est - YN)
Expected specialty (family practice is omitted)
- internal medicine
- pediatrics
- surgery
- ob/gyn
- psychiatry
Constant

191*

5.38

38.0*

8.04

Indicator variables for year of graduation

16.2*
- 4.71
72.9*
63.1*
14.1*

5.28
3.18
11.4
9.57
7.19

6.00
5.17
33.6*
29.5*
17.1*

4.69
2.96
9.94
8.22
6.47

100*

15.4

57.4*

14.0

Included

Included

Observations

2,716

2,716

2,716

2,716

R2

0.07

0.25

0.30

0.45

* = significantly different from zero at the five percent level

30
Table 3: Determinants of Income Expectations From Pooled Regressions ($000)
Dependent variable: expected income with 5 and 10 years of experience
5 and 10 years
Coefficient

5 and 10 years

S.E.

Coefficient

S.E.

Female
High board score
Low board score

-19.0*
2.48
0.319

3.48
3.57
3.88

-18.1*
3.66
0.310

3.40
3.50
3.75

National income at t=0 ($000): YNj,t=0
Accuracy of income information ($000)
Growth in national income between
year 0 and year j ($000): YNj,t=j - YNj,t=0

0.509*
0.402*

0.0944
0.0339

0.342*
0.393*

0.0869
0.0336

0.270*

0.0482

Year of income expectation (5 yrs omitted):
- 10 years experience

23.7*

3.80

35.0*

3.29

Expected specialty indicator
- internal medicine
- pediatrics
- surgery
- ob/gyn
- psychiatry

-10.5*
7.07
-34.2*
-21.6*
-6.66

3.65
4.76
8.15
6.84
5.38

-2.74
4.25
-0.509
-0.563
-1.31

3.38
4.77
5.88
5.66
5.27

Constant

37.8*

11.9

47.2*

11.2

Observations

1,440

1,525

R2

0.41

0.39

Note: indicator variables for a student’s graduation year are included in each regression.
* = significantly different from zero at the five percent level.

31
Table 4: Determinants of Income Expectations From Pooled Regressions ($000)
Dependent variable: expected income with 5,10, and 20 years of experience, and expected peak income
S.E.
Coefficient
Female

-24.5*

4.66

High board score

5.81

4.12

Low board score

1.59

4.11

Expected hours worked/week

-0.0354

0.134

Percentage of time expect to devote
to low-income patients

-0.123

0.125

Percentage of time expect to spend
performing teaching and research

-0.357*

0.122

National income at t=0 ($000)

0.343*

0.094

Accuracy of income information ($000)

0.537*

0.0408

Year of income expectation (5 yrs omitted):
- 10 years experience
- 20 years experience
- peak income

35.3*
59.2*
71.6*

3.54
5.28
5.95

Expected specialty indicator
- internal medicine
- pediatrics
- surgery
- ob/gyn
- psychiatry

4.52
13.8*
22.7*
18.4*
7.62

3.89
5.58
7.57
6.08
6.23

Constant

40.4*

14.4

Observations

2,144

R2

0.54

Note : indicator variables are included for the student’s graduation year
* = significantly different from zero at the five percent level.

32

Variable

Table 5: Specialty Selection Coefficients: Probit Analysis
Contemporaneous
Selection-corrected, subCross-section income
Reduced form
jective income expectations
Coefficient
S.E.
Coefficient
S.E.
Coefficient
S.E.

A: Diff. in student’s expected income
(non-primary - primary care), $000
B: Diff. in contemporaneous income of MDs

0.00389**

0.0165*

0.00860

Subjective expectations
and contemporaneous
Coefficient
S.E.
0.0134**

0.00533

-0.00332

0.00389

0.00103

B–A
Female

- 0.468**

0.0637

- 0.467**

0.0648

- 0.125

0.0888

-0.0941

0.0901

Age

- 0.0773

0.0847

- 0.0614

0.0855

0.0853

0.109

0.105

0.110

White

- 0.272**

0.0771

- 0.304**

0.0807

-0.430**

0.102

-0.464**

0.103

Debt ($00000)

- 0.278

0.203

-0.336

0.209

-0.522*

0.271

- 0.451*

0.272

---

0.0434*

0.0262

---

---

---

0.0833

0.425

---

---

-4.80*

2.87

-1.28

-1.23

1.39

Board score

---

Student’s relative error in
--perceived contemporaneous income
Constant
Observations
Log likelihood
Pseudo R2
Percent predicted correctly

-1.09

1.07
2,458
-1,561
0.027
57.3

2,458
-1,542
0.038
58.3

1.38
2,458
-819
0.49
85.6

2,458
-816
0.49
85.5

Dependent variable is one if a fourth-year medical student chose a non-primary care specialty and zero if they chose a primary care specialty.
Quadratic terms for debt, age, and the student’s board score are included. ** = significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level; * = significantly different
from zero at the 10 percent level.

33
Table 6: Determinants of Peak Income Expectations ($000)
Variables

Non-primary Care

Primary Care

Female

-76.7**
(14.8)

-22.1**
(4.83)

Board score

1.82
(4.15)

-0.916
(1.28)

Student’s error in perceived
contemporaneous income
of practicing physicians

0.655**
(0.123)

1.03**
(0.122)

λ

72.3*
(37.0)

-20.0
(18.1)

Constant

38.8
(431)

248*
(127)

Observations

886

1,583

R2

0.25

0.30

Notes:
(1) indicator variables are included for the year a student graduated from medical school.
(2) A quadratic term for the board score is included.
(3) ** = significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level;
(4) * = significantly different from zero at the 10 percent level.

34

Variable

Table 7: Specialty Selection – Subjective, Contemporaneous Income Expectations vs. Ex Post Income Expectations
Ex Post Income of
Selection-Corrected,
Subjective Expectations
Student’s Cohort
Reduced Form
Subjective Income Expectations
and Ex Post Income
Coefficient
S.E.
Coefficient
S.E.
Coefficient
S.E.
Coefficient
S.E.

A: Diff. in student’s expected income
(non-primary - primary care), $000
B: Ex post income diff.
-0.000506
for student’s cohort of MDs

0.0112

0.0118

0.0205

0.0190

0.00902

0.00854

0.00338

B–A
Female

- 0.407**

0.111

- 0.451**

0.113

- 0.183

0.128

-0.191

0.129

Age

- 0.278**

0.138

- 0.336**

0.140

-0.282*

0.152

-0.264*

0.152

White

- 0.380**

0.154

- 0.392**

0.158

-0.582**

0.177

-0.602*

0.177

Debt ($00000)

- 0.198

0.425

0.0635

0.453

-0.180

0.482

-0.0820

0.487

---

0.0460

0.0391

---

---

---

0.166

0.537

---

---

0.174

-0.258

4.26

3.54*

2.39

1.93

Board score

---

Student’s relative error in
--perceived contemporaneous income
Constant
Observations
Log likelihood
Pseudo R2
Percent predicted correctly

0.356**
1,149
- 719
0.015
50.6

1,149
- 707
0.032
58.1

1.87
1,149
- 549
0.25
72.8

1,149
- 546
0.25
74.0

Dependent variable is one if a fourth-year medical student chose a non-primary care specialty and zero if they chose a primary care specialty.
Quadratic terms for debt, age, and the student’s board score are included. ** = significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level; * = significantly different
from zero at the 10 percent level.

35

Figure 1
Expected Peak Income in Family Practice, 1974-1998
190
1996
Dollars
($000)

National
cross-section
peak: YNpeak,t=0

170
150
130
110

Mean expected
peak income: EYpeak,t=0

90
70
50
74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98

Medical School Graduation Year (t=0)

Figure 2

36

Expected Peak Income in Surgery, 1974-1998
350

1996
Dollars
($000)

National
cross-section
peak: YNpeak,t=0

300

250

Mean expected
peak income: EYpeak,t=0

200

150

100
74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98

Medical School Graduation Year (t=0)

Figure 3
37

National Peak Physician Income by Specialty, 1973 - 1996
(1996 $000)
350

Surgery

300

OB/GYN
250

Medicine
200

Pediatrics
Psychiatry

150

Family practice
100
73 74 75 77 78 79 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96

Source: AMA Socioeconomic Monitoring Study

