NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF HOSPITAL OWNERSHIP ON MEDICAL PRODUCTIVITY
Daniel Kessler
Mark McClellan
Working Paper 8537
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8537
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

We would like to thank David Becker, Daniel Kao, Julie Lee, Kristin Madison, Arran Shearer, and Alex
Whalley for exceptional research assistance, and David Cutler, two referees, and seminar participants at the
NBER conference on the Industrial Organization of Medical Care for helpful comments. Funding from the
National Institutes on Aging through the NBER and from the Center for Social Innovation at the Stanford
GSB is gratefully appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the US Government.
© 2001 by Daniel Kessler and Mark McClellan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Effects of Hospital Ownership on Medical Productivity
Daniel Kessler and Mark McClellan
NBER Working Paper No. 8537
October 2001
JEL No. I1, L3

ABSTRACT
To develop new evidence on the effects of hospital ownership and other aspects of hospital
market composition on health care productivity, we analyze longitudinal data on the medical expenditures
and health outcomes of the vast majority of nonrural elderly Medicare beneficiaries hospitalized for new
heart attacks over the 1985-1996 period. We find that the effects of ownership status are quantitatively
important. Areas with a presence of for-profit hospitals have approximately 2.4 percent lower levels of
hospital expenditures, but virtually the same patient health outcomes. We conclude that for-profit
hospitals have important spillover benefits for medical productivity.

Daniel Kessler
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fkessler@stanford.edu

Mark McClellan
Council of Economic Advisors
17th and Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20502
and NBER
markmc@stanford.edu

Introduction
The social welfare implications of for-profit versus non-profit ownership, and private
versus public ownership, have been of interest to economists for decades. In stylized
microeconomic models of organizations, theory predicts that the for-profit organizational form is
efficient, because of the high-powered incentives that arise from the presence of a well-defined
residual claimant with legally enforceable property rights. In an early work, however, Arrow
(1963) observed that non-profit organizations may be a socially-optimal response to incomplete
markets. Although this line of research has been developed extensively (e.g., Nelson and
Krashinsky 1973; Easley and O’Hara 1983; Hansmann 1980, 1987, 1996; Rose-Ackerman 1996;
Weisbrod 1977, 1988), other theoretical work has shown that the non-profit form may be socially
inferior or equivalent to the for-profit form, even if markets are incomplete (e.g., Newhouse
1970, Feldstein 1971, Pauly and Redisch 1973).
This theoretical indeterminacy has translated into a long-standing policy debate in health
economics about the welfare implications of for-profit, private non-profit, and public ownership,
particularly ownership of hospitals (see Sloan 1997 for a comprehensive overall review; see
Hamilton 1994 and Philipson 1997 for discussion of the impact of ownership status in the
context of nursing homes). Researchers exploring the effects of for-profit, private non-profit,
and public hospital ownership on medical productivity have reported a wide range of empirical
results. On one hand, some researchers report that the for-profit form achieves greater productive
efficiency (e.g., Wilson and Jadlow 1982, Herzlinger and Krasker 1987, Cutler and Horwitz
2000). On the other hand, many studies find that for-profit hospitals have higher costs or
markups than do non-profits (e.g., Lewin et al. 1981, Coelen 1986, Ettner and Hermann 1997,
1

Pattison and Katz 1983, Pattison 1986, Zuckerman et al. 1994), that for-profit hospitals offer
lower quality (Hartz et al. 1989, Mark 1996), or that for-profit hospitals supply less
uncompensated or charity care (Frank, Salkever, and Mitchell 1990, Norton and Staiger 1994,
Mann et al. 1995; but see Sloan and Vraiciu 1983 and Young, Desai, and Lukas 1997). And, a
substantial literature argues that non-profit hospitals have costs and/or quality similar to that of
for-profits, concluding that hospitals are socially indistinguishable on the basis of ownership
status (e.g., Sloan and Vraiciu 1983, Becker and Sloan 1985, Gaumer 1986, Shortell and Hughes
1988, Keeler et al. 1992, Patel, Needleman, and Zeckhauser 1994, Sloan et al. 1998, McClellan
and Staiger 2000, Duggan 2000a).
The existing empirical literature has three key limitations. First, it does not generally
examine both the financial implications and patient health consequences of hospital ownership
structure; without significant additional assumptions, it is not possible to draw conclusions about
the impact of ownership on productivity or welfare. Second, those studies that do seek to make
welfare comparisons generally suffer from potential selection bias. If hospital ownership (or any
other hospital characteristic) does affect productivity, and sicker patients (who value productivity
more highly) seek out more productive hospitals, then estimates of the impact of ownership
status that do not completely control for patient heterogeneity will represent a combination of the
true impact and unobserved differences between patient populations. Although some work has
sought to control for differences in patient populations based on measurement of observable
patient characteristics, observational data on health status is notoriously incomplete, making past
estimates of the impact of ownership difficult to interpret.
Third, it does not generally evaluate the spillover effects of for-profit hospitals on the
2

practices of other types of hospitals in a market. From a policy perspective, spillover effects may
be much more important than direct (own-hospital) effects because public and for-profit hospitals
account for a small fraction of admissions in most markets. For example, if for-profit hospitals
account for approximately 10 percent of admissions in a market, and for-profit hospitals have 5
percent higher expenditures per patient, then even a doubling of the share of for-profit hospitals’
admissions would lead to health care costs that were 1 percent higher in aggregate. If hospitals
of different ownership statuses engage in different types of strategic behavior, or increasing
presence of for-profits results in even modest increases in efficient behavior by non-profits, then
spillover effects would be much more important than the “direct” effects of for-profit hospitals
on practice patterns, health care costs, and health outcomes.1
Our analysis addresses these limitations.

We use longitudinal data on essentially all

nonrural elderly Medicare recipients hospitalized for a treatment of a new heart attack over the
1985-96 period, matched with comprehensive data on all nonrural U.S. hospitals over the same
period. This enables us to examine the resources used in and the health benefits of treatment for a
given occurrence of illness in hospitals of different ownership. Our methods offer an alternative
approach to dealing with selection bias and measuring spillover effects. As we discuss below,
this approach can be used to estimate consistently the effect of any hospital characteristic. Based
on a model of individual patients’ demand for hospital services, we construct area-based
measures of the “density” of hospitals of different ownership types -- that is, the probability that a
patient residing in an area will be admitted to a hospital of a given ownership type, based only on

1

See, for example, the discussion of the consequences for the local market of the sale of
(the non-profit) Wesley Medical Center to (the for-profit) HCA in Cutler and Horwitz (2000).
3

arguably exogenous determinants of hospital demand. We assess the effect of ownership-type
densities on medical expenditures and health outcomes, holding constant the area densities of
other hospital characteristics, the competitiveness and other features of hospital markets, patient
characteristics, and zip-code level fixed effects.
This approach allows us to assess the relative efficiency of ownership-induced differences
in medical practice by identifying the “cost-effectiveness” of hospital organizational form, that is,
the cost of an additional year of life or an additional year of cardiac health associated with
different ownership forms in a market. For example, if non-profit hospitals provide lower levels
of treatment intensity, without leading to any deterioration in patient health outcomes, then the
non-profit form is the most productive way to organize hospital markets. If the non-profit form
leads to higher levels of intensity, but not to lower levels of adverse outcomes, then the nonprofit form is not a productive way to provide hospital services. If the non-profit form either
increases or decreases both costs and health, then our results still provide quantitative guidance
for policy. For example, if non-profits provide treatment that leads to low expenditures per year
of life saved relative to for-profits, then they lead to efficient care; but if non-profits provide
treatment that leads to relatively high levels of expenditures per year of life saved, then they
provide incentives for socially excessive care.
Section I of the paper discusses the theoretical ambiguity of the impact of hospital
ownership on medical productivity. Section II reviews the previous empirical literature on this
topic. Although this literature has helped to shape understanding of markets for medical care,
Section II describes its three key limitations, and how these limitations affect its assessments of
the consequences of hospital ownership. Section III describes how our approach addresses these
4

limitations, and presents our econometric models of the effects of hospital ownership on medical
treatment decisions, health care costs, and health outcomes. Section IV discusses our two data
sources, Section V presents our empirical results, and Section VI concludes.

I.

Theoretical Models of the Impact of Hospital Ownership
In simple microeconomic models of organizations, theory predicts that the for-profit

organizational form leads to efficient production, because of the high-powered incentives that
arise from the presence of a well-defined residual claimant with enforceable property rights.
However, markets for health care in general, and markets for hospital services in particular,
deviate substantially from the assumptions behind this model. For this reason, there is an
extensive theoretical literature examining the welfare implications of hospital ownership status.
One line of research, starting with Arrow (1963), hypothesizes that market failures in
health care can lead the non-profit organizational form to be socially superior. At the base of
these models is the assumption that non-profits either do not or can not pursue an objective of
pure profit maximization (for a general review, see Rose-Ackerman 1996). Because of this
constraint, non-profits might address contract failures in the presence of informational
asymmetries between consumers and producers (e.g., Nelson and Krashinsky 1973; Easley and
O’Hara 1983; Hansmann 1980, 1987, 1996). In markets for health care services, for-profit firms
may have both the incentive and the opportunity to take advantage of customers by providing less
service to them than was promised, or more costly services than would be desired by a wellinformed, paying consumer. A private non-profit or publicly-owned firm, in contrast, may offer
consumers the advantage that those who control the firm either do not or can not pursue pure
5

profit maximization. Thus, physicians and managers of public or private non-profit hospitals
may have less incentive and/or ability to take advantage of patients than do their counterparts at
for-profit hospitals. Alternatively, private non-profit hospitals might serve as an
extragovernmental means to satisfy residual demand for public health services, if hospital
markets have public good aspects (Weisbrod 1977, 1988). Specifically, if governments support
public goods only at the level demanded by the median voter, then non-profits may arise to
supplement public provision of public goods in areas with above-median demand.
Another line of research shares the assumption that non-profits pursue different
objectives than do for-profits, but concludes that the non-profit form may be socially inferior to
the for-profit form. Newhouse (1970), for example, models non-profit hospitals as maximizing
quantity and quality of treatment subject to a zero-profit constraint. Non-profit hospitals are able
to behave in this fashion both because the government gives tax benefits to non-profit providers
of health care services, and because health-insurance and tax incentives make consumers of
medical care relatively insensitive to price. The welfare implications of a Newhouse-type model
are in general ambiguous. On one hand, if the additional quantity and quality of treatment
attributable to the non-profit form results in the provision of additional treatments with expected
value greater than cost, then non-profit hospitals may increase efficiency, even if their treatments
are more expensive. On the other hand, if quality maximization leads to marginal treatment that
results in high expenditures per year of life saved, then the non-profit form provides socially
excessive care.
Other work has pointed out that there is no definitive relationship between ownership
status and social welfare, even if both non-profit and for-profit hospitals seek to maximize
6

revenues less costs. Pauly and Redisch (1973) model the formation of non-profit hospitals’
strategy directly, hypothesizing that non-profit hospitals behave as cooperatives controlled by
physicians, operated to maximize physicians’ private benefit. As they observe, this model is
consistent with the supply of socially excessive quality by non-profit hospitals. If “quality” is
produced through the application of nonphysician labor and capital, then noncooperative
behavior among controlling physicians could lead to rent dissipation that took the form of high
quality. An alternative implication of this approach (e.g., Becker and Sloan 1985) is that nonprofit hospitals may have costs and quality similar to that of for-profits, if doctors monitor the
efficiency of non-profit hospitals just as effectively as do equity-holders in a for-profit enterprise.
These models also highlight the fact that there may be important spillover effects of
hospital ownership. For example, in markets with a high density of for-profit hospitals, nonprofits may be less able either to provide social benefits or impose social costs (described by
Kennedy (1985) as the “proprietorization of voluntary hospitals”). Alternatively, if they face
competition from for-profits, they may be more likely to emulate for-profit behavior, for
example by exploiting loopholes in Medicare reimbursement (e.g., Cutler and Horwitz 2000).

II.

Previous Empirical Literature
The theoretical debate over the effect of hospital ownership structure on medical

productivity and social welfare has spawned a vast empirical literature that includes results
consistent with a wide range of theoretical models. One reason for the empirical literature’s
indeterminacy – indeed, its main shortcoming – is that many of the studies do not assess directly
both the financial implications and patient health consequences of hospital ownership structure.
7

Much of the literature analyzes the impact of ownership status on staffing, spending, costs,
charges, or price/cost markups (Lewin 1981, Wilson and Jadlow 1982, Pattison and Katz 1983,
Sloan and Vraiciu 1983, Becker and Sloan 1985, Coelen 1986, Pattison 1986, Watt et al. 1986,
Grosskopf and Valdmans 1987, Herzlinger and Krasker 1987, Patel, Needleman, and Zeckhauser
1994, Zuckerman et al. 1994, Kao 1998). However, without information on differences in
patient health outcomes (e.g., output) by ownership status, these studies can not draw conclusions
about the impact of ownership on medical productivity without significant additional
assumptions. Conversely, several other studies focus only on the effect of ownership on
outcomes, but not on the effect of ownership on resource use (Gaumer 1986, Shortell and Hughes
1988, Hartz et al. 1989, Keeler et al. 1992, McClellan and Staiger 2000). Other research is
concerned with the effect of hospital ownership and the interaction between hospital market
structure and ownership on the provision of public goods such as care for the poor (e.g., Sloan
and Vraiciu 1983; Frank, Salkever, and Mitchell 1990; Norton and Staiger 1994; Mann et al.
1995; Young, Desai, and Lukas 1997; Duggan 2000a, 2000b; Frank and Salkever 2000), and so
does not address the issue of how ownership status affects welfare through productivity.
Some recent studies use data on individual patients admitted to the hospital to measure
the impact of the ownership status of patients’ hospital of admission on both the inputs and the
outputs of the medical care production process (Mark 1996, Sloan et al. 1998). These studies
suffer from another important shortcoming: possible selection bias. If hospital ownership (or
any other hospital characteristic) does affect productivity, and sicker patients (who value
productivity more highly) seek out more productive hospitals, then estimates of the impact of
ownership status that do not completely control for patient heterogeneity will represent a
8

combination of the true impact and unobserved differences between hospitals’ patient
populations. Although the studies have sought to correct for selection bias by controlling for
measures of patient demographic characteristics and pre-admission comorbidity and functionality
in their estimation of the impact of ownership status, observational data on health status is
notoriously incomplete, making estimates of the impact of ownership difficult to interpret.
Ettner and Hermann (1997) address this concern with instrumental variables techniques, and
examine the effect of hospital ownership on Medicare charges and costs for a given psychiatric
admissions, and the effect of ownership on the probability of readmission and mode of discharge.
Still, none of this work has focused on the spillover or market-level effects of ownership.
Silverman, Skinner and Fisher (1999) compare the growth of Medicare expenditures between
1989-95 in “hospital service areas” (HSAs) characterized by complete for-profit versus nonprofit ownership, and find significantly more rapid expenditure growth in for-profit areas.
However, they do not examine the outcome consequences of differences in spending growth.
And, since most HSAs contain only one hospital, their study also may not capture all spillover
effects. In the limit, if every HSA contained only one hospital, then differences between forprofit and non-profit HSAs would be equivalent to own-hospital differences.

III.

Models
We offer an alternative approach to dealing with selection bias that also measures

spillover effects, and thus provides a more complete assessment of the market-level
consequences of hospital ownership for medical productivity. As we describe in more detail in
the next section, we analyze longitudinal data on essentially all nonrural elderly Medicare
9

recipients hospitalized for a treatment of a new heart attack over the 1985-96 period, matched
with comprehensive data on all nonrural U.S. hospitals over the same period. To avoid the
problems of prior studies in obtaining accurate estimates of the effects of ownership structure, we
use a three-stage method. The core idea of our method is to develop an explicit model of the
demand for hospital services based on exogenous factors such as travel distances, and then to use
this model as a basis for the construction of exogenous measures of patient flows to hospitals of
different ownership statuses and other broad types. This approach allows us to assess the impact
of ownership status, holding other hospital characteristics constant, while avoiding the major
empirical obstacles in previous studies of ownership described in Section II. In addition, our data
permit a thorough evaluation of the consequences of ownership and other hospital characteristics
for the medical expenditures and outcomes associated with a given episode of care.
In stage one, we specify and estimate patient-level hospital choice models as a function of
exogenous characteristics of the patient, the geographic area, and all of the nearby hospitals,
along the lines of Kessler and McClellan (2000).2 Estimates from these models provide for each
patient the probability of admission to every nearby hospital, based only on exogenous factors.
We model the extent to which hospitals with various characteristics -- for-profit, private nonprofit, or public ownership; size, in terms of the number of beds; teaching status; and system
membership status – at various distances from each patient’s residence affect each patient’s

2

We define “nearby” to include all nonfederal, general medical /surgical hospital within
35 miles of the patient’s residence with at least five AMI admissions, and any large, nonfederal,
general medical/surgical teaching hospital within 100 miles of the patient’s residence with at
least five AMI admissions. (We explain the reason for these a priori constraints on patients’
choices below; because markets for cardiac care are generally much smaller than the constraints,
they are not restrictive.)
10

hospital choice, and we also allow each patient’s demographic characteristics to affect her
likelihood of choosing hospitals of one type over another.
In stage two, we use this vector of probabilities in two ways. First, we use the vector of
probabilities to construct area-based measures of the “density” of admissions to hospitals with
different characteristics, including ownership type. We calculate the probability of each
individual’s admission to hospitals of different sizes and different ownership, teaching, and
system membership statuses, based only on exogenous factors. Weighted sums of these
probabilities define the density of admissions to hospitals of each type in every non-rural zip
code of patient residence in the country. The calculation of the probabilistic-admission-weighted
densities of hospital characteristics is described in Kessler and McClellan (2000).
Second, we use the vector of probabilities to construct the exogenous patient zip-code
measures of market competitiveness and capacity utilization described in Kessler and McClellan
(2000). Because hospital ownership status may be correlated or interact with hospital market
structure, simply examining the unconditional average effect of hospital ownership status on
decision-making may lead to biased assessments of the effect of ownership, and may mask
important differences in the impact of ownership in different market environments (e.g., Dranove
1988, Kopit and McCann 1988, Lynk 1995).
Stage three of our method estimates the effect of the area density of hospital ownership
status, the density of other hospital characteristics, and hospital market structure on Medicare
hospital expenditures in the year after the individual’s admission for a new heart attack and on

11

several important measures of patient health outcomes.3 These models provide a consistent
estimate of the sum of the strategic and the area-average direct effects, holding constant the area
average density of other characteristics, regardless of the correlation between unobserved
determinants of patient health status and hospital characteristics.
We assess the impact of ownership on hospital expenditures and health outcomes, using
longitudinal data on cohorts of elderly Medicare beneficiaries with heart disease from 19851996. We use zip-code fixed effects to control for all time-invariant heterogeneity across small
geographic areas, hospitals, and patient populations; our estimates of the effect of ownership are
identified using changes in hospital markets. In addition, we include time-fixed effects that are
allowed to vary by size of geographic area, and include controls for time-varying characteristics
of geographic areas (such as the travel distance between individuals’ residence and their closest
hospital), to address the possibility that our estimated effects of ownership are due to still other
omitted factors that were correlated with health care costs, health outcomes, and hospital
markets.
In zip code k during year t = 1,. . ., T observational units in our analysis consist of
individuals i=1,. . ., Nkt who are initially admitted to hospital j with new occurrences of particular
illnesses such as a heart attack. Each patient has observable characteristics Uikt: four age
3

Ideally, we would like to identify separately three theoretically distinct ownership status
effects: the direct effect of an individual’s initial hospital of admission, the direct effect of an
individual’s subsequent hospital(s) of admission, and the (spillover) effects of other area
hospitals. However, our principal source of exogenous variation in hospital demand –
differential distances between patients’ residences and different types of hospitals – is not
sufficient to distinguish between the direct effects of an individual’s several hospitals’ ownership
statuses and area-based spillover effects. Interactions between area-based instruments and
individual patient characteristics are theoretically sufficient to separate direct from strategic
effects; but in practice, these interactions have very little power.
12

indicator variables (70-74 years, 75-79 years, 80-89 years, and 90-99 years; omitted group is 6569 years), gender, and black/nonblack race; plus a full set of interaction effects between age,
gender, and race; and interactions between year and each of the age, gender, and race indicators.
The individual receives treatment of aggregate intensity Rikt, where R is total hospital
expenditures in the year after the health event (we also examine the effects of ownership on the
components of R). The patient has a health outcome Oikt, possibly affected by the intensity of
treatment received, where a higher value denotes a more adverse outcome (O is binary in all of
our outcome models).
For comparison with previous work, we first estimate linear models of average
expenditure and outcome effects of the ownership status of each patient’s hospital of admission.
These models are of the form

ln( Rikt ) = δ k + σ t M k + U ikt φ + (OWN jt | Z jt ) *η +
OMCkt γ + ξikt

,

(1)

where *k is a zip-code fixed-effect; Ft is a time fixed-effect; Mk is a vector of six indicator
variables denoting the size of individual i’s MSA; OWNjt is a vector of two indicator variables
denoting whether hospital j is a public or a for-profit hospital (omitted group is non-profit); Zjt is
a vector of three indicator variables describing the size (>300 beds), teaching status, and system
membership status of hospital j; OMCkt is a vector of other market characteristics, including
capacity utilization, the travel distance to the hospital nearest to zip code k, an indicator denoting
whether the zip code was in the highest quartile of the distribution of HHIs, and indicators
denoting whether the state has HMO enrollment above the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile; and >ikt
13

is a mean-zero independently-distributed error term with E(>ikt |. . .) = 0. Our dataset includes
essentially all elderly patients hospitalized with the heart diseases of interest for the years of our
study, so that our results describe the actual average changes in expenditures associated with
changes in ownership. We report heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors for inferences
about average differences that might arise in potential populations (e.g., elderly patients with
these health problems in other years).
In this model, 0 represents the impact on treatment intensity or health outcomes of
admission to a hospital of a given ownership status. OLS estimates of 0 suffer from potential
selection bias, because E(>ikt | OWNjt) … 0. If hospital ownership (or any other hospital
characteristic) does affect productivity, and sicker patients (who value productivity more highly)
seek out more productive hospitals, then estimates of the impact of ownership status that do not
completely control for patient heterogeneity will represent a combination of the true impact and
unobserved differences between patient populations. Furthermore, if the true model of the
impact of ownership status on medical productivity includes both a direct effect of the ownership
status of a patients’ hospital of admission and a strategic effect of the ownership status of other
hospitals in a relevant market, even IV estimates of 0 from equation (1) would be inconsistent.
To address these issues, we estimate models of the area effects of the density of
admission to hospitals of different ownership type, holding constant the area densities of
admissions to hospitals with various other characteristics, and the competitiveness and other
characteristics of hospital markets:

ln( Rikt ) = δ k + σ t M k + U ikt φ + (OWN kt | Z kt ) *η +
OMCkt γ + ξikt ,
14

(2)

where OWNkt is a vector of two indicator variables denoting whether zip code k has above the
median density of for-profit relative to non-profit hospitals, or public relative to non-profit
hospitals, and Zkt is a vector of three indicator variables denoting whether zip code k has abovemedian density of large, teaching, and system hospitals. We also estimate an alternative version
of this model (equation (2a)) that includes for each characteristic in OWNkt and Zkt two indicator
variables denoting whether zip code k has probabilistic-admission-weighted for-profit/non-profit
(or other type of) relative density above the median, and relative density above the 75th percentile,
to investigate the impact of increasing rates of for-profit and public ownership status at different
levels of relative ownership.

IV.

Data
We use data from four sources. First, we use comprehensive longitudinal Medicare

claims data for the vast majority of elderly nonrural beneficiaries who were admitted to a hospital
with a new primary diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) from any year between 1985
and 1996. Data on patient demographic characteristics were obtained from the Health Care
Financing Administration’s HISKEW enrollment files. Patients with admissions for the same
illness in the prior year were excluded to insure that we examine only new occurrences of illness.
We calculate several different measures of the financial consequences of differences in hospital
ownership. We calculate total one-year hospital expenditures by adding up all acute plus
nonacute inpatient hospital reimbursements (including copayments and deductibles not paid by
Medicare) from insurance claims for all treatments in the year following each patient’s initial
admission for AMI. This is a nontrivial exercise under the diagnosis-related group (DRG)
15

Medicare prospective payment system (PPS), since more intensive treatments, transfers, and
readmissions lead to higher expenditures, and hospital ownership status may affect resource use
through these channels. For example, an AMI patient receiving a surgical procedure would be
classified into one of 18 different DRGs, which are generally (but not always) more highly
compensated than nonsurgical DRGs (see Medicode 2000 for a list of DRGs; see McClellan
1997 for a detailed explanation of PPS reimbursement as a value-weighted sum of quantities of
treatment).
We also examine the effects of ownership on the five main components of expenditures.
Payment for most PPS admissions consists of a basic payment (primarily the base payment rate
multiplied by the relative weight of the patient’s DRG), adjusted by a labor cost index, plus an
additional “outlier” payment for very costly cases.4 We decompose total payments for each
patient into the Medicare labor cost index of the patient’s geographic area (approximately the
patient’s MSA), the patient’s basic and outlier payments for all cardiac-related admissions (DRG
103- DRG 145) and the patient’s basic and outlier payments for noncardiac admissions.
We examine three measures of health outcomes. We calculate mortality rates within one
year of the index AMI admission with death dates based on death reports validated by the Social
Security Administration. Measures of the occurrence of cardiac complications were obtained by
abstracting data on the principal diagnosis for all subsequent admissions (not counting transfers
and readmissions within 30 days of the index admission) in the year following the patient’s initial
admission. Cardiac complications included rehospitalizations within one year of the initial event

4

See www.hcfa.gov/medicare/ippsover.htm for a more detailed discussion of the steps in
determining a PPS payment.
16

with a primary diagnosis (principal cause of hospitalization) of either subsequent AMI or heart
failure. Treatment of AMI patients is intended to prevent subsequent AMIs if possible, and the
occurrence of heart failure requiring hospitalization is evidence that the damage to the patient’s
heart from ischemic disease has serious functional consequences.
Second, we use data on U.S. hospital characteristics collected by the American Hospital
Association (AHA). The response rate of hospitals to the AHA survey is greater than 90 percent,
with response rates above 95 percent for large hospitals (>300 beds). Because our analysis
involves nonrural Medicare beneficiaries with AMI, we examine only nonrural, nonfederal
hospitals that ever reported providing general medical or surgical services (for example, we
exclude psychiatric and rehabilitation hospitals from analysis). To assess hospital size and bed
capacity per patient, we use total general medical/surgical beds, including ICU/CCU and
emergency beds. We classify hospitals as teaching hospitals if they report at least 20 full-time
residents.
Third, we use a hospital system database constructed from multiple sources (see Madison
2001 for a detailed discussion). The AHA survey contains extensive year-by-year information on
hospital system membership status. First, the AHA supplies a system identification code
(SYSID) that groups hospitals into systems according to an internal AHA process. Second, the
AHA asks hospitals to self-report any system affiliations that they might have. Our validity
checking indicated that the universe of systems and system hospitals, and the timing of
hospitals’ system membership, as defined by AHA did not conform to discussion of hospital
systems in the trade press such as Modern Healthcare. We therefore created our own system
database based on the AHA SYSID, the AHA self-reported system affiliation, and our own
17

research using other sources, including results from an annual survey of hospital systems
published in Modern Healthcare. We also corrected the timing of hospitals’ reported entry and
exit from systems as defined by the AHA, based on independent sources and our own algorithms.
For example, if a hospital reported membership in a system from 1985-1990, and from 1992-95,
we imputed that hospital’s system membership in 1991.
Fourth, we calculate annual HMO enrollment rates by state based on information from
InterStudy Publications, a division of Decision Resources, Inc. Enrollment rates were calculated
by dividing the number of enrollees (exclusive of Medicare supplemental enrollees) by the
population. We excluded residents of the District of Columbia from all analyses because of
concerns about the validity of measured HMO enrollment rates for DC.
Table I describes the population of elderly AMI patients and the characteristics of the
hospital markets serving their residential zip codes. The first column describes our overall
sample, the next three columns describe patient characteristics by ownership status of their
hospital of initial admission, and the last three columns describe the relative differences in each
of these characteristics for the different ownership types. The first row of the table shows that
the inpatient treatment intensity of elderly AMI patients was similar across ownership types. In
the year after AMI, acute plus nonacute inpatient hospital expenditures of patients admitted to
for-profit hospitals were about 1 percent lower than those of patients admitted to public hospitals,
and about 2 percent lower than those of patients admitted to non-profit hospitals. But there are
clear differences in patients across ownership forms: public hospital patients were much more
likely to be black than non-profit or for-profit patients. In addition, patients admitted to nonprofit hospitals had substantially lower one-year mortality rates: approximately 2 percentage
18

points lower than patients admitted to either a public or a for-profit hospital.
The last rows of Table I show how patients were divided into the geographic areas on
which our principal analysis is based. Public hospital attendance is strongly concentrated in zip
codes with above median density of public hospitals. Fully 96.8 percent of all public hospital
admissions occurred in areas with above median density of public hospitals, as compared to 75
percent of all for-profit admissions occurring in areas with above median density of for-profit
hospitals. The cutoffs in Table I show that the median area is very heavily non-profit -- the
median area has approximately 77 times (1/.013) the density of probabilistic admissions to a nonprofit as to a for-profit hospital, and approximately 35 times (1/.029) the density of probabilistic
admissions to a non-profit as to a public hospital. Table I also reflects the dominance of the nonprofit form in the hospital industry: approximately 81 percent of elderly AMI patients were
initially admitted to a non-profit hospital, with the remaining 19 percent split almost equally
between for-profit and public hospitals.
Finally, Table I shows that market and other hospital characteristics are correlated with
hospital ownership status. For example, for-profit areas are substantially more competitive than
non-profit areas (less likely to be very concentrated, i.e., in the top HHI quartile), have higher
rates of bed capacity, and slightly lower rates of HMO enrollment. Along with the differences by
ownership in patient characteristics, this suggests that differences in expenditures and health
outcomes by ownership status may be due to other differences in the characteristics of individual
hospitals (such as system membership or teaching status) that may be correlated with ownership
status; differential selection of patients on the basis of their health status into different types of
hospitals; and market effects, including both market competitiveness and spillover effects of
19

ownership.

V.

Results
Table II presents OLS estimates of the effect of ownership status of hospital of admission

on individuals’ Medicare expenditures and health outcomes, controlling for individual
characteristics, other characteristics of hospital of admission, market characteristics, zip-code
fixed effects, and time fixed effects. Table II suggests that patients admitted to either for-profit
or public hospitals have both higher levels of expenditures and much worse health outcomes than
do patients admitted to non-profit hospitals. The public/non-profit mortality gap is huge, at
almost 3.2 percentage points. Teaching hospitals, according to this analysis, deliver much more
costly care without offering corresponding health benefits. Indeed, patients initially admitted to a
teaching hospital have marginally higher rates of cardiac complications. On their face, these
results suggest that the non-profit form leads to higher levels of medical productivity. But the
magnitude of the differences also suggests that the selection of patients on the basis of their
unobserved health status into different types of hospitals may also be an important determinant of
observed differences by ownership status in health care costs and outcomes.
Table III shows that such effects are important. The table presents estimates from
equations (2) and (2a) of area effects of the density of different hospital ownership types, holding
constant the density of other hospital characteristics, hospital market structure, and characteristics
of patients and geographic areas. Estimates of the impact of ownership structure 0 from
equations (2) and (2a) are a combination of the average direct effect of the ownership of the
hospital of initial admission (incorporating subsequent transfers) and the strategic interaction
20

effects of hospitals within a residential zip code.
The left panel of Table III presents estimates of equation (2), and shows that patients from
areas with above-median density of for-profit/non-profit hospitals have statistically significantly
lower levels of total expenditures as compared to patients from areas with below-median density,
of approximately 2.4 percent. Patients from areas with above-median relative density of
public/non-profit hospitals have slightly greater expenditures (approximately 1.2 percent).
Neither a presence of for-profit nor a presence of public hospitals in an area has a
significant effect on patient health outcomes from AMI. Coupled with the estimated expenditure
effects above, this implies that the additional treatment delivered in an area with essentially no
admissions to for-profit hospitals has an expenditure/outcome effect ratio of over $1,000,000 per
additional AMI survivor to one year in 1994 dollars; using the upper bound of the 95-percent
confidence intervals for the mortality effects leads to an estimated expenditure/effect ratio of
approximately $120,000 per additional AMI survivor (the difference arises out of the small size
and the imprecision of the estimated mortality effects).5
Other hospital characteristics also affect health care expenditures and health outcomes.
Patients from areas with a substantial presence of system hospitals have slight less costly care
without experiencing any worse outcomes. In contrast to the OLS results, patients from areas
with a substantial presence of teaching hospitals receive only slightly more costly care, but
experience statistically significantly better health outcomes (at the 10 percent level). Using the
point estimates of expenditure and mortality effects, the additional treatment for AMI delivered
5

Given mean 1996 expenditures of $21,885 (1994 $), .024*$21,855/.00027 = $1,942,667;
evaluated at the upper bound of the mortality confidence interval
.024*$21,855/[.00027+(1.96*.00203)] = $123,451.
21

in areas with above-median density of probabilistic admissions to teaching hospitals had an
expenditure/benefit ratio of approximately $59,000 per year of life saved6 – with no significant
increase in cardiac complications rates, indicating that the additional survivors were not in
markedly worse health.
The right panel of Table III presents estimates from equation (2a) of the effect of being
above the median and the 75th percentile of the probabilistic-admission weighted density of
different hospital characteristics. The incremental effect of for-profit ownership on expenditures
diminishes as an area moves from the median to the 75th percentile of the distribution of forprofit ownership. Especially given the very large difference between the relative share of
patients with a probabilistic admission to a for-profit in the median area (.013) and the relative
share of patients with probabilistic admission to a for-profit in the 75th percentile area (.188), this
result suggests that for-profit hospital ownership has a strongly nonlinear or threshhold effect on
hospital expenditures. However, patients from areas with above the 75th percentile level of forprofit density do have a statistically significantly greater rate of readmission for heart failure,
although this effect is very small in magnitude (less than one-quarter of one percentage point).
Density of public hospitals, in contrast, has an expenditure-increasing effect at the median,
turning to an expenditure-decreasing effect at the 75th percentile.
Table IV presents estimates of the effect of area densities of hospital characteristics on
each of the components of expenditures: the Medicare labor cost index, and the basic and outlier

6

.00741*$21,855/.00273 = $59,321.
22

payments for cardiac and noncardiac admissions.7 The effect of for-profit hospitals on total
expenditures from Table III comes through two channels: lower labor costs and lower basic
payments for cardiac admissions. The effects of area density of for-profit hospitals on the other
main components of expenditures are small in relative terms. For example, the (statistically
significant) effect of for-profit density on the probability of cardiac outlier payments is only 3.5
percent as large as the total effect (.00167*$8,905/(.024*$17,309)). The labor cost index is
affected most by the presence of for-profit hospitals, and secondarily by the density of system
hospitals. Density of public, teaching, and large hospitals have insignificant effects on hospitals’
labor costs.
Since our models are identified under the assumption that differential distances and
changes in differential distances between patients and hospitals are exogenous, we investigated
whether accounting for the possibility of endogenous changes in hospitals’ ownership status
affects our results. First, we estimated a variant of equation (2) that includes contemporaneous
plus one and two periods leads and lags of area densities of all of the five hospital characteristics
(because of the leads and lags, these models are estimated using data on AMI patients from 19871994). Table V presents only the estimated effects of contemporaneous, leading, and lagged
ownership status characteristics from these models. The coefficient estimates in the first five
rows of the table trace out the time path of the effect of density of for-profit hospitals in an area.
7

The models underlying the results in this table are estimated at the patient level, except
for the Medicare labor cost index model, in which one observation is one Medicare-labor-cost
area (approximately equivalent to an MSA) for one year (N = 4,221). The Medicare labor cost
index model includes as controls Medicare-area fixed effects, time fixed effects allowed to vary
by size of MSA, and Medicare-area average values for market and patient characteristics. In
addition, the Medicare labor-cost index model weights each observation by the number of AMI
patients.
23

The leading effects of above-median density of for-profit hospitals on expenditures are both
small in magnitude and neither of the effects nor their sum is statistically distinguishable from
zero (heteroscedasticity-consistent standard error of the sum of the leading coefficients is .586).
In contrast, the contemporaneous and lagged effects are large and statistically significant
(standard error of the sum is .684). Density of public hospitals has a significant negative leading
effect and positive (but insignifcant) lagged expenditure effects.
Second, following the finding in Cutler and Horwitz (2000) that financial considerations
may affect hospitals’ decision to change ownership status, and because financial considerations
may lead to hospital closures, we reestimated the models underlying Table IV with controls for
area hospitals’ financial condition. Using Medicare cost reports, we constructed four measures
of financial distress: whether each hospital’s ratios of assets/liabilities and patient
revenues/operating expenses were in the lowest decile of all hospitals in our sample, and in the
lowest decile of all hospitals of similar ownership status (see Arnould, Bertrand, and Hallock
2000 for discussion of measurement of non-profit hospital financial performance). Then, treating
this like any other hospital characteristic, we calculated for each residential zip-code the
probabilistic-patient-flow weighted density of hospital financial distress. Including these four
area-level controls individually or in various combinations did not affect substantially the
estimated expenditure effects of for-profit ownership, system membership, or teaching status, or
the estimated mortality benefits of teaching hospitals, but did lead the estimated expenditure
effect of public ownership to become small, negative, and significant.
Third, following the finding in Hassett and Hubbard (2000) that area income and
educational attainment levels may affect for-profit hospitals’ propensity to acquire area non24

profits, we reestimated the models underlying Table IV with controls for area mean household
income and the proportions of the population aged 25 or more who were graduates of high school
and of college, calculated from the March Current Population Surveys (CPS). For those patients
from the approximately 240 MSAs with population greater than 100,000 for which the CPS
provides MSA identifiers (covering approximately 75 percent of nonrural AMI patients), we
calculated MSA-average population characteristics. For the remaining 120 MSAs
(approximately 25 percent of patients), we calculated state-average population characteristics
based on individuals in small MSAs and rural areas. Including these area-level controls had no
substantial impact on any of our estimated effects.

VI.

Conclusion
What is the impact of hospital ownership status on medical productivity and social

welfare? The theoretical literature on this question has generally focused on differences in
behavior between not-for-profit and for-profit organizations: non-profits might address contract
failures in the presence of informational asymmetries between consumers and producers. Nonprofit hospitals may offer consumers the advantage that physicians and hospital managers either
do not or can not pursue pure profit maximization, and so have less of an incentive and/or ability
to engage in opportunistic, socially inefficient behavior. On the other hand, because non-profit
hospitals do not have a well-defined residual claimant with legally enforceable property rights,
they may be less responsive to consumers than for-profits, or more prone to inefficient and/or
opportunistic behavior by managers and physicians.
In the hospital industry, the economic importance of the direct effects of differences in
25

behavior between for-profits and non-profits is limited by the quite small share of the for-profit
market. Even if for-profit hospitals were much more efficient, barring major changes in patient
flows, they could hardly have much of a direct overall impact on the efficiency of the hospital
industry. Few studies have addressed a potentially much more important effect of for-profit
ownership: the effects of an increasing presence of for-profit ownership on the behavior of other
hospitals. For-profit hospitals may still have a significant overall effect on welfare, if their
presence leads to welfare-improving changes in the behavior of not-for-profit hospitals in the
market.
Estimating the magnitude of the direct and spillover effects of hospital ownership on
productivity and welfare is complicated by many features of markets for health care. First,
reaching conclusions about welfare effects requires measures of both resource use and patient
health outcomes, which are generally difficult to obtain. Second, methods that seek to estimate
the impact of ownership by direct comparisons of patients treated at different types of hospitals
are likely to suffer from biases due to both patient selection, and to changes in market
competitiveness and other market characteristics that may be correlated with ownership changes
and that also affect hospital behavior. Third, even if the studies overcome these problems, they
will not have estimated the spillover effects of hospital ownership; and without considering such
market-level implications, any welfare analysis of hospital ownership is incomplete.
Finally, other characteristics of hospitals may have market effects. For example, a greater
presence of teaching hospitals may lead to more intensive styles of practice in an area, both as a
result of direct effects or (because the share of teaching hospital beds in most areas is also
relatively small) spillovers of practice styles among the physicians practicing in area hospitals.
26

Hospital system membership may also have both direct and spillover effects, if systems result in
more efficient management practices and more opportunities for collusion. All of these other
hospital market characteristics may be associated with differences in ownership, complicating the
estimation of ownership effects. For all of these reasons, the effect of hospital ownership on
social welfare is an incompletely resolved empirical question.
To address this question, we use longitudinal data on nonrural elderly Medicare recipients
hospitalized for a treatment of a new heart attack between 1985 and 1996, matched with
comprehensive data on all nonrural U.S. hospitals over the same period. This enables us to
examine both the financial costs and the health benefits of hospital treatment, in order to evaluate
welfare effects more completely. We use zip-code fixed effects to control for all time-invariant
heterogeneity across small geographic areas, hospitals, and patient populations. We model
individual patients’ hospital choice decisions as a function of exogenous patient, area, and
hospital characteristics, particularly the relative travel distances between patients’ residences and
hospitals of different types. Estimates from these models provide for each patient the probability
of admission to every nearby hospital, based only on arguably exogenous factors, and therefore
the relative probability of admission to hospitals of different ownership types. With these
estimates, we construct area-based measures of the “density” of hospitals of different ownership
types -- that is, the probability that a patient residing in an area will be admitted to a hospital of a
given ownership type, based only on exogenous determinants of hospital demand. This allows us
to avoid the problem of patient selection into different types of hospitals on the basis of
unobservable characteristics.
Focusing on area-level effects of ownership and other market characteristics also allows
27

us to capture potentially important spillover effects. Because we measure the market-level
consequences of changes in market composition, our methods do not allow us to identify
separately the contribution of direct and spillover effects. However, the total impact of a change
in ownership composition will generally be the more relevant empirical estimate for evaluating
policy proposals that may influence the ownership composition of hospital markets. In addition,
we develop indirect evidence on the relative importance of direct and spillover effects. All else
equal, if direct effects are relatively important, for-profit ownership should have minimal
consequences at low levels of for-profit market penetration, and should become more important
in proportion to market penetration. In contrast, spillover effects may be relatively large when
for-profit ownership penetration is small, if the presence of for-profit hospitals induces
significant changes in non-profit behavior. Moreover, the area-level effect may not increase as
rapidly as for-profit penetration rises.
Thus, it is not surprising that our analysis yields substantially different conclusions about
the effects of ownership composition on market performance than least-squares estimates of the
direct effects of ownership would imply. Higher market density of for-profit hospitals results in
significantly lower hospital expenditures for AMI patients, with no consequential effects on their
mortality or cardiac health. This effect appears to be predominantly due to spillovers.
Significant expenditure savings are achieved when the for-profit presence increases from near
zero to only a small fraction of admissions in the area; a share of admissions of less than 10
percent is simply not substantial enough for any reasonably-sized direct effect to lead to the large
effects on area expenditures that we observe. Additional penetration of for-profits to higher
market shares leads to sharply declining additional savings. We document that approximately
28

half of the expenditure savings achieved by penetration of for-profit hospitals comes about
through reductions in Medicare’s area hospital labor cost index, which is an intuitively plausible
mechanism through which spillovers would occur.
We also provide evidence that the for-profit effect we estimate is not likely to be due to
endogenous changes in area ownership structure. There is no evidence that changes in
productivity in an area lead changes in the density of for-profits. Controlling for area income,
education, and hospital financial conditions also do not affect the estimated effect of for-profit
hospitals.
Our analysis has certainly not resolved all of the critical empirical questions in evaluating
hospital ownership effects. We have focused on only one condition; effects may be different for
other types of health problems. We have evaluated only net expenditure effects. Consistent with
the theoretical prediction that for-profits are more responsive to economic incentives, other work
has suggested that for-profits may have been more aggressive in exploiting Medicare’s complex
regulated price system, by moving care from the inpatient setting to alternative settings –
including rehabilitation hospitals, outpatient departments, and home care – all of which qualify
for additional reimbursement. In this regard, it is interesting that the association we observed in
our previous work between market bed capacity and higher hospital expenditures is in part an
ownership phenomenon. In results not presented in the tables, we find that higher bed capacity
does not affect hospital expenditures to as great an extent once we account for its correlation with
ownership. This may be a confirmation of theoretical predictions (Newhouse 1970; Pauly and
Redisch 1973): not-for-profits prefer larger size, and so will tend to invest in excess bed capacity
especially when competition from for-profits is weak. However, it might also reflect the fact that
29

for-profits are simply more apt to convert bed capital to more profitable (i.e., reimbursable) uses,
such as rehabilitation services. More complete identification of the mechanism through which
for-profit spillover effects occur is an important question for further work. Evaluation of market
competition and composition effects for stroke, which involves much more post-acute care than
heart attacks, might be a good condition for such an analysis. That analysis could use methods
similar to those developed and applied here.
Finally, while we have focused on market-wide effects, we have done so only for
Medicare beneficiaries. It is possible that the apparently favorable productivity spillovers of forprofits for Medicare beneficiaries may be offset by less provision of public goods in the form of
undercompensated care for uninsured or poorly-insured patients. With suitable data, our
techniques could also be extended to examine effects on these other market segments.

30

31

1,345,217

1,661,674

N

146,193

Profit
17,356
36.1%
5.5%
6.9%
76.3
6.0%
50.6%
1.8%
14.1%
14.0%
22.7%
24.1%
23.1%
41.2%
41.9%
47.2%
54.9%
50.9%
14.8%
15.2%
23%
28.3%
25.3%
24.7%
14.4%
3.21

Sample
17,309
36.5%
5.5%
6.9%
76.3
6.3%
50.4%
1.9%
14.7%
14.2%
21.9%
25.5%
21.7%
50%
50%
50%
50%
50%
25%
25%
25%
25%
25%
25%
14%
3.32

Inpatient Expenditures, year after AMI (94$)
365 Day Mortality Rate
365 Day AMI Rate
365 Day CHF Rate
Age
Black
Female
MSA Size <100,000
MSA Size 100,000 - 250,000
MSA Size 250,000 - 500,000
MSA Size 500,000 - 1,000,000
MSA Size 1,000,000 - 2,500,000
MSA Size >2,500,000
Above median FP/NP [median = .013]
Above median Pub/NP [median = .029]
Above median System [median = .513]
Above median Teaching [median = .206]
Above median Large [median = .299]
Above 75th Percentile FP/NP [75th pct = .188]
Above 75th Percentile Pub/NP [75th pct = .133]
Above 75th Percentile System [75th pct = .728]
Above 75th Percentile Teaching [75th pct=.463]
Above 75th Percentile Large [75th pct = .491]
Very Concentrated Market
State HMO enrollment rate
Bed capacity per AMI patient

Public
17,183
38.3%
5.5%
6.9%
75.9
10.2%
49.8%
3.2%
20.5%
15.1%
19.2%
29.1%
12.6%
75.0%
96.8%
44.4%
34.6%
41.9%
46.8%
86%
21.1%
14.9%
24.8%
33.7%
12.1%
3.65

Non-

Full

167,616

Profit
17,002
38%
5.1%
6.5%
76.5
5.3%
49.8%
1.2%
14.3%
15.3%
18.1%
32.9%
18.0%
99.2%
74.4%
77%
24.4%
49.5%
87.7%
50.5%
44.1%
7.3%
23.2%
20.2%
12.9%
3.89

For-2.0%
5.3%
-7.3%
-5.8%
0.3%
-11.7%
-1.6%
-33.3%
1.4%
9.3%
-20.3%
36.5%
-22.1%
141.0%
77.6%
63.1%
-55.6%
-2.8%
492.6%
232.2%
91.7%
-74.2%
-8.3%
-18.2%
-10.4%
21.2%

FP-NP/NP

-1.1%
-0.8%
-7.3%
-5.8%
0.8%
-48.0%
0.0%
-62.5%
-30.2%
1.3%
-5.7%
13.1%
42.9%
32.3%
-23.1%
73.4%
-29.5%
18.1%
87.4%
-41.3%
109.0%
-51.0%
-6.5%
-40.1%
6.6%
6.6%

FP-P/P

1.0%
-5.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.5%
-41.2%
1.6%
-43.8%
-31.2%
-7.3%
18.2%
-17.2%
83.3%
-45.1%
-56.7%
6.3%
58.7%
21.5%
-68.4%
-82.3%
9.0%
89.9%
2.0%
-26.7%
19.0%
-12.1%

NP-P/P

% diffs between ownership status

Table I: Descriptive Statistics for Elderly AMI Patients, by Ownership Status of Hospital of Admission, 1985-1996

Table II: OLS Estimates of the Effect of Hospital Ownership Status and
Other Characteristics of Hospital of Admission on Expenditures, Costs, and Outcomes
for Elderly Acute Myocardial Infarction Patients, 1985-96
Dependent Variable
ln(Inpatient
Expenditures)

1-Year Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

For-profit

2.177
(0.271)

1.641
(0.173)

0.063
(0.081)

0.088
(0.090)

Public

4.338
(0.290)

3.195
(0.185)

0.324
(0.090)

0.382
(0.099)

System member

-0.534
(0.156)

-0.030
(0.099)

-0.034
(0.048)

-0.047
(0.053)

Large size

3.921
(0.179)

-1.638
(0.113)

-0.044
(0.055)

-0.061
(0.062)

Teaching status

10.822
(0.198)

-0.127
(0.124)

0.209
(0.060)

0.295
(0.068)

Notes: Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses. Hospital Expenditures in 1994 dollars.
Coefficients from expenditures models *100 from regressions in logarithms; coefficients from outcome models in
percentage points.

32

Notes: See notes to table II.

Above 75th percentile density of
for-profit/non-profit [75th pct = .188]
Above 75th percentile density of
public/non-profit [75th pct = .133]
Above 75th percentile density of
system hospitals [75th pct = .728]
Above 75th percentile density of
teaching hospitals [75th pct = .463]
Above 75th percentile density of
large hospitals [75th pct = .491]

Above median density of
for-profit/non-profit [median = .013]
Above median density of
public/non-profit [median = .029]
Above median density of
system hospitals [median = .513]
Above median density of
teaching hospitals [median =.206 ]
Above median density of
large hospitals [median = .299]

-2.425
(0.315)
1.169
(0.293)
-2.090
(0.216)
0.741
(0.257)
1.019
(0.229)

ln(Inpatient
Hospital
Expenditures)
0.027
(0.203)
0.169
(0.187)
0.021
(0.137)
-0.273
(0.163)
-0.014
(0.143)

1-Year
Mortality

33

-0.018
(0.098)
-0.039
(0.090)
-0.013
(0.066)
0.091
(0.079)
-0.063
(0.070)

1-Year
AMI
Readmit

Model (2): controls for above median only

0.109
(0.109)
-0.016
(0.101)
-0.004
(0.074)
0.064
(0.088)
-0.112
(0.078)

1-Year HF
Readmit

-1.087
(0.351)
-2.352
(0.302)
-1.505
(0.242)
-1.439
(0.280)
1.394
(0.242)

-2.146
(0.319)
1.567
(0.299)
-1.685
(0.225)
0.998
(0.260)
0.662
(0.236)
0.167
(0.226)
0.465
(0.191)
0.049
(0.155)
0.003
(0.177)
0.077
(0.154)

-0.025
(0.205)
0.077
(0.191)
0.003
(0.142)
-0.290
(0.165)
-0.193
(0.148)

-0.049
(0.107)
-0.013
(0.092)
-0.057
(0.074)
-0.160
(0.087)
-0.010
(0.075)

-0.012
(0.099)
-0.041
(0.092)
0.001
(0.068)
0.113
(0.080)
-0.058
(0.073)

0.135
(0.117)
-0.071
(0.102)
-0.114
(0.082)
-0.160
(0.096)
-0.024
(0.083)

0.093
(0.110)
-0.013
(0.103)
0.022
(0.077)
0.084
(0.089)
-0.101
(0.081)

Model (2a): controls for above median and above 75th
percentile
ln(Inpatient
1-Year
1-Year
1-Year HF
Hospital
Mortality
AMI
Readmit
Expenditures)
Readmit

Dependent Variable

Table III: Effects of Area Density of Hospital Ownership on Expenditures and Outcomes for Elderly AMI Patients, 1985-1996

1.0277

mean value of dependent variable

13,327

-1.965
(0.283)
1.253
(0.261)
-1.422
(0.194)
0.557
(0.228)
1.200
(0.206)
0.0468

-0.167
(0.088)
-0.234
(0.083)
-0.219
(0.062)
0.051
(0.075)
0.165
(0.066)
8,932

4.717
(3.129)
-3.879
(2.903)
5.983
(2.071)
4.916
(2.385)
-6.142
(2.107)
0.2508

0.381
(0.187)
-0.097
(0.173)
-0.127
(0.127)
0.083
(0.152)
-0.159
(0.134)

Basic
payment
(1=yes)

12,341

0.216
(0.761)
0.383
(0.707)
-0.799
(0.519)
0.516
(0.618)
1.772
(0.547)

ln(Basic
payment)

0.0134

-0.047
(0.047)
-0.034
(0.045)
-0.034
(0.034)
-0.057
(0.041)
0.006
(0.036)

Outlier
payment
(1=yes)

Non-cardiac-related Admissions Only

10,896

-7.046
(7.151)
-1.801
(6.223)
7.776
(4.680)
5.740
(5.647)
1.909
(4.650)

ln(Outlier
payment)

34

Notes: See notes to Table II. All models are patient-level except Medicare labor cost index model, in which one observation is one Medicare-labor-cost-area
(approximately equivalent to an MSA) for one year (N = 4,221). Medicare labor cost index model includes as controls Medicare-area fixed effects, time fixed
effects allowed to vary by size of MSA, and Medicare-area average values for market and patient characteristics. Medicare labor-cost index model weights each
observation by the number of AMI patients. For payments variables, mean values are based on levels not logs of nonzero observations.

-1.452
(0.605)
0.359
(0.570)
-1.256
(0.501)
0.041
(0.572)
0.477
(0.511)

Above median density of
for-profit/non-profit [median = .013]
Above median density of
public/non-profit [median = .029]
Above median density of
system hospitals [median = .513]
Above median density of
teaching hospitals [median = .206]
Above median density of
large hospitals [median = .299]

ln(Medicare
labor cost
index)

Cardiac-related Admissions Only
(DRG 103- DRG 145)
ln(Basic
Outlier
ln(Outlier
payment)
payment
payment)
(1=yes)

Dependent Variable

Table IV: Effects of Area Density of Hospital Ownership on Components of Expenditures for Elderly AMI Patients, 1985-1996

Table V: Effects of Area Density of Hospital Ownership on Expenditures and Outcomes for
Elderly AMI Patients, Dynamic model, 1985-1996
Dependent Variable
ln(Inpatient
Expenditures)

1-Year Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

Two period lead

-0.227
(0.531)

0.063
(0.345)

0.174
(0.165)

0.072
(0.185)

One period lead

-0.695
(0.470)

-0.043
(0.307)

0.189
(0.145)

-0.148
(0.162)

Contemporaneous

-1.240
(0.544)

-0.597
(0.356)

-0.333
(0.169)

-0.053
(0.190)

One period lag

-1.168
(0.535)

0.913
(0.349)

-0.068
(0.166)

-0.220
(0.185)

Two period lag

-1.766
(0.491)

0.420
(0.320)

0.079
(0.153)

0.106
(0.172)

Two period lead

-0.236
(0.425)

0.105
(0.276)

0.198
(0.130)

0.076
(0.148)

One period lead

-1.278
(0.410)

-0.038
(0.266)

-0.063
(0.125)

-0.008
(0.141)

Contemporaneous

0.363
(0.429)

0.297
(0.280)

-0.137
(0.132)

-0.213
(0.151)

One period lag

-0.071
(0.426)

0.068
(0.277)

-0.156
(0.131)

-0.371
(0.150)

Two period lag

0.207
(0.412)

-0.309
(0.267)

-0.004
(0.127)

0.045
(0.142)

Above median density of
for-profit/non-profit

Above median density of
public/non-profit

Notes: See notes to Table II.

35

References
Arnould, Richard, Marianne Bertrand, and Kevin Hallock, 2000, “Does Market Competition
Change the Nonprofit Mission? Managed Care and the Managerial Labor Market in
Nonprofit Hospitals,” mimeo.
Arrow, Kenneth J., 1963, “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care,” American
Economic Review 53: 941-73.
Becker, Edmund R. and Frank A. Sloan, 1985, “Hospital Ownership and Preference,” Economic
Inquiry 23: 21-36.
Coelen, Craig G., 1986, “Hospital Ownership and Comparative Hospital Costs,” in Bradford H.
Gray, ed., For-Profit Enterprise in Health Care, (Washington, DC: National Academy
Press).
Cutler, David and Jill Horwitz, 2000, “Converting Hospitals From Not-for-profit to For-profit
Status: Why and What Effects?” in David M. Cutler, ed., The Changing Hospital Industry:
Comparing Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Institutions (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).
Dranove, David, 1988, “Pricing By Nonprofit Institutions: The Case of Hospital Cost Shifting,”
Journal of Health Economics 7: 47-57.
Duggan, Mark, 2000a, “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending,” forthcoming
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Duggan, Mark, 2000b, “Hospital Market Structure and Medical Care for the Poor,” mimeo.
Easley, David and Maureen O’Hara, 1983, “The Economic Role of the Nonprofit Firm,” Bell
Journal of Economics 14: 531-8.
Ettner, Susan L. and Richard C. Hermann, 1997, “The Role of Profit Status Under Asymmetric
Information: Evidence from the Treatment Patterns of Medicare Beneficiaries Hospitalized
for a Psychiatric Disorder,” draft.
Feldstein, Martin S., 1971, “Hospital Cost Inflation: A Study of Nonprofit Price Dynamics,”
American Economic Review 61: 853-72.
Frank, Richard, David S. Salkever, and Jean Mitchell, 1990, “Market Forces and the Public Good:
Competition Among Hospitals and Provision of Indigent Care,” in Richard Scheffler and
Louis Rossiter, eds., Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research
(Greenwich, CT: JAI Press).
Frank, Richard and David S. Salkever, 2000, “Market Forces, Diversification of Activity, and the
36

Mission of Not-for-Profit Hospitals,” in David M. Cutler, ed., The Changing Hospital
Industry: Comparing Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Institutions (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Gaumer, Gary, 1986, “Medicare Patient Outcomes and Hospital Organizational Mission,”
Bradford H. Gray, ed., For-Profit Enterprise in Health Care, (Washington, DC: National
Academy Press).
Grosskopf, S. and V. Valdmanis, 1987, “Measuring Hospital Performance: A Nonparametric
Approach,” Journal of Health Economics 6: 89-107.
Hamilton, Vivian, 1994, “The Impact of Ownership Form and Regulator Measures on Firm
Behavior: A Study of Hospices,” Nonprofit Management and Leadership 4: 415-30.
Hansmann, Henry, 1980, “The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise,” Yale Law Journal 89: 835-901.
Hansmann, Henry, 1987, “Economic Theories of Nonprofit Organization,” in Walter W. Powell,
ed., The Nonprofit Sector: A Research Handbook (New Haven: Yale University Press).
Hansmann, Henry, 1996, The Ownership of Enterprise, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press).
Hartz, Arthur J., Henry Krakauer, Evelyn M. Kuhn, et al., 1989 “Hospital Characteristics and
Mortality Rates,” New England Journal of Medicine 321: 1720-5.
Hassett, Kevin and R. Glenn Hubbard, “Noncontractible Quality and Organizational Form in the
U.S. Hospital Industry,” mimeo.
Hertzlinger, Regina E., and William S. Krasker, 1987, “Who Profits From Nonprofits?” Harvard
Business Review: 93-106.
Hughes, Robert G. and Harold S. Luft, 1990, “Keeping Up With The Joneses: The Influence of
Public and Proprietary Neighbours on Voluntary Hospitals,” Health Services Management
Research 3: 173-81.
Kao, Daniel, 1998, “Does Hospital Ownership Structure Influence Staffing Levels?” draft.
Keeler, Emmett B., Lisa V. Rubenstein, Katherine L. Kahn, et al., 1992, “Hospital Characteristics
and Quality of Care,” JAMA 268: 1709-14.
Kennedy, L., 1985, “The Proprietarization of Voluntary Hospitals,” Bulletin of the New York
Academy of Medicine 61: 81-9.
Kessler, Daniel P. and Mark B. McClellan, 2000, “Is Hospital Competition Socially Wasteful?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115: 577-615.
37

Kopit, William G. and Robert W. McCann, 1988, “Toward a Definitive Antitrust Standard for
Nonprofit Hospital Mergers,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and Law 13: 635-61.
Lewin, Lawrence S., Robert A. Derzon, and Rhea Margulies, 1981, “Investor-Owned and
Nonprofits Differ in Performance,” Hospitals: 52-58.
Lynk, William J., 1995, “Nonprofit Hospital Mergers and the Exercise of Market Power,” Journal
of Law and Economics 38: 437-61.
Madison, Kristin, 2001, “The Relationship Between Multihospital System Membership and
Treatments, Costs, and Outcomes of Medicare Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction,”
PhD. Thesis, Stanford University.
Mann, Joyce, Glenn Melnick, Anil Bamezai, and Jack Zwanziger, 1995, “Uncompensated Care:
Hospitals’ Responses to Fiscal Pressures,” Health Affairs 263-70.
Mark, Tami L., 1996, “Psychiatric Hospital Ownership and Performance: Do Nonprofit
Organizations Offer Advantages in Markets Characterized by Asymmetric Information?”
Journal of Human Resources 31: 631-49.
McClellan, Mark M.,1997, “Hospital Reimbursement Incentives: An Empirical Approach,”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy VI: 91-128.
McClellan, Mark M. and Douglas O. Staiger, 2000, “Comparing Hospital Quality at For-Profit
and Not-for-Profit Hospitals,” in David M. Cutler, ed., The Changing Hospital Industry:
Comparing Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Institutions (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).
Medicode, DRG Guide 2000: The Complete Book of DRGs, (Salt Lake City, UT: 2000).
Nelson, Richard and Michael Krashinsky, 1973, “Two Major Issues of Public Policy: Public Policy
and Organization of Supply,” in Richard Nelson and Dennis Young, eds., Public Subsidy for Day
Care of Young Children, (Lexington, MA: DC Heath).
Newhouse, Joseph, 1970, “Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions,” American Economic Review
60: 64-74.
Norton, Edward C. and Douglas O. Staiger, 1994, “How Hospital Ownership Affects Access to Care
for the Uninsured,” RAND Journal of Economics 25: 171-85.
Patel, Jayendu, Jack Needleman, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1994, “Changing Fortunes, Hospital
Behaviors, and Ownership Forms,” draft.
Pattison, Robert V., 1986, “Response to Financial Incentives Among Investor-Owned and Not-forProfit Hospitals: An Analysis Based on California Data 1978-82,” in Bradford H. Gray, ed., For38

Profit Enterprise in Health Care, (Washington, DC: National Academy Press).
Pattison, Robert V. and Hallie M. Katz, 1983, “Investor-Owned and Not-for-Profit Hospitals: A
Comparison Based on California Data,” New England Journal of Medicine 309: 347-53.
Pauly, Mark, and Michael Redisch, 1973, “The Not-for-Profit Hospital as a Physicians’ Cooperative,”
American Economic Review 63: 87-99.
Philipson, Tomas, 1997, “Perfect Substitution and Organizational Form,” draft.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan, 1996, “Altruism, Nonprofits, and Economic Theory,” Journal of Economic
Literature 34: 701-28.
Shortell, Stephen M. and Edward F.X. Hughes, 1988, “The Effects of Regulation, Competition, and
Ownership on Mortality Rates Among Hospital Inpatients,” New England Journal of Medicine
318: 1100-07.
Silverman, Elaine M., Elliott S. Fisher, and Jonathan S. Skinner, 1999, “The Influence of For-Profit
and Not-for-profit Hospital Ownership on Medicare Spending,” New England Journal of
Medicine 341: 420-6.
Sloan, Frank A., 1997, “Not-for-Profit Ownership and Hospital Behavior,” draft.
Sloan, Frank A. and Robert A. Vraciu, 1983, “Investor-Owned and Not-for-profit Hospitals:
Addressing Some Issues,” Health Affairs 2: 25-37.
Sloan, Frank A., G.A. Picone, D.H. Taylor, and S.Y. Chou, 1998, “Hospital Ownership and Cost of
Quality of Care: Is There a Dime’s Worth of Difference?” draft.
Thorpe, Kenneth E. and Charles E. Phelps, 1991, “The Social Role of Not-for-profit Organizations:
Hospital Provision of Charity Care,” Economic Inquiry 29: 472-84.
Watt, J. Michael, Steven C. Renn, James S. Hahn, et al., 1986, “The Effects of Ownership and
Multihospital System Membership on Hospital Function Strategies and Economic Performance,”
in Bradford H. Gray, ed., For-Profit Enterprise in Health Care, (Washington, DC: National
Academy Press).
Weisbrod, Burton, 1977, The Voluntary Nonprofit Sector (Lexington, MA: DC Heath).
Weisbrod, Burton, 1988, The Nonprofit Economy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Wilson, George W. and Joseph M. Jadlow, 1982, “Competition, Profit Incentives, and Technical
Efficiency in the Provision of Nuclear Medicine Services,” Bell Journal of Economics 13: 472-82.
Young, Gary J., Kamal R. Desai, and Carol VanDeusen Lukas, 1997, “Does the Sale of Nonprofit
39

Hospitals Threaten Health Care for the Poor?” Health Affairs 16: 137-41.
Zuckerman, Stephen, Jack Hadley, and Lisa Iezzoni, 1994, “Measuring Hospital Efficiency with
Frontier Cost Functions,” Journal of Health Economics 13: 255-80.

40

