                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             WHY ARE FOREIGN FIRMS LISTED IN THE U.S. WORTH MORE?


                                              Craig Doidge
                                           G. Andrew Karolyi
                                             René M. Stulz


                                          Working Paper 8538
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8538


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




Respectively, Ph. D. candidate, Professor of Finance and Dean’s Distinguished Research Professor, and
Professor of Finance and Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics at the Fisher College
of Business of the Ohio State University. René Stulz is also a research associate of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. We thank David Brown, Steve Cosslett, Mark Flannery, David Hirshleifer, Dong Lee,
Andy Naranjo, James Shapiro (NYSE), Michael Weisbach, and seminar participants at the Ohio State
University and University of Florida for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Why are Foreign Firms Listed in the U.S. Worth More?
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 8538
October 2001
JEL No. G15, G30, G32



                                               ABSTRACT


        At the end of 1997, the foreign companies listed in the U.S. have a Tobin’s q ratio that exceeds
by 16.5% the q ratio of firms from the same country that are not listed in the U.S. The valuation
difference is statistically significant and largest for exchange-listed firms, where it reaches 37%. The
difference persists even after controlling for a number of firm and country characteristics. We propose
a theory that explains this valuation difference. We hypothesize that controlling shareholders of firms
listed in the U.S. cannot extract as many private benefits from control compared to controlling
shareholders of firms not listed in the U.S., but that their firms are better able to take advantage of growth
opportunities. Consequently, the cross-listed firms should be those firms where the interests of the
controlling shareholder are better aligned with the interests of other shareholders. The growth
opportunities of cross-listed firms will be more highly valued than those of firms not listed in the U.S.
both because cross-listed firms are better able to take advantage of these opportunities and because a
smaller fraction of the cash flow of these firms is expropriated by controlling shareholders. We find that
our theory explains the greater valuation of cross-listed firms. In particular, we find expected sales growth
is valued more highly for firms listed in the U.S. and that this effect is greater for firms from countries
with poorer investor rights.



Craig Doidge                                                       G. Andrew Karolyi
The Ohio State University                                          The Ohio State University
Department of Finance                                              Department of Finance
Max M. Fisher College of Business                                  Max M. Fisher College of Business
2100 Neil Avenue                                                   2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210                                                 Columbus, OH 43210
doidge.4@osu.edu                                                   karolyi@cob.osu.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Department of Finance
Max M. Fisher College of Business
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction

      Why is it that less than one in ten large companies from outside the U.S. choose to list their

shares on U.S. markets? Surveys of managers typically find that they perceive many benefits

from listing in the U.S. In particular, they mention that firms benefit from listing because it

lowers their cost of capital, gives them access to foreign capital markets, increases their ability to

raise equity, increases their shareholder base, makes their stock more liquid, and adds visibility,

exposure, and prestige (Mittoo, 1992, Fanto and Karmel, 1997). At the same time, the costs

associated with a listing that managers report seem small in comparison to the benefits. These

costs are SEC reporting and compliance requirements, as well as the direct legal costs and

investment-banking fees associated with the listing. In a number of cases, the direct initial costs

have even been picked up by the depository banks.1 Given this apparent imbalance between

benefits and costs, do firms that list in the U.S. benefit from listing? Are firms that list worth

more than firms that do not? Why is it that we do not see more companies listing in the U.S.? Is it

that the managers and controlling shareholders of firms that do not list would not benefit from

listing when other shareholders might benefit from it?

      To address these questions, we first compare the value of foreign firms listed in the U.S. to

the value of foreign firms that are not listed in the U.S. Using the Worldscope database universe

of firms, we find that the firms listed in the U.S. have a Tobin’s q ratio that exceeds the q ratio of

firms from the same country that do not list in the U.S. by 16.5% on average. The valuation

differential of listed firms, which we call the cross-listing premium, increases as firms choose a

more selective and costly listing mechanism; specifically, the valuation difference is largest for

exchange-listed firms, where it reaches 37%. This valuation differential persists after controlling

for country and firm characteristics.




1
    See “Concern arises over ADR payouts,” by Alison Beard, Financial Times, July 23, 2001.


                                                     1
    We argue that earlier theories of the benefits of listing in the U.S. that focus on the reduction

in the cost of capital resulting from expanding the pool of shareholders by overcoming barriers to

international investment cannot explain the cross-listing premium.2 With these theories, one

should see fewer listings in the 1990s when there were fewer barriers to international investment

than in the 1980s. Yet, the 1990s saw a sharp increase in listings in the U.S.

    Our theory explains why firms listed in the U.S. are worth more and why not all firms list in

the U.S. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) show that large foreign firms are

typically controlled by large shareholders, mostly families. We argue that cross-listed firms are

firms with low controlling shareholder agency costs. Firms where controlling shareholder agency

costs are high do not list in the U.S. because of the threat from a U.S. listing to the private

benefits from control of large shareholders. One would expect that agency costs of controlling

shareholders are lower in firms with valuable growth opportunities that cannot be financed

internally or with riskless debt.3 Controlling shareholders of firms where the agency costs of

controlling shareholders are low have the most to gain and the least to lose by listing in the U.S.

since they have lower private benefits from control to protect and greater growth opportunities to

take advantage of by accessing capital markets. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny

(2001) show that equity is worth less in countries with lower investor protection because equity is

priced to reflect the large private benefits the controlling shareholder can extract from the firm in

such countries. For controlling shareholders from countries with lower investor protection to give

up part of their private benefits from control, they have to benefit more from the ability to access

public capital markets than controlling shareholders from countries with better investor

protection. This additional benefit compensates them for the higher cost they incur in taking

actions that limit agency costs. Hence, listed firms from countries with poorer investor protection

must have better growth opportunities than listed firms from other countries.


2
  See Karolyi (1998) for a review of the literature on U.S. listings of foreign firms.
3
  Stulz (1990) shows that agency costs of managerial discretion are negatively related to growth
opportunities. The arguments in that paper can be extended to controlling shareholders.

                                                 2
       The paper proceeds as follows. We explain why the traditional view of the benefits from

listing in the U.S. cannot explain our evidence and develop our theory in Section 2. We present

our sample in Section 3. In Section 4, we show that foreign U.S. listed firms are valued more than

foreign firms that are not listed in the U.S. and that the cross-listing premium is higher for

exchange-listed firms. We provide tests of our theory in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6.



2. The benefits and costs from U.S. listings for foreign firms

       There is a large literature on international cross-listings. Before advancing our theory for why

there is a large cross-listing premium, we review existing explanations for the benefits and costs

of cross-listings, as well as the empirical evidence associated with these explanations.

       Much of the early literature on cross-listings was built using the insights of international asset

pricing models with barriers to international investment.4 In these models, a firm located in a

country that is not fully integrated in the world capital markets typically faces a higher cost of

capital because its risk has to be born mostly by investors from its country. If the firm finds a way

to make it less costly for foreign investors to hold its shares, these investors share some of the

firm’s risk and therefore the cost of capital of the firm falls. From this perspective, a U.S. listing

is a way for firms to make their shares more accessible to foreign investors and will be used only

by those firms for which doing so reduces their cost of capital sufficiently to offset the costs of

the listing. If two firms have the same expected cash flows but one firm has a U.S. listing and the

other does not, one expects the firm with a U.S. listing to have a higher value than the firm

without such a listing.

       There is some support in the event study literature for the argument that listing in the U.S.

reduces barriers to owning the stock and therefore decreases the listing firm’s cost of capital, but

this support is rather limited. The announcement of a U.S. listing is accompanied by a significant




4
    See Karolyi and Stulz (2001) for a review of this branch of the international asset pricing literature.

                                                         3
abnormal return that is higher for firms from emerging markets and for exchange listings.5 For

instance, Miller (1999) finds an abnormal return of 1.15% for the announcement of a U.S. listing,

but this abnormal return is 1.54% for a listing for a firm from an emerging market and is 2.63%

for an exchange listing. There is a stock price runup prior to a U.S. listing announcement, but the

common stock of firms that list underperforms after the listing. For instance, Foerster and Karolyi

(1999) document excess returns of 0.15% per week during the year preceding the listing and of -

0.14% per week during the year following the listing. These changes in share values over the two

years that surround a U.S. listing announcement make it difficult to infer from stock returns the

magnitude of the net benefit to a U.S. listing.

    A risk premium explanation for the cross-listing premium faces five difficulties. First, the

event study abnormal returns are extremely small compared to the premium, but the run-up prior

to listing is not. For the risk premium explanation to explain the cross-listing premium, it would

have to be that the run-up prior to listing is explained by the market anticipating a U.S. listing. An

alternative explanation of the run-up is plausible – firms list after having done well, so that the

cross-listing premium is already there when firms list.6 Second, if the only impact of a listing is a

decrease of the risk premium, then all firms for which the risk premium would fall sufficiently to

justify the transaction costs of listing would list in the U.S., but they do not. Third, the U.S. cross-

listing premium is widespread across countries and is large even for countries whose capital

markets were substantially integrated in world markets during the 1980s and 1990s. For instance,

the risk premium argument would imply a smaller cross-listing premium for Swiss and Canadian

firms than for Indian or Turkish firms. Our results show that Swiss and Canadian firms have


5
  See Switzer (1986), Alexander et al. (1988), Foerster and Karolyi (1993, 1999), Jayaranam et al. (1993),
and Miller (1999). See the survey by Karolyi (1998) for dozens of related references.
6
  It is because of this endogeneity problem that we avoid event-time analysis and instead shift to cross-
sectional tests for our empirical analysis. It is also worthwhile to note that Sundaram and Logue (1996)
examine changes to a number of valuation ratios, such as price-to-earnings, price-to-book, around 76 ADR
listings. They found a 10 percent increase relative to a benchmark sample of firms which did not list in the
U.S. They associate this increase with a decline in cost of equity capital, but it is likely to be associated
with the pre-listing runup documented by others. We thank David Brown and Mike Weisbach for helping
to clarify this point.

                                                     4
among the highest cross-listing premiums, while Indian and Turkish firms have a negative cross-

listing premium. Fourth, the risk premium argument cannot possibly explain the time-series

pattern of listings. Listings have grown sharply over the last ten years. As markets become more

integrated, a listing becomes less valuable with the risk premium argument since the cost of

capital for companies is increasingly determined globally. Consequently, we should have seen a

reduction in U.S. listings in the second half of the 1990s when instead we saw an increase in

listings. Fifth, standard asset-pricing models cannot explain why the cross-listing premium is

largest for firms that choose to list on an exchange versus those that use a private placement.

    There are at least four alternate hypotheses that have been advanced to explain the benefits

for foreign firms of listing in the U.S. The first hypothesis, advanced by Foerster and Karolyi

(1999), is that listing in the U.S. creates value for firms if it enlarges their shareholder base. When

a listing enlarges the firm’s shareholder base, the firm’s risk is shared among more shareholders,

which reduces the firm’s cost of capital. The critical difference between the shareholder base

hypothesis and the capital market segmentation hypothesis is that it recognizes that simply listing

shares in the U.S. does not necessarily imply that U.S. investors will become significant

shareholders. U.S. investors may choose to mostly stay away from shares issued by firms they

know little about. For these firms, the risk premium benefit emphasized by the asset pricing

literature is not relevant and a listing in the U.S. may have little value. The shareholder base

hypothesis helps understand the listing abnormal return, but not the cross-listing premium we

focus on here.

    The second hypothesis, advanced by Lins, Strickland, and Zenner (2000), is that firms that

list in the U.S. gain value because they bypass local underdeveloped capital markets. Hence, the

greater liquidity and efficiency of the U.S. capital markets makes a listing valuable for those

firms that have to raise funds. Lins, Strickland, and Zenner (2000) show that firms that list in the

U.S. become less credit-constrained as a result of doing so, in that their investment depends less

on their cash flow after the U.S. listing than before. This hypothesis makes the critical point that


                                                  5
firms that list in the U.S. gain access to capital. It indirectly suggests that the firms that benefit

most from a listing are those that have the best investment opportunities, which is consistent with

a cross-listing premium.

    A third hypothesis suggests that information disclosure plays an important role in a U.S.

listing decision. Models by Cantale (1996), Fuerst (1998), and Moel (1999) assume information

asymmetry or information incompleteness (similar to the shareholder base hypothesis above) and

establish a signaling equilibrium in which firms try to communicate their private information

regarding their quality to outside investors by listing their shares in overseas markets. Markets

around the world are assumed to differ in terms of the level of information disclosure and higher

levels of disclosure required by some markets, such as the U.S., reduce the cost to outside

investors’ of monitoring managerial actions. As a result, markets will place a higher value on

such firms.

    The fourth hypothesis, advanced by Coffee (1999), Stulz (1999), and Reese and Weisbach

(2001), is that a U.S. listing enhances the protection of investors for firms coming from countries

with poor investor protection and reduces the agency costs of controlling shareholders. A number

of papers have recently provided evidence that investor protection differs across countries and

that investor protection matters for how firms are governed and financed (e.g., La Porta, Lopez-

de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 2000). Poor investor protection is associated with poorly

developed financial markets, high costs of external finance, and more valuable private benefits

from control. Compared to the rest of the world, investors are extremely well protected in the

U.S., especially when firms are subjected to the full extent of the SEC reporting requirements.

Firms in countries with poor investor protection can obtain some of the benefits of the apparatus

that protects investors in the U.S. by listing shares in the U.S. In particular, firms that list shares

on a U.S. exchange have to provide some of the SEC filings that U.S. firms have to provide and

are subject to many of the same U.S. laws and regulations. There are limitations to the extent that

investors of foreign firms listed in the U.S. benefit from U.S. laws and regulations. For instance,


                                                  6
shareholders of a foreign firm listed in the U.S. may face substantial obstacles in recovering

damages awarded to them by a U.S. court if the firm’s assets in the U.S. are small relative to the

damages (Siegel, 2001).

    When a firm has high agency costs of controlling shareholders, it will find accessing public

capital markets for equity or public debt to be very expensive. This is because capital providers

expect that a significant share of firm cash flows will be expropriated by the controlling

shareholder and therefore will only be willing to pay a price for securities issued by the firm that

reflects their expectations about the extent of future expropriation of cash flows. Consequently,

such firms will find it difficult or impossible to fund projects that require large amounts of outside

capital. Controlling shareholders of firms that have growth opportunities that can be taken

advantage of only through the issuance of securities in public markets will therefore have to find

ways to align their incentives better with those of minority shareholders. A number of

mechanisms are available to controlling shareholders to bond themselves to lower consumption of

private benefits. In particular, they can incur the cost of developing a reputation of not extracting

large personal benefits from control, they can use debt to be subject to monitoring from creditors,

they can commit to a high disclosure policy, they can list in the U.S., and they can add outsiders

to the board.7

    As an example of the tradeoff faced by the controlling shareholder of a firm, think of a firm

where the controlling shareholder could extract private benefits worth $100 million a year (as

long as external forces – legal or political – do not prevent him from doing so). If the firm does

not have to sell risky securities on external capital markets, the controlling shareholder has little

reason to refrain from extracting these private benefits. However, suppose that by extracting these

benefits, the controlling shareholder prevents the firm from raising capital to fund growth


7
  Gomes (2000) models the reputation mechanism and draws empirical predictions from his model. His
model implies that reputation is only valuable to firms whose financing requirements outstrip their ability
to finance projects internally, with bank debt, or with riskless debt.



                                                    7
opportunities worth $2 billion in present value. Assume also that these growth opportunities could

be appropriated if the controlling shareholder could bond himself to consume only $50 million a

year of private benefits. Under these circumstances, the value of the firm would increase by $2

billion plus the present value of the private benefits not consumed. If the controlling shareholder

owns 50% of the shares and if his discount rate is 10%, he loses $500 million of private benefits

in present value but gains $1.250 billion of increase in the value of his shares by bonding himself

to limit his consumption of private benefits. If the firm lost few growth opportunities as a result of

having a controlling shareholder who consumes private benefits aggressively, it would make no

economic sense for the controlling shareholder to bond himself to consume less private benefits.

    The growth opportunities that entice a controlling shareholder to bond himself to consume

less private benefits have to be more valuable in countries with worse investor rights since the

controlling shareholder gives up greater private benefits in such countries. This means that

everything else equal, one would expect the proportion of firms from a country that list in the

U.S. to be inversely related to the country’s protection of investor rights. This prediction creates a

problem for explaining the listing premium. Since we know that firms in countries with better

investor protection tend to have higher valuations, this creates the possibility that listed firms

have higher q’s simply because more of these firms come from high firm q countries than from

low firm q countries. This issue creates a possible selection bias that has to be accounted for in

explaining the listing premium.

    As shown by Doidge (2001), the typical non-U.S. firm that lists in the U.S. has a large

controlling shareholder. By listing in the U.S., a foreign firm increases the rights of its investors,

especially of its minority shareholders, and constrains the controlling shareholder in his ability to

extract private benefits from control. Whether the firm lists in the U.S. or not depends on whether

that shareholder finds it advantageous to do so. Controlling shareholders who find it optimal to

extract as many private benefits from the firm as they can get away with will not want their firm

to list in the U.S. because doing so will threaten their ability to extract benefits.


                                                   8
    A U.S. listing decreases the controlling shareholder’s ability to extract private benefits from

control when the firm lists in the U.S., but this is not a cost for controlling shareholders of firms

whose interests are already sufficiently aligned with those of minority shareholders. After all,

they have taken steps to commit to low consumption of private benefits. Nevertheless, a listing

benefits the firm by reducing its cost of outside finance. First, equity financing becomes cheaper

for such a firm because the controlling shareholder’s willingness to expose the firm to greater

disclosure as well as to be subject to U.S. laws reinforces and signals the controlling

shareholder’s commitment to low consumption of private benefits. Second, the firm can better

access the deep U.S. and Eurobond markets. Existing research shows that these benefits are

important. Reese and Weisbach (2001) provide evidence that firms raise more equity subsequent

to a listing. Strikingly, they show that the greater shareholder protection resulting from a listing

means that it becomes more advantageous for firms to raise equity at home and that firms raise

more equity at home following a U.S. listing. The ability to raise more equity at home for U.S.

listed firms has to come from the decrease in the cost of equity capital resulting from the greater

commitment of controlling shareholders to limit their consumption of private benefits.

    When deciding whether to list in the U.S., the controlling shareholder of a foreign corporation

trades off the cost of a constraint on the value of private benefits from control against the benefit

from cheaper access to external finance. We would therefore expect the firms that benefit the

most from additional external finance to be the ones that have a U.S. listing. Firms with better

growth opportunities and lower controlling shareholder agency costs are therefore more likely to

list in the U.S. These firms should therefore be more highly valued than firms that do not list

because of their greater growth opportunities, because the value of their publicly traded securities

reflects more of the value of these greater growth opportunities since they have lower controlling

shareholder agency costs, and because they will be better able to take advantage of these growth

opportunities by having a lower cost of capital and by having access to U.S. and international

capital markets. The market value of a firm’s debt and equity is the value of assets in place plus


                                                 9
the present value of growth opportunities. For a given value of assets in place, q increases with

growth opportunities. It follows from this reasoning that U.S. listed firms should have a higher q

ratio than those that do not list and that the growth opportunities of cross-listed firms will be

valued more highly.

    Since firms that list in the U.S. are less financially constrained and raise additional equity

capital, their q is lower than the q of otherwise similar firms that do not list in the U.S. This is

because firms with a lower cost of capital can exploit more marginal growth opportunities than

firms with a higher cost of capital, which lowers the marginal q of firms with a lower cost of

capital. This effect makes it harder for us to find evidence that cross-listed firms are valued more.



3. Data

    To conduct our study, we need data for the value of firms and data for the country

characteristics that are related to investor protection, capital market accessibility, accounting

standards, and aggregate market liquidity. To obtain data on firms, we use Worldscope, an online

financial information service of the Primark division of the Thomson Financial group.8 The main

results of this study are obtained for firms with data available for 1997. The measures of

shareholder rights and legal enforcement of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny

(LLSV, 1998) are used to control for the degree to which investors are protected in a country.

Their measures are available for countries that have at least five publicly traded firms for which

ownership data is available. They exclude countries from the former Soviet bloc. We include all

firms in the Worldscope universe for the countries for which their measures are available. This

gives us 11,757 firms from 40 countries. Of these firms, 1,167 are cross-listed in the U.S. Listing




8
  The Worldscope database coverage includes: more than 96% of the world’s market value is represented,
10 to 18 years of historical data, over 24,000 public companies in more than 50 developed and emerging
markets, including over 3,000 companies in all the IFC Investables Index countries. See
http://www.primark.com/pfid/index.shtml?/content/worldscope.shtml for more details.

                                                 10
information was obtained from the Bank of New York9 and was supplemented and cross-checked

with data obtained from the NYSE, Nasdaq, OTCBB (http://www.otcbb.com/static/symbol.stm)

and the September 2000 edition of the National Quotation Bureaus’ Pink Sheets. For those firms

that changed listing location in the U.S. (for example, from Rule 144a private placement to

exchange listing) or those that subsequently raised capital, we assigned them to the class of listing

according to their status as of December 31, 1997. There are more cross-listed firms than those

contained in the Worldscope universe. However, we would not be able to obtain valuation data

for the firms that are not in Worldscope.

    The valuation measure we use is Tobin’s q computed as follows. For the numerator, we take

total assets, subtract the book value of equity, and add the market value of equity. For the

denominator, we use total assets. After eliminating the firms for which data is not available to

compute q, we are left with 955 cross-listed firms and 7,725 that are not. Our q estimate does not

attempt to use replacement cost in the denominator and does not use the market value of debt in

the numerator. There is nothing that we could do to avoid these simplifications in a dataset that

spans 40 countries.10

    Since we investigate how country characteristics affect the cross-listing premium, we have to

compare estimates of q across countries. Firms listed on U.S. exchanges have to provide U.S.

GAAP accounting statements. However, Worldscope provides firm data using local GAAP even

when U.S. GAAP is available. Though attempts are made by Worldscope to make the data

consistent across countries, such an effort has obvious limitations. Differences in accounting

practices across countries can increase q in some countries relative to other countries. Many

countries allow firms to hide reserves, so that their assets are understated. At the same time, some


9
   See Bank of New York, 1996, Global Offerings of Depositary Receipts: A Transaction Guide, Bank of
New York American Depositary Receipt Division, New York, NY, and http://www.bankofny.com/adr.
10
    It is difficult to determine ex ante how an imperfectly-measured q will affect our analysis. If rapidly-
growing firms are most likely to cross-list, they are also the most likely to have recently acquired assets and
will tend to have a relatively high book value of assets. As a result, this will lead to a lower marginal q
measure and is, therefore, likely to bias our tests against finding a cross-listing premium. Our thanks to
Mike Weisbach for pointing this out to us.

                                                      11
countries capitalize R&D, while others do not. The capitalization of R&D increases the

denominator of q and consequently decreases q. Because of the concern about the possible biases

introduced by differences in accounting practices, we also estimate the cross-listing premium

within countries.

    To make firms across countries more comparable, we eliminate financial firms and require

firms to be large. More specifically, we exclude firms with total assets of less than $100 million.

This leaves us with 778 cross-listed firms and 4,494 firms that are not. A difficulty with

Worldscope is that firms were added rapidly to the dataset during the 1990s. This makes it

difficult for us to use historical data for the firms in our sample without losing many firms. In a

compromise, we require firms to have three years of sales data so that we can compute a

reasonably stable measure of two-years’ sales growth. After imposing this requirement, we have

714 cross-listed firms and 4,078 firms that are not listed in the U.S.

    We use three country-level variables obtained from LLSV (1998). They are legal origins, the

index of anti-director rights, and the index of judicial efficiency. LLSV (1998) assign each

country to one of four legal traditions: common law, French civil law, German civil law, and

Scandinavian civil law. Their anti-director rights index aggregates six different shareholder rights

and ranges from 0 to 6, where a higher score indicates better shareholder protection. The index is

constructed by adding 1 when a country allows shareholders to mail their proxy to vote, it does

not require shareholders to deposit shares ahead of the shareholder meeting, it allows cumulative

voting or proportional representation of minorities on the board of directors, it has an oppressed

minorities mechanism in place, it allows shareholders who represent less than 10% of share

capital to call for an extraordinary meeting, and it gives shareholders preemptive rights that can

be waived only by a shareholder’s vote. The next variable is an index of judicial efficiency. This

index produces a rating of the “efficiency and integrity of the legal environment as it affects

business, particularly foreign firms.” It takes values from 0 to 10 and judicial efficiency improves




                                                 12
with the score. The index is produced by Business International Corporation and LLSV (1998)

use the average from 1980 to 1983.

     We use a number of additional country variables in our study. First, for our information

disclosure hypothesis, we employ an index of accounting standards produced by the Center for

International Financial Analysis and Research.11 The index rates companies’ annual reports in

1990 for their inclusion or exclusion of 90 items. The accounting index is not available for three

of our countries, namely Ireland, Pakistan, and Indonesia. In the results reported in the paper, we

use a substitute index for these three countries, but none of our results are affected if we exclude

these three countries.12 Second, we use an estimate of the liquidity of markets across countries.

For that purpose, we use the ratio of the dollar value of shares traded divided by the average

market capitalization in 1997.13 Third, the Millken Institute has developed a capital access index

that attempts to capture the structural characteristics of the corporate finance, capital markets, and

financial institutions systems of each country.14 More specifically, it measures capital access

according to the depth, breadth, and liquidity of markets – it is an equally-weighted index of

variables, divided into three categories: quantitative, risk, and qualitative. The score ranges from

0 to 7, where a higher score indicates better capital access. The index focuses on market factors

alone and not on political ideologies. It examines empirical market factors regulating the entry

and exit, origin, and destination of capital flows. The rankings focus less upon macroeconomic

policies and issues than do other economic rankings, and more upon recent revolutions in

corporate finance theory and practice. We also use the total capitalization of domestic listed


11
   See Chapter 1, Volume 1 of International Accounting and Auditing Trends (2nd edition, 1991), Center
for International Financial Analysis and Research, Princeton, New Jersey.
12
   Though we follow LLSV and use the 2nd edition (1991) rankings, we supplement it with the scores from
the 3rd edition (1993) for two of the missing countries, Ireland and Pakistan. For Indonesia, there is no
score, but we assign that of the median score for other Southeast Asian countries (Thailand, Malaysia,
Philippines, and Singapore).
13
   Our sources for liquidity, GDP per capita, and market capitalization include The Salomon Smith Barney
Guide to World Equity Markets 1999 (1999, Euromoney Institutional Investor, PLC, London) and IFC
Emerging Stock Markets Factbook 1998 (1998, http://www.spglobal.com).




                                                   13
stocks in 1997. Finally, we use the GNP per capita in 1997. Appendix A1 details all country-level

variables used.



4. The cross-listing premium

     In this section, we document that there is a cross-listing premium and that it persists even

after controlling for firm and country characteristics. We do so first by providing evidence on the

q of listed firms and the q of non-listed firms for each country in our sample. We then specify and

estimate regressions where we control for firm and country characteristics.

     Table 1 reports first for each country the number of firms (N), the mean and median total

assets (TA) , and the average and median Tobin’s q of firms without a U.S. listing. The number of

firms per country varies widely. We have a minimum of 3 non-listed firms in Peru and

Venezuela, but a maximum of 1,258 firms in Japan. There is considerable variation in q across

countries, from a minimum of 0.61 in Peru to a maximum of 2.61 in Turkey. The range of median

q’s is more limited.

     The next four columns of Table 1 show the number of firms with a U.S. listing, the average

and median total assets, the average and median q, and finally the average and median difference

in q between firms that are not listed and firms that are. The proportion of firms that are listed in

the U.S. varies widely across countries. Greece and Pakistan have no firms listed in the U.S. that

meet our data requirements, but Mexico, South Africa, and Venezuela have more firms in our

sample with a U.S. listing than firms without. Japan and the UK each have more than 100 firms

listed in the U.S.

     Looking at total assets, listed firms are larger than non-listed firms. For the whole sample, the

mean of the total assets of listed firms is almost six times larger than the mean of the total assets

of non-listed firms. The median of the total assets of listed firms is almost ten times larger than


14
  See Think Locally - Act Globally: Domestic Market Restructuring and Sustainable Global Eonomic
Growth by Glenn Yago, Thomas Hall, and Michael Harrington (Millken Institute Policy Brief, March 8,
2000).

                                                  14
the median of the total assets of non-listed firms. Since there are fixed costs for listing in the U.S.

for a foreign firm, one would expect the firms that list to be larger. However, other reasons why

larger firms are more likely to list may matter more. For instance, larger firms are likely to have

more recognition by U.S. investors and are more likely to have internationally traded products.

Kang and Stulz (1997) and others have shown that foreign investors invest more in larger firms

and firms for which international trade is more important.

    Table 1 reports the average cross-listing premium computed as follows. First, for each

country, the difference between the average q of listed firms and the average q of non U.S.-listed

firms is computed. Second, this difference is averaged across the countries in our sample. The

average across countries of the individual cross-listing premiums is 0.221 with a t-statistic of

3.26. The average across countries of the median cross-listing premiums is 0.201 with a t-statistic

of 3.68. Both the mean and median cross-listing premiums are positive for 26 countries. Two of

the countries in the table have no cross-listed firms, which leaves twelve countries with a negative

cross-listing premium. The average q of listed firms exceeds the average q of non-listed firms by

16.5%. One way to assess the economic importance of this valuation difference is that it exceeds

the typical estimate of the diversification discount (Berger and Ofek, 1995, Lang and Stulz,

1994).

    The third panel of the table reports results for Rule 144a private placement listings. These

listings are capital-raising issues in which the securities are privately placed to qualified

institutional buyers (QIBs) and, as a result, do not require compliance with GAAP or SEC

disclosure rules. These securities trade OTC among QIBs with very limited liquidity. There are

only 116 such listings from 20 countries in our sample. The UK and many other countries have

none. The country with the largest number of such listings is India, which has 47, and Taiwan,

which has 20. With the exception of France and Thailand, total assets of the firms using a 144a

listing are lower on average than the total assets of the firms having a U.S. listing. The average

cross-listing premium is positive in 11 countries and the median premium is positive in 12


                                                  15
countries. The average cross-listing premium for 144a listings is 0.149, which is lower than the

overall cross-listing premium. In contrast, the median cross-listing premium for 144a listings is

0.255, which is greater than the overall cross-listing premium. The t-statistics for the averages of

mean and median 144a cross-listing premiums are 1.05 and 2.39, respectively.

    The fourth panel shows results for firms with an OTC listing. These are often referred to as

Level I ADRs for non-Canadian listings. They trade OTC as Pink Sheet issues with limited

liquidity and require only minimal SEC disclosure and no GAAP compliance. These firms are

exempt from filing Form 20-F under Rule 12g3-2(b), which allows home country accounting

statements with adequate English translation, if necessary. This is the most popular listing, in that

almost half of the sample of cross-listed firms has an OTC listing. Twenty-eight countries have

firms with such a listing. Typically, firms with an OTC listing have more assets than firms with a

144a listing. Sixteen countries have a positive average OTC cross-listing premium and 22

countries have a positive median OTC cross-listing premium. The average cross-listing premium

for OTC listings is 0.105 and the median is 0.127; the associated t-statistics for the average and

median OTC cross-listing premiums are 1.40 and 2.34, respectively.

    Finally, the fifth panel shows results for exchange-listed firms. These listings comprise

ordinary listings (mostly Canadian firms and New York Registered Shares for Dutch firms) and

Level II and III ADRs. As the most prestigious and costly type of listing, these require full SEC

disclosure with Form 20-F and compliance with the exchange’s own listing rules. Thirty-two

countries have firms with exchange listings. Except for Brazil, Hong Kong, New Zealand,

Singapore, and Switzerland, these firms are on average larger than the other firms from their

country that are listed in the U.S. The cross-listing premium is positive on average in 25

countries. The median cross-listing premium is positive in 26 countries. The average cross-listing

premium is 0.486 (t-statistic across countries of 3.85) which corresponds to an average cross-

listing premium of 36.5%. This average cross-listing premium is 226% the average cross-listing

premium for 144a listings and 362% the premium for OTC listings. The median premium is even


                                                 16
larger at 0.516 (t-statistic across countries of 4.52) which amounts to a median premium of

45.6%.

     Table 1 does not make it possible to evaluate the significance of the cross-listing premium for

each country. To evaluate this significance, we estimated within-country regressions of q on a

dummy variable that takes value one for firms with a U.S. listing. Using heteroskedasticity

consistent t-statistics, we find three countries with a significant negative dummy variable, but

eight countries with a significant positive coefficient. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the

coefficients and of their t-statistics. It is important to remember that the statistical precision of the

premium depends on the number of listing firms. Contrast, for example, the Japanese cross-listing

premium of 0.26, which is modest but precisely estimated with a t-statistic of 3.83, and that of

Portugal, with a cross-listing premium of 1.29 and associated t-statistic of 1.43.

     The next step in our analysis is to determine whether the cross-listing premium can be

explained by firm-specific and country-level variables. Tables 2 and 3 report a series of

regression results of Tobin’s q on a dummy variable representing a cross-listing overall (“Cross-

list”).

     Regression (1) of Table 2 projects the q of all firms in our sample on a dummy variable,

“Cross-list,” that takes value one if a firm is listed in the U.S. We see that the dummy variable has

a positive coefficient of 0.26 with a t-statistic of 6.26 (computed with a heteroskedasticity

consistent standard error). The R-square of this regression is low, which is not surprising since

the only explanatory variable is whether a firm is listed in the U.S. It could be that firms that list

simply have better investment opportunities. If this were the case, then the cross-listing premium

should disappear if we control for growth opportunities in the regression. In Table 2, we use two

proxies for growth opportunities: sales growth over the last two years (“Sales growth” or “SG”)

and the median q of the global industry a firm belongs to (“Ind_G”). Regression (2) shows that

the premium is significantly positive when we use these proxies for growth opportunities.




                                                   17
Controlling for growth opportunities reduces the premium and its significance.15 Not surprisingly,

the adjusted R-square increases substantially.

     In regressions (3) through (12), we add country characteristics as independent variables to

regression (2). The premium is significant in every regression. When we do not control for other

country characteristics, firms with French civil law (“FL”) and Germanic civil law (“GL”) have

lower q’s, while firms with Scandinavian law (“SL”) have higher q’s. Tobin’s q increases with

the index of accounting standards (“AS”) and increases with the liquidity of the domestic stock

market (“LR”). Finally, firms have higher q’s in countries with easier access to capital (“CAI”).

We do not control simultaneously for capital access and stock market liquidity because of the

correlation between these two variables.16 However, in regression (9) we control for legal origin,

accounting standards, judicial efficiency (“EJ”), and stock market liquidity. Firms with Germanic

law still have low q’s, firms from countries with higher judicial efficiency have higher q’s, and

countries with more liquid markets have higher q’s. In regression (10), we replace stock market

liquidity with the capital access index. The adjusted R-square drops when we do that and some

variables stop being significant because their effect is subsumed by the capital access index. The

capital access index has a positive significant effect as expected. Regressions (11) and (12) repeat

regressions (9) and (10), but the legal origin dummy variables are replaced by the anti-director

index (“AD”). The adjusted R-square is higher when we use the legal origin dummy variables and

the anti-director index does not seem to have an unambiguous impact on q.

     It follows from Table 2 that (1) there is a cross-listing premium, (2) it cannot be explained by

our proxies for firm growth opportunities, and (3) it cannot be explained by differences in


15
   In this analysis, we excluded two firms based on very large outlier values for sales growth (SG). These
firms are Eidos, plc, a UK firm listed on Nasdaq, and Hurrican Hydrocarbons, a Canadian firm listed on the
NYSE. We tracked down the SEC Form 20-F filings and uncovered that the 1,577% and 2,733% growth in
sales in 1996, respectively, were both due to major acquisitions.
16
   In fact, market liquidity is a key component of the capital markets equity (KE) measure which forms the
CAI index together with the capital markets bonds, capital markets advanced, banking, international,
sovereign, macroeconomics, and institutional measures. See Appendix 1 in Think Locally - Act Globally:
Domestic Market Restructuring and Sustainable Global Economic Growth by Glenn Yago, Thomas Hall,
and Michael Harrington (Millken Institute Policy Brief, March 8, 2000).

                                                   18
shareholder protection proxies, capital market development across countries, or other country

factors. We need, however, to be cautious about the interpretation of the cross-listing premium.

Suppose that there are high and low q countries and that, for whatever reason, the firms in high q

countries are more likely to list in the U.S. We could then conclude that there is a cross-listing

premium, but it would simply reflect the fact that the sample of cross-listed firms has a higher

proportion of firms from high q countries than the sample of firms that are not cross-listed.

Hence, the cross-listing premium would be an artifact that has nothing to do with cross-listing and

would have nothing to do with our theory that advances the hypothesis that firms that cross-list

have lower controlling shareholder agency costs compared to other firms from the same country.

We therefore control for the endogeneity of the listing decision with respect to country

characteristics, since otherwise we might wrongly attribute the premium to the firm

characteristics that lead a firm to list. We attempt to control for this endogeneity by modeling an

endogenous self-selection model and using a Heckman (1979) correction to control for the effect

of self-selection bias induced by the firm’s decision to list in the U.S.

    To examine the effect of a listing on q, we define the measure of q as:

                                  qi = α + β' Xi + δ Li + εi (valuation equation)                  (1)

where Xi is a set of exogenous country variables, Li, a dummy variable that equals 1 for a firm

that cross-lists in the U.S., {α, β, δ}, a vector of parameters to be estimated, and εi, an error term.

The estimated parameter δ measures the relation between listing and q, but, since the firms that

list are not random and their decision is related to q, Li and εi are correlated, and δ will be biased.

Following Greene (1997, Chapter 20), we assume that the listing decision is given by,

                                      Li* = γ'Zi + ηi       (listing decision equation)            (2)

                                     Li = 1 if Li* > 0

                                     Li = 0 if Li* < 0,

where Li* is an unobserved latent variable, Zi is a set of variables that affect the decision to list

and ηi is an error term. The correlation between Li and εi will be non-zero if the exogenous

                                                  19
variables in the listing decision equation (2), Zi, affect q, but are not in equation (1), or if the error

terms, εi and ηi, are correlated.

     We can estimate (1)-(2) as a simultaneous equation system or using Heckman’s (1979) two-

step estimator, which is the approach we choose. Assuming that εi and ηi are bivariate normally

distributed with means zero, standard deviations σε and ση (normalized to one), and correlation ρ,

we have the expected q of the listing firm as,

                          E( qi | Li = 1) = α + β' Xi + δ + ρσελi1(γ'Zi)                         (3a)

where λi1(γ'Zi) is the “inverse Mills’ ratio” and is computed as φ(γ'Zi)/Φ(γ'Zi), where φ(⋅), Φ(⋅) are

the density function and cumulative distribution functions for the standard normal, respectively.

The expected value of the firm that chooses not to list is similarly,

                          E( qi | Li = 0) = α + β' Xi + ρσελi2(γ'Zi)                             (3b)

where λi2(γ'Zi) is computed as -φ(γ'Zi)/[1-Φ(γ'Zi)]. The difference in q for the cross-listed and non-

cross-listed firm is given by,

               E( qi | Li = 1) - E( qi | Li = 0) = δ + ρσεφ(γ'Zi)/[ Φ(γ'Zi)(1-Φ(γ'Zi))]          (3c)

which shows how the estimated premium for listing will be biased upward if the correlation of the

error terms, ρ, is positive, as is hypothesized for cross-listed firms. The first step of the Heckman

(1979) procedure is to obtain estimates of γ in equation (2) using a probit model. These consistent

estimates can then be used to compute values for λi1 and λi2. The second step estimates equation

(1) using OLS, but with an additional term, λi, computed as λi1(γ'Zi)Li + λi2(γ'Zi)(1-Li), to correct

for self-selection,

                          qi = α + β' Xi + δ Li + δλλi + εi     (corrected valuation equation)          (4)

where δλ is a new parameter associated with ρσε that captures the sign of the correlation between

the error terms in equations (1) and (2).17


17
   An appendix is available from the authors on the estimation procedure and the computation of the
standard errors from the Heckman covariance matrix (see also, Greene, 1997, Chapter 20; Maddala,
1983,Chapters 8 and 9).

                                                    20
    Table 3 presents our results evaluating the effect of selection bias on the cross-listing

premium. The table is divided into three sections, including the probit model results, the OLS and

Heckman valuation results, the latter with country-level controls and without. We also include

test results using two-stage least squares (2SLS) in which we use the same exogenous variables in

the probit model along with the probability of listing in the U.S. to calculate the estimated value

of listing, Li*. We then use the fitted value from the first-stage probit as an instrument for Li in the

second stage regression on Tobin’s q.

    The probit model results show that country level variables related to the legal environment

and accounting standards are statistically significantly associated with the decision to list.

Companies from countries with Scandinavian and, especially, Germanic laws are much less likely

to list than those from English common law countries, and those from countries with poorer

accounting standards are more likely to list in the U.S. When we swap the anti-directors rights

amendment variable for the legal origin dummy variables, it is also significantly positively related

to listing, which implies that countries with better treatment of minority shareholders rights are

more likely to list in the U.S., a result that is consistent with our arguments in Section 2 and with

evidence in Reese and Weisbach (2001). Since La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny

(2001) show that countries that treat minority shareholders better have higher valuations, there is

the potential for our regressions to attribute to listing a premium which is simply due to the higher

valuations of countries with better protection of minority shareholders. Country GNP is

negatively related to listing in this specification. In either case, the pseudo-R-square, which is

computed as an index from the likelihood ratio, is relatively low at 2.5 percent to 4.1 percent.

    Our OLS, 2SLS, and Heckman estimates of the basic valuation model correspond to model

(2) in Table 2. The dependent variable is again q but our control variables include only firm-

specific variables related to past sales growth and median q of the industry to which the firm

belongs. The 2SLS and Heckman self-selection models employ the probit model in column (2).

When we do not control for country characteristics, the premium is positive but insignificant.


                                                  21
When we control for country characteristics, the premium is 0.65 and significant. λ is

insignificant in both cases. When we use the probit model’s fitted value in 2SLS, the premium is

always significant. The control variables that are statistically important in the full model include

the accounting standards (AS), the liquidity ratio (LR) variables, and the firm-specific measures

for past sales growth and industry q.

        The approach used in Table 3 is designed to correct for the bias in the listing premium

that can arise if firms that cross-list might come from countries where firms have high valuations.

An obvious issue is whether we should also take into account self-selection based on firm

characteristics. There are at least two problems with doing this. First, while it is reasonable to

assume that country characteristics change slowly, such an assumption is less reasonable for firm

characteristics. The firm characteristics we have in our data set are for 1997. Firms make their

decision of whether to list based on firm characteristics at the time of listing. Worldscope does

not have information for many of our firms at the time of listing. Second, an important issue in

self-selection models, such as the 2SLS and Heckman techniques, is the choice of instruments in

the selection (listing decision) equation and the valuation equation. A number of authors suggest

that exogenous characteristics that affect the selection ideally be used, especially if it is less likely

to affect the specific firm’s value (Greene, 1997, Section 20.4.4; Willis and Rosen, 1979).

Obviously, firm characteristics such as growth opportunities will necessarily be closely related to

firm value and hence adding such characteristics could make the selection equation and the

valuation equation alternate ways of estimating the same relations. Despite these two problems

we estimated a selection equation that in addition to the variables used in Table 3 uses firm size in

1997. With this additional variable, the pseudo-R-square of the probit increases sharply to 22%.

With this selection equation, the estimate of the listing dummy variable is 1.79 with a t-statistic of

18.995. The Heckman lambda is –1.08 with a t-statistic of –20.07. Adding this firm-specific

variable to our selection equation does not change our conclusions.




                                                   22
5. Interpreting the premium

    Since we could not eliminate the cross-cross-listing premium by controlling for firm and

country characteristics or by controlling for potential self-selection bias, we now turn to the issue

of whether we can explain the premium. Firms that have controlling shareholders who extract

high benefits from control will not list in the U.S. because doing so threatens their ability to

extract these benefits. Consequently, the firms that will choose to list in the U.S. are those where

controlling shareholders extract fewer benefits from control compared to firms from the same

country that do not list in the U.S.

    If the controlling shareholders do not expect to have to resort to outside financing with equity

or risky debt, they will limit their consumption of private benefits from control only so as to

maximize the future flow of these benefits. However, if a firm has high growth opportunities that

require outside financing with equity or risky debt, the controlling shareholder has to take steps to

convince outside providers of capital that the degree to which they will be expropriated will be

small enough to avoid making outside funding prohibitively expensive. Hence, firms with high

growth opportunities are firms where the controlling shareholders have incentives to establish

mechanisms to commit to lower extraction of private benefits from control. More of the cash

flows of these firms accrue to the capital providers, so that growth opportunities are valued more

highly for such firms. Further, such firms find a U.S. listing more advantageous because it opens

up broader capital markets to them and helps them to convince outsiders that the extent to which

their controlling shareholders consume private benefits from control is limited. The increased

valuation of growth opportunities for these firms should be greater if these firms come from

countries with poorer protection of shareholder rights because controlling shareholders could

expropriate more in these countries. Finally, one would expect private benefits from control to be

most constrained in those firms that raise capital publicly through an exchange listing since those

firms are the ones where the U.S. listing has the strongest impact in improving the protection of

minority shareholders. This suggests a negative relation between the premium and investor


                                                 23
protection variables – the premium should be greatest for firms from countries with the greatest

private benefits from control – and a positive relation between the premium and proxies for a

firm’s growth opportunities.

    Exchange listings impose tighter constraints on controlling shareholders, so that we would

expect that firms with better investment opportunities use an exchange listing rather than a private

issue. Firms that raise capital on an exchange have controlling shareholders whose consumption

of private benefits from control is more restricted compared to firms that raise capital with a 144a

listing or an OTC listing or to firms that do not raise capital. All 144a firms raise capital, but 144a

listings have the weakest impact on controlling shareholders since these firms do not even have to

provide financial statements that use U.S. GAAP. A firm’s ability to finance growth opportunities

through a 144a listing is limited because of the private placement nature of the listing, so that one

would expect the firms with the better growth opportunities to use an exchange listing.

    We investigate in Table 4 whether the cross-listing premium is larger for exchange listings

and whether, for exchange listings, it is larger for firms that raise funds. In regressions (1) to (3),

we replace “Cross-list” with the separate dummy variables by type (“144a”, “OTC”, “Exchange”)

and include them alone, with the growth opportunities variables and with the country-level

variables (hereafter, we only use liquidity ratio, LR, and not the broader measure of capital

access, CAI). There is a small, positive, and statistically insignificant premium of 0.07 to 0.13 for

144a listings. In Section 2, we pointed out that barriers to international investment models of the

cross-listing premium cannot explain why ADRs from India and Turkey have a low cross-listing

premium. The regressions we are discussing can do so because all the ADRs from India and

Turkey are 144a listings. For OTC listings, the premium is positive (ranging from 0.08 to 0.11)

and yet significant at reasonable levels of confidence. The premium for exchange listings is large,

positive (0.44 to 0.54), and statistically significant with robust t-statistics well over 5.00. The

hypothesis that the coefficients for all three types of listings are equal is rejected at conventional

levels of significance. Regressions (4) to (6) include a dummy variable for 144a listings and for


                                                  24
exchange listed firms that raise equity capital at the time of the listing or after. The cross-listing

premium is significant and positive and the capital-raising exchange listings have a significantly

higher premium.

    In Table 5 we re-estimate our valuation models of Tables 2 and 3, but we add different

combinations of interactive variables that allow us to investigate whether growth opportunities

are valued more for cross-listed firms and whether the valuation differential is lower for firms

from countries with better investor protection. As before, our proxies for private benefits from

control are the anti-director rights index (AD), the accounting standard index (AS), and the

efficiency of the judiciary (EJ). Indirectly, the proxy for the liquidity of the firm’s home stock

market (LR) is also a proxy for private benefits from control, but it is somewhat harder to

interpret. Our proxies for growth opportunities are again two-year sales growth and the median q

of the global industry a firm belongs to. We allow all of these variables to interact with the listing

dummy variable (abbreviated as CL). Further, we create an additional interaction, which is the

anti-director index times sales growth times the listing dummy variable.

    The first result to note in each of the three models is that the dummy variable for listing is not

significant. This means that the interactions explain the cross-listing premium. We control for

anti-director rights, accounting standards, judicial efficiency, and turnover. Not surprisingly, we

find that these variables have positive and significant coefficients, though not always significantly

for AD and never so for EJ. Both of our proxies for growth opportunities have positive,

significant coefficients in all specifications as before, even with the additional interactions.

Turning to the interactions, we find that the coefficients on the growth proxies with CL are

positive and significant (model 1). The valuation premium increases as sales growth and industry

q increase, results which are consistent with our hypothesis that a listing is more advantageous to

firms with better growth opportunities. As in Table 4, exchange-listed firms that raise capital have

a higher cross-listing premium.




                                                 25
    Model (2) allows for the listing dummy to interact with the growth opportunities and country-

level variables. The interaction variable for the anti-director rights index with listing has a

negative significant coefficient, as expected. In other words, firms from countries with better

shareholder protection list when their growth opportunities are weaker than firms from countries

with worse shareholder protection, so investors value more those firms that overcome the

challenge and list in the U.S. The positive coefficient on the interaction variable for judicial

efficiency would seem at first to be inconsistent with our theoretical discussion. However, this is

not clear. The judicial system of the firm’s country may be required to enforce investor rights

obtained through the listing. If this effect is important, the impact of a listing would be smaller for

firms coming from countries with a weak judicial system. Though liquidity of the home markets

can be interpreted in parallel fashion to AD and EJ, it has an independent and negative interaction

with listing for q. Firms with a given set of growth opportunities that list in the U.S. are less

valuable, the more active is the home market trading environment. Finally, the greater valuation

of growth opportunities associated with cross-listed firms should be negatively related to

shareholder rights in the country of the firm. We therefore expect the premium of firms from

countries with better shareholder protection to be less correlated with the growth opportunities of

the firm. Model (3) adds this additional interaction variable (SG*AD*CL). The negative

coefficient on sales growth interacted with the listing dummy and with the anti-director index is

consistent with our hypothesis.

    For each model, we also estimate the regression using the Heckman correction for selection

bias. The probit model is the same as the one used in Table 3. The coefficient on λ is negative and

significant in models (2) and (3). This is surprising. We would have expected firms that list,

which have a positive prediction error in the listing equation, to have a positive residual in the q

equation. With our prior, the coefficient on λ would be positive.

    We performed a number of robustness checks on the decomposition of the cross-listing

premium. First, we did examine a number of extended specifications. For example, we allowed


                                                  26
for interaction variables of the listing dummy and sales growth with not only anti-director rights

(AD) but also accounting standards (AS) and judicial efficiency (EJ). These results were not

reliably significant across OLS and Heckman models, but the interaction with AS was negative

and that with EJ was positive. In fact, the positive and significant coefficient on EJ with the

listing dummy alone in Table 5 is displaced by the higher level interaction. The interaction effect

with the accounting standards index and sales growth is weaker. Another extended specification

introduced the same higher level interaction with industry q as well as sales growth. Again, these

effects were weaker overall, and, if any results were reliable, it was that interaction effect with

industry q, anti-director rights, and listing, which was negative and significant.

     Second, in order to address the concern that our results might be sensitive to the year that we

use, we reconstructed our entire database for the year 1995 using the same criteria and data

sources (Worldscope, NYSE, Nasdaq, OTCBB, Pink Sheets, etc). Because of the historical bias

in Worldscope and because of the rapid growth in listings in the latter half of the 1990s, the

number of firms in our sample from 40 countries was reduced to 525 cross-listed firms from 778

and to 3,756 domestic firms from 4,494. We recomputed all of our country-level variables using

earlier editions of the same data sources (e.g. IFC Emerging Stock Markets Fact Book 1996, see

Section 3).18 It is important to note that the composition of the sample by country is quite

different, and may reflect artifacts of the Worldscope data rather than the reality of the markets

and U.S. listings. For example, the country with the largest increase in the number of firms from

1995 to 1997 was Taiwan (305 percent) that went from 40 to 162 firms, of which 21 were listed

in the U.S. Other countries with large percent increases in U.S. listings were Brazil, Colombia,

India, Pakistan, and Peru, all emerging market countries. The main concern is whether the




18
   As in the analysis with 1997, we identified five very large outliers for sales growth statistics among
firms. These two-year growth rates exceeded 1,500 percent.

                                                   27
composition change was systematic with regard to country-level or firm-specific attributes like

sales growth and industry q.19

     Table 6 presents the 1995 results. The OLS regression without the interactions has a

significant cross-listing premium. Except for the anti-director rights variable that is significantly

positive, the other significant variables are the same as in 1997. When we take into account the

self-selection bias, the cross-listing premium becomes too large to be sensible. When we add the

interactions between the cross-listing dummy variable and the other explanatory variables, the

results are consistent with those for 1997 except that the SG*AD*CL variable is not significant

with the OLS regression. However, it is significantly negative with the Heckman correction.

Despite the smaller sample, the results for 1995 are similar to the results for 1997.

     A third and final set of robustness tests examines the changes in q experienced by those firms

that were not listed in the U.S. in 1995, but became so by 1997. Our objective in this experiment

is to address concerns about endogeneity and self-selection bias in the cross-listing premium.

Strikingly, the firms not listed in 1995 that are listed in 1997 experience an increase in q. Further,

this increase is positive and significant only for OTC and exchange listed firms. Since the country

characteristics that we use do not change over time (except for stock market turnover), our theory

suggests that firms that list have to have experienced a change in growth opportunities. The

increase in q is consistent with this. At the same time, however, it is clear that this change is not

explained by changes in sales growth and a firm’s industry q, so that whether a firm lists or not

has information about this change in growth opportunities. We cannot exclude the possibility,

though, that the act of cross-listing itself explains some of the change in q. However, this

evidence is also consistent with firms listing after having done well, for whatever reasons. It is

important to note, however, that the hypothesis that firms list after having done well can explain




19
  We did compute the correlation between the percent increases in U.S. listings across countries with the
anti-director rights index and found a significant and positive correlation of 0.39.


                                                   28
why cross-listed firms are worth more, but it cannot explain why the cross-listing premium is

related to investor protection in a firm’s country.



6. Conclusions

    We have shown in this paper that cross-listed firms have higher valuations than other firms

from their country that do not cross-list. Our explanation for this result is that the firms that list

are those with lower controlling shareholder agency costs. If controlling shareholder agency costs

are high, the controlling shareholder is unlikely to let the firm list in the U.S. because a listing

threatens his ability to extract private benefits from the firm. In support of this theory, we find

that growth opportunities are valued more highly for firms that list in the U.S. and that this

valuation differential is negatively related to the investor protection in the firm’s country. The

stock-price run-up that precedes a listing is further evidence in support of our theory, since it is

consistent with firms acquiring growth opportunities and committing to lower controlling

shareholder agency costs before listing.

    Our work leave some issues unresolved. We attempted to control for self-selection, but doing

so did not affect our conclusions. This could be because self-selection does not matter for our

results, or it could be because our model of the listing decision omits important variables. Further

research may produce models of the listing decision that will help in resolving this issue. Another

issue that further research should address is the extent to which the greater valuation of cross-

listed firms simply results from the U.S. bull market. Is it that cross-listed firms did well because

they were listed in a market that did well? This explanation for the listing premium is hard to

reconcile with the evidence supportive of our theory. At the same time, however, a skeptic could

argue that we show that growth firms are worth more and the 1990s were a period when growth

was valued more in the U.S. than it has been historically.




                                                  29
                                           References

Alexander, G., C Eun, and S. Janakiramanan ,1988, International listings and stock returns: some

        empirical evidence, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23, 135-151.

Berger, P., and E. Ofek, 1995, Diversification's effect on firm value, Journal of Financial

        Economics 37, 39-65.

Cantale, S., 1996, The choice of a foreign market as a signal, working paper, Tulane University,

        New Orleans, MI.

Coffee, J., 1999, The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate

        governance and its implications, Northwestern University Law Review 93, 641-708.

Doidge, C., 2001, Do laws matter for corporate ownership and control? Evidence from emerging

        markets firms that list in the U.S., working paper, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

Fanto, J., and R. Karmel, 1997, A report on the attitudes of foreign companies regarding a U.S.

        listing, Stanford Journal of Law, Business and Finance 3, 143-162.

Foerster S., and A. Karolyi, 1993, International listings of stocks: the case of Canada and the

        U.S., Journal of International Business Studies 24, 763-412.

Foerster S., and A. Karolyi, 1999, The effects of market segmentation and investor recognition on

        asset prices: evidence from foreign stocks listing in the U.S., Journal of Finance 54, 981-

        1014.

Fuerst, O., 1998, A theoretical analysis of the investor protection regulations argument for global

        listing of stocks, working paper, Yale University, New Haven, CN.

Gomes, A., 2000, Going public without governance: managerial reputation effects, Journal of

        Finance 55, 615-646.

Greene, W., 1997, Econometric analysis 3rd ed., Prentice Hall, New Jersey.

Heckman, J., 1979, Sample selection bias as a specification error, Econometrica 47, 153-161.

Heckman, J., 1990, Varieties of selection bias, American Economic Review 80, 313-318.

Jayaranam, N., K. Shastri, and K. Tandon, 1993, The impact of international cross listings on risk

        and return: evidence from American depositary receipts, Journal of Banking and Finance

        17, 91-103.


                                                30
Kang, J., and R. Stulz, 1997, Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign portfolio equity

        ownership in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 3-28.

Karolyi, A., 1998, Why do companies list shares abroad? A survey of the evidence and its

        managerial implications, Financial Markets, Institutions, and Instruments Vol. 7

        Blackwell Publishers, Boston.

Karolyi, A., and R. Stulz, 2001, Are financial assets priced locally or globally?, working paper,

        Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

Lang, L., and R. Stulz, 1994, Tobin’s q, corporate diversification, and firm performance, Journal

        of Political Economy 102, 1248-1280.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world,

        Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of

        Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2000, Investor protection and

        corporate governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2001, Investor protection and

        corporate valuation, working paper, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Lins, K., D, Strickland, and M. Zenner, 2000, Do non-U.S. firms issue equity on U.S. stock

        exchanges to relax capital constraints, working paper, University of North Carolina,

        Chapel Hill, NC.

Maddala, G., 1983, Limited dependent and qualitative variables in econometrics, Cambridge

        University Press, New York.

Miller, D., 1999, The market reaction to international cross-listing: evidence from depositary

        receipts, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.

Mittoo, U., 1992, Managerial perceptions of the net benefits of foreign listing: Canadian

        evidence, Journal of International Financial Management and Accounting 4, 40-62.




                                               31
Moel, A., 1999, The role of information disclosure on stock market listing decisions: the case of

        foreign firms listing in the U.S., working paper, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA.

Reese, W., and M. Weisbach, 2001, Protection of minority shareholder interests, cross-listings in

        the United States, and subsequent equity offerings, working paper, NBER, Cambridge,

        MA.

Siegel, J., 2001, Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by submitting to U.S. law?, MIT

        working paper, Cambridge, MA.

Stulz, R. M., 1990, Managerial discretion and optimal financing policies, Journal of Financial

        Economics 26, 3-28.

Stulz, R. M., 1999, Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied

        Corporate Finance 12, 1999, 8-25.

Sundaram, A. K. and D. E. Logue, 1996, Valuation effects of foreign company listings on U.S.

        exchange, Journal of International Business Studies 27, 67-88.

Switzer, L., 1986, The benefits and costs of listing Canadian stocks in U.S. markets, pp 241-254,

        in L. Sarna (ed.), Corporate structure, finance, and operations, Carswell Co., Toronto.

Willis, R. and S. Rosen, 1979, Education and self-selection, Journal of Political Economy 87, S7-

        S36.




                                               32
Table 1. Valuation by country. Firms that do not cross-list vs. firms that cross-list.
This table shows summary statistics and the distribution of firms that do and do not cross-list as of December 31, 1997. Information on ADRs comes from
BoNY. Information on firms from Canada and Israel that list their shares directly on the NYSE or Nasdaq is obtained from the exchanges’ web sites. The
National Quotation Bureau’s Pink Sheets are used to identify Canadian firms that are directly listed on the OTC market. The first two panels compare firms that
do not cross-list vs. firms that cross-list. The last three panels summarize the data on cross-listed firms based on where the firms choose to cross-list their shares,
on Portal under Rule 144a, over-the-counter as OTC Bulletin Board or Pink Sheet issues, or on the NYSE or Nasdaq. Data for Total Assets (TA, in billions of
USD) and Tobin’s q, computed as (Total Assets – BV(equity) + MV(equity)) / Total Assets. Financial firms, firms with total assets less than $100 million, and
firms with missing data are discarded. D(q) is the difference between the mean (median) cross-listed q and the mean (median) not-cross-listed q. The first row for
each country reports means and the second row reports medians (in parentheses). N is the number of firms.
                    Not cross-listed             Cross-listed                        Rule 144a                              OTC                          Exchange-listed
               N          TA         q     N     TA        q        D(q)      N     TA       q         D(q)      N     TA         q       D(q)      N     TA        q        D(q)
Argentina      13         0.83     1.15    8      3.58     1.39       0.234   1     1.42      0.99      -0.162   2     2.68      1.41       0.258   5     4.38      1.46       0.304
                         (0.81)   (1.10)         (1.65)   (1.39)    (0.292)        (1.42)    (0.99)   -(0.107)        (2.68)    (1.41)    (0.313)        (1.88)    (1.39)    (0.293)
Australia      54         0.56     1.58    35     3.10     1.50      -0.083   1     2.32      2.29       0.708   24    2.32      1.52      -0.061   10    5.04      1.37      -0.215
                         (0.38)   (1.45)         (1.70)   (1.46)    (0.008)        (2.32)    (2.29)    (0.839)        (1.40)    (1.47)    (0.024)        (3.89)    (1.32)   -(0.133)
Austria        33         0.57     1.04    9      2.54     1.41       0.370   0                                  9     2.54      1.41       0.370   0
                         (0.28)   (1.02)         (1.71)   (1.42)    (0.401)                                           (1.71)    (1.42)    (0.401)
Belgium        26         2.81     1.59    2      9.64     1.34      -0.254   0                                  1     8.45      1.24      -0.349   1     10.83     1.43      -0.158
                         (1.47)   (1.39)         (9.64)   (1.34)   -(0.056)                                           (8.45)    (1.24)   -(0.151)        (10.83)   (1.43)    (0.040)
Brazil         83         2.18     0.80    20     9.01     0.71      -0.098   2     4.28      0.84     0.039     15   10.43      0.65      -0.156   3      5.08     0.90       0.097
                         (0.72)   (0.77)         (2.86)   (0.66)   -(0.111)        (4.28)    (0.84)   (0.074)         (1.87)    (0.65)   -(0.114)         (3.86)   (0.65)   -(0.117)
Canada         133        1.32     1.42    66     2.51     1.89       0.471   0                                  11    2.29      1.94       0.521   55     2.55     1.88       0.461
                         (0.43)   (1.27)         (0.92)   (1.41)    (0.137)                                           (0.59)    (1.28)    (0.008)         (1.02)   (1.41)    (0.146)
Chile          34         0.75     0.98    17     2.58     1.40       0.418   1     1.66      1.96     0.982     1     1.66      1.96       0.982   15     2.70     1.32       0.343
                         (0.36)   (0.95)         (1.17)   (1.40)    (0.451)        (1.66)    (1.96)   (1.008)         (1.66)    (1.96)    (1.008)         (0.99)   (1.26)    (0.313)
Colombia       10         0.79     0.73    1      0.90     0.87       0.134   1     0.90      0.87     0.134     0                                  0
                         (0.47)   (0.62)         (0.90)   (0.87)    (0.250)        (0.90)    (0.87)   (0.250)
Denmark        49         0.61     1.77    2      5.63     1.87       0.097   0                                  0                                  2      5.63     1.87     0.097
                         (0.37)   (1.27)         (5.63)   (1.87)    (0.596)                                                                               (5.63)   (1.87)   (0.596)
Finland        39         0.90     1.53    6      4.20     1.41      -0.121   3      1.41     1.24      -0.286   2      6.67     1.08      -0.444   1      7.65     2.54     1.017
                         (0.43)   (1.15)         (1.95)   (1.10)   -(0.056)         (1.30)   (1.10)   -(0.058)         (6.67)   (1.08)   -(0.071)         (7.65)   (2.54)   (1.390)
France         197        2.33     1.44    28    14.75     1.62       0.186   3     17.71     1.05      -0.388   14    10.92     1.64       0.198   11    18.82     1.77     0.328
                         (0.53)   (1.23)        (10.13)   (1.39)    (0.163)        (10.79)   (0.99)   -(0.241)         (7.78)   (1.36)    (0.130)        (16.44)   (1.50)   (0.274)
Germany        251        1.15     1.36    23    20.70     1.88       0.519   4      2.32     2.10       0.742   14    20.98     1.47       0.111   5     34.63     2.84     1.486
                         (0.37)   (1.25)         (9.46)   (1.36)    (0.111)         (1.40)   (2.13)    (0.878)        (14.16)   (1.31)    (0.066)        (33.94)   (1.45)   (0.204)
Greece         24         0.54     1.48    0                                  0                                  0                                  0
                         (0.17)   (1.31)
Hong Kong      143        0.66     1.18    44    1.88      1.23       0.059   0                                  43    1.92      1.23     0.054     1     0.20      1.49     0.316
                         (0.26)   (0.95)        (0.28)    (1.02)    (0.070)                                           (0.29)    (1.01)   (0.060)         (0.20)    (1.49)   (0.545)
India          76         0.49     1.73    47    0.92      1.12      -0.607   47    0.92      1.12     -0.607    0                                  0
                         (0.20)   (0.95)        (0.46)    (0.86)   -(0.093)        (0.46)    (0.86)   -(0.093)
Indonesia      43         0.45     1.07    2     2.11      2.51       1.439   0                                  0                                  2     2.11      2.51       1.439
                         (0.24)   (0.99)        (2.11)    (2.51)    (1.520)                                                                              (2.11)    (2.51)    (1.520)
Ireland         7         0.79     1.45    2     4.90      1.37      -0.080   0                                  0                                  2     4.90      1.37      -0.080
                         (0.66)   (1.52)        (4.90)    (1.37)   -(0.150)                                                                              (4.90)    (1.37)   -(0.150)
Israel          4         2.25     1.12    2     2.37      1.25       0.130   0                                  0                                  2     2.37      1.25       0.130
                         (2.05)   (1.17)        (2.37)    (1.25)    (0.075)                                                                              (2.37)    (1.25)    (0.075)




                                                                                      33
Table 1, continued.
                     Not cross-listed              Cross-listed                         Rule 144a                              OTC                           Exchange-listed
                N          TA         q     N      TA        q        D(q)      N      TA       q        D(q)      N      TA         q       D(q)      N      TA        q        D(q)
Italy           49         4.35     1.38    13    16.67      1.54       0.160    3     3.11     2.62     1.248      5     4.59      1.11     -0.264     5     36.88     1.31      -0.068
                          (1.12)   (1.08)         (5.74)    (1.23)    (0.146)         (3.25)   (2.19)   (1.114)          (5.06)    (1.09)   (0.008)          (45.93)   (1.37)    (0.290)
Japan          1258        1.82     1.02    110   13.73      1.28       0.263    0                                 89     9.20      1.26      0.242    21     32.93     1.37       0.354
                          (0.62)   (0.95)         (5.72)    (1.10)    (0.151)                                            (5.18)    (1.07)   (0.119)          (16.97)   (1.25)    (0.300)
Korea           178        0.80     0.89    13     6.76      0.92       0.029   10     4.76     0.90     0.006      0                                   3     13.43     1.00       0.105
                          (0.42)   (0.87)         (5.22)    (0.90)    (0.033)         (4.94)   (0.90)   (0.034)                                              (10.22)   (0.84)   -(0.030)
Malaysia        152        0.62     1.11    10     2.34      1.16       0.052    0                                 10     2.34      1.16       0.052    0
                          (0.26)   (0.90)         (1.17)    (0.94)    (0.044)                                            (1.17)    (0.94)    (0.044)
Mexico          21         1.08     1.23    25     2.52      1.21      -0.022    4     2.18     0.90      -0.337    7     2.39      1.63       0.392   14     2.67      1.09      -0.140
                          (0.52)   (1.05)         (1.41)    (1.15)    (0.107)         (1.05)   (0.81)   -(0.240)         (2.04)    (1.72)    (0.673)         (1.17)    (1.03)   -(0.019)
Netherlands     58         0.73     1.87    21     9.41      2.39       0.520    2     1.63     1.93       0.061    7     3.27      1.69      -0.183   12    14.29      2.88       1.007
                          (0.36)   (1.40)         (3.96)    (1.74)    (0.341)         (1.63)   (1.93)    (0.526)         (3.96)    (1.52)    (0.117)         (5.99)    (1.81)    (0.404)
New Zealand     24         0.63     1.30     3     2.89      2.05       0.746    0                                  1     4.84      0.98      -0.321    2     1.91      2.58       1.279
                          (0.26)   (1.23)         (2.68)    (1.10)   -(0.135)                                            (4.84)    (0.98)   -(0.252)         (1.91)    (2.58)    (1.348)
Norway          37         0.49     1.44     8     3.65      1.77       0.331    1     2.34     0.83     -0.607     3     2.72      2.43       0.988    4     4.68      1.51       0.072
                          (0.34)   (1.24)         (1.41)    (1.37)    (0.131)         (2.34)   (0.83)   -(0.404)         (0.28)    (1.41)    (0.178)         (1.41)    (1.53)    (0.294)
Pakistan         9         0.36     1.55     0                                   0                                  0                                   0
                          (0.29)   (1.13)
Peru             3         0.59     0.61     3      1.09     1.07       0.457    0                                  1     0.26      0.97     0.362      2      1.48     1.12       0.505
                          (0.13)   (0.51)          (0.38)   (0.97)    (0.461)                                            (0.26)    (0.97)   (0.461)           (1.48)   (1.12)    (0.604)
Philippines     27         0.44     0.93     9      2.09     1.16       0.232    5     1.62     1.22     0.286      3     1.95      1.05     0.123      1      4.87     1.22       0.286
                          (0.23)   (0.82)          (2.17)   (1.12)    (0.308)         (1.22)   (1.19)   (0.374)          (2.17)    (1.08)   (0.263)           (4.87)   (1.22)    (0.400)
Portugal        25         0.59     1.23     5      4.19     2.52       1.290    3     0.92     3.00     1.774      0                                   2      9.10     1.79       0.565
                          (0.31)   (1.10)          (1.57)   (1.70)    (0.605)         (0.79)   (1.70)   (0.605)                                               (9.10)   (1.79)    (0.696)
Singapore       84         0.46     1.02     7      3.93     1.85       0.827    0                                  6     4.48      1.61      0.590     1      0.63     3.27       2.249
                          (0.28)   (0.86)          (1.44)   (0.98)    (0.116)                                            (3.08)    (0.96)   (0.098)           (0.63)   (3.27)    (2.409)
South Africa    14         1.00     1.36    15      1.89     1.19      -0.166    1     1.26     0.88     -0.479    11     1.58      1.17     -0.190     3      3.27     1.38       0.025
                          (0.56)   (1.06)          (1.26)   (1.13)    (0.065)         (1.26)   (0.88)   -(0.187)         (0.98)    (1.13)   (0.065)           (4.31)   (1.61)    (0.547)
Spain           56         1.96     1.51     2     28.83     1.36      -0.154    0                                  0                                   2     28.83     1.36      -0.154
                          (0.52)   (1.35)         (28.83)   (1.36)    (0.003)                                                                                (28.83)   (1.36)    (0.003)
Sweden          53         1.10     1.69    10      7.66     1.27      -0.427    0                                  4      4.35     1.09     -0.605     6      9.87     1.39      -0.308
                          (0.40)   (1.34)          (4.83)   (1.11)   -(0.223)                                             (3.78)   (0.99)   -(0.347)          (7.44)   (1.22)   -(0.118)
Switzerland     73         1.04     1.19     7     21.08     2.05       0.863    0                                  6     23.96     2.08                1      3.83     1.90       0.713
                          (0.52)   (1.07)         (15.13)   (1.90)    (0.833)                                            (25.33)   (1.96)                     (3.83)   (1.90)    (0.833)
Taiwan          141        0.59     1.89    21      1.39     2.03       0.142   20     1.30     1.90       0.009    0                                   1      3.23     4.68       2.789
                          (0.34)   (1.63)          (1.13)   (1.52)   -(0.105)         (0.98)   (1.52)   -(0.112)                                              (3.23)   (4.68)    (3.049)
Thailand        73         0.53     1.10     7      0.85     1.33       0.238    2     1.67     1.01      -0.084    5     0.52      1.46     0.368      0
                          (0.21)   (1.00)          (0.73)   (1.23)    (0.230)         (1.67)   (1.01)    (0.014)         (0.28)    (1.38)   (0.380)
Turkey          21         0.59     2.78     2      0.29     2.73      -0.050    2     0.29     2.73      -0.050    0                                   0
                          (0.18)   (1.90)          (0.29)   (2.73)    (0.831)         (0.29)   (2.73)    (0.831)
UK              500        0.88     1.69    102     7.24     1.98       0.290    0                                 50     3.94      1.63      -0.062   52    10.41      2.32     0.621
                          (0.31)   (1.37)          (3.89)   (1.58)    (0.204)                                            (2.91)    (1.46)    (0.090)         (4.57)    (1.78)   (0.419)
Venezuela        3         1.46     0.89     6      0.39     0.83      -0.055    0                                  4     0.44      0.76      -0.128    2     0.29      0.98     0.093
                          (1.05)   (0.79)          (0.35)   (0.69)   -(0.102)                                            (0.38)    (0.64)   -(0.152)         (0.29)    (0.98)   (0.185)
Average                    1.05     1.33           6.06      1.54     0.221            2.70     1.52     0.149            5.25      1.39     0.105            9.04      1.79     0.486
                          (0.49)   (1.13)         (3.87)    (1.32)   (0.201)          (2.20)   (1.39)   (0.255)          (4.04)    (1.24)   (0.127)          (7.74)    (1.65)   (0.519)
Totals         4,078                        713                                 116                                348                                 249




                                                                                        34
Table 2. The valuation of cross-listed firms.
This table presents results from regressions that estimate the valuation impact of cross-listing in the U.S.
Information on ADRs comes from BoNY. Information on firms from Canada and Israel that list their shares
directly on the NYSE or Nasdaq is obtained from the exchanges’ web sites. The National Quotation
Bureau’s Pink Sheets are used to identify Canadian firms that are directly listed on the OTC market. The
dependent variable in each regression is Tobin’s q, computed as (Total Assets – BV(equity) + MV(equity))
/ Total Assets on December 31, 1997. Financial firms, firms with total assets less than $100 million, and
firms with missing data are discarded. Cross-list is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm cross-lists its
shares in the U.S. and is 0 otherwise. Sales growth (SG) is the firm’s 2-year sales growth rate and Ind_G is
the median global industry q. Two cross-listed firms are deleted because they have extremely high sales
growth rates due to acquisitions. The other explanatory variables are defined in Appendix A1. Firms from
40 different countries are represented in the sample; 710 firms are cross-listed in the U.S. and 4078 firms
do not cross-list their shares in the U.S. t-statistics (in parentheses) are computed with heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors.
             (1)     (2)     (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)     (7)      (8)    (9)    (10)    (11)   (12)
Cons.    1.28 -0.33          -0.14 -0.36 -1.10 -0.39 -0.52 -1.51 -1.28 -1.52 -1.52 -1.64
       (101.97) -(1.97)     -(0.83) -(2.14) -(5.52) -(2.13) -(3.05) -(6.43) -(4.85) -(4.61) -(7.48) -(6.92)
Cross-   0.26    0.21        0.16    0.21    0.22    0.21    0.22    0.22     0.16   0.18     0.22 0.22
 List   (6.26) (5.60)       (4.19) (5.54) (5.74) (5.61) (5.82) (5.86) (4.09) (4.69) (5.83) (5.82)
FL                           -0.08                                            0.09   0.08
                            -(2.17)                                          (1.79) (1.44)
GL                           -0.27                                           -0.36 -0.15
                            -(9.59)                                         -(7.80) -(3.08)
SL                           0.13                                             0.01   0.31
                            (1.54)                                           (0.11) (3.42)
AD                                   0.01                                                     0.02 -0.02
                                    (0.83)                                                   (1.47) -(1.64)
AS                                           0.01                             0.00 -0.00 0.02 0.01
                                            (6.60)                           (1.23) -(0.62) (6.73) (2.99)
EJ                                                   0.01                     0.07 -0.02 -0.00 -0.04
                                                    (0.91)                   (7.84) -(2.68) -(0.34) -(4.89)
LR                                                           0.27             0.49           0.341
                                                            (9.08)          (14.73)         (10.02)
CAI                                                                  0.27            0.36            0.28
                                                                    (7.44)          (6.63)          (5.93)
SG                  0.24     0.21    0.24    0.22    0.24    0.22    0.23     0.19   0.21     0.21 0.21
                   (2.66)   (2.60) (2.67) (2.62) (2.67) (2.55) (2.63) (2.47) (2.55) (2.47) (2.53)
Ind_G               1.48     1.43    1.48    1.42    1.48    1.50    1.40     1.37   1.35     1.42 1.39
                   (9.28)   (9.11) (9.25) (8.93) (9.27) (9.41) (8.91) (9.10) (8.77) (9.05) (8.83)

Adj. R2    1.15    8.08     10.34    8.08    9.30    8.08    9.84    9.77    14.94   11.78   11.75 10.40




                                                     35
Table 3. The effect of self-selection bias on the cross-listing premium.
The probit regressions estimate the probability that a foreign firm cross-lists its shares in the U.S. The
regressions estimate the valuation impact of cross-listing in the U.S. using OLS, 2SLS, and the Heckman 2-
stage estimator. Information on ADRs comes from BoNY. Information on firms from Canada and Israel
that list their shares directly on the NYSE or Nasdaq is obtained from the exchanges’ web sites. The
National Quotation Bureau’s Pink Sheets are used to identify Canadian firms that are directly listed on the
OTC market. The dependent variable in each regression is Tobin’s q, computed as (Total Assets –
BV(equity) + MV(equity)) / Total Assets on December 31, 1997. Financial firms, firms with total assets
less than $100 million, and firms with missing data are discarded. Cross-list is a dummy variable that
equals 1 if a firm cross-lists its shares in the U.S. and is 0 otherwise. Sales growth (SG) is the firm’s 2-year
sales growth rate and Ind_G is the median global industry q. Two cross-listed firms are deleted because
they have extremely high sales growth rates due to acquisitions. The other explanatory variables are
defined in Appendix A1. Firms from 40 different countries are represented in the sample; 710 firms are
cross-listed in the U.S. and 4078 firms do not cross-list their shares in the U.S. t-statistics (in parentheses)
are computed with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. logL is the value of the log likelihood
function.
                 Probit Model                    Basic model (3)                       Full model (4)
               (1)         (2)          OLS         2SLS      Heckman          OLS         2SLS     Heckman
Constant      0.37        0.14          -0.33       -0.41       -0.33          -1.52       -1.76      -1.62
             (1.30)      (0.59)        -(1.97)     -(4.07)     -(3.32)        -(7.48)    -(11.41)   -(10.54)
Cross-                                  0.21        0.40        0.20           0.22        1.04       0.65
 list                                  (5.60)      (1.79)      (0.95)         (5.83)      (3.67)     (2.45)
Lambda                                                          0.01                                  -0.24
                                                               (0.06)                                -(1.63)
FL            -0.28
             -(3.24)
GL            -0.82
             -(8.67)
SL            -0.35
             -(2.80)
AD                        0.12                                                 0.02        0.00         0.01
                         (4.73)                                               (1.47)      (0.14)       (0.56)
AS            -0.02       -0.01                                                0.01        0.02         0.02
             -(5.75)     -(2.65)                                              (6.73)      (8.23)       (7.98)
EJ            0.05        0.00                                                 0.00        0.01         0.00
             (2.86)      (0.20)                                               (0.34)      (1.06)       (0.42)
LR            0.14        -0.06                                                0.34        0.35         0.34
             (1.93)      -(1.01)                                             (10.02)     (11.10)      (10.79)
SG                                       0.23        0.23        0.23          0.21        0.20         0.20
                                        (2.66)      (7.93)      (8.01)        (2.47)      (6.99)       (7.08)
Ind_G                                    1.48        1.53        1.48          1.42        1.46         1.42
                                        (9.28)     (17.38)     (16.83)        (9.05)     (16.90)      (16.39)
Log GNP       0.01        -0.14
             (0.34)      -(7.88)

logL          -1927       -1956
Pseudo R2      4.12        2.51

Adj. R2                                  8.08        7.33        8.06         11.75       11.37       11.78




                                                      36
Table 4. The valuation of cross-listed firms by type of listing.
This table presents results from regressions that estimate the valuation impact of cross-listing in the U.S.
Information on ADRs comes from BoNY. Information on firms from Canada and Israel that list their shares
directly on the NYSE or Nasdaq is obtained from the exchanges’ web sites. The National Quotation
Bureau’s Pink Sheets are used to identify Canadian firms that are directly listed on the OTC market. The
dependent variable in each regression is Tobin’s q, computed as (Total Assets – BV(equity) + MV(equity))
/ Total Assets on December 31, 1997. Financial firms, firms with total assets less than $100 million, and
firms with missing data are discarded. 144a (OTC; Exchange) is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm
cross-lists under Rule 144a (on the OTC market; NYSE/ Nasdaq) and is 0 otherwise. Cross-list is a dummy
variable that equals 1 if a firm cross-lists its shares in the U.S. and is 0 otherwise and Capital*Exchange
equals 1 if the firm raised capital and listed on an exchange. Sales growth (SG) is the firm’s 2-year sales
growth rate and Ind_G is the median global industry q. Two cross-listed firms are deleted because they
have extremely high sales growth rates due to acquisitions. The other explanatory variables are defined in
Appendix A1. Firms from 40 different countries are represented in the sample; 116 firms are cross-listed
under Rule 144a, 347 firms are listed OTC, 247 are exchange listed, and 4078 firms do not cross-list their
shares in the U.S. t-statistics (in parentheses) are computed with heteroskedasticity consistent standard
errors.
                               Type of ADR program                  Cross-list and capital raising dummies
                           (1)          (2)         (3)              (4)           (5)             (6)
Constant                  1.28         -0.30       -1.46            1.28          -0.31           -1.50
                        (101.95)      -(1.80)     -(7.38)         (101.95)       -(1.87)         -(7.54)
144a                      0.12         0.13        0.07             -0.09         -0.05           -0.11
                         (1.40)       (1.58)      (0.81)           -(0.97)       -(0.56)         -(1.21)
OTC                       0.10         0.08        0.11
                         (2.41)       (2.05)      (2.76)
Exchange                  0.54         0.44        0.45
                         (6.22)       (5.49)      (5.74)
Cross-list                                                          0.21           0.18           0.19
                                                                   (4.75)         (4.24)         (4.56)
Capital * Exchange                                                  0.35           0.24           0.30
                                                                   (2.56)         (1.96)         (2.42)
AD                                                  0.02                                          0.02
                                                   (1.56)                                        (1.64)
AS                                                  0.01                                          0.01
                                                   (6.44)                                        (6.59)
EJ                                                  0.00                                          0.00
                                                   (0.22)                                        (0.24)
LR                                                  0.35                                          0.36
                                                   (9.84)                                        (9.92)
SG                                     0.23         0.20                           0.23           0.20
                                      (2.64)       (2.45)                         (2.65)         (2.45)
Ind_G                                  1.45         1.39                           1.46           1.39
                                      (9.28)       (9.03)                         (9.28)         (9.02)

Adjusted R2                 2.01         8.59       12.28           1.62           8.35           12.24
Table 5. Decomposing the valuation impact of cross-listing.
This table presents results from regressions that estimate the valuation impact of cross-listing in the U.S
and corrects for self-selection bias using the Heckman 2-stage estimator. Information on ADRs comes from



                                                    37
BoNY. Information on firms from Canada and Israel that list their shares directly on the NYSE or Nasdaq
is obtained from the exchanges’ web sites. The National Quotation Bureau’s Pink Sheets are used to
identify Canadian firms that are directly listed on the OTC market. The dependent variable in each
regression is Tobin’s q, computed as (Total Assets – BV(equity) + MV(equity)) / Total Assets on
December 31, 1997. Financial firms, firms with total assets less than $100 million, and firms with missing
data are discarded. Cross-list (CL) is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm cross-lists its shares in the
U.S. and is 0 otherwise and Capital*Exchange equals 1 if the firm raised capital and listed on an exchange.
Sales growth (SG) is the firm’s 2-year sales growth rate and Ind_G is the median global industry q. Two
cross-listed firms are deleted because they have extremely high sales growth rates due to acquisitions. The
other explanatory variables are defined in Appendix A1. Firms from 40 different countries are represented
in the sample; 710 firms are cross-listed in the U.S. and 4078 firms do not cross-list their shares in the U.S.
t-statistics (in parentheses) are computed with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.
                               Regression (1)              Regression (2)                Regression (3)
                           OLS        Heckman            OLS        Heckman            OLS        Heckman
Constant                   -1.32        -1.40            -1.31        -1.44            -1.31        -1.44
                          -(6.44)      -(8.68)          -(6.26)      -(8.43)          -(6.26)      -(8.45)
Cross-list                 -0.56        -0.19            -0.57         0.01            -0.56         0.02
                          -(1.25)      -(0.56)          -(1.07)       (0.02)          -(1.08)       (0.04)
Lambda                                  -0.21                         -0.39                         -0.38
                                       -(1.43)                       -(2.39)                       -(2.38)
AD                         0.02          0.01            0.03          0.02            0.03          0.02
                          (1.36)        (0.57)          (2.01)        (1.18)          (2.01)        (1.19)
AS                         0.01          0.02            0.01          0.01            0.01          0.01
                          (6.81)        (8.05)          (6.04)        (6.93)          (6.04)        (6.95)
EJ                         0.00          0.00            -0.01         0.00            -0.01         0.00
                          (0.28)        (0.38)          -(1.09)       (0.06)          -(1.09)       (0.05)
LR                         0.34          0.34            0.36          0.36            0.36          0.36
                          (10.00       (10.77)          (9.54)       (10.32)          (9.54)       (10.35)
AD*CL                                                    -0.08        -0.10            -0.03        -0.06
                                                        -(2.25)      -(3.32)          -(1.07)      -(1.85)
AS*CL                                                    0.00          0.00            0.00          0.00
                                                        (0.21)        (0.20)          (0.27)        (0.13)
EJ*CL                                                    0.05          0.06            0.05          0.05
                                                        (2.16)        (2.50)          (1.93)        (2.23)
LR*CL                                                    -0.13        -0.12            -0.17        -0.16
                                                        -(1.48)      -(1.43)          -(1.88)      -(1.88)
SG                         0.18          0.17            0.18          0.17            0.18          0.17
                          (2.24)        (5.96)          (2.23)        (5.89)          (2.23)        (5.90)
Ind_G                      1.23          1.23            1.23          1.23            1.23          1.23
                          (7.97)       (12.39)          (7.99)       (12.35)          (7.99)       (12.38)
SG*CL                      0.67          0.67            0.71          0.70            2.95          2.94
                          (2.74)        (4.66)          (2.78)        (4.98)          (2.48)        (5.91)
Ind_G*CL                   0.62          0.62            0.61          0.62            0.54          0.54
                          (1.48)        (3.10)          (1.46)        (3.15)          (1.37)        (2.76)
Capital*Exchange           0.23          0.23            0.23          0.22            0.25          0.24
                          (2.02)        (2.90)          (1.87)        (2.82)          (2.06)        (3.11)
SG*AD*CL                                                                               -0.54        -0.54
                                                                                      -(2.14)      -(4.68)
Adjusted R2                12.63        12.65              12.75      12.84            13.09        13.18




                                                      38
Table 6. Valuations in 1995.
This table presents results from regressions that estimate the valuation impact of cross-listing in the U.S.
and corrects for self-selection bias using the Heckman 2-stage estimator. Information on ADRs comes from
BoNY. Information on firms from Canada and Israel that list their shares directly on the NYSE or Nasdaq
is obtained from the exchanges’ web sites. The National Quotation Bureau’s Pink Sheets are used to
identify Canadian firms that are directly listed on the OTC market. The dependent variable in each
regression is Tobin’s q, computed as (Total Assets – BV(equity) + MV(equity)) / Total Assets on
December 31, 1995. Financial firms, firms with total assets less than $100 million, and firms with missing
data are discarded. Cross-list (CL) is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm cross-lists its shares in the
U.S. and is 0 otherwise and Capital*Exchange equals 1 if the firm raised capital and listed on an exchange.
Sales growth (SG) is the firm’s 2-year sales growth rate and Ind_G is the median global industry q. Five
firms are deleted because they have extremely high sales growth rates due to acquisitions. The other
explanatory variables are defined in Appendix A1. Firms from 40 different countries are represented in the
sample; 527 firms are cross-listed in the U.S. and 3751 firms do not cross-list their shares in the U.S. t-
statistics (in parentheses) are computed with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.
                               Regression (1)             Regression (2)                 Regression (3)
                          OLS        Heckman            OLS        Heckman            OLS       Heckman
Constant                  -1.83        -2.15            -1.42        -1.77            -1.42       -1.77
                         -(6.05)      -(8.74)          -(4.96)      -(5.73)          -(4.96)     -(5.73)
Cross-list                0.14         2.40             -2.01        0.66             -2.01       0.66
                         (3.10)       (5.30)           -(2.06)      (0.83)           -(2.06)     (0.83)
Lambda                                 -1.21                         -1.60                        -1.60
                                      -(5.03)                       -(4.29)                      -(4.29)
AD                        0.05         0.01             0.04         0.00             0.04        0.00
                         (4.11)       (0.46)           (2.92)       (0.17)           (2.92)      (0.17)
AS                        0.01         0.01             0.01         0.01             0.01        0.01
                         (5.15)       (2.85)           (4.90)       (2.03)           (4.90)      (2.03)
EJ                        -0.00        0.03             0.00         0.03             0.00        0.03
                         -(0.43)      (2.14)           (0.05)       (2.27)           (0.05)      (2.27)
LR                        0.02         0.10             -0.01        0.08             -0.01       0.08
                         (0.55)       (1.86)           -(0.34)      (1.27)           -(0.34)     (1.27)
AD*CL                                                   0.07         -0.02            0.07        -0.02
                                                       (1.86)       -(0.59)          (1.82)      -(0.57)
AS*CL                                                   0.00         0.00             0.00        0.00
                                                       (0.23)       (0.30)           (0.23)      (0.28)
EJ*CL                                                   -0.02        0.03             -0.02       0.03
                                                       -(0.52)      (1.59)           -(0.53)     (1.62)
LR*CL                                                   0.28         0.49             0.28        0.49
                                                       (1.87)       (4.42)           (1.84)      (4.42)
SG                         0.06          0.05           0.03         0.02             0.03        0.02
                          (2.12)        (2.31)         (1.51)       (0.83)           (1.51)      (0.83)
Ind_G                      1.92          1.94           1.60         1.62             1.60        1.62
                          (7.84)       (12.03)         (6.94)       (7.80)           (6.94)      (7.80)
SG*CL                                                   0.15         0.16             0.13        0.19
                                                       (1.05)       (6.10)           (0.39)      (6.72)
Ind_G*CL                                                1.41         1.51             1.42        1.51
                                                       (1.80)       (7.24)           (1.80)      (7.22)
Capital*Exchange                                        0.35         0.37             0.35        0.37
                                                       (2.24)       (9.49)           (2.19)      (9.47)
SG*AD*CL                                                                              0.01        -0.01
                                                                                     (0.05)      -(3.51)
Adjusted R2                7.04         7.90              8.21        9.33            8.19         9.31



                                                     39
Table 7. Changes in q after listing: Evidence from new listings.
This table presents results from regressions that estimate the valuation impact of cross-listing in the U.S.
Information on ADRs comes from BoNY. Information on firms from Canada and Israel that list their shares
directly on the NYSE or Nasdaq is obtained from the exchanges’ web sites. The National Quotation
Bureau’s Pink Sheets are used to identify Canadian firms that are directly listed on the OTC market. Each
year, Tobin’s q is computed as (Total Assets – BV(equity) + MV(equity)) / Total Assets. Financial firms,
firms with total assets less than $100 million, and firms with missing data are discarded. The dependent
variable in each regression is the percentage change in Tobin’s q from 1995 to 1997. New-list is a dummy
variable that equals 1 if a firm did not have its shares cross-listed in the U.S. in 1995, but did have its shares
cross-listed in 1997, and is 0 otherwise. New-144a (New-OTC; New-Exchange) are similar. ∆Sales growth
and ∆Ind_G are the percentage changes in sales growth and the median global industry q from 1995 to
1997. Firms from 40 different countries are represented in the sample; there are 76 firms that were not
cross-listed in in 1995, but were cross-listed by the end of 1997 (11 are 144a, 36 are OTC, and 30 are
exchange-listed). 3824 firms do not cross-list their shares in the U.S. t-statistics (in parentheses) are
computed with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.
                       Regression (1)         Regression (2)           Regression (3)         Regression (4)
Constant                    -0.06                   -0.06                   0.03                   0.03
                          -(11.73)                -(11.72)                 (1.61)                 (1.59)
New-list                    0.13                                            0.12
                           (3.04)                                          (2.82)
New-144a                                           -0.12                                           -0.12
                                                  -(2.25)                                         -(2.34)
New-OTC                                            0.20                                            0.19
                                                  (3.40)                                          (3.16)
New-Exchange                                       0.12                                            0.12
                                                  (1.79)                                          (1.63)
∆Sales growth                                                               0.00                   0.00
                                                                           (0.52)                 (0.50)
∆Ind_G                                                                      0.81                   0.81
                                                                           (5.71)                 (5.69)

Adjusted R2                 0.25                    0.40                   2.32                    2.45




                                                       40
Figure 1. The cross-listing premium estimated from within country regressions.
This figure presents results from within country regressions that estimate the valuation impact of cross-listing in the U.S. Information on ADRs comes from
BoNY. Information on firms from Canada and Israel that list their shares directly on the NYSE or Nasdaq is obtained from the exchanges’ web sites. The
National Quotation Bureau’s Pink Sheets are used to identify Canadian firms that are directly listed on the OTC market. The dependent variable in each
regression is Tobin’s q, computed as (Total Assets – BV(equity) + MV(equity)) / Total Assets on December 31, 1997. Financial firms, firms with total assets less
than $100 million, and firms with missing data are discarded. For each country, the premium is estimated by regressing Tobin’s q on a constant and on cross-list,
a dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm cross-lists its shares in the U.S. and is 0 otherwise. t-statistics are computed with heteroskedasticity consistent standard
errors.

                           2.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Premium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t statistic                                         4.00
                           1.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3.00
   Cross-listing premium




                           1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t statistic
                           0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1.00
                           -0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -2.00

                           -1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -3.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Israel
                                                                                                                                        France




                                                                                                                                                                                India
                                                                               Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Korea
                                                                                                 Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sweden
                                                                                                                                                           Greece




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ireland


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Italy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Norway




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Turkey
                                                           Austria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Japan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Spain
                                               Australia




                                                                                        Canada




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Taiwan
                                                                                                                              Finland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Portugal
                                                                                                                    Denmark




                                                                                                                                                 Germany




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pakistan
                                                                     Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                        Indonesia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Thailand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Venezuala
                                                                                                         Colombia
                                   Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                    Hong Kong




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 New Zealand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Singapore




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Philippines




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               South Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 41
Appendix A1. Country level variables.
This table summarizes variables for: legal origin, shareholder protection, and the domestic stock markets and economies. The variables in the first seven columns
are taken from La Porta, et al. (1998). English law, French law, German law, and Scandinavian law describe the origin of the legal system. Anti-director rights is
an index that aggregates six different shareholder rights. Efficiency of the judicial system is an assessment of the efficiency and integrity of the legal environment
as it affects business. The accounting standards rating is an index created by examining and rating companies annual reports for their inclusion or exclusion of 90
items. Liquidity ratio is the dollar value of shares traded divided by the average market capitalization in 1997 (from the IFC Emerging Stock Markets Factbook
1998). The Capital Access Index identifies quantitative and qualitative measures of the ability of an entrepreneur to raise capital (developed by the Milken
Institute Capital Studies Group). # Dom Cos. is the number of listed domestic companies in 1997, Total MV (in billions of USD) is the total capitalization of
domestic listed stocks in 1997, Per capita GNP (in USD) figures are for 1997.
                   English French German               Scand.       Anti-     Efficiency Accounting Liquidity         Capital # Domestic                    Per capita
                                                                                                                                               Total MV
                     law        law        law           law       director     judicial standards        ratio       access Companies                        GNP
Argentina             0          1           0            0           4           6.00          45        0.50         4.154         136           59         8,950
Australia             1          0           0            0           4          10.00          75        0.52         4.943        1219          697        20,650
Austria               0          0           1            0           2           9.50          54        0.71         4.289         101           36        27,920
Belgium               0          1           0            0           0           9.50          61        0.23         4.467         138          137        26,730
Brazil                0          1           0            0           3           5.75          54        0.86         3.706         536          255         4,790
Canada                1          0           0            0           5           9.25          74        0.68         4.923        1362          568        19,640
Chile                 0          1           0            0           5           7.25          52        0.11         4.451         264           72         4,820
Colombia              0          1           0            0           3           7.25          50        0.10         3.649         189           20         2,180
Denmark               0          0           0            1           2          10.00          62        0.57         4.520         237           94        34,890
Finland               0          0           0            1           3          10.00          77        0.53         4.692         124           73        24,080
France                0          1           0            0           3           8.00          69        0.64         4.600         683          674        26,300
Germany               0          0           1            0           1           9.00          62        1.38         4.808         700          825        28,280
Greece                0          1           0            0           2           7.00          55        0.73         4.020         230           34        11,640
Hong Kong             1          0           0            0           5          10.00          69        1.13         5.373         658          413        25,200
India                 1          0           0            0           5           8.00          57        0.43         3.907        5843          128          370
Indonesia             0          1           0            0           2           3.98          65        0.69         3.957         282           42         1,110




                                                                                 42
Appendix A1, continued.
               English French   German   Scand.    Anti-     Efficiency Accounting Liquidity   Capital   # Domestic          Per capita
                                                                                                                    Total MV
                 law    law       law     law     director    judicial standards     ratio     access    Companies             GNP
Ireland           1      0         0       0         4          8.75        74       0.83       4.640        83        24     17,790
Israel            1      0         0       0         3         10.00        64       0.26       4.521        640       45     16,180
Italy             0      1         0       0         1          6.75        62       0.66       4.481        235       345    20,170
Japan             0      0         1       0         4         10.00        65       0.46       4.566       1805      2,217   38,160
Korea             0      0         1       0         2          6.00        62       1.88       4.519        776       42     10,550
Malaysia          1      0         0       0         4          9.00        76       0.73       4.714        708       94      4,530
Mexico            0      1         0       0         1          6.00        60       0.38       3.774        198       157     3,700
Netherlands       0      1         0       0         2         10.00        64       0.67       5.128        201       469    25,830
New Zealand       1      0         0       0         4         10.00        70       0.38       4.958        190       90     15,830
Norway            0      0         0       1         4         10.00        74       0.75       4.453        196       67     36,100
Pakistan          1      0         0       0         5          5.00        61       1.06       3.571        781       11       500
Peru              0      1         0       0         3          6.75        38       0.26       4.021        248       18      2,610
Philippines       0      1         0       0         3          4.75        65       0.35       4.137        221       31      1,200
Portugal          0      1         0       0         3          5.50        36       0.66       4.481        148       39     11,010
Singapore         1      0         0       0         4         10.00        78       0.50       5.220        303       106    32,810
South Africa      1      0         0       0         5          6.00        70       0.19       4.423        642       232     3,210
Spain             0      1         0       0         4          6.25        64       1.70       4.647        384       290    14,490
Sweden            0      0         0       1         3         10.00        83       0.68       4.627        245       273    26,210
Switzerland       0      0         1       0         2         10.00        68       1.01       5.360        216       575    43,060
Taiwan            0      0         1       0         3          6.75        65       4.62       4.775        404       288    13,599
Thailand          1      0         0       0         2          3.25        64       0.38       4.560        431       24      2,740
Turkey            0      1         0       0         2          4.00        51       1.30       3.556        257       61      3,130
UK                1      0         0       0         5         10.00        78       0.44       5.333       2046      1,996   20,870
Venezuela         0      1         0       0         1          6.50        40       0.31       3.408        91        15      3,480




                                                                43
