NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE ENVIRONMENT:
A FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYSIS
Brian R. Copeland
M. Scott Taylor
Working Paper 8540
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8540
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2001 by Brian R. Copeland and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

International Trade and the Environment: A Framework for Analysis
Brian R. Copeland and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 8540
October 2001
JEL No. F1, H4

ABSTRACT
This paper sets out a general equilibrium pollution and trade model to provide a framework for
examination of the trade and environment debate. The model contains as special cases a canonical
pollution haven model as well as the standard Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson factor endowments model.
We draw quite heavily from trade theory, but develop a simple pollution demand and supply system
featuring marginal abatement cost and marginal damage schedules familiar to environmental economists.
We have intentionally kept the model simple to facilitate extensions examining the environmental
consequences of growth, the impact of trade liberalization, and strategic interaction between countries.

Brian R. Copeland
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
Canada

M. Scott Taylor
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
6448 Social Science Bldg.
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
staylor@ssc.wisc.edu

International Trade and the Environment:
A Framework for Analysis
Brian R. Copeland and M. Scott Taylor

1.1

Globalization and the Trade vs. Environment debate

“It was the best of times, it was the worst of times”. This line, written by Charles
Dickens over 100 years ago, captures the present day divide between supporters and critics of
globalization. Over this last decade, North America and much of Europe enjoyed its longest
peacetime expansion, unemployment rates hit historic lows, and real income growth in much of
the developing world soared. To many these are the fruits of globalization. But this same
decade saw little progress in addressing climate change, a decline in fish and forest stocks, and
by some measures rising inequality in the world distribution of income. To many others these
are the costs of globalization.
Debates over “globalization” have been going on for some time. But nowhere has the
divide between the two views of globalization been more apparent than in recent discussions
concerning trade liberalization and the environment.
For the last ten years environmentalists and the trade policy community have squared off
over the environmental consequences of liberalized trade.

This debate was fueled by

negotiations over the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Uruguay round of GATT
negotiations, both of which occurred at a time when concerns over global warming, species

1

extinction and industrial pollution were rising. The debate was intensified by the creation of the
World Trade Organization (WTO) and proposals for future rounds of trade negotiations.
Trade negotiators saw the WTO as a step forward because of its improved dispute settlement
procedures and because it closed loopholes in previous trade agreements. Environmentalists,
however, were disturbed by the intrusion of trade agreements into areas previously thought of as
in the realm of purely domestic policy, such as subsidies and product standards.
Some well-publicized trade disputes have involved the right of governments to restrict
imports for environmental reasons, as was the case with genetically modified food. To the trade
policy community, these types of disputes underscore the need to expand the scope of the
international rules-based trading system to ensure that governments do not use restrictive
domestic policy to unfairly restrict imports. To environmentalists, this represents a dangerous
loss of sovereignty, as they fear that local government policies will be constrained by
international trade tribunals. Perhaps not surprisingly, then, an attempt to initiate a new round of
multilateral trade negotiations in Seattle became a flashpoint for growing unrest with
globalization.
In our reading of the literature on trade and the environment, we have often found the
ratio of rhetoric to results astonishingly high. This is an area of public policy debate sorely in
need of guidance from further theory and empirical work. A first step towards a resolution
requires us to define terms, develop theory useful to the discussion, and devise methods that
may help in the estimation of key empirical magnitudes. The first purpose of this paper is to
contribute to this effort. A second purpose of this paper is to move two academic communities
closer together – researchers in the fields of international trade and those in environmental
economics.
2

Accordingly this paper develops “tools” useful to an examination of the trade and
environment debate, and because the debate straddles two fields – environmental economics
and international trade – we develop basic concepts from each field. We apologize at the
outset for being pedantic at times, but our objective is to ensure readers from either field can
follow and extend our analysis.
1.2

The Model

We develop a simple general equilibrium model that may provide a foundation for
further analysis of trade and environmental policy. In this paper we introduce this general
equilibrium pollution and trade model, acquaint readers with its workings, and define the Scale,
Composition and Technique effects.
The model we develop is deliberately simple. Despite this, it contains as one special
case the seminal Heckscher-Ohlin model of International Trade, and as another, a version of
our Pollution Haven model [Copeland and Taylor (1994)]. Therefore, both factor endowments
and pollution regulations play a role in determining relative prices and hence comparative
advantage. This ensures the model has sufficient richness to address the issues at hand.
While much of environmental economics makes use of partial equilibrium analysis, we
need a general equilibrium approach to examine the interaction of trading economies. By the
end of this paper we hope to have constructed, in a relatively transparent way, a simple general
equilibrium pollution demand and supply system determining equilibrium pollution as a function
of world prices, endowments, technology and preferences. Environmental economists would
refer to our constructs as general equilibrium marginal abatement cost and marginal damage
schedules, and this is what they are. This system can then be used to examine to examine the
3

environmental consequences of growth and trade liberalization. Therefore, it is important the
reader understands what underlies its construction.
It is easy to lose the forest for the trees in a paper with over 70 equations. And while
the paper contains many derivations and diagrams, the reader’s understanding of this paper’s
content relies on grasping the four major conceptual steps of our construction. Before we
launch into the specifics it may be useful to spell them out here.
The first step is to understand why we can treat pollution as an input into the production
of goods when in fact it is a joint (and undesirable) output. This is discussed in Section 1.3
where we define the joint production technology and introduce abatement. This leads to a
discussion of potential versus net output, and a formulation explicitly linking pollution abatement
costs to emissions per unit output. Having pollution as an input facilitates our use of national
income or GNP functions in comparative static exercises, and frees us from the less familiar joint
output approach.
The second step is to understand how we construct the general equilibrium demands for
pollution. Once we treat pollution as an input we can then ask, for a given price of pollution
emissions, what would the private sector choose to emit? The answer to this question gives us
the general equilibrium direct demand for pollution. Since this approach follows from the private
sector being quoted a price to pollute, it follows most readily from a formulation with pollution
taxes. Similarly, for any given level of allowed emissions, we can ask what is the marginal value
of one more unit of emissions? This gives us the general equilibrium inverse demand for
pollution. Again since this approach follows from the private sector being presented with a limit
on emissions, it follows most readily from a formulation with emission permits.
Because policy is efficient and there are no other distortions, the choice of a pollution
4

tax or an allowable emissions limit is inconsequential to the results. And the two representations
of demand contain the same information. Despite this fact, it should come as no surprise to the
reader that in some cases it is more convenient to use the direct demand and in others cases, the
indirect demand. The direct demand is useful because pollution emissions are written as explicit
function of the pollution tax. The indirect demand is useful because it directly represents the
marginal benefit of pollution.

Therefore, the second conceptual step is understanding the

derivation of these two representations of pollution demand, and recognizing their equivalence.
While treating pollution as an input makes its inclusion into general equilibrium analysis
easier, researchers in this field must often weigh the relative merits of the Pollution Haven
Hypothesis and the Factor Endowment Hypothesis. This means we have to allow relative
prices to reflect the abundance of two primary factors – call them capital and labor – and yet
maintain a role for pollution regulations to matter as well. We need to do this in a tractable
manner if our framework is to remain useful for examining trade and trade policy. To do so, we
make two key assumptions: we assume the abatement activity employs factors in the same
manner as does production of the dirty good; and we assume a specific form for the abatement
production function.
With these two assumptions our three-factor model simplifies tremendously. For
example, if we hold emissions per unit output in the dirty industry constant, our model inherits all
the comparative static properties of the Heckscher-Ohlin model. Specifically, as we show in
Section 1.4, the Stolper-Samuelson theorem holds: an increase in the relative price of the dirty
good raises the real return to capital and lowers it to labor. As well, the Rybczinski theorem
holds as well: therefore, an increase in capital raises the output of the capital-intensive dirty
good and lowers the output of the labor-intensive clean good.
5

The third conceptual step is for the reader to recognize that the Rybczinski theorem and
the Stolper-Samuleson theorem carry over to determine the properties of both the inverse and
direct demands for pollution. So for example the direct demand has several useful properties
that follow from the Rybczinski theorem, and the inverse demand exhibits a Stolper-Samuleson
like property with respect to goods prices.
Finally we need the reader to understand how we combine the government’s policy rule
(mapping income, prices and pollution levels into pollution policy) with the private sector’s
demand for pollution to solve for the equilibrium level of pollution and its price. While this is
similar to the partial equilibrium equating of marginal damage and marginal abatement cost, in
general equilibrium there are several complications. To deal with these complications in a
tractable manner it proves useful to employ national income or GNP functions. Therefore we
review for the reader the concept of a national income or GNP function and then apply it in a
environmental economics context.
A GNP function captures all of the production side behavior in our economy and being
a maximum value function it has several useful properties. The benefit of this formulation is that
it is more general than our specific model, and in many cases easier to deal with. Rather than
differentiating zero profit conditions and resource constraints we can exploit the properties of
the national income function. When ambiguities arise, we can and will appeal to our specific
formulation to resolve them. It is then that it becomes necessary to understand how our model
is related to the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model of international trade. Understanding the
construction and use of GNP functions is the last conceptual step in this paper.
Once we have grasped how to model pollution as an input, developed a model with
familiar comparative static properties, and represented the entire supply side via a national
6

income function we define the Scale, Composition and Technique effects in Section 1.5. We
then demonstrate how changes in pollution caused by shocks to the economy can be
decomposed into these three effects. Researchers will find this decomposition useful for the
examination of trade liberalization and growth. Antweiler, et al. (2001) provides preliminary
estimates of their magnitudes.
We complete this paper in Section 1.6 by determining the efficient level of pollution
using our pollution supply-and-demand framework. Our pollution supply and demand can be
interpreted as general equilibrium marginal damage and marginal abatement cost schedules, and
so this section clearly links our approach to standard textbook treatments of pollution in
environmental economics.

1.3 Technology

We start by considering a small open economy that faces fixed world prices. At least
two goods are needed for trade to occur, and for trade to be interesting the two goods should
differ in pollution intensity. Consequently, we assume the economy produces two goods, X and
Y. Good X generates pollution during its production, and good Y does not. We let good Y
be the numeraire (so that pY = 1), and denote the relative price of good X by p.
There are two primary factors, capital and labor (K and L), with market returns r and
w. Both factors are inelastically supplied.1 X is capital intensive and Y is labor intensive. This

1 Recently, one branch of the environmental literature [the double dividend literature – see Fullerton and

Metcalf (1998) for a review] has focussed on models with endogenous labor supply in order to anlayze the

7

means that for any w and r, the capital/labor ratio in X is higher than in Y:
Kx K y
>
.
Lx
Ly

(1.1)

We assume the capital intensive sector is also the polluting sector. For industrial pollution, this is
consistent with the evidence.2
To keep things simple, we assume that pollution from any given firm harms consumers
but does not affect productivity in other firms. As well, we rule out pollution generated during
consumption.
Both goods are produced with a constant returns to scale technology. The production
function for good Y is
y = H(K y ,Ly ).

(1.2)

We assume that H is increasing and strictly concave in inputs.
The X industry jointly produces two outputs – good X and emissions Z. However,
abatement is possible, and so emission intensity is a choice variable. To capture the possibility
of abatement very simply, suppose that a firm can allocate an endogenous fraction θ of its inputs
to abatement activity. Increases in θ reduce pollution, but at the cost of diverting primary
factors from X production. The joint production technology is given by:
x = (1-θ)F(K x,Lx),

(1.3)

z = φ(θ)F(K x,Lx),

(1.4)

interaction between pollution taxes and distortionary labor taxes. As our focus is on trade policy we follow
the standard international trade literature and treat labor supply as exogenous.
2 For example, see the evidence cited in Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (2001).

8

where F is increasing, concave and linearly homogeneous, 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1, φ(0) = 1, φ(1) = 0, and
dφ/dθ < 0. We discuss the origins of φ in detail below.
If θ = 0, there is no abatement and by choice of units, each unit of output generates one
unit of pollution. We can think of F(Kx,Lx) as potential output; this is the output of X that would
be generated if there were no pollution abatement. That is, without abatement activity, we have:
x = F(K x,Lx),

(1.5)

z = x.

(1.6)

If firms choose θ > 0, then some resources are allocated towards abatement. If a
vector (K x,Lx) of inputs is allocated to the X sector, then θKx units of capital and θLx units of
labor are allocated to abatement.3 Equivalently, we can think of the firm as producing a gross or
potential output of F(K x,Lx), and using a fraction θ of this as an input for abatement. This
leaves the firm with a net output (1-θ)F(K x,Lx) which is available for consumption and export.
It is convenient for expository purposes to put a little more structure on (1.4); hence we
adopt the following functional form for abatement:
φ (θ) = (1− θ)1/α

(1.7)

3 We are assuming the abatement technology uses the same factor intensity as the production of the final

good X. This is a simple way to capture the notion that abatement is costly, but avoids the complexity of
modelling three activities (each with different factor intensities) in a general equilibrium model.

9

where 0 < α < 1. Using (1.3)-(1.7), we can eliminate θ and invert the joint production
technology to obtain:
x = zα[F(K x,Lx)]1-α,

(1.8)

which is valid for z ≤ F, because θ ≥ 0. That is, although pollution is a joint output, we can
equivalently treat it as an input. 4 This allows us to make use of familiar tools, such as isoquants
and unit cost functions. One can think of pollution Z as the use of "environmental services", as
the firm must dispose of its emissions in the environment. Alternatively, if we treat Z explicitly as
pollution emissions, then we can think of the firm as requiring Z pollution permits in order to
produce.
To understand the construction of (1.8) it is useful to unbundle abatement. To do so we
need to distinguish between pollution produced, zP, and pollution emitted, z. Recall production
of F produces pollution in direct proportion when there is no abatement; therefore zP = F. But if
abatement occurs we define pollution emissions z, as the difference between pollution produced
and pollution abated. Denoting the quantity abated by A, we have:
z = zP − A
Abatement is like any other activity the firm undertakes in the X industry. The quantity abated
depends on the amount of resources allocated to abatement, which we denote xA, and the

4 This generalizes the model in Copeland and Taylor (1994) to allow for two primary factors. Separability

ensures the marginal rate of substitution between capital and labor is not affected by pollution taxes or
quotas This will allow us to use simple diagrams to illustrate much of our analysis . The unitary elasticity of
substitution assumption implicit in (1.8) simplifies the algebra. Much of our work will generalize to the case
where x = Φ[z,F(Kx,Lx)], with both F and Φ being linearly homogeneous. But we have opted the simpler
(albeit more restrictive) specification for clarity.

10

amount of pollution potentially abated, zP. Assuming abatement is a constant returns activity
then allows us to conduct the following transformations:
z = z P − A( z P , x A )
= z P − z P A(1, x A / z P )
= (1 − a(θ )) F ( Kx , Lx )

(1.9)

= φ (θ )F ( K x , Lx )
where the first line is a definition, the second follows from CRS in abatement, the third by
introducing the definition a(θ) = A(1,θ), and the fourth by relabeling to match (1.4).
The particular form we adopted for φ in (1.7) then corresponds to a particular
abatement production function, A. Our choice in (1.7) has two benefits. First, it ensures we
obtain the neat expression (1.8). This in turn requires the share of pollution taxes in the value of
net output be constant. This aids in calculations as it did in Copeland and Taylor (1994).
Second, it ensures the first unit of abatement has a bounded marginal product. This feature
makes zero abatement on the part of firms optimal for low pollution taxes. This seems sensible,
and in fact this feature of our technology was exploited by Stokey (1998) in explaining the
Environmental Kuznet’s Curve.
To understand the relationship between net output, potential output and the resources
allocated to abatement we depict in Figure 2.1 isoquants for two different levels of net output in
the X sector. The higher isoquant (labeled X1) corresponds to higher output. An isoquant
illustrates the trade-off between “inputs” of potential output, denoted by F, and pollution
emissions, denoted by Z, for a constant amount of net output. The constant returns to scale
assumption implies all isoquants have the same shape: higher isoquants are radial blow-ups of
lower isoquants.

11

At point A on the isoquant for X1, no abatement is undertaken and pollution is
proportional to output.5 This corresponds to θ = 0 in (1.3) and (1.4). Similarly, other points
along the dashed ray through the origin correspond to the no-abatement points on other
isoquants.
As we move down along an isoquant, pollution falls because firms allocate resources to
abatement. To maintain a constant level of net output, the inputs into production as measured
by F must increase as the pollution level falls.

1.3.1 Cost minimization

In a competitive market, firms choose production techniques to minimize their cost of
production. Because there is pollution, production costs depend on the regulatory regime. If
there is no regulation, then there is no incentive to abate, and firms choose a point like A in
Figure 2.1. If there is regulation, the firm’s problem is more complex: it must satisfy constraints
imposed by the regulator as well as those coming from the market.
Our model can incorporate a variety of regulatory approaches. For example, in some
jurisdictions, governments impose emission intensity restrictions.

We could capture this

regulation as a constraint that emissions per unit output not exceed some target. In other cases,
governments charge an emission tax, which is a fee per unit of emissions released into the
environment. And in other cases, firms must purchase emission permits if they want to pollute.
We assume here that firms have to pay a fee for each unit of emissions that they

5 Recall we have chosen units to make the factor of proportionality, equal to one.

12

generate. The fee can either be an emissions tax, or it can be the market price for a pollution
permit. We make this assumption in part because of its simplicity, but also because it ensures
that the government’s pollution target is implemented efficiently.6
Our focus is on the larger issue of how trade liberalization affects the environment, and
we want to ensure that our results are not confused with side issues arising from the inefficient
implementation of a pollution target. Notice we are not requiring the pollution target itself be
efficient.
Let us suppose then that firms face a price τ for each unit of emissions they generate.
Given the price of emissions τ, and the prices of capital and labor (r and w), firms are now
faced with a standard cost minimization problem. Moreover, because of the separability of our
production function, we can break the firm’s problem into two steps: first minimizing the cost of
producing potential output F; and then finding the most efficient way to combine F with
environmental services to produce net output X.
First, the firm can find the minimum cost of producing a unit of F (potential output).
Because of constant returns to scale, a unit cost function for F exists, which we denote by cF.
That is, the firm has only to determine the most efficient techniques to produce one unit of F,
because by constant returns to scale, multiple units are produced by simply scaling up

6 A restriction on emissions per unit of output is not an efficient way to implement a pollution target – it can

be shown to be equivalent to an emissions tax combined with an output subsidy. The output subsidy
component of the policy leads to inefficiently high output. The problem is that if a firm is told to satisfy a
restriction on emissions per unit of output, it can satisfy the regulation by either reducing emissions or by
increasing output. In fact, in some cases, such a policy can lead to an increase in overall pollution. The
policy can be rendered efficient if it is accompanied by an output tax, in which case it becomes equivalent to
an emissions tax. In some strategic trade policy contexts, a government may actually want to subsidize

13

production. The unit cost function for F can be found by solving the following problem:
c F (w,r) = min {rk + wl : F (k, l ) = 1}.
{k , l }

(1.10)

The firm chooses the combination of capital and labor that allows it to produce a unit of
potential output at lowest cost. The total cost of producing more that one unit of F is just
cF(w,r)F.
Next, the firm can determine how much abatement activity to undertake, by finding the
unit cost function for net output, which we denote by cx. Again, by constant returns to scale, it
suffices to find the efficient production techniques for one unit. The firm weighs emissions
charges against the cost of foregone potential output to determine the most cost-effective
techniques of production. Formally, the firm solves the following cost minimization problem:
c x (w, r ,τ ) = min {τ z + c F (w, r )F :z α F 1 −α = 1} .
{ z , F}

(1.11)

The solution is illustrated in Figure 2.2. The unit isoquant for net output of X is
illustrated. The isocost line has slope – cF/τ, which is the relative cost of the two inputs
(potential output and environmental services) used to produce net output X.

The cost-

minimizing choice of emissions and primary factor inputs (Fo,Zo) is at point B.
To solve for the optimal level of emissions per unit of net output at a point like B, we
can solve the problem (1.11), and rearrange the first order conditions to obtain:

output, and if production subsidies are illegal under trade rules, a devious choice of seemingly inefficient
pollution instruments can actually be to a country’s advantage. But that is an issue for a future paper.

14

z (1− α ) c F
.
=
τ
F α

(1.12)

Because (1.8) is linearly homogenous, we must also have:
px = c F F + τz

(1.13)

Therefore, using (1.13) and (1.12) we can solve for pollution emissions per unit of net output,
which we denote by e:7
e≡

z αp
=
≤ 1.
x τ

(1.14)

The emission intensity falls as pollution taxes rise because emissions become more expensive.
The emission intensity rises when the price of the polluting good rises because the resources
used in abatement have become more valuable.
The interior optimum depicted in Figure 2.2 is not assured though.8 As the emission tax
falls, the isocost line in Figure 2.2 gets steeper; and for a sufficiently low emission tax, the firm
will find that it is not cost-effective to abate at all and will choose point A in the diagram. To
determine the conditions under which this occurs, define τ* as the pollution tax that leaves a firm
indifferent to abating or not. When there is no abatement at all, z = x = F and e = 1. Evaluating
(1.14) at this point yields:

7 Those familiar with the properties of Cobb-Douglas production functions can obtain (1.14) more quickly

by noting from (1.8) that at an interior solution, the share of emission charges in the total cost of production
of X must be α; that is, τz/px = α. Rearranging yields (1.14).
8 It would be assured if we adopted a formulation where the marginal product of abatement approached

infinity with zero abatement as we did in Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (2001).

15

τ * = αp .

(1.15)

For any pollution tax above τ*, the firm actively abates, (1.14) is relevant and emissions per unit
of output, e, are less than 1. For any pollution tax below τ*, the firm chooses not to abate and
emissions per unit of output are equal to 1: pollution is simply proportional to output.
Once we have found the emissions intensity, the economy’s overall quantity of pollution
emissions is simply
z = ex .

(1.16)

Our main interest is in the level of pollution, and so the next step is to show how the economy’s
aggregate output of X is determined.

1.3.2 Net and Potential Production Possibilities

The simplest way to illustrate the determination of output in a general equilibrium model
is with the aid of the production frontier. However, because pollution is endogenous, the
production frontier in our model is three dimensional; that is, if we think of pollution and X as
joint outputs, we have three goods: X, Y and Z. Alternatively, if we interpret pollution as an
input, then the feasible production of X and Y varies with the level of Z, and so there is no
unique relation between X and Y.
However, by distinguishing between potential and net output, and exploiting some of the
structure of our technology, we can illustrate the market equilibrium in a two-dimensional
diagram, as indicated in Figure 2.3.
16

First we can draw the production frontier for potential output. This indicates the
maximum amount of potential output F in the X industry that can be produced for any level of
Y, given factor endowments and technologies. That is, the potential output frontier illustrates the
production possibilities for the economy if no abatement is undertaken. In Figure 2.3, this is the
outermost curve labeled Potential Frontier.
As well, we can draw a conditional (net) frontier, relating the maximum level of net
output X that can be produced for a given output of Y and for a given emission intensity e. In
Figure 2.3, we have drawn one such net frontier (for a particular level of e) – this is the
innermost curve labeled Net Frontier. All net frontiers lie inside the potential frontier because
some resources are used for abatement unless the economy is specialized in Y.
For a given emission intensity e, we can derive the corresponding net frontier from the
potential frontier as follows. Substituting (1.16) into (1.8) and rearranging yields
α/(1-α)

x=e

F(K x,Lx)

(1.17)

Recalling that e ≤ 1, (1.17) implies that net output is a fixed fraction of potential output. We can
alternatively obtain a simple relation between net and potential output by referring to (1.3):
x = (1 – θ)F(K x,Lx),

(1.18)

where recall that θ is the fraction of resources allocated to abatement. Again, this shows that
net output is a fixed fraction of potential output for a given emission intensity. Using (1.18), it is
easy to derive the net frontier graphically from the potential frontier: given any Y, net output X is
obtained by shifting in the potential output F by a fraction 1 – θ.

17

Finally, it is useful to combine (1.17) and (1.18) to obtain a relation between e and θ for
future reference.
e = (1 − θ )(1−α ) /α .

(1.19)

Since θ is the fraction of value-added used in abatement, (1.19) neatly links pollution abatement
costs to emissions per unit of output. Lower emissions per unit output come at the expense of
higher pollution abatement costs.

1.4 Equilibrium along the Net and Potential Production Frontiers

We can now exploit our two frontiers to illustrate the equilibrium levels of output and
pollution for a given market goods price p and pollution emission charge τ. Suppose that τ is
large enough so that firms allocate some resources to abatement.9

Consider the profit

maximization problem for a firm in the X sector. Profits π x for a firm producing X are given by
revenue, less payments to all labor and capital employed, and pollution charges:
π x = px − wLx − rK x − τz .

(1.20)

But using (1.16) we can eliminate z from (1.20):
x
π = p(1 − τ e) x − wLx − rK x .

(1.21)

9 If τ is so low that firms do not abate, then the net and gross frontiers coincide. Firms in X then receive p(1-

τ) per unit of X produced.

18

As long as the pollution tax is high enough so that abatement occurs, we can exploit the
results of the firm’s cost minimization problem by using (1.14) to eliminate e from (1.21). This
yields:
π x = p(1 − α)x − wLx − rK x .

(1.22)

We can therefore think of the firm as choosing x subject to the technology (1.17), while
facing a producer price of q= p(1–α) for net output. In aggregate firms’ behavior leads to a
production point along the net frontier where the absolute value of the slope of the net frontier is
equal to the producer price q ≡ p(1 − α ) . This is point A in Figure 2.3. Pollution can then be
determined in the bottom half of the diagram, by recalling that z = ex. This yields point D in the
diagram, which corresponds to a pollution level of Zo.
Alternatively, we can depict the equilibrium along the potential frontier.

In the

aggregate, the behavior of firms will place the economy on the potential frontier. Knowing that
some of the potential output will be reallocated to abatement, and using (1.18), we can rewrite
(1.22) as
x
F
π = q F − wLx − rK x

(1.23)

where qF is the producer price a firm obtains for producing one unit of potential output F:
(
)
q F = p(1 − α )eα / 1−α = p(1 − α )(1 − θ ) .

(1.24)

Hence, referring to (1.23), we can think of the firm’s profit maximization problem
entirely in terms of a decision about how much gross output to produce, providing that we use

19

the correct producer price qF. Given that good Y is the numeraire, the relative producer price
of F is qF, and so the market outcome is at point B. This is where the absolute value of the
slope of the potential frontier is equal to qF. At this point, producers receive an effective price
for gross output of qF = p(1 - α)(1 - θ). This is less than p because only a fraction 1 - θ of
output is available for sale outside the firm (the rest is used for abatement), and of that only a
fraction (1 - α) remains after pollution taxes are paid.
Finally, we can also illustrate equilibrium pollution by combining (1.16) and (1.17) to
obtain:
z = e1/

(1−α )

F.

(1.25)

For a given emission intensity, pollution is directly proportional to gross output, and this relation
is plotted in the bottom half of the diagram. Consequently, once F is determined by qF at point
B, we can drop down to point C to determine pollution.

1.4.1 Uses of the Two Frontiers

The two frontiers can be used to clarify the distinction between production of final
goods and production for abatement. In Figure 2.3, Point A represents the production point on
the net frontier. This is the quantity of X actually available for consumption or trade. The
distance BA represents that portion of gross X production used in the abatement process; and
hence the ratio of BA to gross production B represents the share of production in the dirty
industry allocated to abatement; that is θ.

20

As well, note that potential output (represented by the outer frontier) is determined by
technology and endowments alone and is independent of the level of pollution. This is a useful
reminder that an economy cannot pollute itself to prosperity. It can at best abate nothing and
produce the maximum level of outputs consistent with its endowments and technology. This
seems like a simple point, but often when authors adopt a formulation where pollution is an input
it appears that generating more pollution generates more income. In fact, all a society can do is
decide how to divide its potential output across two aggregate goods – pollution prevention and
real consumption.
Improvements in the technology for producing goods shifts out the gross and net
frontiers uniformly, but improvement in the abatement technology alone shifts the net frontier
outwards leaving the gross frontier unaffected. For example, an improvement in abatement
technology shifts the net frontier towards the gross frontier. The gross frontier is unaffected, but
qF must rise because with a constant product price and fixed tax, θ falls. The economy moves
towards the dirty good industry.
And finally note that if emissions per unit of output are held fixed, then changes in
potential and net output mimic one another. For example, if factor endowments change then
both potential output and net output change, but the ratio of the two would remain the same.

1.4.2 Equilibrium using algebra

We can also use algebra to determine the production side equilibrium. We will specify
the equilibrium conditions in terms of gross output. There are two sorts of equilibrium
conditions for a competitive small open economy: free entry conditions and full employment
21

conditions.

10

With free entry, if both sectors are active, we must have zero profits in each

sector. This implies that price must equal unit cost. We previously derived the unit cost function
for F in (1.10). Similarly, the unit cost function for Y is

c (w, r ) = min {rk + wl : H(k, l ) = 1}.
Y

{k, l }

(1.26)

The free entry conditions are therefore:
c F (w,r) = q F ,

(1.27)

c Y (w, r ) = 1.

(1.28)

In each sector, the producer price must equal the unit cost when there is positive production.
These two conditions jointly determined factor prices (w,r).
The full employment conditions simply require that the demand for each of the primary
factors equal supply. The factor demands can be determined from the cost functions with the
aid of Shephard’s Lemma.11 For example, in sector Y, the amount of labor required to
produce one unit of Y ( which we denote a LY ) is obtained by taking the derivative of the unit
cost function with respect to the wage:
a LY ( w, r) =

∂c Y (w,r)
.
∂w

10 The reader who wants more details on analyzing simple general equilibrium trade models is referred to

Dixit and Norman (1980) and Woodland (1982).

22

Total labor demand in sector Y is therefore a LYY , which is the total output of Y
multiplied by the unit labor requirement. Other factor demands are determined analogously, and
recalling that factor supplies are exogenous, we may therefore write the full employment
conditions as:
aLF (w,r)F + a LY ( w, r)Y = L
aKF (w, r )F + aKY ( w, r)Y = K

(1.29)

where a Li ≡ ∂c i / ∂w, and aKi ≡ ∂ci / ∂r .
It is now very important to recognize that our system of endogenous variables resembles
the standard 2-sector Heckscher-Ohlin model. Specifically, the system of equations (1.27) (1.28) can be solved for equilibrium factor prices (w,r) as a function of qF alone. With factor
prices then determined, (1.29) solves for outputs (Y,F) as functions of K and L. Net output of
X can then be determined by (1.17), and total pollution can be obtained from either (1.16) or
(1.25).
This solution method follows since qF is given by (1.24) and it depends on both e –
which is endogenous – and world prices p – which are not. Therefore, our system has the
property that for a given emission per unit output, e, we can solve for all remaining endogenous
variables. The emission intensity is determined by (1.14). The emission price is of course a
policy choice and we will discuss its determination later.
1.4.3 Comparative statics

11 See Dixit and Norman (1980) and Woodland (1982) for derivation of Shepherd's Lemma

application to the analysis of simple general equilibrium trade models.

23

and its

The system (1.27) - (1.29) looks very much like the standard two-sector competitive
trade model – and indeed it is. The only difference is that the producer price qF differs from the
market price to take into account pollution taxes and abatement. This is very useful, because it
means that for given pollution taxes (or given emission intensities), the model inherits the
standard properties of the Heckscher-Ohlin model of international trade.
First, the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem holds: an increase in the producer price of a
good increases the real return to the factor used intensively in the production of that good, and
lowers the real return to the other factor. To see this, note that as long as the economy is
diversified in production, factor prices are determined by (1.27)-(1.28). This is illustrated in
Figure 2.4. The zero profit conditions for F and Y have been illustrated (there are two zero
profit curves for F illustrated in the diagram, corresponding to two different levels of qF). The
zero profit curves are level curves of the cost function, and so are downward sloping (along a
curve of constant cost, an increase in w requires a fall in r to keep costs constant); and they are
convex because cost functions are concave in input prices. Moreover, the absolute value of the
slope of the zero profit condition is the capital / labor ratio. To see this, consider the zero profit
curve for Y in the figure. Along the curve, we have:
dw
kY
∂c Y / ∂r
,
=
−
=
−
Y
dr c Y
lY
∂c / ∂w

where the final result follows from using Shepherd’s Lemma again. Because we have assumed
that X is capital intensive relative to Y (recall (1.1)), the zero profit curve for F is steeper than
that for Y. The initial equilibrium factor prices are (wo,ro).
F
Now suppose that qF rises from qoF to q1 . This would happen either if p rises or if the

24

government lowers the pollution tax. Then the zero profit curve for F shifts out and we can see
that an increase in the producer price of F causes r to rise and w to fall. That is, a reduction in
the pollution tax will raise the return to the factor which the polluting sector uses intensively
(capital) and reduce the return to the factor used intensively in the rest of the economy (labor).
Next, the Rybczinski Theorem holds for a given emission intensity. An increase in the
endowment of capital increases the output of the capital intensive good (X or F) and reduces
the output of the labor intensive good (Y). To see this, first note that as long as the economy is
diversified, changes in factor endowments have no effect on factor prices, because for a
diversified economy, factor prices are completely determined by (1.27)-(1.28) which is not
affected by factor endowment changes. Consequently, the effect of endowment changes can be
obtained from (1.29), treating factor prices as constant. Adjustment to endowment changes
takes place entirely via changes in output, not via changes in factor prices.
For constant factor prices, the equations in (1.29) are linear, as illustrated in Figure 2.5.
Because Y is labor intensive, the full employment condition for labor (the curve labelled "L") is
flatter than that for capital (two such curves are illustrated - labelled "K o" and "K 1") . The initial
outputs are (Fo,Yo). Suppose the endowment of capital rises. Then the full employment
condition for capital shifts out from Ko to K1. This increases the output of F (and hence also
X), and reduces the output of Y.

The intuition for this is that as the capital intensive sector

expands, it requires labor to be used in conjunction with the new capital. But this labor must be
drawn from sector Y, so Y contracts (which in turn free up even more capital to reinforce the
expansion of the X sector).
The Rybczinski theorem will be important in helping us understand the incidence of
pollution across the world. It implies, for example, that holding the emission intensity and goods
25

prices constant, a capital inflow will stimulate the polluting industry and lead to a contraction of
the clean industry.
Before moving on to analyze the comparative statics of the equilibrium, it is worth noting
that we could reformulate the equilibrium conditions in terms of net output. If we divide both
sides of (1.27) by eα /( 1−α) , we obtain:
c F (w,r)
= p(1 −α ) ,
eα /(1−α)

(1.30)

c Y (w, r ) = 1.

(1.31)

The right hand side of (1.30) is the producer price of net output, taking into account pollution
tax payments, and the right hand side of (1.30) is the unit cost of producing X, less payments for
pollution. Hence (1.30) is simply the zero profit condition for X producers.
And similarly, the full employment conditions can be written in terms of the net output of
X:
L = aLX ( w,r)X + aLY (w,r)Y
K = aKX (w, r) X + aKY (w, r)Y

(1.32)

which is equivalent to (1.29) once we note that:
a LX( w, r) = aLF (w,r ) / e α/(1−α )
aKX ( w,r) = aKF ( w,r) / eα /(1−α)

(1.33)

Because the system (1.30)- (1.33) is a transformation of the system (1.27)- (1.29), the two are
equivalent, and either one may be used to analyze the equilibrium.

26

1.4.4 Consumers

We assume there are N identical consumers in the economy. Each consumer cares
about both consumption and environmental quality. We assume that pollution is harmful to
consumers and that it is a pure public bad (all consumers experience the same level of pollution).
The utility function of a typical consumer is given by
U( x, y, z) = u( x,y) − h( z)

(1.34)

where u(x,y) is increasing, homothetic and concave; and h is increasing and convex.
For simplicity, we have assumed that preferences over consumption goods are
homothetic and that the utility function is strongly separable with respect to consumption goods
and environmental quality.
Homotheticity is a standard assumption in the international trade literature, and it helps in
two ways. First, it ensures that we can write the indirect utility function as simply an increasing
function of real income : nominal income divided by a price index.12 Thus it allows us to simplify
our decision problem through a form of aggregation.

The other benefit of assuming

homotheticity is that it ensures that the relative demand for goods is unaffected by income levels.
This is very helpful because it allows us to explain trade patterns as functions of regulation

12 To see this note, a homothetic function is an increasing transform of a function homogenous of degree 1;

that is, u = g(f(x,y)) where f is homogenous of degree 1 and g is increasing. If f is homogenous of degree 1,
then demands are x = a(p)I, and y = b(p)I and using linear homogeneity we can write u = g(I f(a(p),b(p))).
Define k(p) = f -1(.), then we have u = g(I/k(p)) where k(p) is the price index specific to the function f, and
utility is an increasing function of real income so defined.

27

differences and relative costs alone.13
The strong separability assumption means that the marginal rate of substitution between
X and Y is not affected by the level of environmental quality and it also limits the extent to which
goods prices can affect the demand for environmental quality.
Each consumer maximizes utility, treating pollution, prices and per-capita income, I, as
given. This yields an indirect utility function of the following form:
V( p, I ,z) = v( I / β ( p)) − h( z)

(1.35)

The function v is the indirect utility function dual to u(x,y), and β is a price index. The function v
is increasing and concave because of the structure we imposed on u. Note that it is our
homotheticity assumption that has allowed us to write indirect utility as a function of real income,
defined as:
R=

I
.
β( p)

(1.36)

1.4.5 National Income and Revenue Functions

National and per capita income will play a key role in our analysis. As we saw above,
consumer utility depends on income; and this means that a consumer's demand for both

13 Without homotheticity over goods consumption, the relative demand for goods would vary with income:

rich and poor countries would have different spending patterns, and trade would depend on the interaction
between factor endowments, regulation, and income-induced differences in national spending patterns.
This would complicate our model, and distract from out main goals, but the interested reader should be able
to extend the analysis to allow for this added motive for trade.

28

consumption goods and environmental quality will depend on income. This, in turn, will mean
that efficient environmental policy will depend on consumer income.
Because we have a general equilibrium model, income is endogenous. Income is the
value of payments to all factors, including any pollution charges; or equivalently, it is the value of
net goods production. Income will therefore depend on what the economy produces, as well as
on goods prices and environmental policy. That is, the determination of income requires that we
solve the entire general equilibrium of the economy.
Fortunately, there is a simpler way to obtain an expression for the economy's income
that avoids having to resolve the entire model every time we want to undertake a comparative
static exercise. As has become standard in the international trade literature, we can exploit the
fact that the private sector of a perfectly competitive economy maximizes the value of national
income.14 That is, we can represent national income as the solution to an optimization problem.
15

The implied maximum value function will then have a number of very nice properties that will

help us in our analysis. An added benefit of this approach is that we can define a national
income function for a very general economy, and so in some cases it will allow us to easily
generalize our results beyond the confines of the simple technology we have assumed for our
economy. But as well, we will be able to exploit the structure imposed by our technology
assumptions to get clean results to build intuition.
Let us start then by assuming a somewhat more general technology than we have used
so far. Let T(K,L,Z) be a two-dimensional convex production possibility set with constant

14 It is at this point that our assumption that pollution does not cause production externalities is exploited.

29

returns to scale. That is, T is the set of all combinations of net outputs (X,Y) that can be
produced given the primary factor endowments K and L, and for a given level of pollution Z.
The production technology we specified in (1.2)-(1.8) is an example of such a technology.
Now define the maximum value function G as follows:

{

G( p x , p y ,K,L,z ) = max p x x + py y : ( x, y) ∈T( K,L, z)
{x, y }

}

(1.37)

The function G, which we call the national income function, tells us the value of national
income at world prices, for any level of pollution and factor endowment, given the underlying
technology. One can show that the first order conditions for the solution to the maximum
problem in (1.37) are exactly the same as the equilibrium conditions for our competitive
economy.16
We have treated aggregate pollution as exogenous in (1.37) and hence we will show
how to make it endogenous below. Also note that although we suppress the price of Y
throughout most of our analysis because we are treating it as the numeraire, we have included
pY in the above for clarity. In most of our applications, we will set pX = p, and py = 1, and with
slight abuse of notation will refer to the national income function as G(p,K,L,z), where the role
of the price of Y is suppressed.

15

See Woodland (1982) and Dixit and Norman (1980) for a detailed analysis of the national income

function (sometimes called the revenue function). Copeland (1994) applies the national income function to
economies with pollution.
16 Woodland (1982) does this explicitly.

The interested reader should demonstrate that the first order

conditions for (1.37) are equivalent to the equilibrium conditions already spelled out in terms of either gross

30

The national income function has a number of very useful properties, many of which
follow from its being a maximum value function. These are discussed in detail in Woodland
(1982), and here we simply point out those properties that will be of particular relevance.
First, Hotelling's Lemma holds; that is, outputs can be recovered by differentiating with
respect to goods prices:
∂G(p x , p y , K, L,z )
= x,
x
∂p

∂G( p x, p y , K, L,z)
= y.
y
∂p

(1.38)

This follows from the envelope theorem.
Next, the returns to capital and labor can be found by differentiating with respect to the
relevant factor endowment:
∂G( p x , p y, K,L, z )
= r,
∂K

∂G( p x , p y, K, L,z)
= w.
∂L

(1.39)

The intuition for this is straightforward. Suppose the economy acquires an extra unit of capital.
The derivative ∂G / ∂K tells us how much national income rises because of the extra unit of
capital. But this must be the value of the marginal product of capital, which in a competitive
market is equal to the market return to capital. Similarly, an extra worker earns the value of his
or her marginal product, which is the wage.

1.4.6 General equilibrium marginal abatement cost

or net output. To do so, it proves useful to solve for the cost function in (1.11) explicitly and then isolate

31

Perhaps the most useful property for our purposes is that if we apply the same logic as
above, then the derivative of the national income function with respect to pollution emissions is
equal to the price the firms have to pay for the right to pollute:
∂G( p x , p y, K,L, z )
=τ .
∂z

(1.40)

The intuition is the same as above: if the private sector is allowed to release one more unit of
emissions, national income will rise by the value of the marginal product of emissions, which in a
competitive market is equal to the price paid by the firm for the right to pollute. If we think of
environmental services as an input, then the logic is exactly the same as that we exploited in
discussing factor returns above.
The expression ∂G / ∂z can be interpreted as a general equilibrium marginal
abatement cost. If we think of reducing emissions z, then the fall in national income due to a
drop in allowable emissions is just ∂G / ∂z ; that is, it measures the cost to the economy of
adjusting to a lower emission target. Reduced emissions will be achieved by the private sector
in two ways: by investing more in abatement activity, and by producing less of the dirty good X
and more of the clean good Y. In the latter case, the cost to the economy of abatement is the
cost of moving along the production frontier from X towards Y. With either a market for
emission permits or a pollution tax, the private sector will choose the most efficient combination
of these two strategies. The derivative ∂G / ∂z measures the cost to the economy of reducing
emissions when the emission reduction is achieved at lowest possible cost.

cF(w,r).

32

Another interpretation of the result in (1.40) then is simply that the pollution charge paid
by the firm will equal the marginal abatement cost. This is a familiar result from environmental
economics, although there it is usually presented in a partial equilibrium framework.

1.4.7 More properties

Because G is a maximum value function, it has an important curvature property: it is
convex in prices. The economic interpretation of this is that output supplies slope upwards.
That is:
∂2 G
∂p

x2

∂x
≥ 0,
∂p x

=

∂ 2G
∂p

y2

=

∂y
≥0.
∂py

(1.41)

And because of constant returns to scale, G is concave in endowments:
∂2G ∂r
=
≤ 0,
∂K 2 ∂K

∂2G ∂w
=
≤ 0,
∂L2 ∂L

∂2 G ∂τ
=
≤ 0.
∂z 2 ∂z

(1.42)

That is, inverse demands for all factors slope downwards. Holding all other endowments fixed,
increasing the supply of, say, labor, will typically reduce (or more generally, will not increase)
the value of its marginal product. Most relevant to us is the last result in (1.42): it says that the
general equilibrium marginal abatement cost curve slopes down.
And finally, G has a couple of homogeneity properties. First, it is homogenous of
degree 1 in prices; that is:
G( λp x , λp y, K, L, z) = λG( px , p y , K, L, z)
33

for λ > 0

(1.43)

This just says that doubling all goods prices doubles national income, but has no effect on
production decisions. Second, G is homogeneous of degree one in endowments. Doubling all
endowments, but leaving prices unchanged just scales up the economy.
G( p x , p y ,λK,λL,λz) = λG( p x , p y, K, L, z) for λ > 0

This follows from constant returns to scale.

1.4.8. Endogenous Pollution with a National Income Function

It might appear that a potential limitation of the usefulness of (1.37) is that the emission
level z is treated as exogenous when solving the optimization problem. This is fine if the
government regulates pollution using an emission permit system. In that case the government
specifies the overall supply of pollution permits, and the private sector through its competitive
behavior ends up maximizing the value of national income, given the fixed available aggregate
supply of emission permits. However, if there is no regulation, or if there is a fixed pollution tax
in place, then we do not want to treat z as exogenous. It turns out there are two ways of
defining a national income function with endogenous pollution; one involves using (1.37) but
treating z as endogenous; and the other approach involves defining a different national income
function. Because both approaches have their uses, we will do both.
First, we can exploit (1.40). If Z is exogenous, then (1.40) gives us the equilibrium
market price of an emissions permit. But suppose instead that there is an exogenous pollution
tax τ and that z is determined by the market response to the tax. Then if we treat τ as fixed ,

34

(1.40) determines z endogenously. Referring to Figure 2.6, we can think either of a fixed z
determining τ, or a fixed τ determining z.
An alternative and perhaps more direct approach is to revert to the original
interpretation of our technology as a joint production technology producing three outputs
(X,Y,Z). And suppose that there is an exogenous pollution tax τ. Then standard competitive
economic theory tells us that the private sector will maximize the value of output given the prices
of X, Y, and Z. The only slight twist to keep in mind here is that the price of pollution is
negative from the point of view of firms, because they must pay a tax on emissions. Therefore,
we can define: 17

{

}

G˜ ( p x , p y ,τ , K, L) = max px x + p y y − τz : (x, y) ∈ T ( K, L, z ) .
{x, y ,z }

(1.44)

This is the value of net revenue generated by the private sector; however, national income also
includes pollution tax revenue. Consequently, total national income is:
I = G˜ ( p, τ , K, L) + τz .

But notice that when we add pollution tax revenue to G˜ , we are left with:
I = px + y ,

17 This is the approach taken in Copeland (1994).

35

and so it should not surprise the reader that if we treated the equilibrium pollution Zo that solved
our problem (1.44), and confronted the economy with a fixed number of pollution permits Zo,
then we would have:
G( p, K, L, Zo ) = G˜ ( p,τ ,K, L) + τ Zo .

The function G˜ satisfies all the same properties as G that we outlined above, with the
exception of (1.40) because it is a function of τ instead of Z. Instead, we have the following
envelope property, which is an application of Hotelling's Lemma:
∂G˜ (p, τ , K, L)
= −Z ( p,τ ,K, L) .
∂τ

(1.45)

That is, we can obtain the derived demand for pollution by differentiating the national income
function G˜ with respect to the pollution tax. Moreover, because G˜ is convex in all prices
(including τ), we have G˜ ττ ≥ 0 , which implies:
∂Z
≤ 0.
∂τ

The derived demand for the right to pollute is decreasing in the pollution tax.
Finally, (1.45) and (1.40) are related. The former describes the derived demand for
pollution; the latter is the inverse demand. Both describe the same curve in Figure 2.6.

1.5

Scale, Technique and Composition Effects

Because the linkages between the economy and the environment are both subtle and
36

complex, it is useful to decompose changes in pollution into three fundamental forces: scale,
composition and technique effects. This approach was used by Grossman and Krueger (1993)
to interpret the empirical evidence in their influential study of the potential effects of NAFTA on
the environment, and we have found it useful to help clarify both theoretical and empirical
analysis. It is particularly useful in comparing the effects of different types of shocks to the
economy. For example, both trade liberalization and capital accumulation tend to raise the
productive capacity of the economy (this will lead to a scale effect in each case), but they may
stimulate very different types of economic activity (their composition effects will differ).
Moreover, because they both raise income and because environmental quality is a normal good,
both types of changes could lead the government to tighten environmental policy (which will lead
to a technique effect).

By breaking the effects of policy changes into scale, technique, and

composition effects, we can clarify how different types of shocks have both common and
divergent effects on the economy. Moreover, as shown in Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor
(2001) this approach can also help us disentangle the effects of different types of shocks
empirically.

1.5.1 Definitions

In this section, we will define the scale, technique and composition effects, and give
some examples to illustrate how to employ them.
Trade and growth both stimulate economic activity, and therefore both increase the
economy's scale. To be more precise, we need a measure of the scale of the economy; that is,
we need an index of output. There many ways to create such a quantity index, but for
37

simplicity, we will use the value of net output at a given level of world prices as our measure of
the economy's scale. Our measure of scale, S, is defined as
S = pxo x + pyo y

(1.46)

o
o
where px and py denote the base-period level of world prices; that is, the level of world

prices prior to any shocks that we analyze. If world prices change, we continue to construct S
using the old (initial) world prices. This is so that scale will not change simply because of a
change in valuation. But of course if the outputs of x and y change in response to world price
changes, then our measure of scale will change – we evaluate the new outputs at the old prices.
Given this definition of scale, and choosing units to set base-period prices to unity (that
is, we set pxo = poy = 1), we now use (1.46) to write pollution as
z = ex = eϕ x S

(1.47)

where ϕx = pxo x/S = x/S is the value share of net output of x in total output evaluated at baseperiod prices. Hence pollution emissions depend on the emissions intensity of production, e, the
importance of the dirty good industry in the economy, ϕx, and the scale of the economy, S.
Taking logs and totally differentiating yields our decomposition:
^

^

^

^

z = S + ϕx + e ,

(1.48)

^

where z = dz/z, etc.
The first term is the scale effect. It measures the increase in pollution that would be
generated if the economy were simply scaled up, holding constant the mix of goods produced
and production techniques. As an example, if there were constant returns to scale and all of the
38

endowments of the economy grew by 10%, and if there were no change in relative prices or
emissions intensities, then we should expect to see a 10% increase in pollution.
The second term is the composition effect as captured by the change in the share of
the dirty good in national income. If we hold the scale of the economy and emissions intensities
constant, then an economy that devotes more of its resources to producing the polluting good
will pollute more.
Finally, we have the technique effect, captured by the last term in (1.48). Holding all
else constant, a reduction in the emissions intensity will reduce pollution.
Let us illustrate these concepts using some diagrams. We will work through several
examples both to illustrate how the model works, and to show how different sources of
economic growth affect pollution in different ways. Because it is cumbersome to illustrate shifts
in both net and gross frontiers, we will focus on the net frontier throughout.

1.5.2 The Scale Effect: Balanced growth

To isolate the scale effect it is useful to assume that the emissions intensity is held fixed.
This would be the case for example if the government had a fixed pollution tax. To start we
illustrate in Figure 2.7 an initial equilibrium with point A indicating the initial output point (on the
net frontier) with producers receiving p(1-α) per unit of net output. In the lower panel of the
figure we graph a pollution emissions function z = ex with a given fixed emission intensity of e0.
Given the initial production point, A, the initial level of pollution is za. Suppose we scale up the
economy by increasing each of the endowments by an equal percentage. Because of constant

39

returns to scale, the new production frontier is just a radial expansion of the old one. The new
production point is at point B, which must be on the same ray through the origin as A. Pollution
has increased from za to zb and this increase represents the pure scale effect.
Referring to (1.48) we see there is no technique effect because we have held policy
constant by assumption; and there is no composition effect because both the X and Y sectors
expand equally. Therefore, we conclude balanced growth in endowments in the presence of a
fixed emission intensity will raise pollution via a pure scale effect.

1.5.3 The Composition Effect: Capital Accumulation

Next consider the composition effect. To do so we again fix the emissions intensity, and
now consider a change in only the endowment of capital. The consequence of this change for
both pollution and outputs is illustrated in Figure 2.8. In this case, the outward shift of the
production frontier is skewed towards the X-axis, because industry X is capital intensive. At a
constant producer price p(1-α), production in our economy moves from point A to point C.
We know from the Rybczinski theorem that the economy produces more X and less Y at C
than at A.
Both scale and composition effects are operative; and we now illustrate how to
decompose the movement from A to C into these two effects. The line denoted Po measures the
value of the initial output at our base-period world prices; this is the initial scale of the economy
at point A. This line is steeper than the producer price line because of pollution policy (and
possibly also because of trade barriers). For any movement along the P0, the scale of the
economy is constant. We therefore decompose the total change in the economy into a
40

movement from A to B, and from B to C.
The movement from A to B is a pure composition effect, because we have
hypothetically held the scale of the economy constant, and found the pure effect of increasing
the share of X in the economy. This composition effect yields an increase in pollution from za to
zb . Note this is positive, because X is the dirty industry.
Next, the movement from B to C is the pure scale effect - it is the effect on pollution of
increasing the scale of the economy, while holding the composition of output fixed. That is,
along a ray through the origin and through point B, the composition of production is constant.
Pollution rises from zb to zc via the scale effect.18
With capital accumulation, both the scale and composition effects are positive, and
therefore the net effect is to raise pollution.
If we instead were to consider growth in the endowment of labor, we would also obtain
a positive scale effect, but pollution would fall via the composition effect. We know from the
Rybczinski theorem that an increase in the supply of labor will raise the output of the clean good
Y and lower the output of the dirty good.

Therefore, the composition effect of labor

accumulation has an opposite effect to that of capital accumulation.
Summing up, the composition effect is positive if a shock to the economy leads it to
produce a basket of goods that is more pollution intensive on average than it did previously. In
the model above, this is a simple observation, but in more general models this basic result still

18

One could alternatively consider the scale effect first, and then the composition effect. As with income

and substitution effects, when we consider a discrete change, the magnitude (but not the direction) of the
effects will depend on the order in which they are constructed.

41

holds true.19

1.5.4 The Technique Effect: a Change in Emission Intensity

To examine the technique effect we now consider the effects of a change in pollution
policy. Suppose there is an exogenous increase in the pollution emissions tax. From (1.22) we
know the producer price for net output is unaffected by this change, but from (1.14) the
emissions intensity has to fall. As a result, the net frontier must shift in as more resources are
allocated to abatement.20 The effects of this exogenous policy change are illustrated in Figure
2.9. Initially, the economy is at point A, pollution is za and emissions per unit of output are eo.
An increase in the pollution tax increases abatement activity and hence reduces emissions per
unit of output (e falls to e1). The pollution function in the lower part of the diagram shifts up (for
any level of x output, there is less pollution). Holding output at A, pollution falls from za to z1.
This is the technique effect: a higher pollution tax leads to cleaner production techniques; and,
holding the scale and composition of output fixed, this lowers pollution emissions.
The policy change also has two other effects. Note that because the production frontier
rotates inward, the final equilibrium is at point C. This movement is comprised of a scale effect
(A to B) leading to the further drop in pollution from z1 to zb , and the composition effect (B to
C) reducing pollution even more to zc. There is a fall in the scale of output because of increased
abatement (which consumes resources). There is a composition effect because the resource
cost of further abatement affects the dirty industry disproportionately.

19 See for example the discussion of composition effects in Copeland and Taylor (1994).

42

As a result, the

opportunity cost of producing X rises and with constant prices, producers shift towards the
clean good Y.
Tightening up pollution policy therefore reduces pollution via three effects: cleaner
techniques, lower scale of output, and a shift in the composition of economic activity towards
the cleaner good.

1.6 Endogenous Pollution Policy

So far, we have analyzed the equilibrium of the economy under the assumption that
pollution policy is exogenous.

In general, we expect pollution policy to be endogenous. In

particular, we expect that changes in per capita income will lead to an increase in the demand
for environmental quality, and, if governments are responsive, this may lead to a tightening up of
pollution regulations. Both trade and growth affect per-capita income, and we need to account
for possible endogenous policy responses when analyzing their effects on the environment. As
well, endogenous policy differences across countries can themselves be a cause of international
trade. This is the well-known Pollution Haven Hypothesis, and we will need to understand
how pollution policy varies with the economic characteristics of a country in order to fully
analyze it.
There are many ways to model endogenous environmental policy. One is to assume
that the government is responsive to the preferences of consumers and provides efficient policy.
Another is to assume governments respond to interest group pressure along the lines of
Grossman and Helpman (1994). Here we will assume policy is efficient. This choice is made

20 The potential frontier remains in place.

43

because the major theories in this area focus on cross-country differences in either income or
factor endowments as a basis for trade, whereas much of the recent political economy literature
has focused on explaining within country but across industry variation in protection. As well,
efficient policy has played a central role in the literature and all of the political economy
approaches tend to build on the analytics of the efficient policy approach. It will also serve as a
useful base case to compare with other scenarios.
The efficient level of pollution is determined by weighing the benefits of pollution against
the costs. As we showed earlier, it is helpful to treat pollution (or environmental services) as an
input used by producers. Moreover, as we have shown pollution is an input with a variable
aggregate supply. A standard tool for analyzing input markets is the demand and supply
diagram; and we find that it is useful to use such a diagram to illustrate the equilibrium level of
pollution. The demand for pollution is a derived demand, as firms in the X sector derive benefits
from securing the right to pollute. The "supply" of pollution reflects the policy regime. When
pollution policy is optimal, the supply of pollution reflects the aggregate willingness to allow
environmental damage.

The interaction between these demand and supply side factors

determines the equilibrium level of pollution.

1.6.1 The Demand for Pollution

We have already described many features of the private sector’s demand for pollution.
In our previous analysis we fixed the emission intensity for many of our results, and this requires
us to fix the pollution tax or permit price τ. For example, when we found higher pollution levels
with either balanced factor growth (the scale effect example) or capital accumulation (the
44

composition effect example), implicit in our analysis was an outward shift in pollution demand by
the private sector in both these cases. Similarly, when we found a negative relationship between
lower emission intensities and pollution, this in effect illustrated that our pollution demand curve
has negative slope. Higher pollution taxes lower pollution. Therefore our earlier exercises were
very simple characterizations of the private sector’s derived demand for pollution.
At this point we want to be a little more explicit about the properties of pollution
demand, as well as to introduce a convenient diagram. Starting with a general technology, recall
from the properties of the national income function that the inverse demand for pollution is given
by21
τ = Gz ( p,K, L, z) .

(1.49)

This defines an implicit function z = Z(τ,p,K,L). We can differentiate and solve for the slope of
the pollution demand curve:
dz
1
=
≤0
dτ Gzz

(1.50)

The slope of the derived demand for pollution is non-positive because G is concave. 22
We can say more about pollution demand by recalling pollution is determined by the
emission intensity and the output of x. This yields a direct derived demand for the right to pollute
as a function of the pollution tax τ, factor endowments and the price of X.

21 As we indicated earlier, we will suppress the role of the price of p y in G because we have set p y = 1.
22 For general technology, it is possible that pollution demand may have flat regions. For example, the

model presented in Copeland and Taylor (2000) exhibits this property.

45

z = e( p/ τ) x( p, τ , K, L)

(1.51)

where e is defined in (1.14) and we have made use of (1.44) to write output as a function of
goods prices, taxes and endowments. The slope of the general equilibrium pollution demand is
given by
∂z
= eτ x + exτ < 0
∂τ

(1.52)

and hence while (1.50) tells us pollution demand slopes downward, (1.52) identifies the two
mechanisms at work in creating the negative slope.
The derived demand for pollution is illustrated in Figure 2.10. Pollution demand slopes
down for two reasons: first, higher pollution taxes make abatement more profitable, thereby
reducing the emissions intensity of production. This is the technique effect captured by the first
term in (1.52). In discrete form this would represent a movement from za to z1 in Figure 2.9.
Second, with greater abatement efforts resources are drawn away from production of final
goods and services and this causes the output of x to fall as producers exit the x industry and
move into y. This change is due to both scale and composition effects. And again in discrete
terms this is the movement from z1 to zc in Figure 2.9.
Pollution demand shifts in response to changes in factor endowments and goods prices.
An increase in the endowment of capital shifts the demand for pollution to the right. To see this,
first recall from the production side equilibrium conditions that output X (or F) is only a function
of τ through its effect on emissions per unit output. Therefore we could write the direct demand
to reflect this:

46

z = e( p/ τ) x ( p , e (p / τ ), K, L)

(1.53)

Then differentiate with respect to K to obtain:

dz
dx ( p , e (p / τ ), K, L)
= e( p / τ )
>0
dK
dK

(1.54)

For a given pollution tax and goods price, an increase in K has no effect on the emission
intensity. Therefore, the effect of capital accumulation on the demand for pollution depends on
the response of the output of X. But we can now invoke the Rybczinski theorem since e is held
fixed when we take this derivative. And hence capital accumulation stimulates output of the
capital-intensive dirty good X, and so the demand for pollution rises (the private sector will want
to pollute more for any given τ). We illustrate this shift in Figure 2.10. For the initial pollution
tax το, pollution demand rises from za to zc. This is exactly the same as the increase in pollution
illustrated in Figure 2.8 when we considered an increase in capital.
We could alternatively have differentiated (1.49) set dτ = 0 and solved for the resulting
change in z from the change in K. This would have required us to sign the cross derivative GZK
which a priori is uncertain. As well, using the direct demand we can also employ Jones
magnification effect that capital intensive output rises more than proportionately with capital.
Therefore, when calculating quantity responses in pollution demand, using the direct demand is
more convenient.
In contrast to the case of capital, an increase in the endowment of labor shifts pollution
demand to the left:
47

dz
dx( p , e (p / τ ), K, L)
= e( p / τ )
<0.
dL
dL

(1.55)

This again follows from the Rybczinski Theorem.
Finally, an increase in the price of the dirty good shifts pollution demand to the right
because abatement becomes relatively more expensive, and because factors are drawn into the
now more attractive dirty good industry:

dz
de( p/ τ )
dx( p , e ( p / τ ), K, L)
=x
+ e( p / τ )
>0
dp
dp
dp

( +)

( +)

(1.56)

As discussed earlier, the pollution demand curve can be thought of as a general equilibrium
marginal abatement cost curve - it measures the opportunity cost to the economy of reduced
pollution emissions. Capital accumulation and increases in the dirty good price raise marginal
abatement costs and increases in the endowment of labor reduce marginal abatement costs.
To examine how the marginal benefit of polluting has changed with the price of the dirty
good, we may want to employ the inverse demand however. In this case we would find:
∂τ
= Gzp ( p , K , L , z )> 0
∂p
and because of the structure imposed by our model, we can use (1.53) to show that:
∂τ p Gzp p
=
>1
∂p τ
Gz

48

(1.57)

and hence the marginal benefit of polluting rises more than proportionately from an increase in
the price of the dirty good. And consequently, for applications where we are interested in price
responses, employing the inverse demand curve is often convenient.
The pollution demand curve in (1.49) can be thought of as a marginal benefit of polluting
curve. With this interpretation, we have just shown how changes in endowments and goods
prices affect the marginal benefit of polluting. An increase in the price of the dirty good
increases the marginal benefit of polluting because the value of the marginal product of emissions
is higher. Capital accumulation increases the marginal benefit of polluting because a more
capital abundant country is relatively more productive in the dirty industry.

And labor

accumulation reduces the marginal benefit of polluting because it makes the economy more
productive in the clean industry.
1.6.2 Marginal Damage and the "Supply" of Pollution

Let us now find the optimal pollution policy. The demand for pollution as captured by
(1.49) measures the marginal benefit of polluting. To determine the optimal pollution policy, we
need to balance this against the marginal damage from polluting. Because we have assumed all
consumers are identical, the government finds the optimal policy by choosing the pollution level
to maximize the utility of a representative consumer subject to production possibilities and
private sector behavior.
We start by formulating the government's problem with general preferences and
technology:
Max {V ( p,I ,z ) s.t. I = G(p, K, L, z) / N}
z

49

(1.58)

where V is the indirect utility function of a typical consumer. All N consumers are identical and
so each receives the same income.23 The first order condition for the choice of pollution is:
Vp

dp
dI
+ VI
+ Vz = 0 .
dz
dz

(1.59)

An increase in pollution will affect goods prices, income and environmental damage, and each of
these affects the consumer. If we divide both sides of (1.59) by VI , rearrange, and use Roy's
identity, we have:
–Dx

dp dI
V
+
=– z.
dz dz
VI

(1.60)

where Dx is the demand for X by a typical consumer. The term on the right hand side of (1.60)
is the marginal rate of substitution between emissions and income; in other words it measures the
typical consumer's willingness to pay for reduced emissions. In the environmental literature, this
is referred to as "marginal damage". We denote this by MD, and hence we define:
MD ≡ –

Vz
.
VI

(1.61)

To further simplify (1.60), use the constraint in (1.58) and the properties of the national income
function to obtain:
dp
dp
dI Gp dz + Gz x dz + τ
=
=
dz
N
N

(1.62)

23 The government may use either pollution permits or emission taxes. In either case, any revenue accruing

50

Substituting (1.62) and (1.61) into (1.60) yields:
dp
.
dz

τ = N • MD + m

(1.63)

where m = N•Dx – x is imports of X (if X is exported, then m < 0). The condition (1.63) says
that the government should choose pollution so that the emissions price faced by the private
sector is equal to aggregate marginal damage plus a term that reflects the terms of trade effect
induced by changes in pollution.
To interpret (1.63), let us first assume there is no international trade, so that m = 0. In
this case, (1.63) reduces to:
τ = N • MD .

(1.64)

Recall that environmental quality is a pure public good (or equivalently, pollution is a pure public
bad). The condition (1.64) is simply the Samuelson rule for public goods provision: the
government chooses pollution so that firms face an emissions price which is equal to the sum of
the marginal damages across all consumers. Notice that the direct effect of pollution on goods
prices drops out of the rule for optimal policy if the country does not trade. The reason for this
is that although an increase in pollution lowers prices to consumers, it also lowers producer
prices and hence lowers income. Without international trade and with an efficient domestic
market, these two effects exactly offset each other.
Now introduce international trade in goods. Then the world price p of dirty goods is
determined by global demand and supply for the dirty good. If Home changes its emissions

to the government is embodied in G as a return to z and is rebated to consumers in lump sum.

51

policy, this will affect Home's demand and supply for the dirty good, and therefore global
demand and supply will be affected. If Home is small in world markets, however, this effect will
be small, and Home's domestic emissions policy will have a negligible effect on world prices.
That is, if Home is small, it is essentially a price taker in world markets. In the international
trade literature, the small country assumption is that domestic policies have no effect on world
prices. For many, if not most, countries in the world, this is a realistic assumption. Under the
small country assumption, dp/dz = 0, and so (1.63) again reduces to the simple Samuelson rule
in (1.64). That is, when a small country is open to international trade, its efficient pollution
policy is simply to internalize the pollution externality and ensure that firms face an emissions
charge that is equal to the aggregate marginal damage.
If the Home country is large, then changes in its emission policy may affect world goods
prices. This is because an increase in its allowable emissions will stimulate the supply of the
dirty good, and if the Home country is sufficiently big, this can push down the world price of the
dirty good. Because changes in world prices affect the price at which Home buys and sells
goods from foreigners, this effect shows up in the optimal policy rule. That is, if a country is
large, then it has market power; and one way to exploit this power is to use pollution policy to
try to manipulate world prices.
If Home imports the dirty good and the world price of the dirty good falls, Home's
terms of trade improve. That is, an increase in domestic emissions can yield an added benefit to
home by reducing the world price of the good that it imports. This means that a dirty good
importer that is large in world markets has an strategic incentive to set the domestic price of
emissions somewhat below marginal damage in order to manipulate the world price of dirty
goods. In contrast, a dirty good exporter is worse off if the price of dirty goods falls, because
52

the price at which it sells its exports drops. Such a country has a strategic incentive to set the
domestic price of emissions somewhat above marginal damage in order to reduce the world
supply of dirty goods and thereby get a better price for exports.
The strategic manipulation of pollution policy to affect world prices has played an
important role in the policy literature. In such cases, the government uses pollution policy both to
target pollution and as an instrument of international trade policy. This raises a number of
complicated issues, such as why a government with market power doesn't use some other
instrument (such as a trade barrier or other more direct taxes and subsidies) to manipulate world
prices. In fact, if a government is unrestricted in its choice of policy instruments, the first best
policy is to use trade policy to exploit its global market power and use environmental policy
solely to internalize externalities, so we again obtain (1.64).24 As well, if pollution policy is set
at the regional or local level, then even in a large country, the individual regulator may not
perceive any market power. At this point we do not want to focus on these and other issues of
strategic trade policy, and so we will simply assume that countries (or regulators) are small in
world markets.
With our small country assumption then, the government's optimal pollution policy is
given by (1.64). At this point it is instructive to exploit some of the structure (homotheticity and
separability) we have put on preferences. Referring to (1.35), we can write (1.64) as:
τ = N • [ −Vz / VI ] = N •

β ( p)h ' (z)
= N • MD( p, R,z)
v ' ( R)

53

(1.65)

where recall that R = I/β(p) denotes real income. The assumption of homotheticity in goods
consumption allows us to write marginal damage as a function of real income, goods prices and
emissions: MD = MD(p,R,z).
Next, we can use the national income function to substitute for real income and rewrite
(1.65) as:
τ = N • MD[ p,

G( p, K, L, z)
Nβ ( p )

, z]

(1.66)

We can think of (1.66) as the government’s general equilibrium supply curve for pollution. It
reflects the country's willingness to allow pollution. The pollution supply curve is upward
sloping:
∂MD
h' '
v '' 
=τ
−τ
>0
∂z
v ' Nβ 
h '

(1.67)

where we have used Gz = τ. The sign of (1.67) follows in our case from the convexity of h and
concavity of u, but more generally marginal damage slopes upwards because increases in
pollution tend to make environmental quality scarce relative to consumption.

Hence a

diminishing marginal rate of substitution between consumption and environmental quality yields
the result.
The pollution supply curve also shifts with changes in prices or real income. Consider
an increase in real income, holding prices constant. From (1.65) we obtain:

24 However, if a country signs a free trade agreement, it is restricted in its use of trade policy.

The

government is then forced to look for second best trade policy instruments. The question then is whether
environmental policy is an attractive candidate for such a role.

54

MDR = −βh' ( z) / v' ' ( R) .

(1.68)

If v is concave, then MDR is positive. Marginal damage is increasing in real income because
environmental quality is a normal good. If v is linear, then real income gains have no effect on
marginal damage.
It is worth considering a simple example to illustrate how pollution policy depends on
income. Assume utility takes the following form:
 I 
V( p, I ,z) = ln
− γz .
 β( p) 
Then (1.65) becomes:
τ = β( p) R = γI .

That is, the efficient price of emissions is directly proportional to aggregate income in this
example.
Finally, consider a change in relative prices, holding real income constant. This is a pure
substitution effect. From (1.65) it is easy to obtain that marginal damage shifts up with an
increase in p. Recall that β(p) is rising in p. As p rises, goods get more expensive relative to
environmental quality. At the margin, environmental quality is now more highly valued and the
willingness of citizens to supply pollution falls.

1.6.3 Market Equilibrium

55

The equilibrium level of pollution is determined by the interaction between the pollution
demand curve and society's willingness to tolerate pollution as captured by supply:
Gz ( p, K, L, z) = N • MD( p,

G ( p , K, L, z)
N β ( p)

, z) .

(1.69)

This is illustrated in Figure 2.11. The efficient level of pollution zo is determined by the
intersection of the pollution supply and pollution demand curves. To implement this efficient
level of pollution the government can employ either a pollution tax τo or the issue zo marketable
permits which would yield an equilibrium permit price τo . Any equilibrium that can be
implemented with a tax can also be implemented with a permit system.
This figure also makes clear the link between our general equilibrium model and the
standard treatment of optimal emissions in partial equilibrium models in environmental
economics textbooks. As we noted earlier, pollution demand can be interpreted as the general
equilibrium marginal abatement costs, and pollution "supply" is simply marginal damage. That is,
optimal pollution emissions are determined by equating marginal abatement costs to marginal
damage. The difference is that in our framework, the choice of emissions z also simultaneously
determines national income G(p,K,L,z) and all factor prices, such as wages and the return to
capital are fully endogenous. Moreover, our structure allows for an examination of how shocks
to the economy as a whole, such as capital accumulation or trade liberalization, will affect
pollution via their effects on marginal abatement costs or marginal damage.

1.7 Conclusion

56

This paper has set out a general equilibrium pollution and trade model to provide a
framework for future analysis of the trade and environment debate. We have drawn quite
heavily from trade theory, but in the end have developed a simple pollution demand and supply
system featuring marginal abatement cost and marginal damage schedules. These constructs
should be familiar to environmental economists. We have intentionally kept the model quite
simple, as this should allow others to extend our analysis to consider the environmental
consequences of growth, the impact of trade liberalization, and strategic interaction across
countries.25
The framework also provides, as special cases, canonical models capturing both the
Pollution Haven Hypothesis and the Factor Endowment Hypothesis. And as demonstrated
in Antweiler et al. (2001), it yields a parsimonious reduced form suitable for empirical estimation
and hypothesis testing.

25 We have, of course, imposed some assumptions that limit our analysis in some directions. In particular,

two very important issues that we have not mentioned are the role of production externalities, and the
presence of international spillovers in pollution. For an examination of these issues see Copeland and
Taylor (1995), Brander and Taylor (1997), and Copeland and Taylor (1999).

57

References

Antweiler, A., Brian Copeland and M. Scott Taylor, "Is Free Trade Good for the
Environment," American Economic Review, 91 (2001): 877-908.
Brander, J.A. and M. Scott Taylor, “International Trade between Consumer and
Conservationist Countries”, Resource and Energy Economics, 19 (1997):267-298.
Copeland, B. and M. Scott Taylor, "N orth-South Trade and the Global Environment,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109 (1994): 755-87.
Copeland, B. and M. Scott Taylor, "Trade and Transboundary Pollution," American
Economic Review, 85 (1995): 716-737.
Copeland, B. and M. Scott Taylor, "Trade, Spatial Separation, and the Environment”, Journal
of International Economics, 47 (1999):137-168.
Copeland, B. and M. Scott Taylor, "Free Trade and Global Warming: A Trade Theory view
of the Kyoto Protocol”, NBER discussion paper No. 7657 (2000).
Dixit, A.K. and V. Norman. 1980. Theory of International Trade. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Fullerton, D. and G. Metcalf, “ Environmental Taxes and the Double-Dividend Hypothesis: Did
You Really Expect Something for Nothing?”, Chicago-Kent Law Review 73, No. 1 (1998).
Grossman G.M, and A. B. Krueger, "Environmental Impacts of a North American Free Trade
Agreement," in The US-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, P. Garber, ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1993.
Grossman G.M, and A. B. Krueger, "Economic Growth and the Environment," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, (1995): 353-377.
Grossman G. M, and E. Helpman, "Protection for Sale," American Economic Review,
September (1994): 833-850.
Stokey, N. "Are There Limits to Growth?", International Economic Review, 39 (1998):131.
Woodland, A.D. International Trade and Resource Allocation, North-Holland, Amsterdam
(1982).

58

Z
Z=F
(θ = 0)
A

X1
Xo

F

Figure 2.1

Isoquants for the X industry

Z
Z=F

A

Zo

•

Slope = - c F/τ

B
•
Xo = 1

Fo

Figure 2.2

F

Cost minimization in the X industry

Y

A

Yo

B

qF

Net
Frontier

p(1- α)
Xo

Zo

Z

D

Fo

Potential
Frontier

X

C
z = ex

z = eα/(1-α)F

Figure 2. 3 Potential and Net production frontiers

w

wo

w1
cY(w, r) = 1
cF(w, r) = q1
cF(w, r) = qo

ro

r1

r

Figure 2. 4 Producer prices and factor prices

Y

K1
Ko

Yo
Y1

L

Fo

F1

F

Figure 2.5 Effect of endowment changes on outputs

τ

το

Gz

Zo

Figure 2.6 Pollution demand

Z

Y
B
A
q
q

X
Za
Zb
Z=e0x

Figure 2.7 The Scale Effect

Y

P0

A

C
B
q

Za
Zb

q

X

Zc
Z=e0x

Z
Figure 2.8 The Composition Effect

Y

P0

C

A
B

q

q

Zc

X

Zb

Z1
Z=e1x
Za

Z

Z=e0x

Figure 2.9 The Technique Effect

τ

το

Z(τ, p, K1, L)
Z(τ, p, Ko, L)

Za

Zc

Z

Figure 2.10 Capital accumulation

τ

N•MD

το
Gz

Zo

Z

Figure 2.11 Optimal Pollution

