                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHAT ROLE FOR EMPIRICS IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE?


                                          Donald R. Davis
                                         David E. Weinstein


                                        Working Paper 8543
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w8543


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2001




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2001 by Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
What Role for Empirics in International Trade?
Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 8543
October 2001
JEL No. F1, B4



                                              ABSTRACT


        In the field of international trade, data analysis has traditionally had quite modest influence
relative to that of pure theory. At one time, this might have been rationalized by the paucity of empirics
in the field or its weak theoretical foundations. In recent years empirical research has begun to provide
an increasingly detailed view of the determinants of trade relations. Yet the field as a whole has been slow
to incorporate these findings in its fundamental worldview. In this paper, we outline and extend what we
view as key robust findings from the empirical literature that should be part of every international
economists working knowledge.




Donald R. Davis                                                   David E. Weinstein
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
Columbia University                                               Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street                                               420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027                                                New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                                          and NBER
drd28@columbia.edu                                                dew35@columbia.edu
            What Role for Empirics in International Trade?1

I. Introduction

          The centennial of Bertil Ohlin’s birth is an outstanding opportunity to reflect on

his work. One must acknowledge that much of what has come to be known as the

Heckscher-Ohlin theory of trade has been mediated by the contributions of others,

including some contributors to this volume. But none would gainsay that, even for a

specialist in the field, there is great delight and inspiration to be found in reading the

original texts. Deep economic intuition and breadth of vision grace each page. It would

not be far off the mark to observe that a great deal of the theoretical work in positive

trade in the last half century – including some of the most recent – has involved

elaboration of ideas for which Ohlin already provided interesting treatments.

          The centennial of Ohlin’s birth also provides stimulus to take the long view of our

own field of international trade. Others will be discussing theoretical developments. Our

charge is to consider empirical developments, addressing the role of theory only as it has

helped to shape this enterprise. The existence of outstanding recent surveys of empirical

trade, by some of the world’s leading empirical and theoretical researchers (cf. Leamer

1990 and Helpman 1999), allows us to forego any attempt at a comprehensive survey.

Instead, we will ask how our field has approached empirical research, how data findings

have interacted with the development of theory, and how we can strengthen the useful

interaction of the two.




1
    Prepared for the Conference on the Centennial of Bertil Ohlin’s Birth, Stockholm, October 1999.
       Our paper draws a few conclusions. Theory has been the heart of international

trade research for the past half century. And a glorious half century of theorizing it has

been! Yet this research program has been extraordinarily imbalanced. Moreover, we

believe that this imbalance is a serious problem for progress in the field as a whole.

       We take the primary objective of our field to be an understanding of the

determinants of trade patterns in the world we actually inhabit. Yet empirical analysis of

actual trade relations plays a diminutive role in the field. Our field shows little of the two-

way interplay between theory and data that is the very life of many fields of economics,

such as macro, labor, and others. We believe it is possible to maintain what is beautiful

and distinctive about our own field while enriching it in this dimension.

       One response to this may be: Write interesting data analysis and we will read it!

Leamer and Levinsohn (1995) took this perspective as an implicit starting point, looking

inward to understand why empirical research has failed to materially affect the views of

most trade economists. Such introspection for empirical researchers is both important and

necessary.

       Yet we believe that such inward looking by empirical researchers addresses only

one part of our field’s problem. We believe that there needs to be a substantial change in

the way that theorists think about data analysis. Theoreticians need to move beyond only

working with a few stylized facts to a broader encounter with the empirical work. If there

is anything that has been learned on the empirical side of trade in the last decade, it

should surely be that spectacular failures of our theories, anomalies, and inconvenient

facts are our most precious resources. Failure points the way to success – but only if we

learn to embrace and understand facts that are inconvenient for our theories.
       Our summary judgment is that, at a deep level, the field has a quite limited

empirical understanding of international trade patterns. We can say little about the

relative importance of distinct fundamental determinants of trade. Some correlates of

trade and production patterns have been established. Some work has been done on

international patterns of absorption. But such efforts remain in their infancy. Grappling

with the deeper problem of how the pieces really fit together within a world general

equilibrium has barely begun.

       One might read this and view us as relentless pessimists. This would be a mistake.

We believe that skepticism about the state of our knowledge is a very healthy stance for

researchers. But, lest we be misunderstood, let us add a few caveats. We are great

admirers of what the field has achieved in theory over this half-century and more. To

those who have written the beautiful and elegant models that constitute the very language

or our field – and you know who you are – we send our cheers! Likewise, the empirical

side of trade has a number of researchers – you also know who you are – who have

pioneered methods that provide the foundation on which others will build.

       Moreover, we see signs of hope, both in the interests of younger researchers and

in the reception these have encountered among the leaders of our field. To give only one

example, a simple survey, such as that by Helpman (1999), can be extremely important in

focusing the profession’s attention both on the achievements of the recent research and

on the outstanding questions that remain.

       Indeed, our belief is that an acknowledgement that the truly fundamental

questions remain to be resolved is, for researchers, itself a hopeful stance. We believe
that international trade economists will rise to the occasion to make our field richer and

more complete.



II. Interaction of Theory and Empirics

         The folklore of international economics holds that there is a simple difference

between the sub-fields of international finance and international trade. In international

finance, every theory ever proposed is decisively rejected by the data. In international

trade, no theory ever proposed has ever been touched by data. This is, of course, a

parody. But like many parodies, it contains a grain of truth.

         Data analysis has traditionally played a very marginal role in the field of trade.

While macro and labor economics, for example, have the interaction of data analysis and

theory as the lifeblood of the field, this has not been so in trade. This is what Trefler

(1995) had in mind when he wrote: “In other fields of economics, the poor performance

of a major theory leads to more careful consideration of the data and to new theories that

can accommodate the anomalies.” By contrast, he argued, the work in trade had by and

large only produced conjectures, but no alternatives shown to do better. Leamer and

Levinsohn (1995) argue that only two empirical results have materially affected the way

international economists think about trade.2

         The marginal role of empirics in trade is easily discerned in other fora. Graduate

reading lists typically feature only a minute selection of empirical papers relative to the

body of theory to be mastered. Theorists are vastly more likely to say that their work is


2
  The exceptions are the Leontief paradox and the demonstration by Grubel and Lloyd (1975) that a great
deal of trade is intra-industry trade. The fact that Leamer (1980) has strongly challenged Leontief’s finding
and that we believe there is serious reason to question the meaning of the Grubel-Lloyd results (see below)
indicates the limited reach of the empirical side of trade.
inspired by other theoretical work or by a few stylized facts than by any more resolute

data analysis. Perhaps the ultimate metric of the extent of the marginalization of empirics

within the field is the fact that with the last change of editorship, the Journal of

International Economics felt it necessary to institute an affirmative action plan for

empirical articles.

       Why has empirical work in trade, in contrast to other fields, had so little influence

on the evolution of the field? There is no single answer. One part of the answer is surely

that over much of the last half-century, articulation of the theory has proven very fertile

ground. Elaboration of the neoclassical theory, the great advances in commercial policy,

increasing returns, imperfect competition, trade and growth, and more recently economic

geography – these have been tremendous contributions to our understanding of

international economic relations. One certainly can’t say that the field has been sterile.

       Yet the field has nonetheless been extraordinarily unbalanced. A second reason

for this is that the project itself is rather daunting: to provide a parsimonious

characterization of the principal determinants of the structure and evolution of production

and absorption, hence trade, across countries. Of course, to say that the project is

daunting is also to say that the returns to success should likewise be high. Certainly the

limitations of the data, both in availability and quality, have been an issue. But with

improved data collection by a variety of international agencies, and their systematization

by various researchers, including Leamer and Feenstra, these constraints are declining.

       Finally, Leamer and Levinsohn (1995) make the point that the work has failed to

be persuasive because the experiments themselves were often not well formulated. This is

no doubt true, but it begs the prior question of why the self-correcting mechanisms that
lead other fields to concentrate intellectual firepower on relating the theory to the data

had relatively little effect in the field of international trade.



III. Solid Empirics, Low Impact

        Leamer has criticized many empirical papers as not having put enough intellectual

capital on the line. But this is only part of the story of the limited influence of data

analysis in our field. Many excellent empirical papers, including some by Leamer

himself, have put a lot of intellectual capital on the line, found an important tenet of

international trade theory wanting, and ended up off the radar screens of most trade

economists. In this section we will explore some results that are well established in

empirical trade, which should be part of the empirical toolkit of every trade economist,

but which have had very limited impact on the way we think about international trade.



        A. The Failure of FPE and the Role of Comparative Advantage in the OECD

        Let’s start with an important fact. It is well known that FPE fails. Wages differ

strongly across regions within countries and enormously across countries. International

economists tend to hold two stylized facts in their heads with regard to this. The first is

that wage differences are small across developed countries, and the second is that they

are large between developed and developing countries. These facts are true, but one must

also consider the magnitudes. It is not uncommon for wage differentials between

developed and developing countries to be on the order of thirty or more. However, even

in the OECD, wages vary by a factor of five. These are big numbers. Figure 1 portrays

average compensation within the OECD. Even when considering relatively wealthy
countries like Australia, Italy and the US, wages vary by a factor of two or more. The

most likely explanations for this wage disparity in the OECD are differences in labor

quality, productivity, and differences in endowments. Regardless of which of these

stories one finds most plausible, it is hard to escape the conclusion that classical

comparative advantage is likely to be quite important in the North.



       B. One Cone or Many?

       Leamer (1987) was the first to provide solid evidence that one reason for the

failure of FPE was the fact that there are multiple cones of diversification. This paper

made a clear contribution by putting some important intellectual capital on the line. If

FPE were true or if FPE failures were due to factor quality or productivity differences,

one would expect to see a linear and not quadratic relationship between country capital

labor ratios and output per worker in any given sector. His finding of a quadratic

relationship seems to us to be strong evidence against a single cone world. It is

interesting to ask why a paper like this is typically not a required reading for graduate

students. We teach both the FPE and no-FPE models but spend essentially no time

worrying about which world we occupy.

       This is especially surprising considering that other studies tend to confirm

Leamer’s (1987) basic result. Dollar, Wolff, and Baumol (1989) make the search for

multiple cones a centerpiece of their analysis. Using a somewhat different methodology

than Leamer, they find that both industry output per worker and industry capital-to-labor

ratios are highly correlated with country endowments. Indeed, the median correlation

between industry capital to labor ratios and country ratios is 0.62. Over the course of the
next decade, Davis and Weinstein (1998), and Schott (1999) confirmed this basic result

using complementary methodologies.

           A generous interpretation of why papers like Leamer (1987) don’t enter the canon

is concern with robustness. However, if this is so, one must ask why no one published a

critique. A more likely reason for the silence is that Leamer’s result is inconvenient for

trade theory. Both CRS and IRS enthusiasts love the beauty and simplicity of FPE

models. Multi-cone models are messy. It is a testament to the power of elegant theory

that few seized on the importance of these results. Even though there was strong

evidence that a particular cause for the failure of FPE is evident in international data, the

general response of trade economists, both empirical and theoretical, has been to continue

thinking in terms of FPE models.3

           Ironically, when Ohlin wrote “complete equality of factor prices is . . . almost

unthinkable and certainly highly improbable,” he got it half wrong. In spite of being

completely improbable, factor price equalization was far too easily thinkable. The fate of

Leamer (1987) illustrates a problem that empirical researchers face. Studies that put

intellectual capital on the line and confirm our preferred view of the world tend to do

much better than studies that contradict our priors.



           C. Industry Level Technical Differences in the OECD

           Another robust empirical result that tends to get pushed to the side is the role

played by Ricardian differences. There have been innumerable studies that have

demonstrated that industry-level technical differences in the OECD are large. Within this

literature, Jorgenson, Kuroda, and Nishimizu (1987) are notable in finding that even after
3
    An interesting contrast is the strong professional interest accorded Trefler (1993).
matching the international data as carefully as is possible, enormous technological

differences remain. They found that in 1985 in over two-thirds of the tradable goods

sectors they examined, productivity in Japan was either 20 % below or 20 % above the

US level. In perhaps the only trade paper to take both the theory and the data in this area

seriously, Harrigan (1997) found that these industry technological differences matter for

international specialization. Despite the plethora of studies showing industry level

technological differences are big even within the OECD, most trade economists abstract

from this when thinking about determinants of trade within the OECD.4 Again the

profession seems fairly timid about engaging the data.



           D. What is Intra-Industry Trade, Anyway?

           The evolution of our understanding of intra-industry trade illustrates the successes

and failures that occur as theorists and empirical economists communicate. Kojima

(1964) was the first economist to note the large amount of intra-industry trade. Grubel

and Lloyd (1975) expanded and greatly enhanced this early analysis and laid the

foundation for much of our thinking about the empirical importance of intra-industry

trade. Ultimately, two popular theories of intra-industry trade arose. The first, based on

Krugman (1979) and Lancaster (1980), held that intra-industry trade is the exchange of

horizontally differentiated goods produced with identical factor intensities. The second

based on Falvey (1981) suggested that intra-industry trade represents vertically

differentiated products of different factor intensity. In the end, the Krugman-Lancaster

approach to intra-industry trade became the prevailing view because it could be presented



4
    Eaton and Kortum (1999) are a notable exception
in an elegant, comprehensive, and compelling framework that tied together what were

viewed as key stylized facts.

        Interestingly, data analysis did not play much of a role in the success of the

theory. The debate revolved around two easily observable issues. First, did exports in a

sector to a country differ significantly in quality from imports from that country, and

second, were they produced using differing factor intensities? A simple test of the first

issue is straightforward. Are unit values in bilateral trade similar for exports and

imports? Interestingly, the first careful study that put this intellectual capital on the line

was not written until over a decade after the original theory. Defining goods to be

vertically differentiated if unit values at the 5-digit level differ by more than +/- 15%

Greenaway, Hine, and Milner (1994) find that 70 percent of UK intra-industry trade is

vertical. A similar study by Aturupane, Djankov, and Hoekman, (1998) found even

higher shares for vertical intra-industry trade for other European countries.

        Of course, a major worry with this sort of empirical work is whether a mechanical

cut off of +/- 15% is really separating vertical and horizontal and vertical specialization.

Obviously as the bands expand more trade will be classified as horizontal, and one is left

wondering whether this type of study is really informing us about the world. To get a

better sense of the meaning of these results, it makes sense to take a closer look at the

data. The most detailed Harmonized Tariff System data is at the ten-digit level. At this

level of aggregation, there are 11,297 different agricultural, mining, and manufacturing

product categories. Unfortunately, a quick look at these categories suggests that this is a

tremendous underestimate of the true level of heterogeneity in the world.
        Table 1 presents some sample categories that reflect products that we know

something about. What is striking about each category is how much scope for both

vertical and horizontal product differentiation there is even at the ten-digit level. Would

you feel comfortable entering a good restaurant and asking simply for a bottle of red

wine? How much should one pay for a four-cylinder passenger car and what would one

expect to receive? Would you order generic Swiss cheese on the internet and feel

confident about what would arrive? Clearly, quality differences within these 10-digit

categories may support tremendous price differences even when the varieties are sold

side-by-side.

        Consider a typical category: Men’s and boys knit wool suit-type jackets and

blazers. Even at this level of disaggregation there is still substantial intra-industry trade.

In 1994 Japan exported these jackets to 19 different countries and imported them from 31

countries. Overall, Japan’s Grubel-Lloyd index of intra-industry trade, even at this

tremendously fine division of the data, is 0.20. Interestingly, the two largest suppliers of

men’s wool suit jackets to Japan in terms of value are Italy and China. These two

countries account for almost one-quarter of total Japanese imports in this sector. This

fact alone strongly suggests that even at the ten-digit level, very different types of goods

are being aggregated together. Unit values confirm this. The typical unit value for an

Italian wool suit jacket is almost seven times higher than that of a Chinese wool suit

jacket. The unit values for Japanese exports of suit jackets are triple those of Chinese

imports. Clearly there is a lot of vertical differentiation here.

        This ad hoc analysis is easy to attack. We only picked a tiny subset of sectors and

clearly have an agenda. What if we had picked a sector that we “know” to be
homogeneous, like non-durum wheat meant for human consumption?5 Even here we find

Canadian wheat pellets entering Japan with unit values that are 23 percent above

Australian pellets. And this is wheat! If we move downstream slightly to wheat flours,

unit values skyrocket to factors of eight or more. This tends to confirm a problem with

our tendency to group products we know nothing about as being differentiated only

horizontally. Perhaps there is less quality variation in polyacetals, manure spreaders, or

bovine semen, but we think there is cause for alarm.

        What is worse is that Italian and Chinese suits are likely to be produced with very

different factor mixes. This point was made early in the debates over intra-industry trade

by Finger (1975) and Chipman (1992). More recently, Davis and Weinstein (1999)

examine the implications of this for our measures of net factor trade. If matched intra-

industry trade was the exchange of goods produced with identical technologies, the net

factor content of such trade would be zero. In fact, we find that for many OECD

countries over half of their net factor trade is accomplished through intra-industry trade.

The United States is a particularly striking example. Over two thirds of its net factor

trade is accomplished by intra-industry exchange of goods of differing factor intensity.

Much of what we call intra-industry trade is simply a data problem that reflects the

failure of our industrial classification system to capture the fact that very different goods

are being lumped together.

        To say that these studies have made little impact on the day-to-day thinking of

most trade economists is a gross understatement. A typical graduate student at a top

department is likely to believe that intra-industry trade being the exchange of goods of


5
 This category is drawn from the Commodity Classification for Japanese Tariff Statistics, which is actually
more disaggregated than the HTS system.
similar factor intensity is true simply as a matter of definition. That this bears little

relation to measured intra-industry trade does not even present itself as a problem. Such

gross errors would be inconsequential if not for the fact that they form the core around

which a great deal of theorizing occurs. And our beautiful models hold a tenacious grip

on the way we view the world.



        E. How Similar Are Endowments in the OECD?

        A final stylized fact often ignored concerns endowment similarity. It is often

asserted that OECD countries have endowments of factors that are similar. While it is

true that there has been substantial income convergence in the OECD, enormous

differences in factor abundance remain. A natural way to measure factor abundance is to

divide each country’s endowment of a factor by its share of world GDP multiplied by the

world endowment of that factor. This produces a unitless measure of abundance that

indicates what share of a factor should be exported in a frictionless FPE Heckscher-

Ohlin-Vanek world. (Note the sleight of hand – even we feel compelled to appeal to the

frictionless HOV model as a baseline! But see Davis and Weinstein (1998).)

        Table 2 reports the results of this exercise for four factors: aggregate labor,

capital, college educated labor, and labor with less than a college education. For OECD

countries, moving one standard deviation from the median often makes the difference

between a country being a predicted exporter or importer of a factor’s services. This

suggests a prima facie case in favor of endowment differences mattering even for trade

within the OECD. It is not uncommon to find countries that are in the lowest quartile

have abundances that are less than half of those in the upper quartile.
         One possible criticism of this is that countries like Mexico, Korea, and Turkey

may be driving the results. To see if this were true, we also considered a subset of 10

wealthy and large countries in the OECD (Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany,

France, Japan, Italy, Netherlands, Britain, and the United States). The data reveal

substantial differences in endowments even among these countries. The standardized US

endowment of college-educated labor is almost five times that of Italy. The United

Kingdom’s standardized endowment of non-college labor is almost double that of the

United States. And Japan’s standardized endowment of capital is almost double that of

the United Kingdom. Clearly, factor endowment differences are alive and well in the

North, although this fact seem largely ignored by the profession.



         F. How Should We Respond to Uncomfortable Facts?

         Ideally, economic theory serves in part as a way to organize key facts about the

world. Strategic simplification is essential. A consequence is that our theories are always

wrong in some dimensions – this is a necessary fact of life. But we expect them to be

right about the key facts around which they are organized. We have presented what we

view as important examples in which empirical research has had something substantive to

say about the theory, but these facts have had little influence on the way economists think

about trade. In certain cases, the romance of the models has had the upper hand on the

facts.

         We all recognize the fact that anomalies play an important role in the advance of

knowledge. But it is always more convenient for the anomalies to grow in someone else’s

garden. We think that there are important examples – e.g. the work of Trefler (1995),
discussed below – where the characterization of an anomaly has played an absolutely

crucial role in advancing our understanding of trade patterns. Perhaps the best we can do

is to all take a pledge to work harder to embrace our anomalies as the start of richer

theories.



IV. Virtually All of the Key Questions Remain Open

       One of the great joys of academic economics is to encounter an area in which the

most important questions have yet to be resolved. Surely there must have been great

excitement as it became evident that a tremendous body of industrial organization theory

could usefully be applied to problems of international trade. The same excitement no

doubt existed for an earlier generation in consideration of the neoclassical theory of

commercial policy, or more recently in work on trade and growth, political economy, or

economic geography. Often the simple recognition that an important area and its major

problems are open terrain is among the largest steps in finding answers.

       Empirical international trade, in our view, is just such a field. Virtually all of the

major questions remain quite open. Some are almost untouched. What is the role of

increasing returns versus comparative advantage in determining international trade

patterns? What role do endowments play in trade patterns beyond North-South trade?

How do technological differences at the industry or firm level interact with other

determinants of cost in shaping trade patterns? In a world of imperfect integration, how

do absorption and production patterns interact? These are absolutely fundamental

questions. They are also quite open.
        We do not mean in the least to say that the existing empirical literature has taught

us nothing about trade patterns. But it is important to understand the limitations either of

the questions asked or the answers received. We will consider a few examples.

        One of the signal successes of empirical trade is the so-called gravity model. It

relates bilateral trade volumes to a parsimonious set of determinants. It fits well whether

we look at aggregate trade volumes or instead at industry trade volumes. The fits of the

estimating equations really are impressive, with typical R2s in the range of 0.7. The

gravity model, once considered a theoretical orphan, now has several sets of parents in

waiting, with new ones arriving almost daily.6 Yet the meaning of the gravity equation’s

success for our understanding of international trade is worth closer examination.

        The core of international trade theory has always focused on the determinants of

the pattern of production as the key fact to be explained in understanding trade patterns.7

Yet the gravity model, e.g. in its industry-level approach, takes the level of production as

given, and then seeks to explain the distribution of imports across partner countries. Thus,

even if one is willing to be surprised at how well the gravity model fits, the deeper

question is what we can infer from these good fits. The fact that the empirical model

takes the distribution of production as given should make clear that it would be very hard

to use the good fit of the gravity model as evidence for one theory of the determinants of

production patterns over any other.

        The recent literature focusing on the near-universality of gravity has instead

focused on the fact that it might provide evidence of a high degree of specialization,

6
  See e.g. Deardorff (1998) on gravity in a neoclassical world and Feenstra, Markusen and Rose (1999) on
gravity with oligopolistic competition.
7
  Noteworthy exceptions exist. The Linder theory is one example, as would be the recent work on economic
geography, in which market segmentation leads to a more intimate interaction between demand and
production patterns.
whatever its source. Yet Feenstra et al. (1999) have shown that gravity can arise even in a

homogeneous goods model without a high degree of specialization. For all their good fits,

the thousands of gravity models that have been run have done relatively little to inform

our understanding of the deep determinants of trade patterns. Papers such as Feenstra, et

al. that actively seek to distinguish alternative models based on their performance in the

gravity framework are an important contribution. But this work is still far from complete.

       The literature also features important papers establishing robust correlates of

international trade and production. Stellar contributions in this genre include Leamer

(1984) and Harrigan (1997). Yet, as Leamer cautions, these represent incomplete tests of

the theory. They do not try to get the pieces to fit together. The estimated parameters do

not correspond to the structural parameters suggested by the theory.

       The interested reader is encouraged to consult the surveys by Leamer and

Levinsohn (1995) or Helpman (1999). We think our assertion will stand: virtually all of

the most important questions in empirical trade remain to be resolved.



V. The Costs of Failing to Distinguish Models Empirically

       Our understanding of the determinants of actual trade patterns is not deep. This is

a problem in its own right. It becomes a yet larger problem when we turn to normative

and policy analysis. This has been quite evident in the very extended discussion in the

United States in recent years over the reasons for the rising relative wage of skilled

workers and the role that trade may have played in this.

       Among the many leading trade economists who contributed to this discussion

were Jagdish Bhagwati and Paul Krugman. One of them wrote: “Unusually, serious
economists have not by and large argued about theory: with few exceptions they have

agreed that a more or less classical Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson model is the best

framework to use.” The other titled a section of a paper “Why FPE and [Stolper-

Samuelson] Theorems are Inadequate Guides to Reality,” with a first sub-section noting

the potential gains from exploitation of scale economies as a counterweight to concerns

about wage losses. For those who have not followed the debate closely, it might not have

been evident that the first quote comes from Krugman, the second from Bhagwati (co-

authored by Vivek Dehejia).8

          A skeptic could argue that this apparent plasticity of belief about the appropriate

underlying framework confirms that policy analysis is just ideology in fancy garb. Or, as

a Columbia economics department Christmas skit once averred, it is a case of the

assumptions following straight from the conclusions.

          Such a skeptic would miss the central point: honest disagreement about which

model should be applied in any given context, and even shifting from one to another in

different settings, is at present not only respectable but entirely necessary. One reason for

this is our reliance on MIT-style theory. This approach asks a model to be crisp and to the

point; it does not ask the model to be a picture of reality. The deep beauty and great value

of MIT-style theory is unassailable. But, as we have seen, it carries a price when it is not

accompanied by a serious effort to distinguish alternative frameworks on empirical

grounds. When turning to policy issues, it is a matter of judgment which simple model to




8
    The quotes are from Krugman (1996) and Bhagwati and Dehejia (1994).
apply. Serious economists can have honest disagreements. And these disagreements can

make all the difference for the conclusions.9

VI. What Can We Expect of Empirical Work?

         We have argued that there would be great value to arriving at a stronger

consensus about appropriate models of trade. But at least some prominent voices have

expressed skepticism about whether this is a feasible project. This raises a series of

questions. What should empirical analysis of positive trade be doing? What interaction

should there be with theory? What is the role of estimation? What is the role of testing?

What does theory have to learn from empirical work? What is the objective of this entire

enterprise? These are among the most basic questions of our field and we spend too little

energy grappling with them.

         Leamer (1990) argues that a great deal of empirical analysis fails to be persuasive

because it tests propositions that we know to be false. Models in this view are not literally

right or wrong; instead they are useful or not. While holding fast to the idea that a

persuasive data analysis must be developed in the context of a well-articulated theory,

Leamer issues the injunction: “Estimate, don’t test!”10 This is, of course, a stricture that

Leamer himself has violated -- even in some of his most influential work. This should

provide a hint that the injunction is too strong, and for a less accomplished empiricist,

could be seriously misleading about the project of empirical trade.

         The central object of empirical work in trade is narrowing the range of plausible

belief. If all ex ante plausible views are untouched as a result of an empirical analysis,

then it will strike earth with a resounding nothing. How does one place intellectual capital
9
  It is worth noting, though, that in this issue both Bhagwati and Krugman arrived at the same substantive
conclusion.
10
   See, for example, Bowen, Leamer, and Sveikauskas (1987).
on the line? Sometimes, we are simply looking for a number. We are willing to take as

given, for the exercise, the underpinnings. We want to know a plausible value for an

elasticity. We want to know a speed of adjustment. This is Leamer’s “estimation.” Such

estimation is a thoroughly important part of the enterprise. The accumulation of studies

that provide stylized facts about the economy do successively narrow the range of

plausible belief.

        Some caution, though, is warranted with a subset of such studies. It has become a

too-frequent practice to use a framework as the basis for a study, estimate parameters,

and if they are in (very gross) accord with the predictions of the theory, to pronounce it as

being “consistent” with theory xyz. Strictly, this is not incorrect, but it is often seriously

misleading. This is so particularly when virtually any theory that might be in the least

interesting is likely to yield the same or similar predictions. Why not take the extra step

and seek to identify predictions that might usefully distinguish the models?

        We also believe that the prospects for persuasive testing are more hopeful than are

indicated by Leamer. He is quite right that there is no point in testing and rejecting

propositions that we know beforehand to be false. But there is no reason to allow the

existence of pointless exercises to define our attitude to testing more generally. We are

strongly convinced that researchers can identify hypotheses in which two well-defined

theories have contrasting implications, hence in which it is possible to test. The criterion

for whether or not this is interesting has to be whether some real intellectual capital is

placed on the line via the test. Will we look differently at the world depending on the

results of the test? That there are many cases for which the answer is “no” should not

discourage us from identifying cases where the answer is “yes.” We believe that such
well-designed tests can be a crucial part of a research program that successively narrows

the range of plausible belief.

         In physics, there has long been discussion of a “theory of everything.” Its

counterpart in international trade is to give a parsimonious account of the world general

equilibrium.11 Is there a way to specify the nature of differences in technology,

endowments, tastes, plus the underlying parameters of trade costs that makes sense of

world patterns of production, absorption, and trade? That should be our aim. We believe

that the field is open for a great deal of progress.



VII. Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek is Dead; Long Live HOV!

         We believe that the project of successively narrowing the range of plausible belief

by testing is not only a hypothetical possibility but a process already under way in a

number of areas of trade. While a number of areas of inquiry could equally well have

served as a model, the focus of this conference on Ohlin and our own research

proclivities lead us to focus on recent work considering the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek

(HOV) theory.

         The work of Bowen, Leamer, and Sveikauskas (1987) is, in our opinion and that

of the larger profession, a monumental contribution to the empirics of international trade.

Very likely this is the single most widely read empirical paper on trade. We believe that

an important reason for the influence of this paper is its substantive conclusion that the

Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model has little predictive power for the measured factor content

of trade. Perhaps oddly, our opinion of the paper’s importance has little to do with its

11
   Partial equilibrium, of course, is why a dog chases its tail; general equilibrium is why the dog’s chase is
in vain.
substantive conclusions; or rather we think highly of the paper in spite of the fact that its

substantive conclusions are unconvincing.

       The major contributions of the BLS paper are several. This was the first paper to

report results on HOV for a large number of countries, based on a wide array of

endowments, trade, and technology. The sign and rank tests employed to measure the

model’s performance have become standard in the literature. Moreover, the hypothesis

testing developed in the later sections of the paper also proved to be very important in

later research, such as that of Trefler (1995).

       By far, though, the most important contribution of BLS is its conceptual grandeur:

it dares rise to the challenge of assembling all of the empirical pieces to describe a world

general equilibrium. In Leamer’s terms, it provides a “complete” test of the HOV theory,

employing data on endowments, technology, and trade. That it fails utterly to assemble

the pieces in a coherent way is wholly secondary. The attempt itself changed the field.

       The results of BLS, on their face, were devastating for the HOV theory. In their

implementation, factor abundance provides no more information than a coin flip about

which country will be measured to export services of a particular factor. What could be

more damning? In spite of their best efforts, they were unable to identify a model that

performed better.

       Faced with such results, what was the reaction of the profession? On one hand,

the results were likely difficult to accept; trade economists receive the HOV theory with

mother’s milk. It may have seemed very hard to believe that observed differences in

endowments really have no influence on net factor trade. On the other hand, the results

seemed to lend greater credibility to an emerging consensus that, however important
relative factor endowments may have been in the past, they no longer matter much in

determining trade patterns. Trade of jute for aircraft may be explained by Heckscher-

Ohlin, but the bulk of trade is among countries that hardly differ in endowments, so the

dramatic failure of HOV really presents no puzzle.

        The next real landmarks in this literature are the papers by Trefler (1993, 1995).

What is most remarkable in Trefler’s papers is that they were written at all. In the wake

of BLS, it would have been easy to conclude that the HOV theory was a dead end,

perhaps something for historians to contemplate, but not a path for new research.

Trefler’s sound judgment was that it could not be satisfying to declare the theory dead

when we really had no idea why it was failing.

        Trefler asked two key questions. The first follows up directly on the work of BLS:

are there simple amendments in the spirit of HOV that allow the theory to work? The

second is more novel (at least within empirical trade): are the failures systematic? The

latter, in particular, proved to be an extraordinarily fruitful question. And the answers

Trefler provides are striking. The most memorable regularity he identifies in the data is

what he terms the “mystery of the missing trade.” In simple terms, the measured factor

content of trade is an order of magnitude smaller than that predicted based on national

incomes and endowments. This characterization of the data has been extraordinarily

useful in focusing subsequent research on the types of amendments that might be needed

to fit the pieces of the puzzle together.12

        It seemed clear in the wake of BLS that the pure factor price equalization version

of HOV would be a dismal failure if applied to a broad cross section of countries. This


12
  For a more complete discussion of Trefler’s methodology and conclusions, see the survey by Helpman
(1999) and the references therein.
left two paths open. One approach to this is to look for ways to sidestep the problem

while continuing to work broadly within the HOV framework. This is pursued in Davis,

Weinstein, Bradford and Shimpo (DWBS, 1997). The starting point for that paper is to

ask what HOV predicts if only a subset of the world shares FPE – an FPE club. This has a

definite answer and provides the basis for tests provided a suitable FPE club can be

identified. Importantly, the focus on general equilibrium prohibits discarding information

on the rest of the world (ROW). However the ROW must be incorporated appropriately.

       We chose the regions of Japan as our FPE club. This has a number of advantages,

including the high quality and comparability of the data, and the heightened plausibility

of FPE for regions of a single country. A second important characteristic of DWBS is that

while prior work focused solely on the factor content of trade, we were able to examine

separately the HOV theories of absorption and production. This allowed us to see directly

where the failures in predicting factor contents might arise, rather than needing to rely on

indirect inferences.

       The DWBS paper replicates the failures of the theory identified in prior work for

the case in which it assumes that the whole world shares FPE. The mystery of the missing

trade is then very evident. However, it also shows that when you drop the assumption of

universal FPE, restricting this to the FPE club of Japanese regions, the results improve

dramatically. The regions export the services of their abundant factors, and they do so in

approximately the right magnitude. The mystery of the missing trade is in large measure

eliminated for the regions of Japan. Both the production and consumption theory of HOV

fare reasonably well in the Japanese data. This provides a first case of HOV working

while considering the problem within a full world general equilibrium.
       The problem of getting HOV to work while directly confronting the failure of

FPE internationally is addressed in Davis and Weinstein (1998). Prior work on an

international sample had focused on two key reasons for the failure of HOV: (1)

Countries use different techniques of production, possible reasons being efficiency

differences or a breakdown of relative FPE; and (2) the absorption theory based on

identical and homothetic preferences may be at fault. Our starting point was to note that

while the key hypotheses for the failure of HOV concerned technology and absorption,

the prior work employed only a single observation on technology (that of the US) and no

data on absorption. An obvious strategy was to assemble more data to explore the nature

of these failures directly, which should help in selecting which among the competing

hypotheses really matters in trying to get an amended HOV to work.

       For details of implementation, consult Davis and Weinstein (1998); we focus here

just on the conclusions. In line with the literature on cross-country productivity (e.g. see

Jorgenson and Kuroda 1990), efficiency differences matter. The failure of factor price

equalization matters, even within the OECD: more capital abundant countries use more

capital intensive techniques within each industry. Non-trade goods play an unexpectedly

important role, both in allowing us to make inferences about the failure of FPE, and also

by the fact that when FPE fails they tend to absorb a great deal of the “excess” factor

supplies that otherwise might have been available for factor service exports. Finally, trade

costs matter, by reducing the opportunities to arbitrage the factor price differences.

       Having directly estimated the nature of efficiency differences, the failure of FPE

and its implications for production techniques, and the role of trade costs in reducing

trade flows, how well does the model predict net factor trade? In considering the answer,
it is well to keep in mind that due to the “mystery of the missing trade,” the answer in the

prior literature is that the model correctly predicts almost nothing. Here, having taken

advantage of the new and richer data set, measured factor trade is approximately 60 to 80

percent of predicted factor trade. The mystery of the missing trade is, in large measure,

resolved. Countries export their abundant factors and they do so in approximately the

right magnitude. Suitably amended, HOV works.

       At this point, it is tempting to append a fairy-tale ending. There was a moment in

which all appeared lost for the HOV theory; now the theory has been rescued and

provides a beautiful description of the workings of international trade. However, as

devoted researchers, we do not believe in endings, fairy-tale or otherwise.

       We do, though, believe that the profession’s experience with the path of research

on HOV holds important lessons. Some of these are substantive. We do believe that

HOV, or Heckscher-Ohlin more broadly, will have to be an important component of any

empirically based attempt to understand the pattern of trade.

       Perhaps, though, the most important lessons have to do with the future approach

to research in the field of international trade. There is no reason that this should be a field

of very slight empirical content. It can preserve the traditional commitment of the field to

elegant general equilibrium modeling and at the same time make progress in terms of

matching theory and data in a coherent way. The models that emerge will surely be

composites of the various approaches in the literature to trade patterns. However, if we

use enough imagination, we can develop these hybrids so that they are both elegant in

theory and robust when confronted with data. At least that is how we conceive of the

project of future empirical research into trade patterns.
VIII. Conclusion

        The field of international trade is falling short in its central mission. That mission

is to understand the causes and consequences of trade in the world we actually inhabit.

Trade economists can justly take pride in the theoretical achievements of our field. But

these have not been matched with equally illustrious progress on the empirical side.

Indeed, data analysis has long played a marginal role in the professional life of our field.

Notable individual contributions notwithstanding, virtually all of the most important

empirical questions remain open and at times nearly untouched.

        The failure of our field to grapple seriously with empirics bears a cost. Our failure

to identify a positive model adequate to describe the principal empirical features of trade

leaves us in serious straits when we turn to policy analysis. Such analysis requires that we

specify a positive model as a foundation. It is easy to appreciate that with empirical

analysis having done so little to constrain the model that we select, such policy analysis is

likely to be highly sensitive to the analyst’s priors of which model is appropriate.

        Empirical researchers must shoulder part of the responsibility for this state of

affairs. They must insure that their exercises truly place intellectual capital at risk in order

for their analyses to be persuasive. But the field more broadly also needs to accept part of

the responsibility. For long stretches it has operated from small collections of stylized

facts that at times seem impervious to the intrusion of actual facts. Empirical analysis

with substantive insights about the features of the world we inhabit, but which are at

times inconvenient for theory, languish in obscurity.
        We do believe that there are positive models of what the field can achieve when it

is able to concentrate a larger share of its intellectual resources to investigate well-

defined empirical projects. While several ongoing research dialogues could usefully serve

as exemplars, the focus of this conference and our own research interests leads us to

focus on verification of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model. This is truly a case where the

contributions of many economists, including failures and successes for the models,

played a crucial role in shaping our view of the problem.

        The approach we suggest involves a re-conception of the collective project of our

field or, at the very least, a strong shift in priorities. Crisp, lucid theory will always play a

central role in the field. But this needs to be complemented by a serious encounter with

data. Grappling with facts revealed by the data, pressing the limits of what our models

can predict, and identifying the contours of the world should be viewed as a central part

of the program of our leading empiricists and theorists.

        This is a clarion call to a project that we see at least partly in progress. There is a

relatively small, but influential, group of well-established empiricists and theorists who

have actively undertaken research in this area or considered it at length in their own

writings. There is a larger group of younger economists who have made it a key element

of their work. It is time for each international economist to accept the challenge to make

empirical analysis a central feature of our work and dialogue. We have a world to

discover.
References
Aturupane,-Chonira; Djankov,-Simeon; Hoekman,-Bernard (1998) “Horizontal and
        Vertical Intra-industry Trade between Eastern Europe and the European Union,”
        Weltwirtschaftliches-Archiv/Review-of-World-Economics;135(1), pages 62-81.
Bhagwati, J. and Dehejia, V. (1994) “Free Trade and Wages of the Unskilled: Is Marx
        Striking Again?” in Bhagwati, J. and Kosters, M., eds. “Trade and Wages:
        Leveling Wages Down?, Washington, DC: AEI Press.
Bowen, H. et al, (1987) “Multicountry, Multifactor Tests of the Factor Abundance
        Theory,” American Economic Review, 791-809.
Chipman, John S. (1992) "Intra-Industry Trade, Factor Proportions and Aggregation," in
        Economic Theory and International Trade: Essays in Memoriam, J. Trout Rader,
        NY: Springer-Verlag.
Davis, Donald and David Weinstein, (1998) “An Account of Global Factor Trade,"
        NBER Working Paper #6785 November.
Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein (1999) “Trade in a Non-Integrated World:
        Insights From a Factor Content Study,” mimeo, Columbia University.
Davis, Donald, David Weinstein, Scott Bradford and Kazushige Shimpo. (1997) “Using
        International and Japanese Regional Data to Determine when the Factor
        Abundance of Theory of Trade Works,” with American Economic Review.
Deardorff, A. (1998) “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a
        Neoclassical World?” in J. Frankel, ed. The Regionalization of the World
        Economy,” Chicago: U. of Chicago Pr.
Dollar, D., Wolff, E. and W. Baumol. (1989) “The Factor-Price Equalization Model and
        Industry Labor Productivity: An Empirical Test across Countries,” in Feenstra,
        Empirical Methods for International Trade, 23-48.
Eaton, J. and Kortum, S. "International Technology Diffusion: Theory and
        Measurement,” International Economic Review, 40(3), 1999, 537-570.
Falvey, R. (1981) “Commercial Policy and Intra-industry Trade,” Journal of
        International Economics, 11, pp. 495-511.
Feenstra, Robert, James Markusen, and Andrew Rose (1999) “Understanding the Home
        Market Effect and the Gravity Equation: The Role of Differentiating Goods,”
        NBER Working Paper.
Finger,-J.-M. (1975) “Trade Overlap and Intra-Industry Trade,” Economic-Inquiry;13(4),
        pages 581-89.
Greenaway,-David; Hine,-Robert; Milner,-Chris (1994) “Country-Specific Factors and
        the Pattern of Horizontal and Vertical Intra-industry Trade in the UK,”
        Weltwirtschaftliches-Archiv;130(1), pages 77-100.
Grubel, P. and P. Lloyd (1975) Intra-Industry Trade: The Theory and Measurement of
        International Trade in Differentiated Products, London: Macmillan.
Harrigan, J. (1997) “Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization:
        Estimating the Neoclassical Model,” American Economic Review.
Helpman, Elhanan (1998) Explaining the Structure of Foreign Trade: Where Do We
        Stand? Weltwirtschaftliches-Archiv/Review-of-World-Economics134(4), 1998,
        pages 573-89.
Helpman, Elhanan (1999) “The Structure of Foreign Trade,” Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 13(2), pages 121-44.
Jorgenson, D. and Kuroda, M. (1990) "Productivity and International Competitiveness in
        Japan and the United States, 1960-1985" in Hulton, C. ed. Productivity Growth in
        Japan and the United States.
Jorgenson, D., Kuroda, M., and Nishimizu M. (1987) "Japan-US Industry-Level
        Productivity Comparisons, 1960-1979" in Journal of the Japanese and
        International Economies 1(1).
Kojima, K (1964) “The pattern of international trade among advanced countries,”
        Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics, pp. 16-34.
Krugman, P. (1979) “Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International
        Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 9(4), pages 469-479.
Krugman, P. (1996) “But For, As If, and So What? Thought Experiments on Trade and
        Factor Prices, Mimeo, MIT.
Lancaster, Kelvin (1980) “Intra-Industry Trade under Perfect Monopolistic Competition,”
        Journal of International Economics; 10(2), May, pages 151-75.
Leamer, E. (1980) “The Leontief Paradox, Reconsidered,” Journal of Political Economy,
        88(3).
Leamer, E. (1984) Sources of International Comparative Advantage: Theory and
        Evidence. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Leamer E. (1987) “Paths of Development in the Three-Factor, n-Good General
        Equilibrium Model,” Journal of Political Economy, 95, pages 961-999.
Leamer, E. (1990) “Testing Trade Theory,” NBER Working Paper # 3957
Leamer, E. and Levinsohn, J. (1995) “International Trade Theory: The Evidence,” in
        Grossman, G. and Rogoff,-K., eds. Handbook of international economics. Volume
        3. Handbooks in Economics, vol. 3. Amsterdam; New York and Oxford: Elsevier,
        North-Holland, pages 1339-94..
Schott, P. “One Size Fits All? Specialization, Trade and Income Inequality,” Mimeo,
        Yale, October 1999.
Trefler, D. (1993) “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!” JPE,
        101: 961-987.
Trefler, D. (1995) The Case of the Missing Trade and Other HOV Mysteries,” American
        Economic Review, 85: 1029-47.
                              Table 1
Sample Ten-Digit Data

HTS Code     Description

0201306000   Meat bovine animals, boneless ex processed, fresh or chilled
0403100000   Yogurt, sweetened, flavored or containing fruit/coco
0406904520   Cheese, swiss or emmenthaler with eye formation
0702002000   Tomatoes, fresh or chilled
0709510000   Mushrooms, fresh or chilled
0711201500   Olives, not pitted,
0808100000   Apples, fresh
0901210030   Coffee roasted not decaffeinated for retail under 2 kg
1604142020   Tuna, albacore, no oil airtight container under 7kg
1806900075   Chocolate confectionery put up for retail sale
2007991000   Strawberry jams
2204214005   Red wine grape under 14% alcohol
2208303030   Whiskies, scotch & irish, container not over 4 liters
3004906075   Cough and cold preparations
3004906020   Cardiovascular medicaments
3004400050   Dermatological agents and local anesthetics
3002200000   Vaccines for human medicine
3004400020   Anticonvulsants, hypnotics and sedatives
3004400030   Antidepressants, tranquilizers and other psychiatric agents
3926301000   Handles and knobs
4202219000   Handbags, outer surface of leather, value over $20 each
4901990050   Technical, scientific and professional books
6103110000   Men's or boys' suits of wool, knit
6104531000   W/g skirts of synthetic fibers cont 23% more wool, knit
6104622010   Women's trousers of cotton, knitted
7103910010   Rubies cut but not set for jewelry
8411919080   Parts of turbojet or turbopropeller a/c engines
8703240032   Passenger motor vehicle, 4 cylinder & under
9004100000   Sunglasses
9006530040   Camera, 35mm with built-in electronic flash
9202100000   String musical instruments played with a bow
9306900040   Bombs, grenades, torpedoes, & similar munitions of war
9503411000   Stuffed toys
9506512000   tennis rackets, strung
                                     Table 2


  Distribution of Country Measured Factor Abundances in 1990


          COUNTRY                    Total Labor   Capital      College High School
                                                               Educated and Below
                                                                Labor    Educated
                                                                          Labor

          World Average                     2.23        0.76        1.00       2.90
          World Standard Deviation          2.37        0.37        0.87       3.21
          World Median                      1.16        0.76        0.76       1.43


          G10 Average                       0.33        1.12        0.84       0.54
          G10 Standard Deviation            0.07        0.19        0.32       0.15
          G10 Median                        0.31        1.12        0.80       0.52


          OECD Average                      0.45        1.12        0.90       0.75
          OECD Standard Deviation           0.25        0.21        0.46       0.41
          OECD Median                       0.35        1.14        0.79       0.58

(Education Data is average for 1985-1990 from Barro and Lee. Total Labor and `Capital
Data is from the Penn World Tables Mark 5.6. G10 corresponds to the 10 countries in
Davis and Weinstein (1998)).
                                  Average Labor Compensation per Employee in
                                                 Manufacturing


                    M




                                  0
                                      5000
                                             10000
                                                     15000
                                                             20000
                                                                     25000
                                                                             30000
                                                                                     35000
                                                                                             40000
                                                                                                     45000
                        ex
                  Po ico
                       rtu
                           ga
                      Ko l
                           re
                              a
            N Gre
              ew          ec
                   Ze e
                       al
                          an
                              d
                       Sp
                  Au ain
                      st
                         ra
          U                 lia
           ni
             te          I
               d          t
                  Ki aly
                     ng
                         do
                             m
                    Ic
                       el
                          an
                    Fi d
                       nl
                          an
                 D
                                                                                                                                       Figure 1




                   en d
                        m
                           a
                   Sw rk
                        ed




Country
                                                                                                             Wages in Dollars (1993)




                            en
                   C
                      an
                          ad
                    Fr a
              N
                et anc
                  he          e
                      rla
                          nd
                   N          s
                      or
                         w
                   Be ay
                       lg
                 G ium
                   er
                       m
                          an
                    Au y
                         st
                            ria
            U         J ap
              ni
                te
                  d an
                     St
                         at
                            es
