NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MISMATCH BETWEEN LIFE INSURANCE HOLDINGS AND FINANCIAL
VULNERABILITIES: EVIDENCE FROM THE SURVEY OF CONSUMER FINANCES
B. Douglas Bernheim
Katherine Grace Carman
Jagadeesh Gokhale
Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Working Paper 8544
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8544
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

We are grateful to the National Institute of Aging provided financial support. Economic Security Planner
(ESPlanner) is used in this study with the permission of Economic Security Planning, Inc. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2001 by B. Douglas Bernheim, Katherine Grace Carman, Jagadeesh Gokhale and Laurence J. Kotlikoff.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Mismatch Between Life Insurance Holdings and Financial Vulnerabilities:
Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances
B. Douglas Bernheim, Katherine Grace Carman, Jagadeesh Gokhale and Laurence J. Kotlikoff
NBER Working Paper No. 8544
October 2001
JEL No. D10, G22

ABSTRACT
Using the 1995 Survey of Consumer Finances and an elaborate life-cycle model, we quantify the
potential financial impact of each individual’s death on his or her survivors, and we measure the degree
to which life insurance moderates these consequences. Life insurance is essentially uncorrelated with
financial vulnerability at every stage of the life cycle. As a result, the impact of insurance among at-risk
households is modest, and substantial uninsured vulnerabilities are widespread, particularly among
younger couples. Roughly two-thirds of poverty among surviving women and more than one-third of
poverty among surviving men results from a failure to insure survivors against an undiminished living
standard. We also identify a systematic gender bias: for any given level of financial vulnerability, couples
provide significantly more protection for wives than for husbands.

B. Douglas Bernheim
Stanford University
and NBER
bernheim@stanford.edu

Katherine Grace Carman
Stanford University
kcarman@stanford.edu

Jagadeesh Gokhale
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
jgokhale@clev.frb.org

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Boston University
and NBER
kotlikof@bu.edu

1. Introduction
The purpose of this study is to examine life insurance holdings and financial vulnerabilities among
couples over the life cycle. Two separate concerns motivate our analysis. First, there are reasons to suspect
that life insurance coverage is poorly correlated with underlying financial vulnerabilities. A well-known
insurance industry adage holds that life insurance is “sold and not bought.” Alternatively, households may
purchase long-term policies relatively early in life, and subsequently fail to adjust coverage appropriately
because of inertia and/or other psychological considerations. Second, households that purchase little or no
life insurance may leave either or both spouses at risk of serious financial consequences.
With respect to the first concern, the available evidence is limited. Using a sample of older workers
drawn from the 1992 wave of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Bernheim, et. al. [2001] documented
a startling mismatch between life insurance holdings and underlying vulnerabilities (defined as the decline
in living standard that a survivor would experience in the absence of insurance). In particular, they found
virtually no correlation between these two variables. Notably, this finding did not permit them to distinguish
between the hypothesis that insurance bears little relation to needs at the time of purchase, and the hypothesis
that households purchase long-term contracts with initially appropriate insurance coverage, but fail to adjust
this coverage through time as their circumstances change.
The second concern has received considerably more attention. One branch of the literature examines
the experience of widows. Holden, Burkhauser, and Myers [1986] and Hurd and Wise [1989] documented
sharp declines in living standards and increases in poverty rates (from 9 to 35 percent) among women whose
husbands actually passed away. A second branch of the literature projects the consequences of widowhood
for married individuals. Analyzing data gathered during the 1960s from households in middle age through
early retirement, Auerbach and Kotlikoff [1987, 1991a, 1991b] found that roughly one-third of wives and
secondary earners would have seen their living standards decline by 25 percent or more had their spouses
died. Bernheim, et. al. [2001] adopted a similar approach, but used more recent, high quality data, more

1

accurate estimates of survival-contingent income streams, and a more elaborate life cycle simulation model.
They documented significant underlying vulnerabilities among older working couples: ignoring life
insurance, one-third of secondary earners would have experienced significant (20 percent or greater) declines
in living standards had their spouses died in 1992, while one-fifth would have experience severe declines (40
percent or greater). More importantly, only one in three households in these at-risk populations held
sufficient life insurance to avert significant or severe financial consequences. While primary earners
(typically husbands) were less frequently at-risk of significant or severe consequences, they generally had
much less protection (insurance on the secondary earner’s life) for any given level of risk exposure. Notably,
none of the studies mentioned above examined uninsured exposures among younger households. This is a
significant omission, as younger couples generally have more contingent income to protect, and hence greater
underlying vulnerabilities.
In the current study, we reexamine both sets of issues using data obtained from the 1995 wave of the
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Relative to the HRS (studied by Bernheim, et. al. 2001), the primary
advantage of the SCF is that it includes adult respondents of all ages. This permits us to extend the existing
literature by examining financial vulnerabilities and life insurance coverage at all stages of the life cycle.
This extension comes at a cost, as the SCF data are in some ways less comprehensive. Most notably,
matching Social Security earnings histories are not available for the SCF sample.
Following Bernheim, et. al. [2001], we adopt a concrete and easily understood yardstick for
quantifying financial vulnerabilities: the percentage decline in an individual’s sustainable living standard that
would result from a spouse’s death.1

The use of this yardstick permits us to make apples-to-apples

comparisons of vulnerabilities across households, and to investigate correlations between vulnerabilities and
insurance coverage. We also compare actual life insurance holdings to a natural benchmark, defined as the

1

To calculated this decline, we make use of an elaborate life cycle model. The model is embodied in
financial planning software, Economic Security Planner (or ESPlanner). Economic Security Planning, Inc. provides
free copies of the software for academic research. For additional information, consult www.ESPlanner.com.

2

level of coverage required to assure survivors of no change in their sustainable living standard. It is worth
emphasizing that we do not regard this benchmark as a definitive standard of adequacy or rationality.
Rational decision makers may elect to purchase either higher or lower levels of insurance. However, when
combined with other evidence on household objectives, comparisons with the benchmark potentially shed
light on the adequacy of life insurance coverage.
With respect to the first issue, we corroborate the previous finding of Bernheim, et. al. [2001] (based
on the HRS) that there is little correlation between financial vulnerabilities and life insurance holdings. Our
analysis further illuminates this issue by demonstrating that the correlation is essentially zero throughout the
entire life cycle. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that life insurance bears little relation to needs
at the time of purchase; however, it tends to refute the hypothesis that households purchase long-term
contracts with initially appropriate insurance coverage, but fail to adjust this coverage through time as their
circumstances change.
With respect to the second issue, we find that uninsured vulnerabilities are considerably greater
among younger couples. This is particularly noteworthy because, as mentioned above, younger couples
were not included in previous studies. Nearly two-thirds of secondary earners between the ages of 22 and
39 have significant uninsured financial vulnerabilities (projected reductions in living standards exceeding
20 percent), and nearly one-third have severe uninsured vulnerabilities (projected reductions exceeding 40
percent). Moreover, for this age group, only one in five households with at-risk secondary earners (those
who would experience significant or severe declines in living standard upon the death of their spouse,
ignoring insurance) held sufficient life insurance to avert significant or severe financial consequences. For
the entire sample, in the absence of life insurance, 56 percent of secondary earners and 6 percent of primary
earners would have experienced significant or severe declines in living standard upon the death of a spouse.
Actual life insurance holdings reduce these figures to, respectively, 42 percent and 5 percent. Thus, the
overall impact of life insurance holdings on financial vulnerabilities among at-risk households is modest.

3

Roughly two-thirds of poverty among surviving women and more than one-third of poverty among surviving
men resulted from a failure to ensure survivors of an undiminished living standard through insurance.
We also find evidence of a significant gender bias in life insurance holdings. Specifically, for any
given level of financial vulnerabilities, couples provide significantly more protection for wives than for
husbands. For example, couples with severely at-risk wives on average hold $166,628 of life insurance,
while couples with severely at-risk husbands on average hold only 15 percent of this amount ($24,827). :Life
insurance reduced the average impact of a husband’s death on the living standard of a severely at-risk wife
from a 65.5 percent decline to a 47.6 percent decline. In contrast, life insurance reduced the average impact
of a wife’s death on the living standard of a severely at-risk husband by a much smaller amount, from a 68.4
percent decline to a 64.1 percent decline.
The paper proceeds as follows: section 2 discusses methods, section 3 describes the data, section 4
presents basic results, section 5 provides sensitivity analysis, and section 6 concludes.
2. A Strategy for Measuring Financial Vulnerabilities
A. Concepts
We clarify our strategy for measuring financial vulnerabilities through an example. Imagine that a
husband and wife each live for at most two years (equivalently, they are within two years of maximum
lifespan). Both are alive initially, but either may die before the second year. The household’s well-being
depends on consumption in each year and survival contingency. As discussed further below, we allow for
the possibility that some ongoing expenditures are either exogenous or determined early in life by “sticky”
choices. We refer to these expenditures as “fixed consumption,” and to residual spending as “variable
consumption.” Let y1 denote initial assets plus first period earnings net of fixed consumption, and let y2s
denote second period earnings net of fixed consumption in state s = W, H, B, where the state identifies
survivors (wife, W, husband, H, or both, B). The couple divides first period resources between variable

4

consumption, c1, saving, A, and insurance premiums, piLi, i = H, W, where Li represents the second-period
payment to i if his or her spouse dies, and pi denotes the associated price per dollar of coverage. Assets A
earn the rate of return r. The couple faces the following constraints: c1 = y1 - A - pWLW - pHLH, c2B = y2B +
A(1+r), and c2i = y2i + A(1+r) + Li for i = W, H, where c2i denotes second period variable consumption in
state i (for the moment, we ignore non-negativity restrictions on life insurance and assets) Defining
, these equations imply:

(1)

We equate living standard with per capita variable consumption adjusted for family composition.
To determine each individual’s living standard when both are alive, we divide variable consumption by a
factor 2". We assume that 0 < " # 1; the second inequality reflects economies of scale associated with
shared living expenses. To maintain a living standard that is constant across time and states of nature (in
other words, one that is undiminished if and when either spouse dies), the couple must spend 2"C dollars in
every period and state where both are alive for every C dollars in any state where only one survives. From
(1), it is apparent that the household’s highest sustainable living standard is:

(2)

The couple can guarantee that spouse j’s death will not diminish i’s living standard from its highest
sustainable level, c*, by purchasing a life insurance policy with face value

.2

We measure underlying financial vulnerabilities by comparing an individual’s highest sustainable
living standard, c*, with

, which represents the living standard he or she would enjoy if

2

In the special case where the household has Leontief preferences (defined over per capita adjusted
expenditures), this is also the utility maximizing outcome.

5

widowed, ignoring life insurance.

We define the variable IMPACT (ignoring insurance) as

, i = W,H. This is a measure of the percent by which the survivor’s living standard would,
with no insurance protection, fall short of or exceed the couple’s highest sustainable living standard.
Similarly, we measure uninsured financial vulnerabilities by comparing c* with

,

which represents the living standard that the individual would actually enjoy if widowed, based on actual
life insurance coverage,

. We define the variable IMPACT (actual) as

. This is a

measure of the percent by which the survivor’s living standard would, given actual levels of coverage, fall
short of or exceed the couple’s highest sustainable living standard. The IMPACT variables are based on a
concrete and easily understood yardstick for quantifying the consequences of a spouse’s death.3 We also
compare actual household life insurance holdings,

, with the benchmark level,

.

For the preceding example, we implicitly assumed that individuals could borrow at the rate r and
issue survival-contingent claims at the prices pH and pW. As a practical matter, households encounter
liquidity constraints. They are also typically unable or at least very reluctant to purchase negative quantities
of life insurance (buy annuities).4 In solving for each household’s highest sustainable living standard, we
take these restrictions into account, smoothing consumption to the greatest extent possible.5
When the life insurance constraint binds, the benchmark living standard for a survivor,

(where

i = H or W), may be greater than the benchmark living standard for the couple while both spouses are still

3

Note that, when actual life insurance is below the benchmark, the intact couple saves on insurance
premiums, so its actual consumption exceeds c*. Hence, the IMPACT variables understate the change in living
standard that an individual experiences upon a spouse’s death. However, since life insurance premiums typically
account for a small fraction of expenditures, the degree of understatement is small.
4

A non-negativity constraint for life insurance purchases is equivalent to the restriction that life annuities are
not available for purchase at the margin. For further discussion, see Yaari (1965), Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981), and
Bernheim (1987).
5

Formally, one can think of the outcome that we identify as the limit of the solutions to a series of utility
maximization problems in which the intertemporal elasticity of substitution approaches zero. In the limit (the
Leontief case), the household is actually indifferent with respect to the distribution of consumption across any years
in which its living standard exceeds the minimum level.

6

alive,

. This observation raises the following practical issue: when calculating IMPACT, should we set
, or

? Were we to use

, actual IMPACT would be positive not only for households

that depart from the benchmark by purchasing additional insurance (

), but also for constrained

households that conform to the benchmark by purchasing no insurance (
use of

implies that actual IMPACT is positive when

). In contrast, the

and zero when

. Since

we wish to use actual IMPACT as a measure of the extent to which a household deviates from the
consumption-smoothed benchmark, we therefore select

rather than

. As a result, the value of

IMPACT ignoring insurance is always non-positive (even though, absent insurance, the survivor’s material
living standard might actually increase upon his or her spouse’s death), and it equals zero whenever the
corresponding benchmark insurance level,

, is zero.

B. Implementation
We actually evaluate each household’s financial vulnerabilities using a more elaborate and realistic
life cycle model. As mentioned previously, the model is embedded in a financial planning software program,
Economic Security Planner (or ESPlanner). Although a complete description of the model would be
prohibitively lengthy, it is important to summarize some key features.6
For our base-case calculations, we assume that each individual lives to a maximum age of 95. We
include children as members of the household through age 18. We represent household scale economies as
follows: an expenditure of (N + $K)"C, when there are N adults and K children in the household provides
the same standard of living for each household member as does an expenditure of C when there is only one
adult in the household (this generalizes the adjustment factor used in our simple illustration). The coefficient

6

The software has many capabilities that we do not make use of here due to data limitations. For example,
it can account for a variety of special expenditures (college education, weddings, etc.), plans to change homes,
various kinds of state contingent plans (e.g. a non-working wife plans to return to work and spend less on a child’s
education if her husband dies), and estate plans (including intended bequests).

7

$ is a child-adult equivalency factor; we set it equal to 0.5.7 The exponent " captures economies of scale
in shared living. We set it equal to 0.678, which implies that a two-adult household must spend 1.6 times
as much as a one-adult household to achieve the same living standard.8
Insurance needs depend on differences in survival-contingent income streams. Consequently, a
careful and thorough treatment of the social security system is essential. In calculating benefits for
retirement, survivors, parents, children, spouses, and dependent children, the model accounts for eligibility
rules, early retirement reductions, delayed retirement credits, benefit re-computation, the legislated phased
increase in the normal retirement age, the earnings test, restrictions on maximum family benefits, the wage
indexation of average indexed monthly earnings, and the price indexation of benefits once they are received.
Various characteristics of the tax system, such as rate structure and the treatment of married couples,
can alter insurance needs by influencing the distribution of after-tax income across the various survival
contingencies. Consequently, a careful treatment of taxation is also critical. The model calculates federal
and state income and payroll taxes for each year in each survival contingency.9 It incorporates a wide range
of provisions, including federal deductions and exemptions, the decision to itemize deductions, the taxation
of social security benefits, the earned income tax credit, the child tax credit, the phase-out at higher income
levels of itemized deductions, and the indexation of tax brackets to the consumer price index. In computing
federal deductions, it determines whether the sum of state income taxes, mortgage interest payments, and
property taxes is large enough to justify itemization. Contributions to tax-favored retirement savings accounts

7

Our child-adult equivalency factor is that used by the OECD (see Ringen, 1991). Nelson’s (1992) work
suggests a smaller value, but she considers total household expenditures whereas our child-adult equivalency factor
applies only to non-housing consumption expenditure; for our base-case results, we treat housing expenditure as
inflexible. It appears from Nelson’s work that a higher equivalency factor is appropriate for non-housing
expenditures.
8

The OECD uses a value of 0.7 for " (see Ringen, 1991). Williams, et. al. (1998) consider values of 0.5 for
both " and $.
9

The SCF does not contain data on the state of residency. Therefore, we assume all households reside in
Massachusetts.

8

are excluded from taxable income, and withdrawals are included. Though the model determines total saving
simultaneously with life insurance, tax-favored saving is specified exogenously.
Choices concerning housing may also affect life insurance needs. Unlike many other expenditures,
housing outlays are not easily smoothed. It is difficult to scale mortgage, property tax, and insurance
payments up and down with other expenditures. Cost and inconvenience discourage many households from
moving or refinancing mortgages; others form psychological attachments to their homes, and resist changing
residences prior to death (Venti and Wise, 2000). Moreover, few households access the equity in their homes
through refinancing or reverse annuity mortgages (Caplin, 2000). Consequently, for our base-case
calculations, we treat housing as fixed consumption. In effect, we assume that couples and survivors remain
in the same home until death, and die with home equity intact. Formally, we subtract housing expenses from
income off-the-top, itemizing mortgage interest and property taxes as deductions for federal income tax
purposes when it is optimal to do so, prior to smoothing variable consumption.
Several potentially important factors are omitted from our analysis. We do not model uncertainty
concerning future income and non-discretionary expenses (e.g. medical care). Since small groups of
individuals can share risks to some extent, the adverse effect of uncertainty on living standard is probably
greater for widows and widowers than for couples. For this reason, our analysis tends to understate insurance
needs. We also neglect the possibility that an individual might remarry after a spouse’s death. The extent
to which remarriage mitigates the financial consequences of a spouse’s death depends on one’s view of the
marriage market.10 Although relatively few elderly individuals remarry after the death of a spouse (see
Bernheim, et. al. [2001]), remarriage is more common among younger households.
Table 1 summarizes some illustrative life insurance calculations.11 We begin with a couple

10

See Lundberg (1999) for a discussion.

11

For additional examples, and for comparisons with recommendations generated by Quicken Financial
Planner, see Gokhale, Kotlikoff, and Warshawsky (1999).

9

consisting of a 40 year-old man earning $45,000 per year, and a 38 year-old woman earning $25,000 per year.
The man intends to retire at age 64, the woman at age 63. They have two children, ages 5 and 7. The net
value of their non-housing assets is $50,000; in addition, they own a $150,000 home, and have an unpaid
mortgage balance of $120,000. They expect their real earnings to grow at the rate of one percent per year
until retirement. They also expect to earn a real after-tax return of 3 percent on their non-housing
investments. According to our model, this couple must purchase $285,922 in term insurance on the
husband’s life, and no insurance on the wife’s life, to ensure each potential survivor of an undiminished
living standard. The remainder of the table illustrates the sensitivity of insurance needs to changes in various
household characteristics and economic parameters. As one would expect, benchmark life insurance falls
with age and with the earnings of the insured spouse; it rises with the addition of a child, with an increase
in the rate of earnings growth, and with a reduction in the real interest rate (these last two changes increase
the present discounted value of future human capital). There is one surprising finding: benchmark insurance
also rises with the removal of one child. This result is attributable to the associated changes in social security
survivor benefits, which are quantitatively important for the hypothesized family. For an otherwise identical
family with high income (for which social security survivor benefits are less important), benchmark
insurance rises monotonically with the number of children.
C. Interpretation
We do not regard any single measure of financial vulnerability as ideal. Though elaborate, the life
cycle model used in our analysis is still an abstraction, and we have imperfect information concerning the
economic circumstances of each household (see the Appendix). Nor do we regard the benchmark level of
life insurance as an objective standard of adequacy or rationality. Optimal insurance coverage depends on
a variety of considerations, including (but not limited to) the manner in which marginal utilities vary across
survival states, the weights that households attach to the well-being of each family member, degrees of risk
aversion, and load factors (more generally, the degree to which the industry departs from actuarially fair

10

pricing). Consequently, it is possible to rationalize a wide range of behaviors.
Nevertheless, the absence of a significant correlation between life insurance and financial
vulnerabilities (measured by benchmark life insurance) would be difficult to reconcile with theories of
rational financial behavior. Even if a household places less weight on the well-being of a particular spouse,
and even if it must pay actuarially unfair rates, it should still obtain greater insurance protection when the
spouse in question is exposed to more severe financial consequences. To explain the absence of a
correlation, one would need to believe either that our measure of benchmark life insurance is largely
unrelated to underlying vulnerabilities, or that marginal utilities vary in a way that just offsets the differences
in measured vulnerabilities. Both possibilities strike us as improbable.
Evidence of widespread and substantial uninsured vulnerabilities (as measured by actual IMPACT
or by the divergence of actual insurance from the benchmark) are also more difficult to rationalize than it
might at first appear. Most potential explanations presuppose that households deliberately choose different
living standards for survivors. Yet this premise is inconsistent with preliminary findings from a financial
planning case study at Boston University, involving nearly 500 subjects. Each of these individuals
constructed a comprehensive financial plan using the same financial planning software employed in the
current study. Participants hoped to benefit from these sessions, and therefore had strong incentives to
provide accurate information. Though the software permits users to specify different living standards for
intact couples and each potential survivor, the vast majority of subjects selected the same living standard for
each contingency.12 While it is perfectly rational for individuals to have other objectives, it is irrational for
individuals with these objectives to purchase coverage that diverges significantly from our benchmark
(assuming, of course, that the benchmark is derived from a model that correctly depicts all important aspects
of the household’s opportunity set).

12

Even with risk aversion, such choices are reasonable if load factors are low. For evidence on load factors
in the context of life annuities, see Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky, and Brown (1999).

11

3. Data
The 1995 wave of the SCF was fielded between June and December 1995. It surveyed over 4000
households, with oversampling of the wealthy.13 The data cover demographics, income, wealth, debt and
credit, pensions, attitudes about financial matters, the nature of various transactions with various types of
financial institutions, housing, real estate, businesses, vehicles, health and life insurance, current and past
employment, current social security benefits, inheritances, charitable contributions, education, and retirement
plans. The architects of the SCF data files imputed missing information, supplying five “implicates” for each
household.14 We use the first implicate.
Our final sample consists of 1,033 couples. We excluded couples for the following reasons: a) a
spouse was self employed or owned and actively managed a business (67 percent of excluded observations);
b) a spouse was temporarily unemployed (11 percent); c) neither spouse had regular earnings as an employee
(54 percent); d) labor earnings were defined in terms of a unit other than time worked, for example by the
piece (0.7 percent); e) mortgage information was inconsistent (7.4 percent); f) property taxes were greater
than 5 percent of the value of the home (2.6 percent); g) a spouse was over the age of 85 (1.6 percent); or h)
the couple’s reported income and other economic resources were insufficient to support its reported fixed
expenditures (3.3 percent).15
Accurate measurement of life insurance coverage is, of course, particularly critical for our analysis.
Fortunately, the SCF data match up reasonably well with other sources of information concerning this
variable. In table 2, we make some comparisons between statistics on life insurance coverage (including all
individual and group policies) drawn from the SCF and from a survey fielded by the Life Insurance
Marketing Research Organization (LIMRA), an authoritative industry source. Generally, the figures are quite
13

The SCF sampled 2,874 married couples and 1,425 single individuals.

14

Kennickell (1991) provides a description of the imputation procedure.

15

Note that some households fall into more than one category.

12

close. Certainly, there is no indication that the SCF understates life insurance coverage. It is, of course,
possible that households underreported certain forms of insurance (e.g. employer-provided policies) in both
surveys. As an additional check on the validity of the data, we computed the aggregate amount of in-force
life insurance implied by the SCF survey responses, and compared this with total in-force life insurance
reported by the industry (obtained from the American Council on Life Insurance [1999]). Since the latter
figure is derived directly from company records, it is presumably reliable. The SCF survey data accounts
for roughly 81 percent of aggregate in-force life insurance ($9.52 trillion out of $11.70 trillion). Since some
life insurance policies are owned by companies, trusts, and foreign individuals rather than by U.S.
households, the SCF figure appears to be in the right ballpark.
An important limitation of the SCF is that it contains information only on the total amount of life
insurance held by each household, and not on the division of this insurance between spouses. Using data
from the 1992 Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), we estimated a regression equation explaining the
fraction of a couple’s total life insurance held on the life of the husband as a function of the age of each
spouse, the husband’s earnings, the husbands share of the couple’s total non-asset income, family size, and
the husband’s share of the couple’s total benchmark life insurance. We then used this regression to impute
the fraction of total insurance held on the life of each spouse for every couple in the 1995 SCF. Because we
do not wish to rely on these imputations more than is necessary, much of our analysis concerns household
aggregates. This approach is somewhat different from that of Bernheim, et. al. [2001], who treated an
individual spouse as the unit of analysis throughout.
4. Results
Table 3 provides a variety of summary statistics, including some simple information on insurance
coverage. According to figures in panel A, the average benchmark level of life insurance for a household
exceeded actual life insurance holdings by a wide margin (more than two-to-one for the mean, and nearly

13

three-to-one for the median). Panel B indicates that the average level of insurance actually held on the lives
of husbands and primary earners diverged sharply from the average benchmark, whereas the average level
of insurance actually held on the lives of wives and secondary earners was quite close to the average
benchmark.16 This implies that, on average, wives and secondary earners faced substantial uninsured
vulnerabilities, whereas husbands and primary earners did not.
In the second-to-last line of panel B () liv. std., ignore ins.), we tabulate means and medians for
IMPACT calculated as if each household held no life insurance. This variable measures underlying financial
exposure. Without insurance, the average living standards for surviving husbands, wives, primary earners,
and secondary earners would have been, respectively, 5.7 percent, 28.6 percent, 3.8 percent, and 30.5 percent
below their benchmark levels. Since the corresponding medians for husbands and primary earners are zero,
we can infer that more than half of these individuals were not at-risk of a reduction in sustainable living
standard. Likewise, since the corresponding median living standard reductions for wives and secondary
earners were 21.5 percent and 24.6 percent, respectively, we conclude that more than have of these
individuals confronted significant underlying vulnerabilities.
In the final line of panel B () liv. std., actual), we tabulate means and medians for IMPACT based
on actual insurance holdings. This variable measures uninsured financial exposure. Life insurance reduced
the mean value of IMPACT by roughly 40 percent for wives and secondary earners. The decline in the
median value of IMPACT for secondary earners is a bit larger, while the proportional decline in median
IMPACT for wives is closer to two-thirds. For husbands and primary earners, life insurance had a relatively
minor absolute effect on mean and median IMPACT, but the average underlying vulnerabilities were small
for these groups to begin with.
Based on these initial findings, one might be inclined to conclude that, on average, life insurance

16

It is important to bear in mind that we have imputed the shares of a household’s insurance held on the
lives of each spouse, as described in section 3.

14

addresses between 40 percent and 50 percent of the underlying exposure for the most vulnerable spouse.
However, this conclusion is premature. Underlying financial exposures vary dramatically across households.
From an inspection of averages (table 3), one cannot determine whether the distribution of insurance holdings
matches up with the distribution of exposures. As we will see, the averages mask a startling mismatch
between vulnerabilities and insurance holdings. Moreover, simple averages also fail to reveal substantial
uninsured vulnerabilities for sizable minorities of husbands and primary workers.
Table 4 provides a first glimpse at the relation between benchmark insurance and actual insurance
across households. In panel A, we group households into four categories based on the benchmark insurance
level. As indicated in the second column, similar fractions of the data sample fall into each of these groups.
The figures in the third column suggest that there is practically no relationship between benchmark insurance
and the likelihood of holding insurance. In this sense, the decision to obtain insurance appears to be
uncorrelated with underlying vulnerabilities. The fourth and fifth columns permit comparisons between the
medians of benchmark insurance and actual insurance for each of the four groups. There is perhaps a small
correlation across groups between insurance purchases and the benchmark. A similar conclusion follows
from a comparison of means (columns 6 and 7), though the average level of actual insurance for those with
no underlying vulnerabilities (benchmark insurance of zero) is anomalously large.
Though there is some indication that benchmark insurance is mildly correlated with actual insurance,
the proper interpretation of this correlation is unclear. From panel A, it is apparent that differences in the
median and mean levels of actual insurance across groups correspond reasonably closely to differences in
median household income (second-to-last column). Consider the alternative hypothesis that households with
more income mechanically acquire more insurance without much deliberate consideration of vulnerabilities
and needs. It is reasonable to entertain this possibility because many employers automatically provide life
insurance equal to some multiple of salary, and because life insurance agents frequently base
recommendations on simple rules of thumb involving multiples of earnings. This hypothesis would account

15

for the positive correlation between benchmark and actual insurance levels among those for whom the
benchmark is positive. Moreover, it would explain the otherwise anomalously high levels of insurance
holdings among those for who benchmark insurance is zero (and who also tend to have higher incomes).
Panel B of table 4 contains the same information as panel A, except that insurance levels are
expressed as ratios to household earnings. This serves as a rough control for earnings, and permits us to
evaluate the extent of the relationship between benchmark and actual levels of insurance that exists
independently of the mechanical “income effect” hypothesized in the preceding paragraph. Once again, we
divide the sample into four groups of roughly equal sizes (as indicated in the second column). Though the
percent insured rises slightly with the ratio of benchmark insurance to earnings across the first three groups,
it is lowest for the most vulnerable group (those with ratios of benchmark insurance to earnings in excess
of 8). Moreover, regardless of whether one looks at medians (columns 4 and 5) or means (columns 6 and
7), the correlation across groups between the ratio of benchmark insurance to earnings and the ratio of actual
insurance to earnings is weak at best. These observations suggests that the small correlation between
benchmark and actual insurance levels noted in our discussion of panel A results from an income effect, and
not from deliberate evaluation of other factors affecting vulnerabilities.
Table 5 summarizes the relationship between benchmark and actual levels of life insurance through
some simple univariate regression models. Panel A presents results based on levels of life insurance, while
panel B examines ratios of life insurance to earnings. In each panel, we estimate the equation of interest
using three different methods: OLS, Tobit (to check for potential biases arising from the sizeable fraction
of households who hold no insurance), and median regression (to check for sensitivity to outliers). In
addition, we also estimate a Probit model explaining the likelihood that a household’s actual insurance
holdings are strictly positive.
In panel A, we find that a one-dollar increase in the benchmark tends to coincide with a 22 cent
increase in actual insurance holdings. For each of the three methods employed, we estimate this coefficient

16

with considerable precision. Households with higher levels of benchmark insurance are also more likely to
hold strictly positive insurance, but the difference is not statistically significant. In panel B, we find that the
correlations noted in panel A result almost entirely from systematic differences in income. The ratio of
benchmark insurance to earnings is almost completely unrelated to the ratio of actual insurance to earnings,
and is in fact negatively related to the likelihood of holding insurance.
The logic of examining simple univariate regressions is that benchmark insurance functions as a
sufficient statistic for the full range of factors – ages of spouses, number of children, division of earnings
between spouses, and so forth – that determine underlying vulnerabilities. Certainly, it would not be sensible
to control for all of the factors affecting vulnerabilities, as this would leave no residual variation in
benchmark insurance from which to identify the covariation with actual insurance.
There are, however, valid reasons to investigate the correlation between benchmark and actual levels
of insurance conditional upon a subset of the factors that determine vulnerabilities. As mentioned at the
outset of this paper, Bernheim, et. al. [2001] previously documented the absence of a correlation between
insurance holdings and vulnerabilities among older workers. One of our primary objectives is to distinguish
between two alternative explanations for this pattern: that insurance purchases are largely uncorrelated with
vulnerabilities, or that households purchase long-term policies based on vulnerabilities relatively early in life,
but subsequently fail to adjust coverage appropriately because of inertia and/or other psychological
considerations. To accomplish this objective, we must study the relationship between life insurance and
underlying vulnerabilities conditional on age.
The final column of panels A and B in table 4 provide a separate reason to control for age. Note that
both the absolute value of benchmark insurance and the ratio of the benchmark to household earnings decline
sharply with the couple’s average age (defined as the average of the husband’s and wife’s ages). This stands
to reason, since younger individuals generally have more future human capital to protect. Now consider the
following two-part hypothesis: (1) young individuals tend to procrastinate with respect to decisions

17

concerning life insurance, and (2) when they finally obtain insurance, the amount purchased is closely related
to vulnerabilities. Since younger households have greater vulnerabilities, the first portion of the hypothesis
would tend to create a negative correlation between insurance holdings and underlying vulnerabilities. In
principle, this could obscure the positive correlation implied by the second portion of the hypothesis.
Table 6 contains various regressions in which we control for the effects of age. In each case, the
dependent variable is the ratio of actual life insurance to household earnings.17 There are two separate sets
of results. For the first four regressions, we include linear and quadratic terms in the couple’s average age
(defined as above), as well as an interaction term between age and the ratio of benchmark life insurance to
household earnings. The interaction term permits us to investigate the hypothesis that the correlation
between insurance holdings and vulnerabilities changes with age.

If households initially purchase

appropriate levels of insurance but subsequently fail to adjust their holdings as circumstances change, we
would expect to obtain a positive coefficient for the benchmark insurance term, and a negative coefficient
for the interaction term. For the last four regressions in table 6, we adopt a more flexible functional
specification. In particular, we divide the population into five age groups, and control both for age-group
dummies and for interactions between these dummies and the benchmark-insurance-to-earnings ratio. This
is equivalent to estimating a separate univariate regression for each age group. At the bottom of the table,
we report test statistics for two hypotheses. The first is that there is no relationship between actual insurance
and benchmark insurance at any age. The second is that the relationship between actual insurance and
benchmark insurance does not change systematically with age.
In the first three specifications of table 6, the coefficient of the benchmark-insurance-to-earnings
ratio is small, slightly negative, and statistically insignificant, while the insurance-age interaction term is
indistinguishable from zero. This implies that there is essentially no relationship between actual insurance

17

Scaling the insurance variables by earnings is, of course, a perfect control for earnings only if the earnings
elasticity of insurance purchases is unity. When an earnings variable (either levels or logs) is added to the list of
explanatory variables for any specification in table 5, the results described below change relatively little.

18

and benchmark insurance at any age. The test statistics at the bottom of the table confirm this impression.
For the fourth specification (a probit model), the coefficient of the benchmark-insurance-to-earnings ratio
is negative and marginally significant, while the coefficient of the interaction term is positive but
insignificant. One rejects the hypothesis that vulnerabilities (as measured by benchmark insurance) have no
effect on the likelihood of holding insurance at any age, but the direction of the effect is counterintuitive: the
probit coefficients imply that the likelihood of holding insurance is negatively correlated with benchmark
insurance for households under 100 years of age.
Regression results based on a more flexible functional specification tell a similar story. The agespecific benchmark insurance coefficients are generally small, frequently negative, and almost always
insignificant. For the OLS and Tobit specifications, one cannot reject the joint hypothesis that there is no
significant correlation between benchmark insurance and actual insurance at any age. In every specification,
we fail to reject the hypothesis that this correlation does not vary significantly with age.
Table 7 provides further information on the distributions of the IMPACT variables. Recall that the
measurement of actual IMPACT requires us to impute the share of household insurance held on the life of
each spouse. As discussed previously, ignoring insurance, IMPACT is never strictly greater than zero. This
reflects the fact that we have imposed a non-negativity constraint on life insurance purchases. An
individual’s living standard may rise upon a spouse’s death; however, without life insurance, it cannot exceed
the living standard that the he or she would enjoy as a survivor assuming implementation of the (constrained)
benchmark financial plan. Note also that actual IMPACT is exactly equal to zero for a substantial fraction
of the population. Generally, these are individuals for whom actual and (model-generated) benchmark levels
of insurance protection are both zero.
From table 7, it is once again evident that insurance holdings match up rather poorly with financial
vulnerabilities. Overall, 36.8 percent of wives, 64.1 percent of husbands, 32.0 percent of secondary earners,
and 68.8 percent of primary earners had strictly positive life insurance protection despite the fact that they

19

would have experienced increases in living standards upon the deaths of their spouses (in Table 7, those with
actual IMPACT greater than zero). Insurance reduced the fraction of individuals at-risk of severe financial
consequences (defined as a decline in living standard of 40 percent or greater) from 31.0 percent to 19.3
percent for wives, from 32.5 percent to 20.6 percent of secondary earners, from 3.5 percent to 2.9 percent
of husbands, and from 1.9 percent to 1.6 percent for primary earners. Similarly, insurance reduced the
fraction of individuals at-risk of significant financial consequences (defined as a decline in living standard
of 20 percent or greater) from 51.9 percent to 37.9 percent for wives, from 55.9 percent to 41.7 percent for
secondary earners, from 10.0 percent to 8.5 percent for husbands, and from 6.0 percent to 4.7 percent for
primary earners. Roughly speaking, only 15 to 25 percent of households with significant financial exposures
held sufficient life insurance to avert significant consequences for survivors.
Table 8 provides further information on the extent to which insurance mitigates financial
vulnerabilities. We subdivide the population based on underlying financial exposure, measured by the value
of IMPACT, ignoring insurance. For each subgroup, we then calculate the means of both IMPACT variables,
as well as the percentage of households holding no life insurance, and averages for benchmark and actual
insurance.
We draw three conclusions from table 8. First, life insurance had, at best, a moderate impact on
financial exposures among the at-risk population. For example, among severely at-risk wives, insurance
reduced the average consequences of a spouse’s death (mean IMPACT) by only 27 percent (17.9 percentage
points), from -65.5 percent to -47.6 percent. This is a far cry from the one-half overall reduction in mean
IMPACT for wives noted in table 3. For this same group, households would have needed to hold an average
of $630,079 in total life insurance to assure both the husband and wife of an undiminished living standard.
In fact, on average, they held only one-quarter of this amount ($166,628). This implies an even larger
discrepancy (more than $460,000) than the overall difference (just under $240,000) noted in table 3.
Second, for a fixed level of financial exposure, households were more inclined to protect women than

20

men. For example, among severely at-risk husbands, insurance reduced the average consequences of the
wife’s death (mean IMPACT) by only 6 percent (4.3 percentage points), from -68.4 percent to -64.1 percent.
This contrasts sharply with the corresponding figures for wives, noted above. One might question the
reliability of this finding on the grounds that we have imputed the division of insurance between spouses
based on patterns in the HRS. However, the gender difference is plainly not an artifact of the imputation
procedure. Note in particular that couples with severely at-risk wives on average held in total $166,628 of
life insurance, while couples with severely at-risk husbands on average held only 15 percent of this amount
($24,827).
Third, the likelihood of holding insurance bears little if any relation to underlying vulnerabilities,
as measured by IMPACT (ignoring insurance). Indeed, the fraction of couples without life insurance is
generally largest for those with severe financial exposures (IMPACT ignoring insurance less than -40
percent).
Table 9 provides disaggregated results for various population subgroups. To conserve space, we
confine our attention to primary and secondary earners (results for husbands and wives are similar). In
addition to reporting the percentage of each subgroup with severe and significant exposures based on
IMPACT with actual insurance (Freq. Actual) and on IMPACT ignoring insurance (Freq. Ins=0), we also
report the fractional reduction in each exposure rate resulting from insurance coverage (Frac. Addr.).18
Significant and severe uninsured financial vulnerabilities were more common among low income
households, couples with disparate earnings, relatively young households, couples with dependent children,
and non-whites. Thus, factors that are highly correlated with underlying vulnerabilities (particularly earnings
disparaties, age, and children) are also highly correlated with uninsured vulnerabilities. This finding is, of
course, implied by the poor correlation between vulnerabilities and insurance holdings.
According to table 9, conditional upon the existence of a significant or severe vulnerability,
18

Formally, frac. addr. (fraction addressed) = [(Freq. Ins=0) - (Freq. Actual)]/(Freq. Ins=0).

21

households with lower incomes, greater income disparities between spouses, no children, and non-whites are
less likely to moderate the financial consequences of a spouse’s death through life insurance (see the column
labeled “frac. addr.”). The relationship between age and the conditional likelihood of addressing a
significant or severe vulnerability was hump-shaped, with a peak in the 40-55 year age range. Households
were generally less likely to address vulnerabilities for primary earners. Note that a low proclivity to address
exposures can coincide either with high (as in the case of lower income households) or low (as in the case
of older individuals and primary earners) levels of underlying vulnerability.
When one compares households of similar ages, our results are quite close to those derived from the
HRS data in Bernheim, et. al. [2001].19 For example, we find that 13.4 percent of secondary earners between
the ages of 56 and 70 have significant uninsured vulnerabilities while 7.6 percent have severe uninsured
vulnerabilities; the comparable figures in Bernheim, et. al. [2001] for 60 to 69 year old survivors are 14.1
percent and 8.9 percent. Moreover, the data exhibit the same qualitative patterns with respect to the
magnitudes of vulnerabilities, as well as with respect to the propensity to address vulnerabilities, across
household categories.
It is, however, important to reiterate that data limitations precluded previous studies from shedding
light on the insurance holdings of younger households. Consequently, our findings concerning age are
particularly noteworthy. According to table 9, nearly two-thirds of secondary earners between the ages of
22 and 39 have significant financial vulnerabilities (projected reductions in living standards exceeding 20
percent), and nearly one-third have severe vulnerabilities (projected reductions exceeding 40 percent).
Moreover, for this age group, only one in five households with at-risk secondary earners (those who would
experience significant or severe declines in living standard upon the death of their spouse, ignoring

19

The age-adjusted frequencies of severe and significant uninsured financial exposures reported here and in
Bernheim, et. al. [2001] are lower than Auerbach and Kotlikoff’s [1987, 1991a, 1991b] estimates. Possible
explanations for the disparity include increases in female labor force participation since the 1960s, changes in
patterns of insurance coverage, and methodological differences.

22

insurance) held sufficient life insurance to avert significant or severe financial consequences.
Thus far, we have measured the consequences of a spouse’s death in terms of the proportional change
in sustainable living standard. For many individuals, the potential financial consequences of a spouse’s death
are also severe in absolute terms. With maximal consumption smoothing (benchmark insurance), sustainable
consumption for 3.58 percent of surviving wives and 2.61 percent of surviving husbands would fall below
the 1995 poverty thresholds published by the U.S. Census Bureau. Taking into account actual levels of
insurance coverage, poverty rates would have been 10.45 percent among surviving wives and 4.16 percent
among surviving husbands. These findings imply that 66 percent (6.87 of 10.45 percentage points) of
poverty among surviving women and 37 percent (1.55 out of 4.16 percentage points) of poverty among
surviving men resulted from a failure to ensure survivors of an undiminished living standard through
insurance. Ignoring insurance, poverty rates would have been 13.17 percent among surviving wives and 4.26
percent among surviving husbands. Consequently, insurance eliminated only 28 percent of the avoidable
poverty among surviving widows (2.72 out of 9.59 percentage points), and only 6 percent of the avoidable
poverty among surviving men (0.1 out of 1.63 percentage points).
5. Robustness
In table 10, we examine the extent to which our estimated frequencies of significant and severe
uninsured vulnerabilities are sensitive to changes in key assumptions and parameters. To conserve space,
we focus on primary and secondary earners. For purposes of comparison, we reproduce our base-case results
in the first line of the table.
Changes in the real interest rate, baseline wage growth rate, and maximum lifespan alter the results
relatively little.20 In each case, this reflects the opposing effects of offsetting forces. With higher interest
rates, a given level of life insurance coverage generates higher real income. However, since survivors are

20

For our base case, we assume that the inflation rate and real interest rate are both 3 percent.

23

typically more dependent on long-duration life annuities than intact couples, the present discounted value
of their resources tends to decline by a larger proportion when the rate of return rises. For older workers,
the rate of wage growth is relatively unimportant because it affects comparatively few years of earnings.
Moreover, while a given rate of growth produces a larger absolute increase in earnings for primary earners,
secondary earners tend to be younger, and therefore benefit from higher growth over a longer time frame.
A reduction in maximum lifespan reduces the resources that a survivor needs to achieve a given living
standard, but increases the living standard that the intact couple can achieve from available resources.
The consumption growth rate refers to steepness of the sustainable living standard trajectory. For
our base-case, we compute the highest living standard that is sustainable throughout life in all contingencies;
this corresponds to a consumption growth rate of zero. For sufficiently patient (impatient) households, it may
be more natural to construct benchmarks based on a rising (falling) living standard trajectory. The
proportional effects of a change in the consumption growth rate on the resource needs of survivors and intact
couples are approximately equal. Our results are therefore robust with respect to changes in this parameter.
The frequencies of exposure to significant and severe financial consequences are noticeably lower
in the absence of household scale economies (an extreme and somewhat implausible assumption). It is
somewhat higher when we reduce the rate of pension survivor benefits from 100 percent to 50 percent, but
the change is much smaller than that reported in Bernheim, et. al. [2001]. The discrepancy is presumably
attributable to differences between the age distributions of the SCF and HRS samples. For younger
households, pension survivor benefits make less of a difference both because they are further in the future
and thus more heavily discounted, and because younger workers have not yet accumulated substantial
pension entitlements.
As mentioned previously, our base case assumptions concerning housing are consistent with
empirical evidence indicating that individuals avoid changing residences (increasingly so as they age), and
that they resist using housing equity to finance ordinary living expenses. However, since some widows do

24

move, we examine sensitivity to two alternative assumptions. For the first, we adopt the extreme position
that housing consumption is completely and continuously flexible, and that housing equity is a perfect
substitute for other forms of wealth. For the second alternative, we adopt an intermediate position: a survivor
downsizes the couple’s primary residence by 30 percent, but thereafter avoids using housing equity to finance
ordinary living expenses.21 Though the first alternative dramatically reduces the estimated frequencies of
individuals at risk of severe or significant financial consequences, the effect of the second (and, we think,
more plausible) alternative is relatively small.
As in Bernheim, et. al. [2001], our base case calculations assume that survivors do not alter their
labor force participation. Since non-working wives approaching retirement age have limited employment
options subsequent to their husbands’ deaths, this assumption was appropriate for the HRS sample. It is
somewhat more problematic for the younger households that are included in the SCF. Conceivably, some
couples may hold apparently low levels of insurance on a primary earner because, in the event of his or her
death, they expect the surviving spouse to find full-time employment. We note, however, that this
explanation is inconsistent with a finding reported in section 4: fixing the level of underlying vulnerability,
couples are less likely to obtain insurance for the protection of primary earners (and husbands) than for
secondary earners (and wives). Since primary earners are already (in most cases) fully employed, secondary
earners have greater latitude to increase labor force participation. Consequently, for a given level of
vulnerability, one would expect to observe greater protection of primary earners, which is not the case.
To evaluate the sensitivity of our results with respect to possible changes in labor force participation,
we consider an extreme alternative assumption: all survivors, whether out of the labor force or employed
part-time, return to full-time employment. We impute full-time earnings based on regressions of earnings

21

In this exercise, we assume that the financing for the new house is the same as the continuation financing
for the old house. Consequently, upon a spouse’s death, the decline in home equity equals the reduction in the value
of the home, and there is an offsetting increase in non-housing assets; mortgage payments are unchanged, but other
housing expenses fall by 30 percent.

25

on demographic characteristics, estimated separately for fully employed men and women. A survivor’s
contingent earnings are set equal to the maximum of imputed earnings and actual earnings. Due to familiar
sample selection problems, this procedure tends to overstate potential earnings for non-workers; it therefore
understates survivors’ financial vulnerabilities. As indicated in table 10, the estimated frequencies of
financial vulnerability are reasonably sensitive to this alternative assumption. This contrasts with the findings
of Bernheim, et. al. [2001]. The difference is not particularly surprising, since the ability to alter labor
supply is more important for younger workers. Note, however, that substantial uninsured vulnerabilities are
reasonably widespread even with this extreme alternative assumption. This too is not surprising, given the
high levels of vulnerabilities among dual earner households noted in table 9.
In principle, shifts in non-labor income might also cushion the financial impact of a spouse’s death.
Our analysis makes no allowance for this possibility. Presumably, the most important source of potential
support is assistance from relatives. Bernheim, et. al. [2001] report that, between the first two waves of the
HRS, only 6.2 percent of new widows received any assistance of this type. Between the second and third
waves, the figure was 7.5 percent; and between the third and fourth waves, it was only 2.5 percent. In
addition, support may have been modest and/or temporary in many of these cases. Consequently, there is
little evidence that external support payments are significant in practice. Although the HRS only provides
information on older widows, we conjecture that these figures are lower for young widows (except perhaps
where young children are present).
As emphasized in section 3, the SCF collects information only on total life insurance for each
household, and not on the proportions attributable to each spouse. Our base case results apportion this
insurance using the imputation method described previously. If in some cases these imputations falsely
imply that insurance is held to protect spouses who are not financially vulnerable, then our calculations will
overstate uninsured vulnerabilities for at-risk individuals. To examine the potential significance of
imputation error, we consider an extreme alternative assumption: all life insurance is held to protect the

26

secondary earner (who is, in general, considerably more vulnerable). As indicated in table 9, the effects on
our results are minimal. This is not surprising for two reasons: total household life insurance is typically
small relative to benchmark insurance, and, in any case, our imputations attribute most life insurance to the
primary earner.
If important economic variables are measured with error, our calculations may overstate the thickness
of the upper and lower tails of the distribution of IMPACT, thereby exaggerating the frequencies of
significant and severe financial vulnerabilities. Measures of household assets tend to be particularly noisy.
However, as illustrated in the final two rows of table 10, our findings are not sensitive to moderate changes
in the values of wealth (a 20 percent increase or decrease).
As mentioned in section 2, we have ignored the possibility that remarriage might cushion the impact
of a spouse’s death. Bernheim, et. al. [2001] report that remarriage occurs with low frequency among the
HRS sample, but it is probably more common for the younger households included in the SCF. Since it is
difficult to model the consequences of remarriage, we did not conduct pertinent sensitivity analysis.
Consequently, we cannot rule out the possibility that low levels of insurance among young households are
attributable to the expectation that a survivor will benefit financially from remarriage. However, this
hypothesis strikes us as odd. Even young individuals must consider the risk that they may be unable or
unwilling to remarry, the value of retaining the option not to remarry, and the effect of financial status on
remarriage prospects.
Although the estimated fractions of individuals with significant and severe uninsured financial
vulnerabilities are sensitive to certain critical assumptions, it is important to emphasize that the poor
correlation between coverage and vulnerability is robust. From table 10, we see that the change in the
estimated incidence of vulnerability is largest when we assume either that there are no economies of shared
living, that housing expenditures are completely flexible, or that all survivors work full time. However, for
all of these alternative scenarios, regressions analogous to those reported in section 4 continue to indicate

27

that households with greater vulnerabilities (measured by benchmark insurance) typically have no more
coverage on average, at any age, than those with greater vulnerabilities.
6. Conclusions
Using the 1995 Survey of Consumer Finances and an elaborate life-cycle model, we have quantified
the potential financial impact of each individual’s death on his or her survivors, and we have measured the
degree to which life insurance moderates these consequences. We have found that life insurance is
essentially uncorrelated with financial vulnerability at every stage of the life cycle. This finding is consistent
with the hypothesis that life insurance bears little relation to needs at the time of purchase; however, it tends
to refute the hypothesis that households purchase long-term contracts with initially appropriate insurance
coverage, but fail to adjust this coverage through time as their circumstances change.
The impact of insurance among at-risk households is modest, and substantial uninsured
vulnerabilities are widespread, particularly among younger couples. Nearly two-thirds of secondary earners
between the ages of 22 and 39 have significant financial vulnerabilities (projected reductions in living
standards exceeding 20 percent), and nearly one-third have severe vulnerabilities (projected reductions
exceeding 40 percent). Moreover, only one in five of these at-risk households held sufficient life insurance
to avert significant or severe financial consequences. Combining all age groups, 56 percent of secondary
earners and 6 percent of primary earners would have experienced significant or severe declines in living
standard upon the death of a spouse in the absence of life insurance. Actual life insurance holdings reduce
these figures to, respectively, 42 percent and 5 percent. Thus, the overall impact of life insurance holdings
on financial vulnerabilities among at-risk households is modest. Roughly two-thirds of poverty among
surviving women and more than one-third of poverty among surviving men results from a failure to ensure
survivors of an undiminished living standard through insurance.
We have also provided evidence of a significant gender bias in life insurance holdings. Specifically,

28

for any given level of financial vulnerabilities, couples provide significantly more protection for wives than
for husbands. For example, couples with severely at-risk wives on average hold $166,628 of life insurance,
while couples with severely at-risk husbands on average hold only 15 percent of this amount ($24,827).

29

Table 1

Sample life insurance benchmarks
Insurance benchmark
for husband

Insurance benchmark
for wife

Base case
+ Age (50,48)

285,922
127,455

0
0

- Age (30,28)

607,446

0

+ Husband's earnings ($60K)

382,239

0

- Husband's earnings ($30K)

187,457

32,581

+ Wife's earnings ($40K)

225,430

52,606

- Wife's earnings ($20)

282,246

0

+ Child (age 9)

298,016

0

- Child (only the 5 year old)

295,732

0

+ Earnings growth (2%)

327,984

0

- Earnings growth (0%)

240,957

0

+ Real interest rate (5%)

210,364

0

- Real interest rate (1%)

409,454

0

Note: Assumptions for base case: age of husband: 40, age of wife: 38, husband’s employee earnings:
$45,000, wife’s employee earnings: $25,000, husband’s retirement age: 64, wife’s retirement age: 63,
number of children: 2, age of children: 5 & 7, non-housing net wealth: $50,000, primary home value:
$150,000, mortgage balance: $120,000, earnings growth: 1%, real interest rate: 3%.

30

Table 2 Validation of the SCF life insurance data
Percent covered (all life insurance)

Mean coverage (all life insurance)

LIMRA

SCF

LIMRA

SCF

All households

78%

85%

132,304

163,973

Ages 18-24

47%

51%

92,222

96,438

Ages 25-34

75%

80%

149,476

159,916

Ages 35-44

85%

87%

202,150

203,759

Ages 45-54

83%

92%

159,569

200,058

Ages 55-64

83%

86%

96,567

105,441

65 and older

77%

87%

27,156

39,692

Note: Life Insurance Marketing Research Association (LIMRA) figures are based on a 1992 survey (see
American Council of Life Insurance [1994]), with mean coverage adjusted to 1995 dollars.

31

Table 3 Descriptive statistics
Panel A: Household level variables
Mean

Median

Non-housing net wealth

1,641,724

45,250

Primary home ownership

0.76

1

Primary home value

160,551

85,000

Household non-asset income

125,779

52,300

Total Household Life Insurance,
actual
Total Household Life Insurance,
benchmark
Number of children

206,022

71,000

443,444

205,058

0.97

1

Panel B: Individual level variables
Husband

Wife

Primary earner

Secondary earner

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

44

43

42

41

43

43

42

41

0.172

0

0

0

1

1

0.220

0

0.780

1

College degree

0.404

0

0.375

0

0.422

0

0.356

0

Pension coverage

0.716

1

0.538

1

0.750

1

0.504

1

Non-asset income

85,292

34,200

18,606

14,160

87,916

36,000

15,983

12,480

Imputed life ins.

166,215

54,391

39,806

14,685

160,539

47,597

45,483

15,598

Age
Non white
Gender

405,916 149,535
37,528
0
415,229 168,224
28,214
0
Benchmark life
ins.
0.00%
-28.59% -21.51%
-3.77%
0.00%
-30.48% -24.59%
) liv. std., ignore -5.66%
ins.
0.66%
-16.27%
-7.75%
-0.16%
0.87%
-18.51% -13.25%
) l i v . s t d . , -2.40%
imputed
Note: Imputed and benchmark life insurance refer to insurance on the life of the individual listed at the
top of the column. Changes in living standard () liv. std.) for the spouse listed at the top of each column
depend on insurance on the life of the other spouse.

32

28.4%

25.8%

24.6%

$1-$199,999

$200,000$449,999

$450,000 or
more
83.5%

82.8%

81.2%

83.1%

Percent
Insured

21.2%

26.8%

24.9%

27.1%

0 to 3.99

4 to 7.99

8 or more

Fraction of
Households

0

Ratio of
Benchmark
Household
Insurance to
Household
Earnings

71.1%

89.9%

87.0%

83.1%

Percent
Insured

12.57

5.59

2.07

0

Median ratio
of
Benchmark
Insurance to
Household
Earnings

674,480

309,668

97,972

0

Median
Benchmark
Insurance

Panel B: Ratios of Insurance to Household Earnings

21.2%

Fraction of
Households

$0

Benchmark
Household
Insurance

33

1.09

1.91

1.37

0.96

Median ratio
of Actual
Insurance to
Household
Earnings

100,000

100,000

39,000

68,000

Median
Actual
Insurance

15.03

5.69

2.08

0

Mean ratio
of
Benchmark
Insurance to
Household
Earnings

1,359,286

313,821

99,073

0

Mean
Benchmark
Insurance

Table 4 Characteristics of households with different levels of benchmark insurance
Panel A: Insurance Levels

2.86

2.84

2.09

2.53

Mean ratio
of Actual
Insurance to
Household
Earnings

346,001

174,565

106,499

215,174

Mean Actual
Insurance

37,901

54,789

54.000

65,000

Median
Household
Earnings

62,220

50,000

35,360

65,000

Median
Household
Earnings

30

39

47

56

Median
Average Age
of Couple

31

38

46

56

Median
Average Age
of Couple

Table 5 Regression results, actual life insurance versus benchmark life insurance
Panel A: Level of Actual Household Insurance
Constant

Benchmark

OLS

109294.5
(10904.63)

0.2181
(0.0029)

Tobit

61187.04
(12799.07)

0.2187
(0.0033)

Median Regression

20275.87
(11529.65)

0.2202
(0.0453)
0.0010
(0.0021)

Probit (probability scaled, using
benchmark insurance/105)
Panel B: Ratio of Life insurance to Earnings
Constant

Benchmark

OLS

2.432
(0.2598)

0.024
(0.0275)

Tobit

1.911
(0.3057)

-0.042
(0.0341)

Median Regression

1.487
(0.1316)

-0.026
(0.0091)

Probit (probability scaled)

-.0093
(0.0015)

Note: Standard errors are given in parentheses.

34

Note: Standard errors are given in parentheses.

0.793

The relationship between actual and
benchmark is the same at all ages

0.420

0.184

(4.19)

0.840

0.8826

(3.43)

(0.0042)

(0.0034)

2.7713

0.0034

-0.0009

-0.0023
(0.0017)

-0.0012
(0.0013)

0.1374
(0.1701)

0.0540
(0.1390)

No relationship between actual and
benchmark at any age

p-value for tests

Constant

Benchmark insurance to earnings
ratio interacted with age group 5

Benchmark insurance to earnings
ratio interacted with age group 4

Benchmark insurance to earnings
ratio interacted with age group 3

Benchmark insurance to earnings
ratio interacted with age group 2

Benchmark insurance to earnings
ratio interacted with age group 1

Age 71+(group 5)

Age 56-70 (group 4)

Age 41-55 (group 3)

Age 22-40 (group 2)

Age<22 (group 1)

Benchmark Insurance to Income
interacted with age

average age of couple squared

average age of couple

-0.1923
(0.1355)

-0.0485

Tobit

(0.1057)

OLS

0.456

0.123

(1.3460)

0.3540

(0.0012)

0.0009

(0.0005)

-0.0012

(0.0507)

0.0854

(0.0337)

-0.0524

Median Reg.

35

0.598

0.009

(0.0002)

0.0001

(0..0001)

-0.0002

(0.0077)

0.0195

(0.0059)

-0.0102

Probit

0.925

0.958

0.864

0.435

0.2251
(0.8592)

-0.0368
(0.7363)

-0.0052
(0.2575)

-0.0066
(0.2239)

0.0400
(0.1464)

0.0738
(0.1261)

-0.1098
(0.0510)

-0.0306
(0.0408)

-0.0405
(0.1706)

0.0458

(1.7915)

(1.4840)
(0.1213)

-1.2351

(0.6674)

(0.5756)
0.7924

0.7231

1.6729

1.8239
(0.5415)

2.2872
(0.4705)

3.1355
(0.6250)

3.4352
(0.5222)

-1.7201
(5.1116)

0.15054

Tobit

(3.8696)

OLS

Additional regression results, actual life insurance vs. benchmark life insurance

Benchmark Insurance to Household
Income

Table 6

0.287

0.002

(0.1057)

0.0750

(0.0632)

0.0348

(0.0779)

0.0362

(0.0128)

-0.0556

(0.0814)

0.00

(0.1381)

.2759

(0.1167)

0.6167

(0.2209)

1.5278

(0.2103)

2.2503

(1.7100)

0.00

Median Reg.

0.794

0.001

(0.0443)

0.0389

(0.0131)

0.0003

(0.0076)

-.0083

(0.0222)

-0.0091

(0.0069)

-0.0077

(0.0750)

0.1109

(0.0330)

0.2340

(0.0305)

0.3293

(0.0295)

0.2959

(0.2005)

0.1367

Probit

Table 7

Distribution of Changes in Living Standard for Surviving Spouses

Panel A: Husbands and Wives
Surviving spouses are:
Wives
IMPACT

Husbands

Ignoring Insurance Imputed Insurance

Ignoring insurance

Imputed Insurance

<-40%

30.98%

19.26%

3.48%

2.90%

-40% to -20%

20.91%

18.68%

6.49%

5.61%

-20% to 0%

19.36%

19.94%

17.42%

15.10%

0%

28.75%

5.32%

72.60%

12.29%

0% to +20%

-

31.85%

-

63.12%

+20% to +40%

-

3.39%

-

0.68%

>+40%

-

1.55%

-

0.29%

Observations

1033

1033

1033

1033

Panel B: Primary and Secondary Earners
Surviving spouses are:
Secondary earners

Primary earners

IMPACT

Ignoring insurance

Imputed Insurance

Ignoring insurance

Imputed Insurance

<-40%

32.53%

20.62%

1.94%

1.55%

-40% to -20%

23.33%

21.10%

4.07%

3.19%

-20% to 0%

20.52%

22.17%

16.26%

12.88%

0%

23.62%

4.07%

77.73%

13.55%

0% to +20%

-

27.49%

-

67.47%

+20% to +40%

-

3.00%

-

1.06%

>+40%

-

1.55%

-

0.29%

Observations

1033

1033

1033

1033

36

-26.8%
-8.6%
0.0%

-40% to -20%
0% to -20%
0%

earners

-66.4%

0.0%

0%
<-40%

-10.3%

0% to -20%

Primary

-29.8%

-40% to -20%

earners

0.0%

0%
-65.8%

-8.7%

0% to -20%

<-40%

-27.1%

0.0%

0%

-40% to -20%

-10.3%

0% to -20%

-68.4%

-30.1%

-40% to -20%

<-40%

-65.5%

<-40%

Ignoring
insurance

37

2.9%

-3.1%

-21.5%

-53.2%

6.9%

-0.3%

-18.2%

-49.1%

2.9%

-4.4%

-23.4%

-64.1%

6.14%

1.68%

-17.2%

-47.6%

Imputed
insurance

Mean IMPACT

Secondary

Husbands

Wives

Surviving souses are:

Range for IMPACT,
ignoring insurance

17.2%

15.5%

26.2%

30.0%

16.8%

13.2%

14.9%

22.3%

16.7%

18.3%

22.4%

22.2%

18.2%

10.5%

14.8%

22.8%

Percent
uninsured

0

79,962

243,488

274,272

0

104,850

830,155

614,989

0

78,528

210,961

291,568

0

107,633

908.146

630,079

Mean
benchmark

Insurance Holdings

Table 8 Effect of Life Insurance on Changes in Living Standards for Surviving Spouses, by Level of Vulnerability

44,609

51,181

44,115

35,598

125,237

116,975

236,420

159,234

42,545

37,625

23,056

24,827

116,059

133,122

265,210

166,628

Mean actual

20.6%
46.2%
30.1%
15.0%
9.52%
17.1%
26.7%
9.07%
28.0%
60.0%
31.1%
11.9%
7.64%
8.82%
19.2%
22.0%
20.1%
23.0%

Full sample

HH earnings < $15K

HH earnings $15-$45K

HH earnings $45-$100K

HH earnings > $100K

Dual earners

Single earners

Earnings diff. 1-1 to 2-1

Earnings diff. over 4-1

Age of survivor <22

Age of survivor 22-39

Age of survivor: 40-55

Age of survivor: 56-70

Age of survivor: >71

No children

One or more child

Whites

Non-whites

Freq.
Actual

30.9%

32.9%

37.9%

26.9%

8.82%

10.8%

23.8%

47.4%

60.0%

42.7%

15.8%

40.6%

27.8%

21.4%

28.9%

39.9%

53.9%

32.5%

0.256

0.389

0.280

0.286

0.000

0.293

0.500

0.344

0.000

0.344

0.426

0.290

0.385

0.555

0.481

0.246

0.143

0.366

45.5%

40.9%

46.0%

37.2%

11.8%

13.4%

27.6%

62.6%

90.0%

43.6%

35.5%

41.4%

41.9%

22.0%

40.0%

51.6%

53.9%

41.7%

38

56.7%

55.7%

64.8%

46.5%

14.7%

19.1%

45.0%

78.5%

90.0%

55.8%

50.5%

52.9%

57.6%

39.9%

56.5%

61.5%

64.1%

55.9%

0.198

0.266

0.290

0.200

0.197

0.298

0.320

0.203

0.000

0.219

0.300

0.217

0.273

0.449

0.292

0.161

0.159

0.254

Frac.
Addr.

3.37%

1.17%

1.14%

1.98%

16.7%

0.67%

0.71%

1.67%

0.00%

1.02%

2.59%

1.31%

1.69%

0.60%

0.65%

2.73%

5.13%

1.55%

Freq.
Actual

3.37%

1.64%

1.52%

2.38%

16.7%

0.67%

0.94%

2.39%

0.00%

1.23%

3.11%

1.57%

2.15%

0.60%

0.65%

3.83%

5.13%

1.94%

Freq
Ins=0

0.000

0.287

0.070

0.168

0.000

0.000

0.245

0.301

0.000

0.171

0.167

0.510

0.214

0.000

0.000

0.080

0.080

0.201

Frac.
Addr.

7.30%

4.21%

3.41%

6.14%

26.7%

2.01%

2.12%

6.70%

9.09%

2.04%

9.07%

2.62%

5.99%

0.60%

3.91%

7.65%

5.13%

4.74%

Freq.
Actual

Freq
Ins=0

Freq.
Actual

Freq.
Ins=0

Frac.
Addr.

Severe
(>40%)

Significant
(>20%)

Severe
(>40%)

8.99%

5.38%

4.74%

7.33%

26.7%

2.68%

3.29%

8.37%

9.09%

2.25%

11.9%

2.88%

7.83%

1.19%

5.65%

8.74%

5.13%

6.00%

Freq
Ins=0

Significant
(>20%)

Consequences for Primary Earners

Consequences for Secondary Earners

Table 9 Frequency of Severe and Significant Financial Consequences for Surviving Spouses: Selected Population Subgroups

0.188

0.217

0.281

0.162

0.000

0.250

0.000

0.200

0.000

0.093

0.238

0.090

0.250

0.496

0.308

0.125

0.000

0.210

Frac.
Addr.

20.6%
23.9%
19.3%
19.8%
22.6%
20.5%
20.2%
21.1%
14.7%
22.3%
10.8%
18.5%
11.5%
19.9%
21.3%
20.2%

Base case

Real interest rate = 1%

Real interest rate = 5%

Baseline wage growth rate = 0%

Baseline wage growth rate = 2%

Maximum lifespan = 85

Consumption growth rate = 1%

Consumption growth rate = -1%

No ecs. of shared living ("=1)

Survivor receives 50% pens. bens.

Housing completely fungible

Survivor downsizes house by 30%

Survivors fully employed

All life insurance assigned to the
primary earner

Wealth reduced by 20%

Wealth increased by 20%

Severe
(>40%)

39

40.9%

43.1%

38.8%

29.6%

36.9%

28.3%

45.3%

26.2%

42.5%

39.9%

41.2%

42.9%

40.0%

38.5%

44.2%

41.7%

Significant
(>20%)

Consequences for Secondary Earners

1.45%

1.54%

1.94%

1.45%

1.16%

0.38%

1.65%

0.77%

1.55%

1.45%

1.45%

1.45%

1.65%

1.35%

1.92%

1.55%

Severe
(>40%)

4.45%

4.73%

6.00%

4.65%

4.07%

2.00%

4.84%

1.84%

5.02%

4.17%

4.66%

5.14%

4.55%

4.15%

5.19%

4.74%

Significant
(>20%)

Consequences for Primary Earners

Table 10 Frequency of Severe and Significant Financial Consequences for Surviving Spouses: Robustness (Full Sample, Imputed
Insurance)

References
American Council of Life Insurance, 1994 Life Insurance Fact Book, American Council of Life Insurance:
Washington, DC, 1994.
American Council of Life Insurance, 1999 Life Insurance Fact Book, American Council of Life Insurance:
Washington, DC, 1999.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Life Insurance of the Elderly: Its Adequacy and
Determinants,” in G. Burtless (ed.), Work, Health, and Income Among the Elderly, The Brookings
Institution, Washington D.C., 1987.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Life Insurance Inadequacy - Evidence from a Sample of Older
Widows,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 3765, 1991a.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “The Adequacy of Life Insurance Purchases,” Journal of
Financial Intermediation, 1(3), June 1991b, 215-241.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, “The Economic Effects of Social Security: Towards a Reconciliation of Theory and
Measurement,” Journal of Public Economics 33 (3), August 1987, 273-304.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Lorenzo Forni, Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “The Mismatch
Between Life Insurance Holdings and Financial Vulnerabilities: Evidence from the Health and Retirement
Survey,” American Economic Review, 2001, forthcoming..
Caplin, Andrew, “The Reverse Mortgage Market: Problems and Prospects,” in Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond,
Olivia Mitchell, and Steven Zeldes (eds.), Innovations in Managing the Financial Risks of Retirement,
Pension Reserach Council, the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, forthcoming, 2000.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Mark Warshawsky, “Financial Planning -- The Economic
vs. the Conventional Approach,” mimeo, NBER working paper, 1999.
Holden, K.C., R.V. Burkhauser, and D.A. Myers, “Pensioners’ Annuity Choice: Is the Well-Being of their
Widows Considered?” University of Wisconsin Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper 802-86,
1986.
Hurd, Michael D. and David A. Wise, “The Wealth and Poverty of Widows: Assets Before and After the
Husband’s Death,” in D. Wise (ed.), The Economics of Aging, Chicago and London: University of Chicago
Press, 1989, 177-99.
Kennickell, Arthur, “Imputation of the 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances: Stochastic Relaxation and
Multiple Imputation” mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1991.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Avia Spivak, “The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market,” Journal of
Political Economy, 89 (2), April 1981, 372-91.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., What Determines Savings?, Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press, 1989
Lundberg, Shelly, “Family Bargaining and Retirement Behavior,” in Henry Aaron (ed.), Behavioral
Economics and Retirement Policy, Brookings Institution, 1999 (forthcoming).

40

Mitchell, Olivia S. and James F., Moore, “Retirement Wealth Accumulation and Decumulation: New
Developments and Outstanding Opportunities,” NBER working paper, no. 6178, 1997a.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and James F., Moore, “Projected Retirement Wealth and Savings Adequacy in the Health
and Retirement Study,” NBER working paper, no. 6240, 1997b.
Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark J. Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown, “New Evidence on the
Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities,” American Economic Review 89(5), December 1999, 1299-1318.
Nelson, Julie A., “Methods of Estimating Household Equivalence Scales: An Empirical Investigation,”
Review of Income and Wealth, 38 (3), September 1992.
Ringen, S. “Households, Standard of Living, and Inequality,” Review of Income and Wealth, 37, 1991, 1-13.
Venti, Steve, and David Wise, “Patterns of Housing Equity Use Among the Elderly,” in Zvi Bodie, Brett
Hammond, Olivia Mitchell, and Steven Zeldes (eds.), Innovations in Managing the Financial Risks of
Retirement, Pension Reserach Council, the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, forthcoming,
2000.
Williams, Roberton, David Weiner, and Frank Sammartino, “Equivalence Scales, the Income Distribution,
and Federal Taxes,” Technical Paper Series 1999-2, Congressional Budget Office, October 1998.
Yaari, Menachem, “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer,” Review of
Economic Studies, 32, April 1965, 137-50.

41

Appendix
Data Imputation
Non-Asset Income. Our calculations require data on each spouse’s past and future covered earnings as well
as future total (covered and uncovered) earnings. We assume that all earnings are covered. For respondents
who were working at the survey date, we have 1995 self-reported labor earnings. In order to impute past and
future earnings we use a model that assumes that the cross section age-earnings profile for fully employed
workers remains constant through time. We allow real wages for all ages to grow over time, using the
historic Social Security real wage growth for past years, and a 1 percent overall real wage growth factor for
future years. (In our robustness analysis, was also look at a 0 percent and 2 percent overal real wage growth
factor for future years.) In estimating past earnings we assume that the first year of employment is the
maximum of 1951 and the year the person was 22.22 Households where one of the spouses was temporarily
not working, as opposed to out of the labor force, were dropped from our sample.
The SCF provides information on other kinds of non-asset income. We treat some of these income sources,
such as Veteran’s Benefits, SSI, disability income, welfare, child support, and regular help from friends or
relatives, as non-taxable. Except for Social Security disability income and child support, we assume these
income streams continue, with full adjustments for inflation, until the respondent’s death. Social Security
disability income is assumed to end at age 62, when the recipient becomes eligible for Social Security
retirement benefits. We divide child support received by the number of children to obtain child support per
child and assume it is received until the child in question reaches 18.23 We treat other kinds of special
receipts, such as income from trust funds and royalties, as taxable. We assume they will be received for ten
years beyond the survey date, and that the payments will be constant in nominal terms. Relatively few
respondents receive these kinds of income flows, and the amounts are generally small relative to average
earnings. We assume that SCF respondents retire at their stated intended ages of retirement or age 70,
whichever is smaller. For those who fail to say when they will retire, we use age 65.
Pension Plans, Retirement Accounts, and Social Security. The SCF provides information on nominal
benefits currently received from defined benefit pension plans as well as expected nominal benefits for future
pension recipients. We assume that all pensions are indexed to inflation and that a surviving spouse would
receive 100 percent of the monthly benefit or lump-sum distribution. We further assume that employersponsored defined contribution plans and all private retirement accounts (IRAs and Keoghs) provide for taxdeductible contributions and tax-deferred accumulation. Contributions in all future years up to age 59 are
set equal, in real terms, to contributions in the survey year. If total contributions are greater than the legal
limits ($30,000 or 25% of income) contributions are truncated. The proportion given by the employer
remains constant. Any contributions (by the employee or the employer) over the legal limit are included in
employee non-deductible and tax-favored contributions.
The SCF contains information on IRA account balances, but not annual contributions. We impute
contributions based on tobit regressions from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Contributions are
calculated as a function of marital status, work status, age, earnings, and family size.

22

For workers who were under 22 in 1995, we assume that 1995 was their first year of employment.

23

The HRS reports only the sum of child support and spousal support. However, we confine our attention
to couples, 98 percent of which are married. Since spousal support generally ends upon remarriage (and also
declines somewhat on average when individuals become unmarried partners), we can safely assume that the entire
reported amount is child support.

42

If an individual is already receiving Social Security benefits, we assume that benefits have already started.
Otherwise, we impute the initial age of benefit receipt as follows. If the individual is still working, we
assume that benefits will start at his or her projected retirement age (but not earlier than age 62). If the
individual is retired, we use the reported start date for those currently receiving benefits, for those not yet
receiving benefits we assume benefits will start at age 62 for those currently under 62, and at the current age
for those over 62. In all cases, the initial age of benefit receipt is between 62 and 70. For respondents
currently receiving social security disability benefits, we assume that they switch to retirement benefits at
age 62.
Our calculations also require information on the age at which individuals begin to receive private pension
benefits. For those not yet receiving benefits, we use the age at which the individual expects benefits to
begin, as reported in the SCF.
Individuals with previous marriages lasting more than ten years and ending in divorce or separation and
individuals with previous marriages lasting more than nine months and ending in the spouse’s death are
eligible to receive Social Security benefits based on the earnings history of their prior spouse. This presents
us with a problem, since we do not have any information about prior spouses. We assume that all such
individuals receive benefits based on either their own earnings history or that of their current spouse.
Housing. Our calculations require information on a variety of specific housing expenditures, including
mortgages, home insurance premiums, property taxes, and other recurring expenses. Association fees,
homeowner or condo/coop/townhouse association fees and rent on the site for households owning and living
in mobile homes are added to home insurance premiums to form recurring house expenditures. When you
own part of a farm, you are classified as a homeowner. The rent you pay is then also added to your insurance
premium. While it does not contain information on home insurance premiums, it does include the face
amount of insurance. We imputed annual home insurance premiums by multiplying by 0.0025 home value.
If the mortgage payment (minus property taxes and insurance premium if respondent states these are included
in their payments) is negative then the observation is dropped. If the annual property tax is greater than 5%
of the home value the observation is dropped.
With regards to mortgages, the SCF reports the balance remaining, the number of years remaining, the
interest rate, and the payment. In order to ensure consistency, we imputed the balance remaining on the
mortgage based on the years remaining and the interest rate and payment.
In some instances, rental payments reported in the sample include heat and electricity expenses; in such
cases, respondents were not asked separately about these utility payments. We apportion the reported
number into separate components by assuming that the ratio of rent to utilities is the same for these
respondents as the average ratio computed from the Health and Retirement Study. If rent includes all
utilities, rent is set to 0.77*rent. If rent includes some utilities, rent is set to 0.89*rent. We have no
information on utility expenditure if it is not included in rent. The SCF does not include any information
concerning property taxes paid on second homes. We assume that this property is taxed at the same rate as
the primary home. Finally, we set monthly rental payments equal to zero for the few respondents who report
that they live in a house or apartment that they neither rent nor own.
In addition, for our base case we assume that all households plan to remain in the same house before and after
retirement. One test of robustness allows widows and widowers to move to smaller homes. For this case
we assume that the move to homes that are 70% of the size of their previous homes.
Other Variables. For confidentiality reasons, the SCF does not report the respondent’s date or month of birth
or state of residency. We assume that each respondent was born on the fifteenth of June. For the purposes

43

of computing state taxes, we use Massachusetts law. We set the maximum age of life to 95 for all
individuals. Many households have adult children living with them. For the purposes of this project, only
children 18 or under are included.
We assume for all respondents a fixed amount for funeral expenses which is set equal to the median of the
reported expenses ($5000) for HRS spouses for spouses actually died in 1991 (90 observations). The HRS
reports information on actual funeral expenses and legal fees of deceased spouses. We set intended bequests
equal to zero.
The SCF allows mortgages to end with a balloon payment. When there is a balloon payment, we assume that
they refinance for the amount of the balloon payment with a 15 year mortgage (8% interest rate). There is
no space in ESP for future mortgages so these are included in special expenditures. Interest payments on the
first home are included in deductible special expenditures. Payments on the balance are included in nondeductible special expenditures. Non-deductible special expenditures also include child support or alimony
payment and support to other family members. These are assumed to be paid in the current year and the next
four years (a total of 5 years). Non-deductible special expenditures also include child support or alimony
payment and support to other family members. These are assumed to be paid in the current year and the next
four years (a total of 5 years).
As a measure of a household’s net worth, we use total non-housing assets minus total non-housing liabilities.
Total non-housing assets include checking and saving accounts, money market funds, CDs, government
saving bonds, T-bills, stocks, mutual funds, investment trusts, business equity, bonds, bond funds, real estate
other than primary and vacation homes, the cash value of life insurance policies, and some miscellaneous
items. Total non-housing liabilities include personal loans, student loans, credit card balances, car loans,
installment loans, and other non housing debt. Housing debt (mortgages and equity lines of credit) are
considered separately (see above). We assume that, apart from mortgages and other outstanding housing
debt, households cannot borrow against future income. For our base case, we use a 3 percent rate of inflation
and a 3 percent real pre-tax rate of return.
Credit Constraints. We assume respondents’ borrowing limit is set equal to zero
Expected change in living standard. The expected change in living standard after retirement or in case of
death of one partner is set equal to zero.

44

