NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAS “IN-WORK” BENEFIT REFORM HELPED THE LABOUR MARKET?
Richard Blundell
Hilary Hoynes
Working Paper 8546
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8546
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

This paper was prepared for the CEP-IFS-NBER Premier League volume. We have benefited from the
comments and advice of participants at the conference meetings and especially to Mike Brewer, David Card,
Alan Duncan, David Ellwood, Costas Meghir and Michal Myck. We are also very grateful to Mike Brewer,
Darren Lubotsky and Zoe Smith for generous help in preparing and interpreting the figures and tables. The
research is part of the programme of the ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Fiscal Policy at
IFS. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Richard Blundell and Hilary Hoynes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Has “In-Work” Benefit Reform Helped the Labour Market?
Richard Blundell and Hilary Hoynes
NBER Working Paper No. 8546
October 2001
JEL No. H2, I3, J2

ABSTRACT
The aim of this paper is to examine the labour market impact of in-work benefit reform in the
UK. Evidence is drawn from the impact of earlier reforms in the UK and similar reforms in the US. We
focus on the impact on labour supply -- employment and hours of work. In the US a large proportion of
the dramatic increase in participation among low educated single parents in the 1990s has been attributed
to the increased generosity of the EITC. The impact of apparently similar reforms in the UK appears to
have been smaller. We argue that these differences can be attributed to four factors: the impact of
interactions with other means tested benefits in the UK; the importance of workless couples with children
in the UK, who make up nearly 50% of the recipients in the UK; the level of income support given to
non-working parents; and the strength of the economic upturn in the US during the 1990s.

Hilary Hoynes
Department of Economics
One Shields Avenue
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu

Richard Blundell
Institute for Fiscal Studies
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street
London, England
r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk

1

Introduction
Welfare policy toward low-income families in the UK experienced a significant

shift toward “in-work” benefits in the late 1980s and 1990s. Although a form of inwork benefit existed in the UK since the late 1970s, the shift in policy began in
earnest with the introduction of the Family Credit in 1988 - a minimum working hours
based credit for families with children. After a number of reforms during the early
1990s, Family Credit was replaced by the Working Families Tax Credit in 1999. Over
this period the generosity of these “in-work” benefit schemes also increased,
enhancing the emphasis that has been placed in welfare reform in the UK on
supplementing low incomes in work for adults with dependent children. There are
now over one million recipients contrasting with less than 250,000 when Family
Credit was introduced. Expenditure per recipient has also increased dramatically over
this period, rising fourfold in real terms.
But what of the impact on the labour market? There have been two main target
groups for “in-work” benefit policy reform in the UK. These target groups reflect a
rise in the proportion of families with no parent working in the 1980s and early 1990s.
For single parents and low skilled couples with children, labour market attachment
steadfastly refused to rise after the sharp fall in the early 1980s recession – quite
against the overall trend. Single parent employment rates fell by twenty percentage
points in the early 1980s and have remained well below that experienced by many of
the UK’s European neighbours. For women with unemployed husbands, the fall in
employment was even more marked, remaining at little over 20%. Over the same
period the overall trend for married mothers saw a continuing growth and
employment among single women without children remained around the 80% level.
For the US the picture is quite different. The early 1980s decline in employment was
short lived and was followed by a 14 percentage point increase in the 1990s. For
couples with children in the US, there was a steady increase in employment for both
parents. The behaviour of these different groups in the UK and the differences in
employment trends with similar groups in the US presents us with a puzzle. This is
the focus of this study.
The comparison with the US system of “in-work” benefits is particularly useful.
Like the system in the UK, the Earned Income Tax Credit in the US has grown
2

significantly in terms of coverage and generosity over the past two decades. It has
seen a four-fold increase in caseload and expenditure per recipient has tripled in real
terms. It is now the largest cash programme directed toward working families in the
US with nearly 20 million recipients. Not only are the US and the UK at the forefront
of the use of in-work benefits but also the other socio economic profiles bear
interesting similarities. The proportion of single parents in the US and the UK more
than doubled over the period – one reason why this group featured so centrally in the
policy agenda. Moreover, single parents in both countries began the period, the late
1970s, with very similar employment rates and close to those of married women with
children. Both countries experienced a similar rise in employment rates of married
women with children. The real contrast is the gain in employment for single parents in
the US and the higher employment rates among low skilled couples with children.
Although the administration of the system in the US is somewhat different to that
in the UK, we do not attribute the apparent differences in impact on labour supply to
these. Instead, we highlight certain distinct features of the UK system. Unlike the
EITC, income from in-work benefits is counted as income in the computation of other
benefits – in particular, housing benefits. This is shown to significantly dampen the
labour supply incentives created by the in-work benefit system. The importance of
housing benefits has increased strongly since the early 1980s in the UK. Over the
same period much of the increase in the generosity of in-work benefits has been
matched by increases in the generosity of income support – available to all lowincome non-working families with children. In particular, increases in child credits in
the in-work benefit system have been matched by similar increases in the generosity
in the child component of income support. There has also been a substantive increase
in the real value of the universal child benefit. If anything these increases act as an
income effect and against increased employment in the target groups.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In the next section, the
underlying labour market trends are presented. Section 3 describes the reforms in the
UK and their impact on work incentives. Section 4 draws a direct comparison with the
impact of EITC reforms in the US. In section 5 we evaluate the recent Working
Families Tax Credit reform in the UK. Section 6 concludes.

3

2

Trends in Labour Supply over the 1980s and 1990s
Although differences in the pattern of working behaviour across different

groups at any point in time can be suggestive of important impacts of financial
incentives, it is the time series behaviour of labour supply for groups of individuals
who have been subject to changing incentives that is of direct policy interest. This is
precisely the way the puzzle in the introduction was posed between the employment
behaviour of single mothers in the UK and the US.
In this section we focus on trends in the UK over the last two decades but also
draw on evidence from the US where comparisons are particularly informative. One
well-documented trend that occurred in both countries over this period is the shift in
returns to education and skill. We do not reproduce them here but they have certainly
reinforced the arguments for increasing the generosity of in-work benefits for lowincome workers families.
Macroeconomic conditions over the past two decades differed somewhat in
the US and UK. There are two large recessions in the UK, one in 1980-1981 and one
in 1991-93. The recession in the US in the early 1990s was shorter and less severe.
Since 1992 the US experienced an unprecedented expansion with unemployment rates
lower than they have been in three decades. The expansion in the UK occurred much
later and at a lower pace. It is likely that the differences in the strength of the labour
markets across the two counties explain some of the difference in the employment
trends discussed here. This may be especially important for low education groups,
who are typically found to be more sensitive to business cycles (Hoynes 2000).
2.1 Overall Employment Trends for Women
To describe these trends we draw on a number of data sets from the UK and the
US. These are briefly described in the data appendix. Figure 2.1 shows the fraction of
women working in the UK by marital status and presence of children from 1978 to
1999. Figure 2.2 shows a similar contrast for the US. We have selected women aged
between 20 and 55 for this comparison.
There are many similarities in employment for women in UK and US over this
time period. First, single parents have very similar employment rates at the beginning
of the period, at about 55 to 60 percent. These are close to those for married women
with children. Second, the labor market attachment for married women, especially
those with children, saw a steady rise over the period in both countries. For example,
4

in the US somewhat less than half of married women with children worked at all in
1979 compared to almost 70 percent in 2000. Third, single women without children
experienced a rather more stable and higher level of employment at around 80 percent
over these two decades in both countries.
-

Figures 2.1 and 2.2 –

The differences between the UK and US, however, are striking. First, the
employment for all groups was more severely reduced in the UK during the recession
in the early 1980s. Second, single mothers in the UK saw little recovery from the
initial decline in employment in the early 1980s. In the US, beginning in the early
1990s, employment in this group increased dramatically from 60 to 73 percent.1
Married women saw steady increases in work over this period. The increase in
employment among single women with children in the US is not due to a cohort
effect. When the employment trends are presented by cohort the increase in
employment is shared by all but the oldest age groups. In fact, among less educated
women the gains are largest for the youngest cohort.
2.2 A Focus on Single Mothers
In-work benefit reform will provide the greatest incentives for those
individuals who can only attract a low market wage. One way to focus on this
“incentivised” group is to consider those with lower levels of schooling. Figures 2.3
and 2.4 consider the pattern of employment by education for single mothers in the UK
and US respectively. In both the UK and the US single women were an increasing
share of all women over this period. In contrast, the fraction of women who are
married with children is declining steadily over this period. Single women with
children represent an increasing fraction of all women, especially among less
educated women. By the end of the 1990s this group represented nearly one fifth of
all low educated working age women in the UK, up from around 6% at the turn of the
1980s.
These trends for low educated single parents are presented for the period since
1984. This period is primarily chosen so that the larger Labour Force Survey can be
1

The US definition of work is “working at all last week”. This is a somewhat weak definition of work
but is used to compare with the UK definition, which relates to employment in the last two weeks. An
additional measure that may capture better the intensity of work is the average number of weeks
worked last year. In figures not shown here, the trends for average weeks work show much the same
pattern as those for worked at all last week.

5

utilised for the UK, but it also coincides with the period over which most of the action
on in-work benefit reforms has taken place.
- Figures 2.3 and 2.4 The differences between the employment patterns for women in UK vs. US
presented above are also evident here. In the UK the employment pattern for the
lower educated single mothers, those who left school at age 16 (the minimum school
leaving age), is very similar to the picture for all single mothers. The employment rate
for lower education single mothers remained quite low throughout the period. In
contrast, in the US the employment rate of lower educated single women with
children in the US increased from 50 percent in 1994 to almost 67 percent in 2000, a
gain of more than 16 percentage points. Indeed in the US, by the end of the period,
low educated single women with children were working more than married women
with children, and almost as much as single women without children. This increase
has received tremendous attention in the US and is the subject of some debate as to
how much of this can be attributed to policy versus the strong economy.
- Figure 2.5 One additional feature of the UK data for single women that will be important
for the discussion of in-work benefit reform is the distribution of hours of work. As
will be discussed below, since 1992 the UK system has provided a strong incentive
for single mothers to work at least 16 hours per week. The frequency histogram for
low education single women with and without children in the UK over three recent
years is presented in Figure 2.5. The peak at 16 hours for single mothers is clear.
2.3 Workless Couples with Children
The in-work benefit reforms in the UK have targeted both single parents and
workless couples. Figure 2.6 shows the growing importance of this latter group in the
UK towards the end of the 1980s and the early 1990s. In the 1980s recession, the
percent of married couples with children without an earner increased substantially.
-

Figure 2.6 –

Figure 2.6 shows that, similar to the pattern for single mothers, this rate has not
declined much in the post-recession period. This pattern is not found in the US,
however. Like the increase in employment among single women with children, the

6

fraction of married couples without any work has been in decline. In fact, even among
low educated couples, the later period shows declines in the workless rate down to
less than 5 percent by 2000.
3

History and Reforms to UK In-Work Benefits
In-work benefit reform has been motivated as a method of poverty relief that

does not create adverse work incentives. This is achieved by targeting low-income
families with an income supplement that is contingent on work. Typically eligibility is
based on family income and requires the presence of children, reflecting in part the
higher welfare benefits for families with children, partly a desire to help low income
working families and partly the costs of childcare etc. Consequently these benefits are
most heavily targeted toward single parents and low income couples with children.
Increasingly, they are also being extended to low-income workers without children.2
The family income based eligibility rules and the interaction with other aspects of the
tax and benefit system make the analysis of incentives for in-work benefits more
complex than they may first appear.
Table 3.1 provides a “timeline” of the evolution of in-work benefits in the UK
and the US since their introduction in the 1970s. In the UK, Family Income
Supplement (FIS) which provided an earnings supplement for those families with at
least one full-time worker, was introduced in 1971. Like FIS in the UK, the EITC in
the US was also introduced in the 1970s as a way of offsetting the payroll tax for low
income US working families. The change in the composition of low income
households and the fall in labour market attachment in certain family types, further refocused the policy debate in both countries and highlighted the implicit tax on income
faced by such low income families in the tax and benefit system. In the UK FIS was
reformed and renamed Family Credit in 1988 which finally mutated into the current to
Working Families Tax Credit (WFTC) in 1999. At each step increasing the generosity
of the credit and mirroring, to some extent, the increase in generosity that occurred in
the reforms to EITC in the US.

2

See the proposed Employment Tax Credit, HM Treasury, March 2000.

7

3.1 The UK System of In-Work Benefits and Comparison to US In-Work Benefits
The current system of in-work benefits in the UK is the Working Families Tax
Credit. Introduced in October 1999, it increased the generosity of in-work support
relative to the previous Family Credit system through a larger adult and child credit, a
less severe benefit reduction rate and a new childcare credit. The main provisions of
the WFTC are outlined in Table 3.2. Eligibility for the WFTC requires having
dependent children, working at least 16 hours per week, and having income and assets
below the limit. The basic weekly credit is £53.15 and it is phased out at a rate of 55
percent. Both single and married couples are eligible. A useful way of viewing the
characteristics of British system is in comparison with the US EITC. Eligibility for
the EITC, also outlined in Table 3.2, requires dependent children, positive earned
income, and having income below the limit. The credit is phased in at a 34 (40)
percent rate, phased out at a rate of 15.98 (21.06) percent for families with one child
(two or more children).
A picture of the two systems in terms of their gross transfers is given in Figure
3.1. These are evaluated for a minimum wage single parent with one and with two
eligible children in both systems. Assuming that eligibility and receipt continued for a
complete year. The broad similarities in the programs include larger credits for two
child families and the phasing out of the benefits. The differences are also clear from
the figure. The vertical rise in eligibility in the UK system corresponds to the
minimum hours eligibility at 16 hours. At 16 hours the UK recipient receives the
maximum she is eligible to. This contrasts with the US proportionate tax credit up to
the maximum amount. The UK system also displays a much steeper withdrawal
reflecting a higher benefit reduction rate. This provides for a greater degree of
targeting in the UK system but the potential for higher implicit tax rates. There are
many additional specific idiosyncrasies to each of these systems (see Brewer (2000)
for an in depth recent comparison).
Overall for low earning families the UK system can be quite generous and
significantly more so than the US system. This is also clear from Figure 3.2, which
presents per recipient expenditures in both countries since the 1970s. Notice also the
four-fold increase in spending per recipient. However, as Figure 3.3 documents, the
caseloads for these two systems are quite different. In the US there are nearly 20m
recipients where as in the UK there are approaching 1m, even though the working age
8

population is around 1/5 of that in the US. The rapid growth of the caseload in the UK
is also significant especially given the slower population growth in the UK - from
216m to 273m from 1975 to 1999 representing 26.4% growth in the US in contrast to
56.2m to 59.5m representing just 5.3% growth in the UK over the same period.
So on the face of it; the UK system looks generous, well targeted with a caseload
that is growing rapidly. So why does it appear to have had less impact on labour
supply? For this we take a look back over the last two decades at the whole tax and
benefit system in the UK as it effects work incentives.
3.2 The Earlier In-work Benefits in the UK
In-work benefits have a long history in the UK. The first, Family Income
Supplement (FIS), was introduced in 1971. This was a non-contributory benefit
payable to low-income families with children, provided the head of the family was in
full-time paid work (defined as 30 hours per week, or 24 if the individual concerned
was a single parent). Entitlement depended on the family’s income falling below a
certain limit. The amount payable was half the difference between the family’s
income and the relevant limit.3 In addition to receipt of FIS, entitlement to FIS
automatically conferred a number of “passport” benefits available to those on
supplementary benefit – the income assistance programme for those not in full time
work, including free school milk and meals, free prescriptions and dental treatment
(see Dilnot, Kay and Morris (1985), for further detail).
Although FIS clearly provided some financial incentive to work, the combined
effect of the 50% FIS benefit reduction rate together with the impact of housing
benefit, tax and national insurance contributions often resulted in implicit tax rates in
excess of 100%. For example, under the FIS system an eligible worker with housing
costs would pay a 25% basic tax rate, plus a national insurance contribution of 7%, a
50% benefit reduction rate on FIS and a effective Housing Benefit reduction rate of
23%, resulting in an implicit tax rate of 105%. After the Family Credit reform this
would reduce to 97%. Still high, but below 100% (see: Dilnot and Webb (1989)).

3

The limits in 1983 were £85.50 per week for a one-child family with £9.50 for each subsequent child
with a maximum payment of £22 per week.

9

Family Credit
Introduced in 1988, Family Credit was an extension of FIS and was designed
to increase generosity and remove tax rates in excess of 100%. It achieved the later
objective by fully integrating the in-work credit with the rest of the tax and benefit
system. An unusual feature of the Family Credit system, retained from the FIS, was
the minimum weekly hours eligibility criterion. At its introduction this was set at 24
hours but then reduced to 16 in April 1992 to encourage part-time work by lone
parents with young children. FIS had a minimum hours criteria set at 30 hours for
workers in couples and 24 hours for single parents. To partially offset any adverse
incentive effects for full time work from these lower hours eligibility levels, a further
supplementary credit at 30 hours per week was introduced in April 1995.
In the FC system each eligible family was paid a credit up to a maximum
amount that depends on the number of children. Eligibility depended on family net
income being lower than some threshold (£79.00 per week in 1998-99). As incomes
rose the credit was withdrawn at a rate of 70%. In 1996 average payments were
around £57 a week and take-up rates stood at 69% of eligible individuals and 82% of
the potential expenditure.
The 16-hour reform proposed in the 1988 review of the UK benefit system,
only became effective in April 1992 and moved the hours eligibility rule from 24
hours per week to 16 (see Duncan and Dilnot (1994) for a detailed description of this
reform). Figures 3.4(a) – (b) show the impact on the budget constraint of a typical
single parent.4 Family Credit is treated as income in calculating other benefits
incomes – this is not the case for the US system. In the UK, this has the effect of
dampening down the incentives in the underlying in-work benefit system. The impact
of Housing Benefit (Rent Rebate), which is withdrawn at 65%, is particularly notable.
In the UK once family income falls below a specific level all rental payments are
covered through the benefit system. For example, in Figure 3.4(b), when the FC
becomes available at 16 hours, the housing benefit decreases substantially leading to a
minimal increase in income.
- Figures 3.4(a) – (b) 4

These are constructed using the IFS tax and benefit simulation model TAXBEN (see www.ifs.org.uk)
designed to utilise the Family Expenditure Survey and the Family Resources Survey used in this paper
(see the Data Appendix).

10

Similar budget constraints with very similar effects can be drawn for a low wage
couple with children (see Blundell (2001)). These figures show our first central point the importance of allowing for the interaction with other benefits and taxes.
Especially where means tested programmes, such as housing benefit in the UK,
extend up the income distribution to such an extent that the overlap extensively with
in-work benefits.
Although these budget constraint pictures show a high replacement rate they do
nevertheless suggest some financial incentive to take a 16 hour job after the 1992
reform. Does the data confirm this? Recall the picture of hours of work for low
education single parents in the UK in Section 2. This showed a strong peak at the 16
hours point. Blundell (2000) presents a picture of the hours changes before and after
the 1992 reform. It is notable that for single mothers a spike at 24 hours tends to
disappear in 1992 and 1992 as a spike at 16 hours becomes more pronounced. This 16
hour eligibility rule has been maintained throughout all the subsequent changes to inwork benefits in the UK. Interestingly as we saw in Figure 2.5, the spike at this point
in the hours distribution has also remained a predominant feature of the data for those
most likely to be eligible for in-work benefits in the UK.5
Figures 3.4(a) and (b) also highlight our second central point – the out of work
benefit system over this period was relatively generous and implied a fairly high
replacement rate for a low wage working parent. For example, income support and
housing benefits amount to about £100 per week comparing to a minimum wage in
1999 of £3.60 per hour.
In the discussion below we will show that increases in the value of in-work
benefits in the UK have typically been matched by similar increases in the value of
out of work benefits. Consequently replacement rates have remained quite high
contrasting quite dramatically with the recent experience in the US. We return to this
theme below but first complete our brief discussion of the history of UK in-work
benefit reforms.

5

As mentioned above further 30-hour supplement to Family Credit in the UK was introduced in 1995
(see Duncan and Giles (1996) for a detailed description). This has also been maintained throughout all
subsequent reforms and is what gives rise to the second peak in the in-work benefit payments in Figure
3.1.

11

The Working Families Tax Credit
The replacement of FC – the WFTC – was substantially more generous and was
fully phased in from April 2000. It increased the level of in-work support relative to
the FC system in four ways: by enhancing the credit for younger children; by
increasing the threshold; by reducing the benefit reduction rate from 70% to 55%; and
by incorporating a new childcare credit of 70% of actual childcare costs up to a quite
generous limit. The effects of these changes relative to FC are shown in Figure 3.5.
- Figure 3.5 The largest cash gains go to those people who are just at the end of the FC benefit
reduction taper. The impact on the budget constraint of a single parent is presented in
Figures 3.6(a)-(b). Again a similar constraint can be calculated for couples with
children (see Blundell (2001)). Indeed, since couples typically have higher housing
costs and are eligible to higher levels of in-work credit the replacement rate for lower
hours is even higher. If anything this reform increases the incentives for full time jobs.
As we find in section 5, this is born out in the simulation model.
This discussion once again highlights the importance of interactions between
benefits. WFTC payments are counted as income in computing the entitlement to
other benefits such as housing benefits. The budget constraints show the importance
of these interactions in reducing the impact of the increased generosity in the WFTC.
-

Figures 3.6(a) – (d) -

Childcare credit increases the maximum amount of WFTC by 70% of childcare
costs up to a maximum of £100 per week for those with one child or £150 per week
for those with two or more children. The childcare credit component is available to all
working lone parents and to couples where both partners work more than 16 hours per
week.6 The requirement that both parents work helps to offset the negative incentive
to work on the second worker in a couple implicit in the family based calculation of
the level of the credit in both the WFTC. We return to the importance of this adverse
effect on couples in our detailed discussion of the WFTC reform in section 5. It is also
important for the EITC and reoccurs in our discussion of the EITC reforms in section
4.

12

3.3 The Impact on Work Incentives over the 1980s and 1990s in the UK.
In the previous discussion the importance of interactions of in-work benefits
with other benefits in the UK and the level of those other benefits has been
highlighted. It is central to our understanding of the financial incentives to work for
low wage parents in the UK. We have seen the impact of these interactions is to
dampen, often quite dramatically, the financial incentives to work. To evaluate the
likely effect of these reforms to the financial incentives to work facing the target
groups in the UK population over the 1980s and 1990s we consider an overall view of
changes to the UK income support and benefit system.
We first consider the impact of all reforms on the maximum amount of out of
work income support and the maximum amount of in-work benefit over this period
since the late 1970s. These figures are presented in Figures 3.7(a) and 3.7(b) for a
single mother in the UK. These maximum amounts simply depend on the hours
worked and the number of children. They underscore the second important feature of
the UK system that is in direct contrast to the US experience. The real value of the
maximum amount of income support in and out of work has remained very similar
over time. Where in-work credits have increased, especially with regard to the recent
very large increases in the real value of child credits (see Figure 3.7(b)) they have
been matched by very similar rises in the child component of out of work income
support for low income families. The only slight divergence from this rule came in the
1995 introduction of a supplementary adult credit at 30 hours of work.
Interesting as these figures are, they clearly miss the differences that have
occurred due to changes in the minimum hours requirement and to interactions with
taxes and other benefits in calculating actual receipts rather than maximum eligible
amounts. Figures 3.8(a) and 3.8(b) attempt to capture this. In these figures we have
ignored housing benefit – this will be introduced in the following two figures. They
consider the financial incentives for a single parent with two children (one aged less
than 5 and one aged between 5 and 10). They assume that if she works she is paid at
the real value of the minimum wage in 1999 (£3.60 per hour). Three possible weekly
hours of work are considered; 16, 24 and 35. Figure 3.8(a) presents the replacement
rate computed as the ratio of total benefit income if out of work and total disposable
6

This is not included in the calculation of the budget constraint figures because the take-up of childcare
credits has been rather low. As we point out in section 5, recent figures of take-up under WFTC show it

13

income if in work. Figure 3.8(b) shows corresponding average tax rate calculated as
the proportionate loss in earnings in taking a minimum wage job at these hours of
work.
At the beginning of the period the replacement rates for 24 and 35 hour jobs
were around 60% and relatively stable over the early and mid 1980s falling with the
introduction of FIS in 1988 especially for 24 hour jobs. The replacement rate fell back
a little in the 1995 for higher hours workers after the 30 hour supplement in 1995.7
For 16-hour jobs the replacement rate is very high indeed. The biggest changes in
these figures come from the reform in the late 1980s that reduced eligibility for inwork benefits to 16 hours from 24 hours.
Figures 3.9 (a) and (b) present the replacement rate and average tax rates
including Housing Benefit. The overall pattern is very similar. The dampening effect
of HB is clearly visible. For example, the replacement rates are in general higher for
the 24 and 35 hour jobs than in Figure 3.8(a). The drop in the rates for 16 hour jobs
with the 1992 reform is still important but less dramatic.
These figures serve to underscore our two key points with regard to the benefit
and tax credit system in the UK. First, that the interaction of work based credits with
the tax and benefit system has the effect of dampening the financial incentives. This is
not a feature of the US EITC. Second, where generosity in the work-based credits has
increased, it has been typically matched by increases in out of work income support
for families with children. This has left the replacement rate and effect tax rates rather
stable over time. Again this contrasts importantly with the US system where there has
been a relative decline in the value of out of work income support. The generosity of
Housing Benefit and child additions to income support in the UK has left the level of
out of work income for families with children at an increasingly higher rate than that
in the US. Four fifths of all single parents on Income Support in 1999 were also in
receipt of Housing Benefit.
Two other features of the UK experience are probably worth highlighting at this
juncture. First, the UK welfare system provides benefits not only to lone parents but
also so couples with children. This is in contrast to the US where couples with
to have remained low but increasing quite rapidly.
7
The rise in the replacement rate in 1999 reflects the removal of one parent benefit. This is reversed by
the introduction of WTFC in the final year of our Figure.

14

children are provided substantially more limited benefits. In fact, in the UK, Housing
Benefit and Income Support are generally higher for couples due to higher housing
costs and larger families. The upshot of this is that the budget constraint and
replacement rate figures for couples on low incomes look very similar to those for
single parents, indeed the replacement rates can be quite a bit higher. This certainly
has some bearing on the much larger incidence of workless couples with children in
the UK.
The second factor, which adds to the findings so far, is the growing importance
of housing costs for low-income families over the last two decades. This reflected a
strong increase in the real level of rents paid in both private and public housing over
the 1980s. Even though the rules of the housing benefit system were left relatively
unchanged, the eligible amounts and receipts increased dramatically over this period.
This was one of the main factors behind the rise in out of work incomes received by
low income families in rented accommodation over the 1980s (see Giles, Johnson and
McCrae (1997) and Dickens and Ellwood (2001), for example). In Figures 3.9(a) and
(b) the housing benefit is kept at the same 2000 real value throughout so that the true
picture for someone in the rented sector would have an increasing the financial
disincentive to work, counteracting increases in in-work benefits.
4
4.1

Evidence from the US Reforms
Programs for the Low Income Population in the US
Out of work benefit programs through the welfare system have been the

backbone of assistance to low income persons in the US. Since 1935, the Aid to
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) has provided cash transfers to needy
single parents with children.

Since the 1960s and 1970s, the social safety net

expanded to provide in kind benefits to needy individuals. The primary in-kind
benefit programs include Food Stamps, Medicaid (health insurance), and housing
subsidies.

Eligibility for these welfare programs requires satisfying resource

restrictions in the form of limits on current income and assets. In general, these
welfare programs have primarily been limited to single parents with children, largely
excluding married couples and non-elderly persons without children. While some
working families receive welfare benefits, they are not “in work” programmes. Like
most welfare programs, families receive the maximum benefit if they are not working,
15

and face high benefit reduction rates with increases in family earnings. As is well
recognized, the programs provide adverse work incentives.
The Earned Income Tax Credit began in 1975 as a modest program aimed at
offsetting the social security payroll tax for low-income families with children.

As

discussed more below, the generosity of the EITC increased in tax acts of 1986, 1990,
and 1993. The contrasts between the EITC and traditional welfare benefits are many.
First, the EITC is provided through the tax system rather than the welfare system.
Second, eligibility for the EITC is available to all low-income families with children,
independent of marital status. Third, receipt of the credit requires positive family
earnings. Consequently, the EITC creates positive incentives to work for single
parent families. Because the credit is based on family earnings, however, the credit
can create adverse incentives to work among married couples.
Reforms to the Earned Income Tax Credit
The basic structure of the EITC has not changed substantially in the 25 years
since its introduction. Eligibility for the EITC depends on the taxpayer’s earned
income (or in some cases adjusted gross income), and the number of qualifying
children who meet certain age, relationship and residency tests. Several features of the
credit are different from the UK in-work programs. First, the credit is within the tax
system and is a refundable credit so that a taxpayer with no federal tax liability, for
example, would receive a tax refund from the government for the full amount of the
credit. Second, the credit amount depends on annual income and earnings and
virtually all recipients receive the credit in one lump sum at the end of the year. Last,
the EITC does not count as income in welfare benefit formulas. As we will see
below, this difference turns out to be very important.
The amount of the credit to which a taxpayer is entitled depends on the
taxpayer's earned income, adjusted gross income, and, since 1991, the number of
EITC-eligible children in the household.

There are three regions in the credit

schedule. The initial phase-in region transfers an amount equal to the subsidy rate
times their earnings. In the flat region, the family receives the maximum credit. In
the phase-out region, the credit is phased out at some phase-out rate.
Table 4.1 summarizes the parameters of the EITC over the history of the
program. The real value of the credit increased only modestly in the early years and
16

was mostly due to inflation8. The 1987 expansion of the EITC, passed as part of the
Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86), represents the first major expansion of the EITC.
TRA86 increased the subsidy rate for the phase-in of the credit from 11 percent to 14
percent and increased the maximum credit from $550 to $851 ($788 in 1986 dollars).
The phase-out rate was reduced from 12.22 percent to 10 percent.
The 1991 expansion, contained in the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1990
(OBRA90), increased the maximum credit, and introduced separate credit rates for
families with two or more children. By 1993, a family with two or more children
could receive a maximum credit of $1,511, $77 more than a family with one child.
The largest single expansion over this period was contained in the Omnibus
Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA93) legislation. The 1993 expansion of the EITC,
phased in between 1994 and 1996, led to an increase in the subsidy rate from 19.5
percent to 40 percent (18.5 to 34 percent) and an increase in the maximum credit from
$1,511 to $3,556 ($1,434 to $2,152) for taxpayers with two or more children
(taxpayers with one child). This expansion was substantially larger for those with two
or more children. The phase-out rate was also raised, from 14 percent to 21 percent
(13 to 16 percent) for taxpayers with two or more children (taxpayers with one child).
Overall, the range of the phase-out was expanded dramatically, such that by 1996 a
couple with two children would still be eligible with income levels of almost $30,000.
- Table 4.1 To summarize the changes in the EITC, Figure 4.1 presents the credit schedule
in 1984, 1990, 1993, and 1996. This shows that 1986 and 1993 expansions were the
most substantial.
- Figure 4.1 here -

Reforms to the AFDC Program
This period saw not only expansions in the EITC but also important changes
in AFDC, changes that are important for analysing the financial incentives to work.
These changes generally take the form of making the out of work benefits less
generous and creating greater work incentives. This is the opposite of the trend in the
8

The EITC was first indexed to inflation in 1987.

17

UK. This difference is critical to understanding the “puzzle” here. From the late
1970s to the early 1990s the only substantial change in the AFDC program was a
gradual erosion in the real value of benefits. For example, between 1979 and 1993
real benefits for welfare recipients fell by over 30 percent. Even taking into account
falling real wages for the low skilled population in this period, benefits relative to
wages still fell by over 15 percent (Hoynes and MaCurdy 1994). Beginning in the
early to mid 1990s some states made significant changes to their AFDC programs
through the provision of federal waivers. These waivers, as discussed recently by
Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999) and Schoeni and Blank (2000), largely created greater
incentives to work by reducing the implicit tax on earned income or expanding the
work requirements. This led up to major federal welfare reform legislation passed in
1996 (the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act or
PRWORA) that ended the entitlement nature of the AFDC program. The AFDC
program was abolished and replaced by Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF).
The major provision of this act is the addition of lifetime time limits on
welfare receipt, typically five years in length. In addition, states are required to
increase the work effort of welfare recipients and have been given much more
flexibility to redesign programs to achieve this goal. Overall, these changes have
unambiguously led to an increase in the financial incentive to work.
As we discussed above, it is important whether the income from in-work
programs is taken into account in the calculation of welfare benefits. Overtime, the
rules surrounding the treatment of income from the EITC have changed (2000 Green
Book). Between 1975 and 1978, the EITC did not count as income for the calculation
of welfare benefits.9 However, between 1979 and 1987, the credit was treated as
income. Since 1988 (the main period of importance) the EITC once again is not
counted as income.
4.2

The EITC Reforms
The trends presented in Section 2 show the quite dramatic increases in

employment among single women with children. The explanations advanced in the
9

While the EITC was counted as income for 1979-1987, WHEN it counted as income changed
somewhat. For part of the period, the credit only counted as income in the month that it was received
(remember that the vast majority of recipients receive it as a tax refund in one annual payment) while
in another part of this period, the imputed value of the credit was spread out over the year.

18

literature include the expansion of the EITC, increases in the minimum wage, welfare
reform and the sustained economic expansion. Of particular interest here is the role
played by the EITC. An expansion in the EITC leads unambiguously to increases in
employment rates for single women with children. The EITC policy reforms in 1986,
1990 and 1993 are useful in providing a “before and after” assessment of their
effectiveness in changing labour market behaviour. Eissa and Liebman (1996) use
repeated cross sections of the CPS to examine the effect of the 1986 reform on single
mothers. They consider two comparisons, either the whole group of single women
with children are used with single women without children as controls, or the group of
low education single women with children are used with the low education single
women without children as controls. The former control group can be criticized for
not capturing the common macro effects. In particular, this control group is already
working to a very high level of participation in the US labour market (around 95%)
and therefore cannot be expected to increase its level of participation in response to
the economy coming out of a recession. In this case all the expansion in labour market
participation in the group of single women with children will be attributed to the
reform itself. The later group is therefore more appropriate as it targets better those
single parents who are likely to be eligible to EITC and the control group has a
participation rate of about 70%.
With these caveats in mind, there remain some relatively strong results on
participation effects that come from the Eissa and Liebman study. For single parents
there is evidence of a reasonable movement in to work. The expansion of the EITC
and other tax changes led to a reduction in the relative tax liability of single mothers
of $1331 (1996 dollars) and their estimated impact of the expansion was to increase
employment from 73.0 to 75.8 percent. There is also some evidence of negative effect
on hours for those in work but this is rather small.
Liebman (1998) and Meyer and Rosenbaum (2000) use a similar approach to
examine the impact of all three of the EITC reforms. The estimated behavioral
responses are very similar in magnitude to those found by Eissa and Liebman (1996).
The Liebman results are summarized in Figure 4.2. The figure plots the difference in
employment rates of single women with and without children against the difference in

19

the maximum EITC credit in 1996 dollars.10 The figure shows that the relative
increase in employment rates among single mothers tracks quite closely the expansion
of the EITC. Meyer and Rosenbaum (2000) present similar calculations for several
other comparison groups including comparing single women with one child to those
with two or more children, single mothers to married mothers, single mothers to black
men. Figure 4.3 summarizes the results comparing single women with one child to
those with two or more children.

The “treatment” here is that the 1993 EITC

expansion was much more generous for families with two or more children. These
results are somewhat less clear than above but show an increase in employment of
single women with two or more children relative to those with only one child at the
same time that the EITC is becoming more generous for larger families.11
Of course, the EITC reforms were not the only changes affecting the returns to
work during this period. As recently discussed by Blank (2000), the mid 1990s
simultaneously brought EITC expansions, minimum wage increases, welfare reform,
and the very strong labor market.12 Blank argues that our ability to determine the
relative importance of these factors is limited by the fact that the changes were
coincident. Despite these difficulties, Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999) examine the
determinants of employment of single mothers between 1984 and 1996. This period
ends before federal welfare reform but includes the period when states were
experimenting with welfare waivers. They use a sample of single mothers with and
without children and model the gains to entering work for the two groups taking into
account a rich set of tax and transfer programs. They find that expansions in the EITC
account for 60 percent of the sizeable increase in employment rates with smaller
impacts due to welfare waivers and declining real welfare benefits. Ellwood (1999),
comparing employment across skill groups, also finds changes to welfare and the
EITC to have stimulated labor supply of single mothers with children. However, in
contrast to Meyer and Rosenbaum, his work finds that welfare program changes were
slightly more important than the EITC expansions.

10

In the early period, the difference in maximum credit is equal to the credit for families with children.
The figure takes into account that there was a small EITC for childless families starting in 1994. It is
not clear whether Liebman took this into account in his calculation.
11
The employment figures in Liebman and Meyer and Rosenbaum are unconditional. The authors state
that the general conclusions do not change when adding controls.
12
The federal minimum wage increased in nominal terms from $3.35 in 1990 to $5.15 in 1997.

20

Overall, the literature suggests that the EITC has played an important role in
the large increases in employment among single women with children. Eissa and
Hoynes (1998) is one of the few papers that have considered the impact of the EITC
on married couples. They use two estimation approaches. In the first they compare
the labor market outcomes of married couples with children to married couples
without children.

In the second, they limit the sample of married couples with

children and model changes in the returns to work including tax and transfer policy
changes. Using both methods, they find that an expansion in the EITC leads to
modest increases in labor force participation for married men and somewhat larger
decreases in labor supply for married women. That is, they find evidence of negative
“income” effect reducing the labour supply of married women. This is precisely the
adverse effect that can be expected when a work contingent tax credit is based on a
family income and will also be found in our evaluation of the likely impact of the
WFTC in the UK.13
5

Evaluating the WFTC Reform
As was described in section 3, the Working Families Tax Credit introduced in

October 1999 is substantially more generous than the prior in-work benefit in the UK
– Family Credit. It increases the generosity of in-work support relative to the FC
system in four ways: by enhancing the credit for younger children; by increasing the
threshold; by reducing the benefit reduction rate from 70% to 55%; and by
incorporating a new childcare credit of 70% of actual childcare costs up to a quite
generous limit. As we have argued there are two important aspects of the UK benefit
and credit system that have to be accounted for when assessing any in-work benefit
reform. First, any increase in generosity will be dampened by interactions with means
tested income maintenance schemes. In particular the Housing Benefit scheme. As we
noted above, four fifths of single parents who do not work and who claim Income
Support are in receipt of Housing Benefit. Second, increases in the credit for children
and in the threshold level have typically been matched by increases to income support
for non-working parents. As our discussion in section 3 stressed, this has also been a
feature of the WFTC reform.

13

This negative labor supply result for married couples can also be found in Dickert et al (1995) and
Neumark and Wascher (2000).

21

5.1 Simulating the Reform
To provide an ex-ante simulation of the impact of new reforms like the WFTC
a model is required that separates preferences from constraints. Such a model is
developed in Blundell, Duncan, McCrae and Meghir (2000). This work develops
earlier structural labour supply simulation models14 by Hoynes (1996), for example,
and provides a similar framework to Bingley and Walker (1997) who considered
earlier reforms to the UK benefit system.

In particular, it allows for child care

demands to vary with hours worked and it allows for fixed costs of work. It also
accounts for take-up by incorporating welfare stigma following on from Keane and
Moffitt (1998).15 This model was estimated and the simulations reported here
computed before the WFTC was fully implemented.
The simulations focus on the two target groups for the WFTC reform: single
parents and married couples with children. Two samples from the 1994-95 and 199596 British Family Resources Surveys (FRS) are selected; single parent households
and married or de facto married couples. Excluding self-employed and retired
households, together with students and those in HM forces, leaves samples of 1807
single parents and 4694 two-person households for use in estimation. Nearly 50% of
currently working single parents were found to be in receipt of some Family Credit.
For married couples with children this proportion is smaller, at around 16%.
However, the latter group is more than two and half times the size of the former.
As we have seen, the WFTC reform is designed to influence the work
incentives of those with low potential returns in the labour market. It does this via the
increased generosity of in-work means-tested benefits. For single parents the WFTC
does unambiguously increase the incentive to work. For couples, however, the
incentives created by the WFTC can lead to a lower participation in the labour
market. This offsetting effect on employment for secondary workers in couples has
also been highlighted in the context of the EITC reforms, see Eissa and Hoynes
(1998) and the discussion above.
- Figures 5.1(a)-(e)14

Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) provide a detailed overview of such models.
Introducing a stigma costs to participation in WFTC allows the simulation model to predict a low
probability of take-up among those with low eligibility. Something found in earlier studies of welfare
programme take-up in the UK (Blundell and Fry (1986)). Moreover, its suggests a higher take–up of

15

22

Figure 5.1 (a) shows the effect of the WFTC reform on the net income and
hours schedule for a typical eligible single parent. This accounts for all the
interactions in the tax and benefit system and concurrent reforms to the income
support system. Provided, fixed costs of work are not too high, the financial incentive
to move into work for a non-participant is clear. There is also an incentive to reduce
hours of work among those single parents working full time. The balance between
these is purely an empirical matter although the EITC analysis, discussed in the
previous section, suggested that the adverse hours effect would not dominate the
positive participation effect.
Figure 5.1 (c) presents a similar example of the financial incentives facing a
male in a married couple where the partner does not work. For such couples where
neither parent is working the incentives are unambiguously to move into work. Indeed
the gains are far larger than for our lone parent example, as the largest cash gains
from the WFTC reform accrue to those at the end of the current taper. The incentives
to change hours of work are ambiguous. But one interesting point is the marked
increase in the effective marginal tax rate for those who become eligible to WFTC as
a result of the reform. This group face an increase in their marginal tax rates from
33%, produced by income tax and National Insurance, to just under 70%, produced by
the interaction of the 55% WFTC taper on post-tax income. In the example the
marginal tax rate rises from 33% to just under 70% above 40 hours of work.
One final point, highlighted in our discussion of the EITC reforms in the US,
is the likely incentive for some workers in married couples to move out of work
altogether. Figure 5.1 (d) shows the budget constraint for the partner of the man in
Figure 5.1 (c). The figure is conditional on the man working 40 hours a week. Thus
the family income of the woman when she does not work is that shown at 40 hours
point. This means that the income at zero hours has increased through the WFTC
reform. In the example, anyone working more than 10 hours has an increased
incentive to reduce their hours or move out of work altogether. The situation changes
slightly when we allow for childcare costs at 16 hours as shown in Figure 5.1 (e).
Here there is an additional incentive to work just over 16 hours to take advantage of

WFTC (in contrast to FC) for those whose eligible amount of credit has increased as a result of the
WFTC reform.

23

the childcare credit. Thus the impact on partners in eligible families where there is
already one worker is again ambiguous.
5.1.1

WFTC Simulations: Lone parents
In Table 5.2 (a) the simulated work responses to the WFTC among the sample

of single parents are reported. The simulated transition takes around 2.2% of the
sample from no work to either part-time or full-time work, with no offsetting
movements out of the labour market. This represents nearly a 5% impact on
employment for this group which has employment rates around 40%. To take account
of sampling variability, a standard error of 0.42% is placed around the 2.2% figure.
To provide the population counterparts to these changes, Table 5.1 provides the
total size of the population and the grossed up equivalent from the FRS sample. One
can clearly see the reason for this shift in the earlier graphs of the potential impact of
the WFTC on single parents' budget constraints. At or above 16 hours per week the
single parent becomes eligible for WFTC (with any childcare credit addition to which
she may be entitled). For some women this extra income makes a transition to parttime employment attractive.
Tables 5.1 and 5.2 (a)-(d) about here
We see a minor offsetting reduction in labour supply through a simulated shift
from full-time to part-time employment among 0.2% of the sample. This is consistent
with a small (negative) income effect among some full-time single women, for whom
the increase in income through the WFTC encourages a reduction in labour supply.
Nevertheless, the predominant incentive effect among single parents is a positive
effect on participation.
5.1.2

WFTC Simulations: Women with employed partners
For married women the simulated incentive effect is quite different. Table 5.2

(b) reports estimates of the transitions following WFTC among a sub-sample of
women with employed partners. There is a significant overall reduction in the number
of women in work of around 0.57%. This overall reduction comprises around 0.2%
who move into the labour market following the reform, and 0.8% who move from
work to non-participation. The number of hours worked by women with employed
partners is predicted to fall slightly.
24

The predominant negative response is clearly not one that is intended, but from
the earlier budget constraint analysis one can easily see why. There will be a
proportion of non-working women whose low earning partners will be eligible for the
WFTC. The greater generosity of the tax credit relative to the current system of
Family Credit increases household income. This increase in income would be lost if
the woman in the household were to work. And for those women currently in the
labour market, the WFTC increases the income available to the household if she were
to stop working.
5.1.3

WFTC Simulations: Women with unemployed partners
In Table 5.2 (c) the incentives for a sub-sample of women whose partners do

not work are presented. For this group there is a significant overall increase of 1.32%
in the number of women who work. The reason for this shift is more straightforward,
and stems from the increased generosity of the basic WFTC relative to the current
Family Credit system for those women who choose to move into work. Note that for
this group the generosity of the childcare credit component of the WFTC is not an
issue, since households only qualify for the childcare credit if both household
members work 16 hours or more. There is of course potential for both members of an
unemployed household to move into work in order to qualify for the WFTC including
the childcare credit, but a joint simulation (not reported here) shows that such an
outcome is virtually non-existent.
Table 5.2 (d) provides an overall summary of the employment effects that could
be expected from this reform. This table also provides the impact on male
employment. The impact on single parents is quite significant. This is also the case for
workless couples with children. These are the two target groups we mentioned at the
outset. However, “adverse” effects on couples in which one spouse is working
somewhat offset these effects. Overall the effects on participation across the two
groups of men roughly cancel out leaving the major impact operating through the
effects on women, mainly single parents. However, if we consider the impact on
workless households alone, then the overall impact of the WFTC is predicted to be
much more substantial.

25

5.2 WFTC – Some Recent Ex-Post Evidence
The WFTC was introduced for all new recipients in October 1999 and fully
phased in by April 2000. From recent administrative caseload data16, the introduction
of the WFTC, and the substantial increase in generosity, appears to have had a marked
effect on the number of people claiming in-work benefits. Figure 5.2 shows that
caseload has risen by 30% in the 12 months since May 1999. Table 5.2 shows that the
average award has risen from £63 to £76 a week over the same period. Average gross
weekly income of claimants is now £153, and average weekly hours worked 30.5.
52% of recipients are lone parents.
There has also been a large increase in take-up of the Childcare Tax Credit
compared to the childcare disregard under Family Credit. 111,000 families were
receiving help with childcare costs in May 2000, a 156% increase over 12 months.
The average amount of costs claimed was £32 a week. But although a large increase,
this is still only 10% of the total WFTC caseload (Table 5.1).
Obviously some of the change in WFTC caseload is due to the increased
numbers of already working parents who qualify for WFTC due to its increased
generosity. This alone cannot be taken as a measure of success in increasing
employment. We can learn a little more by looking at administrative data on crossbenefit flows. Figure 5.3 breaks down the WFTC/FC caseload by their situation 12
months ago. It shows that a large component the caseload increase (around 75%,
taking the last 4 quarters of FC as a baseline) since October 1999 has come from
people who were not claiming any means-tested benefits or tax credits 12 months
before. Both these two facts are consistent with the increased entitlement of the
WFTC compared with FC.
It is informative to compare the predicted labour supply effects discussed
earlier with the available administrative data. The simulations reported in Table 5.2
above17 estimate that around 30,000 currently-workless lone parents with children
will enter work as a result of WFTC18. The Government’s equivalent (and
unpublished) estimate for the package of tax and benefit reforms is around 40,000
lone parents with children. Although we cannot make accurate inferences from this
16

Department of Social Security, Client Group Analysis.
Similar percentage effects on single parents can be found in the Gregg et al (2000) study.
18
We cannot analyse couples who move into work because of the difficulties in classifying couples
who change claimants when they change benefits/tax credits.
17

26

high-level analysis of administrative data, we cannot yet see a change in the behaviour
of lone parents of this magnitude. Comparing February 2000 with August 1999, only
5% (10,000 families) of the increase in the WFTC/FC caseload is due to lone parents
moving from Income Support to WFTC.
There are several important reasons that could explain the discrepancy. First,
responses to reforms take time. It took two years for the strong peak at 16 hours to
appear after the 1992 reform to Family Credit in the UK. Second, we have presented
an extremely crude analysis that does not, for example, control for any underlying
changes in the number of lone parents moving from IS to WFTC/FC (for example, the
number of lone parents moving from Income Support to WFTC/FC fell by 7,000 in
the 12 months to August 1999). Third, we also cannot identify lone parents on other
out-of-work benefits.
Nonetheless taken together with our simulation results these administrative
statistics suggest that the impact of the WFTC reform on employment among low
income families in the UK will be positive but modest. This supports our overall view
that the workings of the tax and benefit system in the UK together with the increased
generosity to workless families with children, mean that changes to financial work
incentives from in-work benefit reforms are relatively small. One caveat to this is the
possible impact of childcare credit. Under WFTC this is a generous scheme available
only to those in work (requiring both parents in a couples to work at least 16 hours)
but, as we have indicated, it is currently taken up by only a small fraction of WFTC
recipients. If participation in this part of the WFTC program was to expand
significantly it could further encourage labour supply among those low income
parents currently who are currently out of work and claiming Income Support.

6

Summary and Conclusions
The late 1980s and 1990s saw substantial expansions to the UK system of in-work

benefits. Most recently, in 1999 the Family Credit was expanded and replaced by the
Working Families Tax Credit.

The goal of these policy reforms is clear: to

significantly increase the employment of the targeted groups of lone parents and
workless couples. That goal, however, has not yet been realized. Employment rates
of single women with children declined with the recession of the early 1980s and
since then have remained quite low. This presents somewhat of a puzzle, especially

27

in contrast to the very different experience in the US. The US also expanded its main
in-work benefit program, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), during the late 1980s
and 1990s.

But these expansions were accompanied by large increases in the

employment rates of single mothers. This has been heralded as a great policy success.
The goal of our paper is to explore this “puzzle” and determine why the results were
so different in the UK.
We adopt a two-part strategy. First, we present a comparative analysis of the
UK and the US. In particular, we gain insight into the puzzle in the UK by comparing
the features and reforms to the in-work and out-of-work benefit programs in the US
and UK. Second, we use estimates from an empirical labor supply and program
participation model to simulate the effects of the recent policy expansions in the UK.
This analysis leads to several important findings. First, in-work benefits in the
US are structured in such a way as they generate larger financial incentives to work
compared to the UK.

The UK in-work benefits are counted as income in the

computation of important out-of-work benefit programs like Housing Benefit – a rent
rebate system. The significant benefit reduction rate in these programs eats away at
the in-work benefit leading to very small gains to working. In the US, by contrast, the
EITC is not counted as income for the calculation of any other transfer program so the
household sees the full gain of the in-work benefit. We conclude that the interaction
between in-work benefits and other means tested benefits is of central importance in
understanding the precise change in incentives that reforms to the in-work benefit
system have delivered.
Second, in the US, the expansions to the in-work benefits occurred at a time
when the out-of-work benefits were being reduced. In particular, welfare programs
underwent major reforms leading to a decline in the value of staying out of the labor
force for single mothers. Thus the increase in incentives to work through the EITC
was strengthened by the decline in the generosity of out-of-work benefits. In the UK,
by contrast, the out-of-work programs either maintained levels of generosity or in
some cases actually increased generosity in step with the increases in the in-work
programs. The combination of these two forces meant that the expansions of the UK
in-work programs generated rather modest increases in the incentives to work.
We do find strong evidence that targeted groups respond to the incentives in
their labour supply behaviour. For example, we can point to the concentration of
hours of work for lone parents at the 16 hours per week eligibility point. And the
28

movement in this concentration from 24 to 16 when the minimum hours eligibility
point was changed in the 1992 budget. Using a simulation model that reflects these
responses to incentives, we consider the likely impact of the recent WFTC reform in
the UK. The simulations suggest an important impact on single parents drawing more
than 30,000 into work and off income support. For couples there are offsetting effects.
A significant percentage of men in workless couples are predicted to move into
employment. A further and larger group of mothers in workless couples are predicted
to move into work. These positive increases in employment for workless couples with
children is offset somewhat by a decrease in the level of employment in couples with
children where both spouses are working, reflecting the income effect. The impact on
workless families is therefore likely to be much more substantial than on overall
participation.
This can only be a partial assessment of the recent reforms to the structure of
in-work benefits in the UK. There are several additional issues that have been raised.
The first relates to childcare. The recent reform in the UK contains a generous
childcare component. If taken up it could significantly improve the labour supply of
the target groups. Also it mitigates the offsetting effect on working married couples
since there is a requirement that both parents work in a couple for eligibility. On face
value, childcare should be important. The data show that the low attachment rates are
concentrated among women whose youngest child is below formal school age.
Indeed, one interpretation of the experimental findings in Card and Robins (1998) is
that in-work benefits speed up the entry into work of mothers with young children.
However, to date, the take-up among couples is less than 2% and among single
parents it is also less than 10%. These low take-up rates are somewhat of a puzzle and
may reflect the time taken for the child care market to adapt.
Finally, there is the issue of wage progression. Will the earnings of the
recipients who are brought into work due to the increase generosity of in-work benefit
programmes see any significant growth in real wages? Will they eventually be able to
earn their way out of the in-work benefit system? Unlike the Canadian SSP
experiment the UK and US systems are not time limited. At first sight this looks to set
up the wrong incentives for wage progression. Certainly the incentives for individuals
to seek out wage progression are likely reduced. But there is a potential pay-off from
on the job learning. For this the evidence is sparse but there are two important studies
– Card and Robins (1999) study of the wages of the control and treatment groups in
29

the Canadian experiment, and the Gladden and Taber (1999) study of true experience
effects across education and gender groups in the US. Both these studies point to
modest wage growth. The second study shows that growth is rather similar across
skill and gender groups. Positive news? Yes, but the growth rates are low and the
wage rates of these individuals in the UK are very low. Given the large impact on
incomes – and implicitly on hourly wages – that is brought about through in-work
benefits in the UK, it is doubtful that wage progression alone will lead to any
significant movement out of in-work benefit receipt.

REFERENCES
Bingley, Paul and Ian Walker (1997), “The Labour Supply, Unemployment and
Participation of Lone Mothers in In-Work Transfer Programs”', Economic
Journal, 107, 1375-1390.
Blank, Rebecca (2000), “Declining Caseloads / Increased Work: What Can We
Conclude about the Effects of Welfare Reform,” prepared for conference
Welfare Reform Four Years Later, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Blank, R.M., Card, D.E., and Robins, P.K. (2000), “Financial Incentives for
Increasing Work and Income Among Low-Income Families” in Finding Jobs:
Work and Welfare Reform, David Card and Rebecca M. Blank (eds), New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Blundell, Richard, Alan Duncan and Costas Meghir (1998), “Estimating Labour
Supply Responses using Tax Policy Reforms”, Econometrica, 66, 827-861.
Blundell, R. W, Duncan, A.S., McCrae, J. and Meghir, C. (2000), “The Labour
Market Impact of the Working Families Tax Credit”, Fiscal Studies, 21, 6574.
Blundell, R. (2000), “Work Incentives and In-Work Benefit Reforms: A Review”,
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 16(1).
Blundell, R. (2001), “Welfare Reform for Low Income Workers”, Oxford Economic
Papers, 53, 189-214.
Blundell, R and V. Fry (1986), “Modeling the Take-Up of Means Tested Benefits:
The Case of Housing Benefits in the UK”, Economic Journal, 83, 18-34.
Blundell, R. and Reed, H. (2000), “The Employment Effects of the Working Families
Tax Credit”, http://www.ifs.org.uk/labmarket/wftc_bn.pdf.
Blundell, R.W. and MaCurdy, T. (1999), “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches”, in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds), Handbook of Labor
Economics Vol III, Elsevier North-Holland.
Brewer, M. (2000), “Comparing In-Work Benefits and Financial Work Incentives for
Low-Income Families in the US and the UK”, Institute for Fiscal Studies
Working Paper W00/16, forthcoming Fiscal Studies

30

Brewer, M, M. Myck and H. Reed, (2001), “Financial Support for Families with
Children”, Institute for Fiscal Studies, Commentary 82, January.
Card, David and Philip K. Robins (1998), “Do Financial Incentives Encourage
Welfare Recipients To Work?”, Research in Labor Economics, 17, pp 1-56.
Card, David and Philip K. Robins (1999), “Measuring “Wage Progression” Among
Former Welfare Recipients”, Center for Labor Economic, Discussion Paper,
Berkeley, September.
Cossa, R., Heckman, J.L. and Lochner, L. (1999), “Wage Subsidies and Skill
Formation: A Study of the Earned Income Tax Credit”, mimeo.
Council of Economic Advisers (1999), The Effect of Welfare Policy and the Economic
Expansion on Welfare Caseloads: An Update, Washington DC: Executive
Office of the President.
Department of Social Security (various years c), Client Group Analysis – Working
Age, London: Government Statistical Service.
Dickens, Richard, and David Ellwood (2001), “Whither Poverty in Great Britain and
the United States? The Determinants of Changing Poverty and Whether Work
will Work”, mimeo, Centre for Economic Performance, London; prepared for
the NBER Premier League volume.
Dickert, Stacy, Scott Houser and John Karl Scholtz (1995), “The Earned Income Tax
Credit and Transfer program: A Study of Labor market and Program
Participation”, in Tax Policy and the Economy, vol 9, James Poterba, ed.
Cambridge MIT press.
Dickert, Stacy, and Scott Houser (1998), “Taxes and Transfers: A New Look at the
Marriage Penalty”, National Tax Journal, 51, 175-217.
Dilnot, Andrew and Alan Duncan (1992), “Lone Mothers, Family Credit and Paid
Work”, Fiscal Studies, 13, pp.1-21.
Dilnot, Andrew, John Kay and Chris Morris (1984), The Reform of Social Security,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dilnot, A. and Webb, S. (1989), “The 1988 Social Security Reforms” in Dilnot and
Walker (eds), The Economics of Social Security, Oxford University Press,
Oxford and New York.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (1998), “The Earned Income Tax Credit and the
Labor Supply of Married Couples”, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working paper 6856, December.
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey Liebman (1996), “Labor Supply Response to the Earned
Income Tax Credit”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, 605-637.
Ellwood, David, T. (1999), “The Impact of EITC and other Social Programs on Work
and Marriage in the United States”, mimeo John F. Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University.
Giles, C., Johnson, P. and McCrae, J. (1997), “Housing Benefit and the Financial
Returns to Employment for Tenants in the Social Sector”, Fiscal Studies, 18,
49-72.

31

Gladden, T. and Christopher Taber, (2000) “Wage Progression among Less Skilled
Workers” in Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, David Card and
Rebecca M. Blank (eds), New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Gregg, Paul, Paul Johnson and Howard Reed (1999), “Entering Work and the British
tax and benefit System”, IFS Monograph, London.
Heckman, James J., (1974), “Effects of Child-Care Programs on Women's Work
Effort”, Journal of Political Economy, 82(2), S136-S163.
HM Treasury (1999b), Supporting Children Through the Tax and Benefit System, The
Modernisation of Britain’s Tax and Benefit System 5.
HM Treasury (2000), Tackling Poverty and Making Work Pay: Tax Credits for the
21st Century, The Modernisation of Britain’s Tax and Benefit System 6.
Holtzblatt, Janet and Jeffrey Liebman. (1998), “The EITC Abroad: Implications of the
British Working Families tax Credit for Pay-As-You-Earn Administration of
the EITC”, prepared for the 91st Annual Conference on Taxation, National Tax
Association.
Hoynes, Hilary Williamson (1996). “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families:
Labor Supply and Welfare Participation Under the AFDC-UP Program”,
Econometrica, Volume 64 No. 2, 295-332, March 1996.
Hoynes, Hilary Williamson (2000). “The Employment and Earnings of Less Skilled
Workers Over the Business Cycle”, in Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare
Reform, edited by Rebecca Blank and David Card. Russell Sage Foundation:
New York, pp 23-71.
Hoynes, Hilary Williamson and Thomas MaCurdy (1994). “Has the Decline in
Benefits Shortened Welfare Spells?”, American Economic Review, Volume 84
No. 2, 43-48.
Inland Revenue (various years), Working Families’ Tax Credit Quarterly Enquiry,
London: Government Statistical Service.
Institute for Fiscal Studies, (2000), “Distributional Consequences of Fiscal Reform
Since 1997”, http://www.ifs.org.uk/taxben/fiscalreform.pdf.
Keane, M.P. and Moffitt, R. (1998), “A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare
Program Participation and Labor Supply”, International Economic Review 39
553-589.
Liebman, Jeffrey B. (1998). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on
Incentives and Income Distribution” in James M. Poterba, ed. Tax Policy and
the Economy, vol 12.
Meyer, Bruce and Dan T. Rosenbaum (1999) “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax
Credit, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 7363, September 1999.
Meyer, Bruce and Dan T. Rosenbaum (2000) “Making Single Mothers Work:
Recent Tax and Welfare Policy and its Effects.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 7491, January 2000.
Moffitt, Robert and Kenneth Kehrer (1981), ''The Effect of Tax and Transfer
programs on Labor Supply: the Evidence from the Income Maintenance

32

Experiments''. In R.G. Ehrenberg, ed. Research in Labor Economics, Volume
4: 103-150. Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press.
Moffitt, Robert (1998),”The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility”, in Robert
Moffitt, editor, Welfare, The Family and Reproductive Behavior. National
Research Council, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C. NA
Press.
Neumark, D. and Wascher, W. (2000), Using the EITC to Help Poor Families: New
Evidence and a Comparison with the Minimum Wage, NBER Working Paper
7599.
Paull, G, Walker, I. and Zhu, Y. (2000), Child Support Reform: Some Analysis of the
1999 White Paper, Fiscal Studies, 21, 105-140.
Scholz, J. Karl. (1994), ``The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Compliance,
and Anti-Poverty Effectiveness. '', National Tax Journal, 48, 63-85.
Scholz, J.K. (1996), ``In-Work Benefits in the United States: The Earned Income Tax
Credit'', Economic Journal, 106, 156-169.
Schoeni, Robert and Rebecca Blank (2000), “What Has Welfare Reform
Accomplished? Impacts on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income,
Poverty, and Family Structure.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 7627, March 2000.
U.S. House of Representatives (2000). Background Materials and Data on Programs
Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means. Washington
D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Walker, R. and Wiseman, I. (1997), “The Possibility of a British Earned Income Tax
Credit”, Fiscal Studies, 18(4).

33

Data Appendix
1. UK Labour Market sources and definitions
Family Expenditure Data (FES): The FES is a repeated continuous cross-sectional
survey of households which provides consistent data on wages, hours of work,
employment status in last 2 weeks and education for each year since 1978. FES years
correspond to the financial year. Consequently 1998, for example, covers the twelve
months up to April 1999. It therefore corresponds to 1999 in the March CPS data used
in the US comparisons. Prior to 1978 the FES contains no information on educational
attainment. In particular, the survey contains information on usual labor market status.
Low Education: We show trends for all women and trends in a low education sample
classified as those who left full-time education at age 16 or lower.
Labour Force Survey (LFS): The LFS is a quarterly survey of some 60,000 working
age individuals in the UK. It is carried put each March/April and has detailed annual
observations of labour force status extending back to 1984.
Family Resources Survey (FES): The FRS is an annual budget survey of individual,
family and household incomes, characteristics and labour market status. It is a
repeated cross-section and covers 50,000 households. The first available data come
from the 1994/95 survey and contains a much larger and more representative sample
of households than the Family Expenditure Survey. The simulations in section 5 are
based on the 1994-95 and 1995-96 FRS. Two samples are selected; single parent
households and married or de facto married couples. Excluding self-employed and
retired households, together with students and those in the forces, leaves samples of
1807 single parents and 4694 two-person households for use in estimation.
2. US Labour Market sources and definitions
The March Current Population Surveys (CPS): The March CPS is an annual
demographic file of between 50,000 and 62,000 households. For each individual in
the household the survey provides detailed information on labor market, income, and
demographic characteristics. In particular, the survey contains information on labor
market status last week as well as detailed labor market information for the previous
calendar year. Our main labor market measure from the CPS is work status last
week, but as an alternative measure we consider weeks worked last year. As for the
UK, we calculate trends in these labor market variables using women between the
ages of 20 and 54. We also restrict the sample in this way because we do not want to
address issues of early retirement and exit from the labor market. We present trends
in labor market variables by marital status and presence of children.
Low Education: The low education sample consists of women with no more than a
high school education (less than or equal to 12 years of education). Again we use this
criteria to better select women affected by the EITC.

34

Figure 2.1: Employment Trends for Women in the UK
0 .9

0 .8

0 .7

0 .6

0 .5

s in g le n o c h ild
m a r r ie d n o c h ild

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

19

78

0 .4

s in g le w it h c h ild
m a r r ie d w it h c h ild

Notes: UK FES data.
Figure 2.2: Employment Trends for Women in the US

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Notes: US March CPS data.

Single no Children

Single Mothers

Married no Children

Married Mothers

99
19

97
19

95
19

93
19

91
19

89
19

87
19

85
19

83
19

81
19

19

79

0.4

Figure 2.3: Employment Trends for Single Mothers by Education in the UK

0.80

Employment

0.70

0.60

0.50

0.40

0.30
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999

All Single Parents

High Education

Low Education

Notes: UK LFS data: low education “left school at age 16 or below”.
Figure 2.4: Employment Trends for Single Mothers by Education in the US

0.90

Employment

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40

All Single Parents

Low Education

99
19

97
19

95
19

93
19

91
19

89
19

87
19

85
19

19

83

0.30

High Education

Notes: US March CPS data: low education “left school at 12 grade or below”.

Figure 2.5: Weekly hours of work, single low-education women with and without
children
Single Mothers, low education

Single no children, low education

1997/98

1997/98
.15

.1

.1

Fraction

Fraction

.15

.05

.05

30

16

40

50

16

tothours

30

40

50

tothours

1998/99

1998/99
.15

.1

.1

Fraction

Fraction

.15

.05

.05

16

30

40

50

16

tothours

30

40

50

tothours

1999/00

1999/00

.15

.15

Fraction

Fraction

.1

.1

.05

.05

16

30
tothours

40

50

16

30

40

tothours

Notes: UK Family Resources Survey: Low Education is “left school at age 16 or before”.

50

Figure 2.6: Workless Couples with Children in the UK

Workless Couples with Children: UK FES Low Education
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

19
7
19 8
7
19 9
8
19 0
8
19 1
8
19 2
8
19 3
8
19 4
8
19 5
8
19 6
8
19 7
8
19 8
8
19 9
9
19 0
9
19 1
9
19 2
9
19 3
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
99

0

Year
Married Parents: Neither Works

Notes: UK FES data. Low education is head “left school at age 16 or before”.

Figure 3.1 EITC schedule and WFTC weekly award, 2000
£6,000

£5,000
Inwo
rk £4,000
be
nef
it
£3,000
(£/
ye
ar)

£2,000

£1,000

£0
£0

£5,000

£10,000

£15,000

£20,000

£25,000

Gross income (£/year)

WFTC (2 children)

WFTC (1 child)

EITC (2 children)

EITC (1 child)

Source: Brewer (2000), Notes: £1 = $1.50. Assumes 2000 tax system in US, and 2000 tax
system in UK

Figure 3.2. Expenditure per claimant on in-work benefits in UK and US
£5,000

Spend per person (1998 £)

£4,000

£3,000

£2,000

£1,000

£0
1970

1975

1980

1985
UK

Source: Brewer (2000)

1990
US

1995

2000

Figure 3.3. In-work benefit caseloads

20,000

1,000

17,500

875

US Caseload (000s)
15,000

750

12,500

625

10,000

500

UK Caseload (000s)
7,500

375

5,000

250

2,500

125

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

EITC - US

1990

1995

FIS/FC/WFTC - UK

2000

Figure 3.4: The 1992 Hours Reform to FC and Other Taxes and Benefits
(a) Single Parent in 1991
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

48

45

42

39

36

33

30

27

24

21

18

15

12

9

6

3

0

0

Hours worked
cb

Net earnings

Income Support

Family Credit

Rent rebate

Local tax rebate

Notes: Single parent, April 1991, earning £3.00 per hour.
(b) Single Parent 1992
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

48

45

42

39

36

33

30

27

24

21

18

15

12

9

6

3

0

0

Hours worked
cb

Net earnings

Income Support

Family Credit

Rent rebate

Notes: Single parent, April 1992, earning £3.00 per hour

Local tax rebate

Figure 3.5: WFTC and Family Credit

Family Credit/WFTC

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Hours of work
WFTC with childcare

WFTC

Family Credit

70

Figure 3.6(a): Single Mother before WFTC
250

200

150

100

50

48

45

42

39

36

33

30

27

24

21

18

15

12

9

6

3

0

0

Hours worked
Child Benefit

Net earnings

Income Support

Family Credit

Rent rebate

Local tax rebate

Notes: Single parent, April 1997, earning £3.50 per hour (2000 prices).
Figure 3.6(b): Single Mother after WFTC
The April 2000 system
250

200

150

100

50

Hours worked @ £3.50
Child Benefit

Net earnings

Income Support

Family Credit

Rent rebate

Local tax rebate

Notes: Single parent, April 2000, earning £3.50 per hour (2000 prices).

50

48

46

44

42

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

26

24

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

Figure 3.7(a): Adult Credit and Income Support: Single Mother in UK

Adult Credit and Income Support in the UK

Adult credits or allowances, £/week

£80
£70
£60
£50
£40

IS, single adult

£30

WFTC/FC basic credit (under 30 hours)

£20

WFTC/FC basic credit (30 hours or more)
£10
£0
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Source: Brewer, Myck and Reed (2001)

Figure 3.7(b): Child Credit and Income Support: Single Mother in UK

Maximum support, child aged under 11,
£/week

Child Credit and Income Support in the UK
£50
£45
£40
£35
£30
£25
£20
£15
£10
£5
£0
1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

IS, 1st child

IS, 2nd child

WFTC/FC, 1st child

WFTC/FC, 2nd child

Figure 3.8(a): Replacement Rate by Hours of Work for Single Mother in UK:
without Housing Costs
Replacement Rate: Lone parent with 2 children: no housing costs

100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%
1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

16

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

24

1998

2000

35

Figure 3.8(b): Average Tax Rate for Single Mother in UK: without Housing Costs
Single Mother in UK
Average Tax Rate: Lone parent with 2 children: no housing costs

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1978

1980

1982

16

1984

1986

1988

1990

24

1992

1994

1996

1998

35

2000

Figure 3.9(a): Replacement Rate by Hours of Work for Single Mother in UK: with
Housing Costs

Replacement rate

Replacement Rate: Lone parent with 2 children with Housing Benefit
100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%
1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

16

1990

1992

1994

1996

24

1998

2000

35

Figure 3.9(b): Average Tax Rate for Single Mother in UK: with Housing Costs
Single Mother in UK

Average Tax Rate: Lone parent with 2 children with Housing Benefit

100%
90%
Average tax rate

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1978

1980

1982

16

1984

1986

1988

1990

24

1992

1994

1996

1998

35

2000

Figure 4.1: The EITC Reforms (1996 Dollars)

Taxyear = 1984

Taxyear = 1990
4000

EITC (1996$)

EITC (1996$)

4000
3000
2000
1000

3000
2000
1000
0

0
0

5000

0

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000

All Families

All Families

Taxyear = 1993

Taxyear = 1996

4000

4000

3000

3000

EITC (1996$)

EITC (1996$)

5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000

Family Earnings (1996$)

Family Earnings (1996$)

2000
1000

2000
1000
0

0
0

5000

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000
Family Earnings (1996$)

1 Child

2+ children

0

5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000
Family Earnings (1996$)

1 Child

2+ Children

Figure 4.2: Maximum EITC and Difference in Annual Employment Rates

-0.0500

3000

-0.1000
2000

Maximum EITC
Difference

1500

-0.1500

1000

Employment Rate
Difference

-0.2000

500

0

-0.2500
1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

Year

Comparison: Single Women with Children to Single Women without Children

Source: Liebman (1998) Figure 6. Updated through 1998 using unpublished data
from Liebman. The employment rate figure is based on a CPS sample of single
women ages 16-45 who are not disabled or in school. Employment rate difference is
the difference between the annual employment rate of single women with children
and the annual employment rate of single women without children.

2

Diff in Employment Rate

Diff in Maximum EITC Benefit (1996$)

2500

Figure 4.3: Maximum EITC and Difference in Annual Employment Rates

1600

-0.0500

1400

1000

-0.1000

Employment Rate Difference

800

-0.1500

600

400

-0.2000

200

Maximum EITC Difference
0

-0.2500
1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Year

Comparison: Single Women with 1Child to Single Women with 2+ Children

Source: Employment rate differences come from Table 6 in Meyer and Rosenbaum
(2000) and use a CPS sample of single women ages 19-44 who are not disabled or in
school. Employment rate difference is the difference between the annual employment
rate of single women with two or more children and the annual employment rate of
single women with one child.

3

Diff in Employment Rate

Diff in EITC Maximum (1996$)

1200

Figure 5.1: WFTC Reform budget constraints

Family disposable income (£p.w.)

Figure 5.1 (a): Lone parent with childcare

300
250
200
150
100
0

10

20

30

40

50

40

50

Hours of work
WFTC
Notes:

Family Credit

1 child aged under 11
Hourly wage £4.39 (median for lone parents)
Rent £41.10p.w. (median for social renters with children)
No childcare costs

Family disposable income (£p.w.)

Figure 5.1 (b): Lone parent with childcare
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

10

20

30

Hours of work
WFTC (net)
Notes:

Family Credit (net)

1 child aged under 11
Hourly wage £4.39 (median for lone parents)
Rent £41.10p.w. (median for social renters with children)
Childcare at £1.96 per hour

Family disposable income (£p.w.)

Figure 5.1 (c): Man in couple without childcare
300
250
200
150
100
0

10

20

30

40

50

40

50

Hours of work
WFTC
Notes:

Family Credit

Spouse not working
1 child aged under 11
Hourly wage £5.87 (25th percentile for men in couples with children)
Rent £41.10p.w. (median for social renters with children)

Family disposable income (£p.w.)

Figure 5.1 (d): Woman in couple – no childcare
400
350
300
250
200
0

10

20

30

Hours of work
WFTC
Notes:

Family Credit

Spouse working 40 hours at £5.87 per hour
1 child aged under 11
Hourly wage £3.72 (25th percentile for women in couples with children)
Rent £41.10p.w. (median for social renters with children)
No childcare costs

2

Family disposable income (£p.w.)

Figure 5.1 (e): Woman in couple – with childcare
400
350
300
250
200
0

10

20

30

40

50

Hours of work
WFTC
Notes:

Family Credit

Spouse working 40 hours at £5.87 per hour
1 child aged under 11
Hourly wage £3.72 (25th percentile for women in couples with children)
Rent £41.10p.w. (median for social renters with children)

3

Figure 5.2: Caseload of lone parents on Income Support and all families on
FC/WFTC, 1996-2000.

1200

1100

1000
tho
us
an
ds

900

800

700

600

Feb
96

May
96

Aug
96

Nov
96

Feb
97

May
97

Aug
97

Nov
97

Feb
98

May
98

Aug
98

Nov
98

Feb
99

May
99

Aug
99

Nov
99

Feb
00

May
00

667 693 703 726 734 748 707
WFTC
LPs on IS 988 1,017 1,040 1,044 1,020 1,014 1,012

727
982

760
972

767
961

783
992

790
963

788
953

791
941

786
935

931
918

989
922

1023
910

Notes: GB only.
Sources: Blundell and Brewer (2000), DSS (Income Support QSE) and IR (WFTC QSE).

Figure 5.3: Families on WFTC: where were they 12 months ago ?

1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

Aug 98

Nov 98

Feb 99

May 99

Aug 99

Nov 99

Feb 00

New claimer (in own right)

180

186

189

193

188

285

334

From other MTBs

52

44

40

39

39

41

45

Lone parents from IS

81

78

76

73

71

74

81

437

449

447

454

460

485

486

On WFTC already

Source: Blundell and Brewer (2000), DSS (Client Group Analysis – Working Age).
4

Table 3.1: Timeline of developments in in-work benefits in the UK and US.

US
1971
1975
1987
1988

1991

Earned Income Tax Credit introduced with
maximum credit of $400
Increase in EITC generosity and credit rate.
FIS replaced by Family Credit (FC) with
increased generosity and lower MWRs (most
instances of MWRs > 100% were removed).
24 hours work a week needed to qualify.
Increase in EITC generosity. Separate rate
for two or more children. Requirement for
applicants to earn more than received in
welfare removed. EITC no longer counted
in means-tested programs’ income
calculations.

1992
1994

UK
Family Income Supplement (FIS) introduced as
a means-tested in-work benefit.

Qualifying conditions reduced to 16 hours a
week.
Substantial increase in EITC generosity
particularly for families with 2 or more
children. (phased in over 1994-1996). EITC
for workers without children introduced.

1995

Extra credit introduced for working more than
30 hours a week

1996
PRWORA reformed AFDC/TANF.
1999

2000
Source: Brewer (2000)

Working Families’ Tax Credit replaces FC with
increased generosity, longer phase-out portion
and more generous support for childcare.
Increase in generosity.
Credit paid through the wage packet.

Table 3.2 Detail of WFTC and EITC operation
Working Families
(from June 2000)

Tax

Credit

Earned Income Tax Credit (2000)

Eligibility
Eligibility

Must work more than 16 hours a
week,

have

dependent

children

(under 16 or under 19 and in fulltime education), have less than
£8,000 capital. Couples need to claim
jointly; need not be married.
Extension to those without dependent
children proposed alongside an
integrated child credit.

Must have positive earnings in past year and
annual investment income under $2,350.
Married couples need to file a joint tax return,
unmarried couples file separately.
Parents need to have a “qualifying” child (either
theirs or their spouse’s, or any other child that
was cared for all year). “Children” are under 19 or
under 24 and a student, or permanently and totally
disabled.
Where a child potentially qualifies two unmarried
adults for EITC, only the adult with the highest
income can apply (this includes multiple tax unithouseholds).

Structure
Value of
basic credit

Tapering

Credit is weekly.
Basic credit of £53.15 plus possible
30 hour credit of £11.25 plus credits
for each child at £25.60 or £26.35 for
16-18s.
Childcare tax credit is supplementary
to this.
Beyond threshold of £91.45, tapered
at 55%.

Credit is annual and is a fraction of annual
income up to a maximum level of
$353/$2,353/$3,888 for families with no, 1 or
more than 1 children.

Phase-in threshold applies a 7.65% /34%/40%
credit (for no, 1, more than 1 children) to income
until maximum credit reached.
Beyond threshold of $12,690 ($5,770 for no
children), tapered at 7.65%/15.98%/21.06% so
that runs out at $10,380/$27,413/$31,152.

Interaction with other parts of tax and benefit system
Definition of
income

Net income (i.e. income after income
tax and national insurance).
Self-employed: same definition of
“income” as for other tax liabilities.

Exclusions
from
the
definition of
income

Child Benefit, Statutory Maternity
Pay,
Attendance
Allowance,
maintenance payments, Housing
Benefit and Council Tax Benefit
awards

Gross earnings or “modified adjusted gross
income” if “modified adjusted gross income” is
higher and claimant is on the taper (“modified
adjusted gross income” is income minus standard
deductions for tax purposes).
Self-employed: same definition of “income” as
for other tax liabilities.
TANF & Food Stamps are not taxable.

Awards
count
as
income for

Housing Benefit and Council Tax
Benefit awards

Federal law prohibits EITC to be treated as
income for purpose of Medicaid, SSI, Food
Stamps and low-income housing. Since 1991,
EITC did not count for AFDC assessment; States
can now count EITC when determining TANF
awards.

Assessment and payment mechanism
Assessment

Payable

Paid to

Assessed on average weekly income
in “assessment period” prior to claim.
Length of “assessment period”
depends on frequency of claimant’s
earnings: 7 weeks for weekly
payments, 8 weeks for fortnightly, 16
weeks for 4-weekly, 4 months for
monthly
payments.
Estimated
earnings used for new workers.
Weekly award fixed for 26 weeks
(unless family status changes).
Paid through wage packet unless
non-earner in couple elects to receive
it or if self-employed. Timing of
payments aligned with timing of
wages, so if worker paid monthly in
arrears, credit will be paid monthly in
arrears.
Non-earners paid fortnightly.
Couples decide who receives it. If
couple cannot agree, then Inland
Revenue will probably pay to the
main carer (CPAG, 2000).

Assessed at year-end on past year’s income.

Annual award is a refund on annual tax liability
with any excess paid as a lump-sum. Families
have to file by April 15 each year.
Up to $1,418 can be paid in advance through the
wage packet for claimants that have federal
income tax withheld from wages. Few elect for
this option.

Married couples who claim the EITC have to file
a joint tax return. Their EITC credit reduces the
joint tax liability. They nominate who receives
the payable part of the credit.

See “eligibility” for other rules on who can claim
in non-married couples.
Sources: Brewer (2000). For WFTC: CPAG (2000), IR (2000a&b). For EITC: IRS (1999a&b&c),
Committee on Ways and Means (1998).

Table 4.1: US Earned Income Tax Credit Parameters
Year

Group

Phase-In
Rate

Phase-In
Range

Maximum
Credit

Phase-Out
Rate

Phase-Out Range

1975-1978
1979-1984

1+ children
1+ children

10.0%
10.0%

$0-$4,000
$0-$5,000

$400
$500

10.0%
12.5%

$4,000-$8,000
$6,000-$10,000

1985-1986

1+ children

11.0%

$0-$5,000

$550

12.22%

$6,500-$11,000

1987

1+ children

14.0%

$0-$6,080

$851

10.0%

$6,920-$15,432

1988

1+ children

14.0%

$0-$6,240

$874

10.0%

$9,840-$18,576

1989

1+ children

14.0%

$0-$6,500

$910

10.0%

$10,240-$19,340

1990

1+ children

14.0%

$0-$6,810

$953

10.0%

$10,730-$20,264

1 child

16.7%

$0-$7,140

$1,192

11.93%

$11,250-$21,250

2+ children

17.3%

$1,235

12.36%

1 child

17.6%

$1,324

12.57%

2+ children

18.4%

$1,384

13.14%

1 child

18.5%

$1,434

13.21%

2+ children

19.5%

$1,511

13.93%

1 child

26.3%

$0-$7,750

$2,038

15.98%

$11,000-$23,755

2+ children

30.0%

$0-$8,425

$2,528

17.68%

$11,000-$25,296

No children

7.65%

$0-$4,000

$306

7.65%

$5,000-$9,000

1 child

34.0%

$0-$6,160

$2,094

15.98%

$11,290-$24,396

2+ children

36.0%

$0-$8,640

$3,110

20.22%

$11,290-$26,673

No children

7.65%

$0-$4,100

$314

7.65%

$5,130-$9,230

1 child

34.0%

$0-$6,330

$2,152

15.98%

$11,650-$25,078

2+ children

40.0%

$0-$8,890

$3,556

21.06%

$11,650-$28,495

No children

7.65%

$0-$4,220

$323

7.65%

$5,280-$9,500

1 child

34.0%

$0-$6,900

$2,353

15.98%

$12,700-$27,413

2+ children

40.0%

$0-$9,700

$3,888

21.06%

$12,700-$31,152

No children

7.65%

$0-$4,600

$353

7.65%

$5,800-$10,380

TRA86

OBRA90
1991

1992

1993

$0-$7,520

$0-$7,750

$11,840-$22,370

$12,200-$23,050

OBRA93
1994

1995

1996

2000

1

Source: The Green Book and authors' calculations from OBRA93.

Table 5.1 Numbers of families with children
Group

Number in population
(thousands)

Lone parents
Total population
Modelled population

1,600
1,550

Couples – man works
Total population
Modelled population

4,550
3,500

Couples – man not working
Total population
Modelled population
Source: Family Resources Survey, 1994/5

850
820

Table 5.2: WFTC Reforms, Simulations
(a) Single Parents
pre-reform
Out of work
Part-time
Full-time
Post-reform %
Change (%)

out of work
58.0
0.0
0.0
58.0
-2.2

post-reform
part-time
0.7
18.6
0.2
19.4
0.3

Full-time
1.5
0.5
20.6
22.6
1.9

Pre-reform %
60.2
19.1
20.7
100

post-reform
part-time
0.1
31.6
0.1
31.8
-0.1

Full-time
0.1
0.0
35.0
35.2
-0.4

pre-reform %
32.4
32.0
35.6
100

post-reform
part-time
0.4
22.2
0.1
22.8
0.2

Full-time
0.9
0.4
19.2
20.5
1.1

pre-reform %
58.1
22.6
19.3
100

(b) Married women with employed partners
pre-reform
Out of work
Part-time
Full-time
Post-reform %
Change (%)

Out of work
32.2
0.3
0.4
33.0
0.6

(c) Married Women with partners out of work
pre-reform
Out of work
Part-time
Full-time
Post-reform %
Change (%)

out of work
56.8
0.0
0.0
56.8
-1.3

(d) Summary Table
Group
Single Parents
Married Women (Partner not working)
Married Women (Partner working)

Married men, partner not working
Married men, partner working
Total Effect
Decrease in Workerless Families

Number
34,000
11,000
-20,000
13,000
-10,500
27,500
57,000

%
2.20
1.32
-0.57
0.37
0.30

Source: Blundell, Duncan, McCrae and Meghir (2000) and Blundell and Reed (2000)

