                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MASTERPIECES AND MARKETS:
 WHY THE MOST FAMOUS MODERN PAINTINGS ARE NOT BY AMERICAN ARTISTS


                                         David W. Galenson


                                         Working Paper 8549
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8549


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2001




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2001 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Masterpieces and Markets:
Why the Most Famous Modern Paintings Are Not by American Artists
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 8549
October 2001



                                            ABSTRACT


       A survey of the illustrations in art history textbooks reveals that the most important modern
American painters, including Pollock, Johns, and Warhol, failed to produce individual paintings as
famous as the masterpieces of a number of major French artists, such as Picasso, Manet, and Seurat.
Analysis of the textbooks reveals that art historians do not consider the American artists to be less
important than their French predecessors, or judge the Americans’ innovations to be less important. The
absence of American masterpieces instead appears to be a consequence of market conditions, as changes
over time in the primary methods of showing and selling fine art reduced the incentive for artists to
produce important individual works.




David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sogrodow@midway.uchicago.edu
                                                 3

Paris and New York

       It has become a commonplace of art history that "after the Second World War, the art

world witnessed the birth and development of an American avant-garde, which in the space of a

few years succeeded in shifting the cultural center of the West from Paris to New York."1 The

Abstract Expressionists and the painters who followed them in New York dominate histories of

modern art in the second half of the twentieth century as decisively as the Impressionists and the

painters who followed them in Paris dominate histories of the late nineteenth and early twentieth

centuries.

       This paper documents and explores a striking fact about the history of modern art that

involves a neglected contrast between these two episodes. Specifically, the great American

painters of the modern era failed to produce individual paintings as famous as those produced by

a number of the great French painters who preceded them. This is not because the American

painters are less important than their predecessors; indeed, the same evidence that establishes that

the greatest American masterpieces are less famous than their French counterparts reveals that

the American masters themselves are at least as important as several of the French painters who

produced the most celebrated individual works. The resolution of the puzzle appears to lie

instead in a basic difference in practice between the French and American painters, which was a

product of a change over time in the market institutions of modern art. Explaining why modern

French painters produced more famous paintings than their American successors highlights a

very concrete way in which changes in the methods of showing and selling fine art have changed

the way artists work.
                                                  4

Famous Paintings

        The puzzle considered here is posed by a comparison between the results of two earlier

studies.2 Both studies counted the illustrations of paintings contained in published surveys of art

history in order to identify and rank the painters and paintings considered most important by art

historians. The approach is analogous to a citation study, in which the importance of scholars,

and of individual publications, is measured by the frequency with which they are cited. Yet

using illustrations as the unit of study has an advantage over analyzing written references,

because of the greater cost involved. In addition to the greater expense of printing photographs,

authors or publishers must bear the cost of obtaining permission to reproduce each painting, and

a suitable photograph. The much higher cost in both time and money should tend to make

authors more selective in their use of illustrations, thus making illustrations an even more

accurate indication than written references of what an author believes to be genuinely important.3

        The first of the earlier studies alluded to above identified the most often reproduced

paintings done by 35 leading artists born during 1819-1900 who lived and worked in France,

while the other did the same for 35 leading artists born during 1900-40 who lived and worked in

the United States.4 The results of these studies are shown in Tables 1 and 2, respectively, which

list the leading 10 paintings (actually 11, in both cases, because of ties) done by these two groups

of artists.

        Neither table appears surprising in itself. The 15 artists listed, including Picasso, Manet,

and Matisse in Table 1, and Pollock, de Kooning, and Johns in Table 2, are obviously among the

most influential artists who worked in the relevant times and places. And the 22 paintings are all

landmarks of modern art, their images immediately familiar to students of art history.
                                                  5

       A puzzle appears, however, in a striking contrast in the relative frequency with which the

French and American paintings appear in the books surveyed. The Demoiselles d’Avignon

appears in 91% of the books considered, a percentage more than 2 ½ times as great as that of any

American painting. Six French paintings appear in more than half of the books considered, while

no American painting reaches that level. In fact, all 11 French paintings appear in at least 45% of

the books, a level greater than any one of the American paintings. To be included in Table 2, an

American painting did not have to appear in even a quarter of the books surveyed; only six of the

works listed in Table 2 reached that level.

       This comparison suggests that the most celebrated French modern paintings are

considerably more famous than their American counterparts. Yet one other possibility must be

considered, for Tables 1 and 2 are not based on identical sets of books. The study of French

artists surveyed a total of 33 books, whereas the study of American artists surveyed a larger

number of books, totaling 56. Although the two sets of books overlap to some extent, some of

the books used in each study could not be used in the other, because of limitations in subject

matter by time and place. The difference observed here could consequently be due, at least in

part, to differences in the use of illustrations by authors whose books were included in only one

of the studies: perhaps books on French modern art systematically include more illustrations than

books on American art.

       To eliminate this possibility, illustrations of the paintings of Tables 1 and 2, and of all the

works of the artists who produced them, were searched in a common set of books. The books

used were all those that could be found that were published in English, from 1980 on, that

provide illustrated treatments of the entire history of modern art. Some of the books analyzed
                                                  6

survey all periods of art history, some only the modern period, but the necessary requirement for

use of a book was that no artist listed in Table 1 or 2 was excluded by the definition of the book’s

designated coverage by time and place.

       Twenty-nine books were found that satisfied these criteria for selection.5 Table 3 shows

the ranking of the 22 paintings from Tables 1 and 2 that results from the survey of the

illustrations in these 29 books. The Demoiselles d’Avignon remains in first place, and the 97%

of the books in which it appears is again more than 2 ½ times as great as any American painting.

Seven of the French paintings appear in more than half of the books surveyed, compared to none

of the American works. All but one of the French paintings appear in more books than any of the

American paintings; the two highest-ranked American works tie Courbet’s L’Atelier, the lowest-

ranked French painting, by appearing in 38% of the books. Six of the eleven American works

appear in less than a quarter of the books surveyed.

       Table 3 therefore shows that the puzzle posed by comparing Tables 1 and 2 is not an

artifact of differing practices of the different sets of authors of the books used to produce those

earlier rankings. For Table 3 yields the same result: when measurement is restricted to a set of

books that survey both the French and American painters, it remains the case that the most

famous French modern paintings are simply much more often reproduced than the most famous

American modern paintings. And this finding is reinforced by Table 4, which lists all other

paintings by the 15 artists whose work appears in Table 3 that appear in at least one quarter of the

29 books surveyed. Table 4 shows that there are 11 other paintings that satisfy this criterion, and

that all 11 are by French artists. Considering Tables 3 and 4 together, a total of 8 works by the 15

artists considered in this study appear in at least half of the books examined that survey both
                                                     7

French and American modern art, and all of these are by French painters. Furthermore, 27 works

by these artists appear in at least one quarter of the books, and 22 of these - 81% - are by French

artists.

           Simple quantitative analysis of evidence produced by art historians thus poses an

intriguing puzzle that does not appear to have been studied - or even noticed - by art historians.

And the interest of this question may not be solely historical, for ownership of famous individual

paintings appears to be a key determinant of the ability of museums to attract visitors.6 From this

vantage point, the puzzle raised here would be why some leading nineteenth-century French

modern artists were more likely than their American successors to produce superstar paintings.7

The task of this paper is to solve this puzzle.

Famous Painters

           Perhaps modern French painters produced more famous paintings than their American

successors simply because they themselves were more important. It would hardly be surprising

that the most important works of great artists would be more celebrated than the major works of

lesser artists.

           Yet the evidence of the art history surveys indicates that greater eminence of the artists

cannot explain the dominance of French over American paintings seen in Table 3. Based on the

same 29 books used in Tables 3 and 4 to rank individual paintings, Table 5 measures the

importance of the artists who produced these paintings, by listing the total illustrations of each

painter’s work. French artists do dominate the top positions. Remarkably, Picasso has more than

twice the illustrations of any other artist, but Matisse, Manet, Duchamp, and Gauguin also have

more total illustrations than any American artist. Yet two Americans - Pollock and Johns - rank
                                                8

above Courbet, and Warhol ties Courbet in total illustrations. Furthermore Pollock, Johns, and

Warhol all rank above Seurat, who is also tied by Rauschenberg.

       Table 5 clearly demonstrates that the greater fame of individual French paintings cannot

simply be explained as a consequence of the greater importance of French modern artists. The

evidence of the texts does show that the ranking of the Demoiselles d’Avignon at the top of Table

3 can be explained by the enormous importance of Picasso, as witnessed by his dominant

position in Table 5. Yet Seurat, whose painting of the Grande Jatte ranks second in Table 3, is

outranked in this measure of importance by no less than three Americans, and tied by a fourth.

Why did Seurat produce a painting that is surpassed in frequency of illustration only by the

Demoiselles d’Avignon, while none of the four Americans whose overall achievement was

deemed at least as important as his produced a single work that was reproduced even half as

often as Seurat’s masterpiece? Similarly, Courbet produced three paintings that are illustrated

more often than all but two paintings by all the American artists considered here. Why did

Courbet produce more famous individual works than all the Americans combined, even though

the overall importance of his work is considered no greater than that of three Americans?

Famous Innovations

       Perhaps French modern painters produced more famous paintings than the Americans

because their innovations were more specific and highly concentrated in time. Thus whereas

some great artists’ contributions have arrived suddenly, and could consequently be embodied in

individual works, the advances of other great artists have been made much more slowly, and

have therefore appeared gradually in a larger body of work.8 If the French artists made

contributions of the first type, and the Americans made advances of the second type, this could
                                                    9

account for the greater emphasis on specific works of the French painters.

        Yet the evidence of the texts suggests that greater suddenness of innovations cannot

account for the greater fame of the French artists’ paintings. Table 6 presents evidence on the

total illustrations of the work of each artist in the specific years in which they executed the

paintings listed in Table 3. The goal here is to measure the importance of particular innovations

rather than of particular works. Although the choice of the period of time is to some extent

arbitrary, one year is a sufficiently short period of an artist’s career that it is unlikely to capture

more than one discrete contribution.

        Picasso places first in Table 6 for the works he produced in 1907, the year he initiated the

Cubist revolution. Manet stands second for 1863, the year he painted both the Olympia and the

Déjeuner sur l’herbe , from which many scholars date the modern era in art. Andy Warhol’s

work of 1962, in which he made his seminal contributions to Pop Art, stands third in Table 6,

ahead of all the other great French innovations, including Seurat’s contribution of 1886 to Neo-

Impressionism and Matisse’s 1906 innovations in Fauvism. Pollock’s work of 1950, in which he

reached the peak of his signature drip style, ties Seurat’s work of 1886 for fifth place in Table 6.

        In all, four of the top nine entries in Table 6 are for American painters. Since the table

can be considered to rank the most important temporally concentrated contributions made by the

masters of modern art considered by this study, this prominent representation of Americans

among its highest entries suggests that the failure of American artists to produce individual

paintings as famous as those of the French cannot be attributed to any absence of suddenness in

the important innovations of the Americans.
                                                 10

From Group Exhibitions to Gallery Shows

       The greater fame of the major French masterpieces of the modern era thus does not stem

simply from the greater fame of their creators, or the greater importance of the innovations they

embody. Providing a complete explanation for the absence of American paintings from the

highest ranks in Table 3 may lie beyond the scope of this investigation. Yet it is possible to point

to one powerful factor that made a direct contribution to the change observed here. Specifically,

the lesser importance of individual paintings from the later episode appears to be related to a

difference in artists’ practices that stemmed from a differing conception of artistic success in

Paris before World War I and New York after World War II. The change in these practices and

attitudes between the two episodes may have been in turn a consequence of a major change in

market institutions.9

       Throughout most of the nineteenth century - certainly until the last quarter of the century -

French artists understood that the government’s official Salon was the sole means of having their

work “published”- presented to the public in a setting that would assure critics and collectors of

its worth.10 Historian Jacques Lethève described the significance of the Salon for French artists:

               [F]or the nineteenth-century artist in France there was only one
               place to exhibit, only one place which could set the seal on his
               success: the Salon... To be accepted for the Salon marked a turning
               point in an artist’s life. The various prizes and medals awarded by
               the jury were essential steps in their career for those who wanted to
               succeed. The contacts made at the Salon with art lovers and
               potential patrons made sales and commissions much easier to
               secure, particularly as the general public regarded those excluded
               from the Salon as bad painters or bad sculptors. Some purchasers
               would only buy a work of art on condition it was accepted for the
               Salon.11

Artists who wished to have successful careers consequently devoted considerable attention to the
                                                  11

style and subject matter favored by the Salon’s jury. The growing size of the Salon over time

also had implications for artists’ behavior, as the competition for attention at the crowded

exhibitions grew more intense.12 The growing congestion increased the danger that an artist’s

work would be ignored because it was hung in a bad location. Historian George Heard Hamilton

observed that “one way for an artist to avoid such a calamity was to paint a picture so large it

could not possibly be overlooked. Such huge ‘machines,’ by reason of their size alone, attracted

critical and popular attention quite out of proportion to their merit.”13

       As an ambitious young artist, Gustave Courbet took for granted that reputations were

made at the Salon, and he quickly realized that it was necessary to exhibit large and important

individual works there in order to attract notice. When Courbet was 26, one of the five paintings

he submitted to the 1845 Salon was accepted. He told his family that “at the Salon it has

attracted some potential buyers,” but he explained that this success would not greatly advance his

career because the painting was too small: “When you don’t yet have a reputation you cannot sell

easily and all those small paintings do not make a reputation. That is why this year I must do a

large painting that will definitely show what I am really worth.”14 For many years Courbet made

it a practice to produce large paintings that would gain attention at the Salon. All three of

Courbet’s works listed in Tables 3 and 4 were prepared for the Salon: both the Stone Breakers

and the Funeral at Ornans were exhibited at the Salon of 1851, while L’Atelier was rejected by

the 1855 Universal Exhibition. Courbet is of course celebrated for his “challenge [to] the

hegemony of official art” in 1855, when the jury’s rejection of L’Atelier and two other paintings

prompted him to mount an independent exhibition of his work near the Universal Exhibition.15

Even then, however, Courbet believed that the legitimacy of his enterprise would be established
                                                 12

by the jury’s acceptance of the other paintings he had submitted, as when he wrote to tell a patron

of his decision to stage a private show he explained that “I am taking advantage of the boost the

government has given me by receiving eleven paintings in its exhibition.”16

       Edouard Manet was firmly committed to the goal of achieving success at the Salon.

Despite numerous snubs of his work by the jury, including the Salon’s famous rejection of the

Déjeuner sur l’herbe in 1863, he held steadfastly to the position that “the Salon is the true field

of battle - it is there that one must measure oneself.”17 This attitude led him consistently to

decline invitations from his younger friends to join them in the renegade Impressionist group

exhibitions of the 1870s and early ‘80s. Manet’s three paintings of Table 3 were all submitted to

the official jury; the Déjeuner sur l’herbe was exhibited at the Salon des Refusés in 1863, the

Olympia at the 1865 Salon, and the Bar at the Folies-Bergère at the Salon of 1882, the year

before his death.

       It is a staple of art history that the influence of the Salon dwindled during the second half

of the nineteenth century. In 1881 its government sponsorship was ended, and in 1884 it lost its

monopoly as Paris’ only large annual group exhibition.18 Yet in historians’ concern for the

decline of the official Salon, what has sometimes been overlooked is the continuing importance

of group exhibitions in general in allowing artists to create reputations. The Impressionists are

often identified as the artists who undermined the Salon system, by selling their work through

one-man shows.19 Monet did begin to have successful shows at the galleries of Paul Durand-

Ruel and Georges Petit in the late 1880s, and his friends Renoir and Pissarro would do the same

in the next decade, but their successes came only after the Impressionists’ reputations had been

established in the group exhibitions they had held during 1874-1886.20 Although no one
                                                  13

institution would any longer be the exclusive forum in which artists could become recognized, it

would still be some time before private galleries could successfully introduce new talents to the

public, and during this period group exhibitions would continue to be critical in allowing young

artists to publish their work. One consequence of this was that young artists were still

conditioned to produce important individual works that could compete successfully for attention

in large halls filled with paintings by many other artists: thus “much of the general education and

the instruction in Paris ateliers continued, in the mid to late nineteenth century, to inspire the

desire to create the great work, the tableau worthy of being hung beside Poussin.”21

       Georges Seurat’s career illustrates the continuing desire to produce individual major

works for group shows. Seurat first submitted his work to the Salon of 1883, but the jury

accepted only one drawing and refused his other entries. His work first gained attention the

following year, when his large composition, Une Baignade à Asnières, was rejected by the Salon

but was subsequently shown at the exhibition of the Société des Artistes Indépendents. Seurat

first exhibited his monumental Grande Jatte in 1886 at the final Impressionist group exhibition,

where the painting quickly became an object of controversy. Throughout his brief career, Seurat

followed the practice of producing many preparatory studies for occasional major individual

works, which he then presented to the public in group exhibitions.22

       Unlike Seurat, Paul Gauguin had no formal training in art, and had consequently not been

indoctrinated with the traditional respect for the Salon. Yet the ambitious Gauguin may have

learned indirectly the importance of producing major individual works. Although Gauguin

exhibited at the five Impressionist group shows held during 1879-86, his paintings attracted little

notice from critics or collectors. A biographer has suggested that Gauguin realized at the 1886
                                                 14

Impressionist exhibition, where his were among the many works overshadowed by Seurat’s

Grand Jatte, that he would have to produce a powerful and bold work to have a comparable

impact. His masterpiece of 1888, The Vision After the Sermon, may have been a result of that

lesson.23

        Henri Matisse routinely exhibited at Paris’ major group exhibitions early in his career -

initially at the Salon de la Nationale, then annually at the Salon des Indépendents and the Salon

d’Automne. In 1896, after Matisse had studied with Gustave Moreau for five years, the teacher

told his pupil that it was time for him to produce a major work to demonstrate his progress. On a

canvas larger than any he had used before, Matisse executed The Dinner Table, which he

exhibited at the 1897 Salon de la Nationale.24 Matisse would later continue to demonstrate his

progress with large works, including Luxe, calme, et volupté, his major Divisionist painting,

which he exhibited at the 1905 Salon des Indépendents, and The Joy of Life, his Fauve manifesto,

which was shown at the 1906 Indépendents.

        An outsider who arrived in Paris after completing his formal training in art, Pablo Picasso

was the first major modern artist who established himself without participating in large group

exhibitions.25 His dominant work of Table 3 may nonetheless have been prompted by the French

tradition described here. Early in his Paris career, the ambitious young Picasso recognized

Matisse as his rival for the informal leadership of the artistic avant-garde. Picasso particularly

envied the attention Matisse gained from showing his Joy of Life at the 1906 Indépendents.26 A

friend and biographer of Picasso observed that Matisse’s painting challenged Picasso in part

“because of its success within the terms of traditional Salon canvases.”27 Picasso responded

methodically, as for months during the winter of 1906-07 he filled one sketchbook after another
                                                    15

with preparatory drawings for his own major work. Historian William Rubin estimated that in all

Picasso produced between four and five hundred studies for the Demoiselles d’Avignon, “a

quantity of preparatory work...without parallel, for a single picture, in the entire history of art.”28

Picasso had deliberately set out to produce a painting that would be recognized as a masterpiece

by the artists, critics, and collectors who made up Paris’ advanced art world.29 Remarkably he

succeeded, as Table 3 echoes the judgments of many art historians that the Demoiselles is the

most celebrated painting of the twentieth century.

        The latest of the French artists considered by this study, Marcel Duchamp, followed a

more conventional path than Picasso in exhibiting his work. Early in his career, Duchamp

regularly exhibited his work at group shows, both the Salon des Indépendents and the Salon

d’Automne. His Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 was rejected by the Indépendents in 1912,

but created a sensation when it was exhibited at the American Armory Show the next year.

Duchamp disliked what he considered the commercialization of modern art, and his distrust of

dealers led him consistently to avoid having shows of his work at private galleries.30 His overall

output, with a limited number of major works that were often preceded by a large number of

preparatory studies, reflects his belief that “in the production of any genius, great painter or great

artist, there are really only four or five things that really count in his life.”31

        Even this brief survey appears sufficient to demonstrate that the traditional importance of

group exhibitions in the French nineteenth-century art world influenced many artists’ practices,

even after the demise of the official Salon. For much of the nineteenth century success at the

Salon was virtually required for commercial success, and even after the demise of the official

Salon, for a time success at other large group exhibitions continued to be necessary to establish
                                                  16

young artists’ reputations. One consequence of this central role of group exhibitions was to fix in

the minds of artists the importance of producing significant individual works - large, important

paintings that might stand out among rows of paintings crowded onto the walls of great rooms.

Many painters annually devoted disproportionate time and effort to producing these works, as a

means of establishing and advancing their reputations. This conception of the importance of the

masterpiece persisted even after the conditions that had motivated it had disappeared: so, for

example, it appears to have influenced even the young Picasso, who had no interest in exhibiting

his work together with that of scores of other artists.

       The central role of the large group show, and the attendant importance of individual

master works, eventually ended. When Barnett Newman was interviewed for a documentary film

in 1970, his description of the early opportunities for the Abstract Expressionists to present their

work to the New York art world was expressed exclusively in terms of the names of individuals,

taking for granted that viewers would understand that the galleries run by these dealers were the

only significant exhibition spaces available to the artists:

               We had no general public. The only thing we did have was the
               opportunity of seeing each other in shows, so to speak. There were
               just a few galleries: Peggy Guggenheim up until 1947... and
               between ‘47 and ‘52, you might say Betty Parsons, Charlie Egan,
               and to some extent Sam Kootz were the only places where any of
               us had an opportunity of presenting ourselves, of showing the
               work.32

Nor would a more prestigious exhibition format have been available had these artists been more

successful: of the same period, Robert Motherwell recalled that “in those days it was impossible

for an unknown American to show in a first-rate modern gallery, such as Curt Valentin or Pierre

Matisse.”33 Thus one-man shows were the primary means of publishing artists’ work, with the
                                                 17

prestige of the imprimatur varying among galleries rather than among types of exhibition.34

        Instead of Salon acceptances or medals, in New York one-man shows became the units

by which artists’ careers were measured, and their progress assessed. So for example, critic

Clement Greenberg began his review of a 1945 exhibition by declaring that “Jackson Pollock’s

second one-man show at Art of this Century establishes him, in my opinion, as the strongest

painter of his generation.”35 Two years later Greenberg again began in similar fashion, writing

that “Jackson Pollock’s fourth one-man show in so many years at Art of this Century is his best

since his first one and signals what may be a major step in his development.”36 The format of

these shows tended to shift the focus of critics from individual paintings to an artist’s recent work

more generally, and reviews often discussed an artist’s style or methods without reference to

specific paintings.

       The importance of the one-man show changed the task of the artist. Instead of

concentrating on producing a single work that might satisfy the jury and attract public attention at

a large group show, the artist had to produce a body of work that would impress critics and

collectors. Curator Henry Geldzahler’s comments reflected this change in emphasis when he

recalled “in the late 1950s being shocked to hear painters, who believed in the primacy of de

Kooning’s position and who admired him, wondering aloud whether next year’s show would

repeat his success, whether he could consolidate his lead not by painting a beautiful show but by

changing in an unexpected and unpredictable way.”37 Although Geldzahler’s point was to

express his dismay at the pressure on an artist repeatedly to innovate, he simply assumed the

form the artist’s new work would take, whatever its contribution: the emphasis had thus shifted

from producing major paintings to painting important shows.
                                                  18

       Painters of the New York School typically did not set out to produce individual master

works. Willem de Kooning explained that “for many years I was not interested in making a good

painting - as one might say, ‘Now this is a really good painting’ or a ‘perfect work.’ I didn’t

want to pin it down at all. I was interested in that before, but I found out it was not my nature.”38

The Abstract Expressionists became known not for individual landmark paintings, but for

signature images that recurred in large bodies of work. Mark Rothko defended his repeated use

of the stacked rectangles that provided the basis for his work for two decades by declaring that “if

a thing is worth doing once, it is worth doing over and over again - exploring it, probing it,

demanding by this repetition that the public look at it.”39 The artists often stressed the continuity

of their work. Thus Clyfford Still declared that “No painting ... is complete of itself. It is a

continuation of previous paintings and is renewed in successive ones,” and Barnett Newman

observed that “I think a man spends his whole lifetime painting one picture or working on one

piece of sculpture.”40 The critic David Sylvester observed that Picasso and Duchamp were the

twentieth century’s “most practiced creators of legendary works” of art - a judgment impressively

confirmed by Table 3 - then asked:

               But what of American Abstract Expressionism, a movement
               steeped in legend? - legendary hopes, legendary deeds, legendary
               battles, legendary rags to riches, legendary drinking and, alas,
               legendary deaths. It did not produce many legendary masterpieces,
               for it flourished at a moment in art history when the masterpiece
               had given way to the series.41

Historian Anna Chave has pointed out one consequence of this: “The usual procedure has been

to write or speak about Rothkos, Pollocks, or Newmans in generic terms ... In the three most

widely read books on the New York School, by Dore Ashton, Irving Sandler, and Serge Guilbaut,
                                                 19

the authors rarely or never focus on specific works of art.”42

       Jackson Pollock’s signature image was a product of the drip style he first used in 1947,

and there is a broad critical consensus that his best work consisted of the all-over compositions

he produced from then through 1950. No one or two paintings emerged from that period as

definitive examples or statements; Pollock’s career is understood as having a plateau rather than

a peak. A typical account of this is provided by curator Kirk Varnedoe’s summary essay for the

recent Pollock retrospective. Varnedoe begins by declaring the importance of the innovation:

“Pollock in 1947 ruptured the existing definitions of how art could be made.” He then observes

that no landmark marks the origin: “There is no grand incident to mark this passage - no

legendary effort or single ‘breakthrough’ picture.” He asserts the homogeneity of Pollock’s

mature work: “When the poured paintings did get underway, the manner arrived full-blown, and

then showed no standard, linear development over the next three years.” The absence of a

specific masterpiece follows: “One of the smallest and earliest canvases ... is generally consonant

with one of the largest and last ... and in between, works of widely varying sizes and formats are

remarkably coherent in manner.”43 The books surveyed for this study contain 43 illustrations of

Pollock’s paintings from 1947-50; these constitute more than three-fifths of the total illustrations

of Pollock’s work, although the four-year period represents less than one-fifth of the 22-year

career documented by Varnedoe’s retrospective. Those 43 illustrations could have placed two

paintings among the top five entries in Table 3, or three among the top ten, but instead they are

divided among 15 different paintings, of which only Autumn Rhythm appears in Table 3, tied for

17th place.

       The next generation of American artists would go even farther than the Abstract
                                                 20

Expressionists in emphasizing bodies of work rather than individual paintings, not only

producing paintings that were closely related, but often conceiving and creating groups of

individual works that were intended to be seen as a whole.44 Table 6 shows the great importance

art historians attach to the paintings Andy Warhol produced during 1962. One of the central

influences on his work during that year was the suicide of Marilyn Monroe, which prompted

Warhol to begin a series of portraits of the movie star. Yet probably more significant for

Warhol’s art was his discovery during the same year of silkscreening. A biographer observed

that “Andy quickly realized that this process was tailor-made for his talent,” and he would make

silkscreening his primary painting medium for the rest of his career.45 Using the technique in the

living room of his apartment, Warhol prepared for his first New York one-man show by painting

one hundred pictures in three months.46 Yet Warhol’s repeated use of particular themes had

begun even before his adoption of silkscreening. Earlier in 1962 his first one-man show, at Los

Angeles’ Ferus Gallery, had consisted of 32 paintings of Campbell’s soup cans. The size of the

show was determined by the number of varieties of Campbell’s soup available at the time: as he

worked Warhol checked off a list of Campbell’s products to keep track of the flavors he had

already painted.47 Warhol’s repetitive use of images naturally gave rise to discussions of groups

of paintings. So for example the critic Michael Fried’s review of Warhol’s exhibition at the

Stable Gallery in the fall of 1962 referred to the “beautiful, vulgar, heart-breaking icons of

Marilyn Monroe ... These, I think, are the most successful pieces in the show.”48 More generally,

an art historian has observed that Warhol’s works should be considered in groups: “since Warhol

generally conceived and presented new works as ensembles, a single work removed from its

original setting operates at a loss.”49
                                                  21

        Jasper Johns’ first one-man show was held at Leo Castelli’s gallery in 1958. Paintings

from that single exhibition appear in a total of 19 of the books surveyed for this study.50 This

would be sufficient to put one painting in fourth place in Table 3, but instead the illustrations are

divided among eight different works, none of which appears in more than seven books. Only

Flag appears in Table 3, and only in a tie for 17th place. It is remarkable that nearly half of all

the paintings in an artist’s first exhibition are illustrated in these texts, and also that none emerges

as a dominant individual work. Yet these appear to be consequences of Johns’ approach, and of

the message of his work. He selected commonplace objects as his motifs, “things the mind

already knows.”51 He painted them with detachment: “I decided that looking at a painting should

not require a special kind of focus like going to church. A picture ought to be looked at the same

way you look at a radiator.”52 And he used each motif repeatedly, as the 1958 show included

four paintings of flags, five of numerals, and six of targets. All of these elements contributed to

the impact of Johns’ early work. So for example Frank Stella, a young artist who was directly

affected by Johns’ first exhibition, later recalled that “the thing that struck me most was the way

he stuck to the motif... I began to think a lot about repetition.”53 Yet the repeated and

dispassionate use of commonplace motifs also served to deemphasize the individual paintings in

Johns’ show. Interestingly, the press release for the exhibition, which summarized its subjects

and their treatment, did not refer to any painting by name.54

        A number of Robert Rauschenberg’s contributions have explicitly emphasized groups of

works rather than individual pieces. A notable early example is the white paintings, a series of

seven canvases without images, on which Rauschenberg applied white house paint evenly with a

roller. Rauschenberg wanted the paintings to reflect their surroundings: “one could look at them
                                                 22

and almost see how many people were in the room by the shadows cast, or what time of day it

was.”55 Although the paintings varied in size, each was identically titled “White Painting.”56 In

another instance, in 1957 Rauschenberg produced Factum I and Factum II, two paintings with

collage elements, done in an Abstract Expressionist style, that appeared identical. The paintings

have been interpreted as Rauschenberg’s ironic comment on the belief that the value of a painting

lies in its uniqueness. His message may be underscored by the paintings’ titles, for an archaic

definition of “factum” is from mathematics: “the product of two or more factors multiplied

together.” Rauschenberg’s own words suggest that he does not set out to produce individual

works. So for example he told critic Calvin Tomkins that “I just paint in order to learn

something new about painting, and everything I learn always resolves itself into two or three

pictures.”57 One of the organizers of the recent monumental retrospective exhibition devoted to

Rauschenberg observed that he “has always created series, groups, and cycles of work, formally

and informally; few works in his oeuvre were conceived as isolated entities.”58

Size

       Producing a work that would gain attention at a Salon involved more than simply making

a large painting. Subject matter, style, originality, and technical virtuosity were all important

elements that could contribute to having a painting attract favorable comment.59 Yet although

size alone was not sufficient to make a painting successful at a group exhibition, it was often

necessary to prevent a work from being overlooked. If the argument of the preceding section is

correct, it should therefore be the case that the most famous works of the French painters should

be large, and in particular generally larger than those of the Americans.

       Table 7 shows that this is true. The median size of the French paintings is 4.88 square
                                                  23

meters, 65% larger than the median size of 2.95 square meters of the American works. The two

largest paintings are French, as are six of the largest nine.

       Interestingly, when the French works are not large, this can often be traced to particular

constraints. The smallest painting in Table 7 is Gauguin’s Vision After the Sermon. Gauguin

made the painting while living in Pont-Aven in severely straitened conditions. At the time Emile

Bernard reported to Vincent van Gogh that “it grieves him to see how Gauguin is often prevented

from doing what he could otherwise for purely material reasons, paints, canvas, etc.”60 In the

circumstances Vision After the Sermon was a large work; when Gauguin took it to a neighboring

town to offer it as a gift to the chapel, he recruited Bernard and another friend to help him carry it

there.61 The next smallest French painting in Table 7, Manet’s Bar at the Folies-Bergère, was

constrained in size by the progression of the artist’s terminal illness. Painted at a time when

Manet was suffering acutely, the combination of the painting’s size and the complexity of its

composition mark it clearly as the most ambitious of Manet’s late works.62

       It might be objected that Table 7 does not support the argument offered above, because

two of the four largest paintings - Pollock’s Autumn Rhythm and Newman’s Vir Heroicus

Sublimis - are by Americans. Yet in contrast to the practice of the French painters, the large size

of these two paintings does not appear to signal the intent of the artists to produce individual

works of exceptional importance. The Abstract Expressionists’ mature work was characterized

by the frequent use of large formats: so for example in 1959, when Alfred Barr asked rhetorically

what united the work of the group, his answer began “First, their size... They are often as big as

mural paintings.”63 In 1947 Pollock had declared “I believe the easel picture to be a dying form,

and the tendency of modern feeling is towards the wall picture or mural,” and in 1950 when an
                                                   24

interviewer asked about the size of his canvases, he responded: “They’re an impractical size -

9x18 feet. But I enjoy working big and - whenever I have a chance, I do it whether it’s practical

or not.”64 Autumn Rhythm, which was subtitled Number 30, 1950, was one of a series of wall-

sized works Pollock produced in that year; others included One: Number 31, 1950, which was

slightly larger than Autumn Rhythm, and Number 32, 1950, which was 12% smaller.65 Barnett

Newman often stated his belief that the size of a painting was unimportant in itself, and he

followed Vir Heroicus Sublimis by painting Cathedra, another work the same size, in the same

year.66 In contrast, the larger French works - not only the wall-sized Guernica, but also

Courbet’s L’Atelier, Seurat’s Grande Jatte, Picasso’s Demoiselles d’Avignon, and others, stood

out in these artists’ work: each was by far the largest painting the artist produced in that period.67

It is thus not only the absolute size, but also the size of these paintings relative to each artist’s

other work, that signals the French artists’ intent to create an individual work of particular

importance. Unlike the paintings of the Americans considered here, those of the French artists

generally reflect the recognition expressed by the young artist Frédéric Bazille in 1870: “In order

to be noticed at the exhibition, one has to paint rather large pictures that demand very

conscientious preparatory studies and thus occasion a good deal of expense.”68 In sum, the

evidence of Table 7 appears consistent with the view that the French painters considered here

conceived their most important works in a different manner from the Americans who followed

them.

Conclusion

        The dominant form of exhibition in nineteenth-century Paris favored a conception of

artistic achievement that focused on individual master works. In contrast, the dominant
                                                  25

exhibition type in twentieth-century New York privileged a conception of artistic success that

considered an artist’s recent output more generally, as evidenced in larger bodies of work.

Painters who seek critical and financial success must take account of prevailing exhibition

practices in producing their work. In nineteenth-century Paris, the central role of large group

exhibitions meant that artists had to devote considerable effort to producing important individual

pieces. In twentieth-century New York, the dominance of one-man gallery shows shifted the job

of the artist from making striking individual works to producing larger numbers of paintings that

would make up significant shows.

       Differences in exhibition practices thus appear to explain why the most famous modern

paintings are not by American artists. American modern artists have not produced paintings as

famous as those of their French predecessors not because they were less important artists, or

because they produced less important innovations, but rather because of a change in the market

environment they faced. In revealing a specific way in which market institutions have influenced

artistic practices, this investigation underscores the fact that the study of market conditions is

central to an understanding of the history of modern art.
                                                 26

Footnotes

I thank Robert Jensen for discussions of the issues treated in this paper, and the National Science
Foundation for financial support.


1.     Serge Guilbaut, How New York Stole the Idea of Modern Art: Abstract Expressionism,
       Freedom, and the Cold War (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), p. 1.

2.     David W. Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic Success: Ranking French Painters - and
       Paintings - from Impressionism to Cubism,” Historical Methods (forthcoming, 2001);
       Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock the Greatest American Modern Painter? A Quantitative
       Investigation,” (unpublished paper, 2001).

3.     For additional discussion, see David W. Galenson, Painting outside the Lines: Patterns of
       Creativity in Modern Art (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001), pp. 24-26.

4.     For lists of the artists considered, see Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic Success,” Table 1,
       and Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock the Greatest American Modern Painter? Table 1.

5.     These books are listed in the appendix.

6.     Bruno S. Frey, “Superstar Museums: An Economic Analysis,” Journal of Cultural
       Economics, Vol. 22, Nos. 2-3 (1988), p. 115; Martin Feldstein, editor, The Economics of
       Art Museums (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991), pp. 13-14.

7.     Support for the observation that the American artists failed to produce famous individual
       works comes from a very different source. In 1979 the eminent art historian Kenneth
       Clark delivered a lecture titled “What is a Masterpiece?” Clark answered the question
       inductively, discussing a series of examples that ranged widely in time. Clark’s lecture
       concluded chronologically with Courbet’s Funeral at Ornans, Manet’s Olympia, and
       Picasso’s Woman with a Guitar and Guernica. Thus Clark considered no painting made
       after 1937; nor did he explain why he neglected paintings done in the 42 years that
       preceded his lecture. Clark’s conservatism can be cited as the explanation for his lack of
       interest in recent art, but that in this context he was able to ignore all art of the 1950s and
       ‘60s without comment was made possible, or at least facilitated, by the absence of widely
       recognized and acclaimed individual works from these decades. See Kenneth Clark,
       What is a Masterpiece? (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1981).

8.     Cézanne is a prime example of an artist whose work developed gradually, and I would
       argue that this accounts for his absence from this study. For discussion see Galenson,
       Painting Outside the Lines, Chapter 5.

9.     A widely accepted study of the shift from large group exhibitions to one-artist shows in
       private galleries is Harrison C. White and Cynthia A. White, Canvases and Careers:
                                              27

      Institutional Change in the French Painting World (Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press, 1993). A different interpretation of this shift will be offered in David W. Galenson
      and Robert Jensen, “Careers and Canvases: The Rise of the Market for Modern Art in the
      Nineteenth Century” (in preparation).

10.   Robert Jensen, Marketing Modernism in Fin-de-Siècle Europe (Princeton: Princeton
      University Press, 1994), p. 23.

11.   Lethève, Daily Life of French Artists in the Nineteenth Century (London: George Allen
      and Unwin, 1972), p. 108.

12.   Patricia Mainardi, The End of the Salon: Art and the State in the Early Third Republic
      (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), pp. 18-19, 47.

13.   Hamilton, Manet and his Critics (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1954), p. 15.

14.   Gustave Courbet, Letters of Gustave Courbet (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
      1992), p. 53.

15.   Patricia Mainardi, Art and Politics of the Second Empire (New Haven: Yale University
      Press, 1987), pp. 59-65.

16.   Courbet, Letters of Gustave Courbet, p. 139.

17.   Anne Coffin Hanson, Manet and the Modern Tradition (New Haven: Yale University
      Press, 1977), p. 44.

18.   From 1881, the official Salon was replaced by the Salon of the Société des Artistes
      Francais. In 1884 the Société des Artistes Indépendents began to hold an annual Salon, as
      did the Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts in 1890. In 1903 these were joined by the
      Salon d’Automne. For discussion see Mainardi, The End of the Salon, pp. 84-86.

19.   E.g. White and White, Canvases and Careers, pp. 144-45, 150-51.

20.   Jensen, Marketing Modernism in Fin-de-Siècle Europe, Chapter 3.

21.   Martha Ward, Pissarro, Neo-Impressionism, and the Spaces of the Avant-Garde
      (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), p. 5. Ward continued: “This was despite
      the fact that the justifications that had been offered for the production of such paintings
      and their display in the French public arena - moral didacticism, nationalist sentiments,
      cultural heritage - had been seriously undermined by the apparent debasement of history
      painting into a theatricalized, trivialized or propagandized mode of entertainment, and by
      the gradual demise of any serious commitment to that type of painting on the part of
      many of the audiences held in high esteem;” ibid.
                                              28

22.   Ward observes that “Seurat’s habit of producing a large painting annually [was] perhaps a
      carry-over from preparing works for the Salon;” ibid., p. 107.

23.   David Sweetman, Paul Gauguin (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995), pp. 130, 201.
      Also see Mark Roskill, Van Gogh, Gauguin, and the Impressionist Circle (Greenwich
      Conn.: New York Graphic Society, 1970), p. 96.

24.   Hilary Spurling, The Unknown Matisse (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998), pp. 130-35.

25.   A minor work of his was shown at the Spanish pavilion of the 1900 Exposition
      Universelle, but he would not again participate in a large group exhibition until World
      War I; Marilyn McCully, editor, Picasso: The Early Years, 1892-1906 (Washington:
      National Gallery of Art, 1997), p. 143; Pierre Daix, Picasso (New York: Harper Collins,
      1994), pp. 152-53.

26.   John Richardson, A Life of Picasso: The Early Years, 1881-1906 (New York: Random
      House, 1991), pp. 411-14.

27.   Daix, Picasso, p. 56.

28.   William Rubin, Hélène Seckel, and Judith Cousins, Les Demoiselles d’Avignon (New
      York: Museum of Modern Art, 1994), pp. 14, 119.

29.   David Cottington, “What the Papers Say: Politics and Ideology in Picasso’s Collages of
      1912,” Art Journal, Vol. 47, No. 4 (Winter, 1988), pp. 353-54.

30.   Calvin Tomkins, The Bride and the Bachelors (New York: Viking Press, 1968), p. 67.

31.   Pierre Cabanne, Dialogues with Marcel Duchamp (New York: Da Capo Press, 1987), p.
      69.

32.   Barnett Newman, Selected Writings and Interviews (Berkeley: University of California
      Press, 1990), p. 305.

33.   Stephanie Terenzio, editor, The Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell (New York:
      Oxford University Press, 1992), pp. 161-62; also see Deirdre Robson, “The Avant-Garde
      and the On-Guard: Some Influences on the Potential Market for the First Generation
      Abstract Expressionists in the 1940s and Early 1950s,” Art Journal, Vol. 47, No. 3 (Fall,
      1988), pp. 217-20.

34.   Alan Bowness has remarked that the replacement of public group exhibitions by private
      gallery shows is “an innovation too little recognized;” The Conditions of Success (New
      York: Thames and Hudson, 1990), pp. 39-42.
                                              29

35.   Clement Greenberg, The Collected Essays and Criticism, Volume 2 (Chicago: University
      of Chicago Press, 1986), p. 16.

36.   Ibid., p. 124.

37.   Henry Geldzahler, Making It New (San Diego: Harcourt Brace, 1994), p. 111.

38.   Thomas B. Hess, Willem de Kooning (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1968), p. 149.

39.   James E. B. Breslin, Mark Rothko (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), p. 329.

40.   Clifford Ross, editor, Abstract Expressionism: Creators and Critics (New York: Harry N.
      Abrams, 1990), pp. 197, 214.

41.   David Sylvester, About Modern Art (New York: Henry Holt, 1997), p. 353.

42.   Anna C. Chave, Mark Rothko (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989), pp. 11-12.

43.   Kirk Varnedoe, Jackson Pollock (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998), pp. 48-50.

44.   Michael Fried, Art and Objecthood (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), pp.
      257-58; Philip Fisher, Making and Effacing Art (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
      1997), pp. 22-23, 118-19, 174; Geldzahler, Making It New, p. 52.

45.   Victor Bockris, Warhol (New York: Da Capo Press, 1997), p. 151.

46.   Ibid., p. 153.

47.   Benjamin H. D. Buchloh, “Andy Warhol’s One-Dimensional Art: 1956-1966,” in
      Kynaston McShine, editor, Andy Warhol: A Retrospective (New York: Museum of
      Modern Art, 1989), p. 54.

48.   Steven Henry Madoff, editor, Pop Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), p.
      267. Warhol’s portrayals of Marilyn Monroe appear to be his most popular among art
      historians, as they account for a total of 20 illustrations in the books surveyed for this
      study.

49.   Charles F. Stuckey, “Warhol in Context,” in Gary Garrels, editor, The Work of Andy
      Warhol (Seattle: Bay Press, 1989), pp. 3-4.

50.   Paintings from the show are listed in Kirk Varnedoe, Jasper Johns: A Retrospective (New
      York: Museum of Modern Art, 1996), p. 128.

51.   Jasper Johns, Writings, Sketchbook Notes, Interviews (New York: Museum of Modern
      Art, 1996), p. 82.
                                              30

52.   Ibid., p. 82.

53.   William S. Rubin, Frank Stella (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1970), p. 12.

54.   Leo Castelli, Jasper Johns: 35 Years (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1993), not paginated.

55.   Calvin Tomkins, Off the Wall: Robert Rauschenberg and the Art World of Our Time
      (New York: Penguin Books, 1981), p. 71.

56.   Walter Hopps and Susan Davidson, Robert Rauschenberg: A Retrospective (New York:
      Guggenheim Museum, 1997), pp. 56-59.

57.   Tomkins, The Bride and the Bachelors, p. 236.

58.   Walter Hopps, “Introduction,” in Hopps and Davidson, Robert Rauschenberg, p. 24.

59.   E.g. see Thérèse Burollet, “Pompier Art,” in Alexander V. J. Gaudieri, et. al., William
      Bouguereau (Montreal: Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, 1984), pp. 31-38.

60.   Vincent van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent Van Gogh, Vol. 3 (London: Thames
      and Hudson, 1958), p. 34.

61.   John Rewald, Post-Impressionism (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1956), p. 202.

62.   Denis Rouart, Edouard Manet (Paris: Flammarion, 1970), pp. 115-21; Pierre Schneider,
      The World of Manet (New York: Time-Life Books, 1968), p. 172.

63.   David Shapiro and Cecile Shapiro, Abstract Expressionism (Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press, 1990), p. 97.

64.   Pepe Karmel, editor, Jackson Pollock (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998), pp. 17,
      22.

65.   E. A. Carmean and Eliza E. Rathbone, American Art at Mid-Century (Washington:
      National Gallery of Art, 1978), pp. 133-36.

66.   Newman, Selected Writings and Interviews, pp. 198, 271-72; Thomas B. Hess, Barnett
      Newman (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1971), p. 78.

67.   E.g. Alan Bowness, Courbet’s L’Atelier du Peintre (Newcastle: University of Newcastle
      upon Tyne, 1972), p. 3; John Rewald, Georges Seurat (New York: Wittenborn, 1943), p.
      20; Roland Penrose, Picasso (New York: Harper 1959), p. 124; Alfred H. Barr, Matisse
      (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1951), pp. 81-82.

68.   John Rewald, The History of Impressionism, revised edition (New York: Museum of
      Modern Art, 1961), p. 140.
Table 1: Ranking of Most Illustrated French Paintings



 Rank    % of books    Artist, title                               Date   Location
 1           91        Picasso, Les Demoiselles d’Avignon          1907   New York
 2           76        Picasso, Guernica                           1937   Madrid
 3           73        Seurat, Sunday Afternoon on the Island of   1886   Chicago
                       the Grande Jatte
 4(t)        64        Duchamp, Nude Descending a Staircase,       1912   Philadelphia
                       No. 2
 4(t)        64        Manet, Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe              1863   Paris
 6           61        Manet, Bar at the Folies-Bergère            1882   London
 7           48        Duchamp, The Bride Stripped Bare by Her     1923   Philadelphia
                       Bachelors, Even
 8(t)        45        Courbet, L’Atelier                          1855   Paris
 8(t)        45        Gauguin, The Vision After the Sermon        1888   Edinburgh
 8(t)        45        Manet, Olympia                              1863   Paris
 8(t)        45        Matisse, The Joy of Life                    1906   Merion, PA

Source: Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic Success,” Table 3.
Table 2: Ranking of Most Illustrated American Paintings
 Rank    % of books   Artist, title                                Date   Location
 1           36       de Kooning, Woman I                          1952   New York
 2           34       Newman, Vir Heroicus Sublimis                1951   New York
 3           31       Lichtenstein, Whaam!                         1963   London
 4(t)        27       de Kooning, Excavation                       1950   Chicago
 4(t)        27       Rauschenberg, Bed                            1955   New York
 4(t)        27       Rauschenberg, Monogram                       1959   Stockholm
 7(t)        23       Gorky, The Liver is the Cock’s Comb          1944   Buffalo
 7(t)        23       Johns, Flag                                  1958   New York
 7(t)        23       Johns, Three Flags                           1954   New York
 7(t)        23       Pollock, Autumn Rhythm                       1950   New York
 7(t)        23       Warhol, Marilyn Diptych                      1962   London

Source: Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock the Greatest American Modern Painter?” Table 3.
Table 3: Ranking of Paintings from Tables 1 and 2, by Total Illustrations in Common Books

 Rank    N       % of      Artist, Title
                 books
 1       28        97      Picasso, Les Demoiselles d’Avignon
 2       23        79      Seurat, Sunday Afternoon on the Island of the Grande Jatte
 3       22        76      Picasso, Guernica
 4       18        62      Manet, Olympia
 5(t)    17        59      Manet, Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe
 5(t)    17        59      Manet, Bar at the Folies-Bergère
 7       15        52      Duchamp, Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2
 8       14        48      Matisse, The Joy of Life
 9       13        45      Gauguin, The Vision After the Sermon
 10      12        41      Duchamp, The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even
 11(t)   11        38      Courbet, L’Atelier
 11(t)   11        38      Newman, Vir Heroicus Sublimis
 11(t)   11        38      Rauschenberg, Monogram
 14      9         31      Lichtenstein, Whaam!
 15(t)   8         28      de Kooning, Woman I
 15(t)   8         28      Warhol, Marilyn Diptych
 17(t)   7         24      Johns, Flag
 17(t)   7         24      Johns, Three Flags
 17(t)   7         24      Pollock, Autumn Rhythm
 20(t)   5         17      Gorky, The Liver is the Cock’s Comb
 20(t)   5         17      de Kooning, Excavation
 20(t)   5         17      Rauschenberg, Bed

Source: see text and appendix.
Table 4: Ranking of Other Works by Artists Included in Tables 1 and 2 that Appear in More than
 One Quarter of the Books Surveyed

 Rank    N     % of books   Artist, Title                             Date   Location
 1       15        52       Courbet, The Stone Breakers               1894   Unknown
 2       14        48       Picasso, Three Musicians                  1921   New York
 3       11        38       Courbet, Funeral at Ornans                1849   Paris
 4(t)    9         31       Matisse, Green Stripe (Mme. Matisse)      1905   Copenhagen
 4(t)    9         31       Matisse, Harmony in Red                   1909   Leningrad
 6(t)    8         28       Duchamp, Bicycle Wheel                    1951   New York
 6(t)    8         28       Duchamp, L.H.O.O.Q.                       1919   New York
 6(t)    8         28       Gauguin, Where do We Come From?           1897   Boston
                            What Are We? Where Are We Going?
 6(t)    8         28       Gauguin, Manao Tupapau                    1892   Buffalo
 6(t)    8         28       Matisse, Red Studio                       1911   New York
 6(t)    8         28       Picasso, Still Life with Chair Caning     1912   Paris

Source: see text and appendix.
Table 5: Total Illustrations for All Painters Considered by this Study

 Rank                     N        Painter
 1                       343       Picasso
 2                       159       Matisse
 3                        93       Manet
 4                        85       Duchamp
 5                        83       Gauguin
 6                        69       Pollock
 7                        60       Johns
 8(t)                     52       Courbet
 8(t)                     52       Warhol
 10(t)                    46       Rauschenberg
 10(t)                    46       Seurat
 12                       39       Lichtenstein
 13                       32       de Kooning
 14                       24       Newman
 15                       22       Gorky

Source: see text and appendix.
Table 6: Total Illustrations of Each Artist in the Single Years Listed in
       Table 3

 Rank           N       Artist                                       Year
 1              52      Picasso                                      1907
 2              37      Manet                                        1863
 3              36      Warhol                                       1962
 4              32      Picasso                                      1937
 5(t)           26      Pollock                                      1950
 5(t)           26      Seurat                                       1886
 7(t)           25      Duchamp                                      1912
 7(t)           25      Johns                                        1955
 9              19      Lichtenstein                                 1963
 10(t)          17      Manet                                        1882
 10(t)          17      Matisse                                      1906
 12(t)          15      Gauguin                                      1888
 12(t)          15      Rauschenberg                                 1959
 14(t)          12      Courbet                                      1855
 14(t)          12      Duchamp                                      1923
 16             11      Newman                                       1951
 17             10      de Kooning                                   1952
 18              9      Johns                                        1958
 19(t)           7      Gorky                                        1944
 19(t)           7      Rauschenberg                                 1955
 21              5      de Kooning                                   1950

Source: see text and appendix
Table 7: Ranking by Size of Paintings in Table 3

 Rank          Artist and Painting                                               Size (m2)
 1             Picasso, Guernica                                                  27.12
 2             Courbet, L’Atelier                                                 21.59
 3             Pollock, Autumn Rhythm                                             13.97
 4             Newman, Vir Heroicus Sublimis                                      12.44
 5             Seurat, Sunday Afternoon on the Island of the Grade                 6.38
               Jatte
 6             Picasso, Les Demoiselles d’Avignon                                  5.66
 7             Manet, Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe                                      5.62
 8             de Kooning, Excavation                                              5.29
 9             Duchamp, The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors,                  4.88
               Even
 10            Gorky, The Liver is the Cock’s Comb                                 4.63
 11            Matisse, Joy of Life                                                4.14
 12            Rauschenberg, Monogram                                             3.35*
 13            Warhol, Marilyn Diptych                                             2.95
 14            de Kooning, Woman I                                                 2.84
 15            Manet, Olympia                                                      2.49
 16            Johns, Flag                                                         1.65

 17            Rauschenberg, Bed                                                  1.53*
 18            Duchamp, Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2                         1.31
 19            Manet, Bar at the Folies-Bergère                                    1.25
 20            Lichtenstein, Whaam!                                                1.09
 21            Johns, Three Flags                                                 0.91*
 22            Gauguin, Vision After the Sermon                                    0.69

*These works are three-dimensional. The figure given for each is the product of their two largest
dimensions.
                                             31

Appendix:    The books surveyed for this study are listed here, in chronological order. In one
             case, as indicated, four books that were included in a series were treated as a
             single book.

1.    Robert Hughes, The Shock of the New (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1982).

2.    Sara Cornell, Art: A History of Changing Style (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
       1983).

3.    Ralph A. Britsch and Todd A. Britsch, The Arts in Western Culture (Englewood Cliffs,
       NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984).

4.    Dennis J. Sporre, The Arts (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984).

5.    Edmund Burke Feldman, Thinking About Art (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
       1985).

6.    H. H. Arnason and Daniel Wheeler, History of Modern Art, third edition (New York:
       Harry N. Abrams, 1986).

7.    Frederick Hartt, Art, third edition (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1989).

8.    Michael Wood, Bruce Cole, and Adelheid Gealt, Art of the Western World (New York:
       Simon and Schuster, 1989).

9.    Kirk Varnedoe, A Fine Disregard: What Makes Modern Art Modern (New York: Harry
       N. Abrams, 1990).

10.   Horst de la Croix, Richard G. Tansey, and Diane Kirkpatrick, Gardner’s Art Through the
       Ages, ninth edition (San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1991).

11.   Philip Yenawine, How to Look at Modern Art (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1991).

12.   Sam Hunter and John Jacobus, Modern Art, third edition (New York: Harry N. Abrams,
       1992).

13.   Sandro Sprocati, editor, A Guide to Art (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1992).

14.   Carol Strickland, The Annotated Mona Lisa: A Crash Course in Art History from
      Prehistoric to Post-Modern (Kansas City: Andrews and McMeel, 1992).

15.   Four books treated as one:
                                              32

      Francis Frascina, Nigel Blake, Briony Fer, Tamar Garb, and Charles Harrison, Modernity
        and Modernism: French Painting in the Nineteenth Century (New Haven: Yale
      University Press, 1993).

      Charles Harrison, Francis Frascina, and Gill Perry, Primitivism, Cubism, Abstraction: The
       Early Twentieth Century (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).

      Briony Fer, David Batchelor, and Paul Wood, Realism, Rationalism, Surrealism: Art
      between the Wars (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).

      Paul Wood, Francis Frascina, Jonathan Harris, and Charles Harrison, Modernism in
      Dispute: Art Since the Forties (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).

16.   Larry Silver, Art in History (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1993).

17.   Laurie Schneider Adams, A History of Western Art (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1994).

18.   William Fleming, Arts and Ideas, ninth edition (Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace, 1995).

19.   H. W. Janson and Anthony F. Janson, History of Art, fifth edition (New York: Harry N.
       Abrams, 1995).

20.   Marilyn Stokstad and Marion Spears Grayson, Art History (New York: Harry N. Abrams,
       1995).

21.   Liz Dawtrey, Toby Jackson, Mary Masterton, Pam Meecham, and Paul Wood,
      Investigating Modern Art (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996).

22.   Alison Gallup, Gerhard Gruitroy, and Elizabeth M. Weisberg, Great Paintings of the
      Western World (New York: Hugh Lauter Levin Associates, 1997).

23.   David Wilkins, Bernard Schultz, and Katheryn M. Linduff, Art Past, Art Present, third
       edition (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1997).

24.   Julian Freeman, Art: A Crash Course (New York: Watson-Guptill, 1998).

25.   Volker Gebhardt, The History of Art (New York: Barron’s, 1998).

26.   Sandro Bocola, The Art of Modernism: Art, Culture, and Society from Goya to the
      Present Day (Munich: Prestel Verlag, 1999).

27.   Hugh Honour and John Fleming, The Visual Arts: A History (New York: Harry N.
      Abrams, 1999).
                                             33

28.   Duane Preble, Sarah Preble, and Patrick Frank, Artforms: An Introduction to the Visual
       Arts, sixth edition (New York: Longman, 1999).

29.   Martin Kemp, editor, The Oxford History of Western Art (Oxford: Oxford University
      Press, 2000).
