                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE ADJUSTMENT OF PRICES AND THE ADJUSTMENT OF THE EXCHANGE RATE


                                             Charles Engel
                                            James C. Morley


                                          Working Paper 8550
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8550


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




We thank David DeJong, Linda Goldberg, Bruce Hansen, Shang-Jin Wei, Ken West, and Holger Wolf for
useful comments and discussion. Engel acknowledges research support from a National Science Foundation
grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Charles Engel and James C. Morley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Adjustment of Prices and the Adjustment of the Exchange Rate
Charles Engel and James C. Morley
NBER Working Paper No. 8550
October 2001
JEL No. F3, F4



                                               ABSTRACT


        The purchasing power parity puzzle relates to the adjustment of real exchange rates. Real
exchange rates are extremely volatile, suggesting that temporary shocks emanate from the monetary
sector. But the half-life of real exchange rate deviations is extremely large – 2.5 to 5 years. This half-life
seems too large to be explained by the slow adjustment of nominal prices. We offer a different
interpretation. We maintain that nominal exchange rates and prices need not converge at the same rate,
as is implicit in rational-expectations sticky-price models of the exchange rate. Evidence from an
unobserved components model for nominal prices and nominal exchange rates that imposes relative
purchasing power parity in the long run indicates that nominal exchange rates converge much more
slowly than nominal prices. The real puzzle is why nominal exchange rates converge so slowly.




Charles Engel                                                      James C. Morley
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin                                            Box 1208, Eliot Hall 205
1180 Observatory Drive                                             Washington University
Madison, WI 53706-1393                                             One Brookings Drive
and NBER                                                           St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu                                                morley@wueconc.wustl.edu
        Since the advent of floating exchange rates in 1973, real exchange rates among

advanced countries have been persistent and volatile. There are two explanations for this

outcome, but neither is entirely satisfactory. The first is that real productivity shocks and

real demand shocks to economies have been very persistent. But it is difficult to identify

shocks that would lead to such great volatility of real exchange rates.

        A second view builds on rational-expectations sticky-price (RESP) models of

open economy in the tradition of Dornbusch (1976). Those models demonstrate that

monetary shocks could lead to a high degree of real exchange rate volatility through the

overshooting effect. Real exchange rates can be persistent because they adjust at the

same rate as nominal prices adjust.

        However, empirical studies of real exchange rate adjustment have found very long

half-lives for transitory shocks to real exchange rates. Typically, the half-life of real

exchange rates is estimated to be from 2.5 to 5 years.1 That adjustment seems to be too

slow to be explained by stickiness of nominal prices. Hence, we have the “purchasing

power parity puzzle”, as defined by Rogoff (1996):

         How can one reconcile the enormous short-term volatility of real exchange rates
with the extremely slow rate at which shocks appear to damp out? Most explanations of
short-term exchange rate volatility point to financial factors such as changes in portfolio
preferences, short-term asset price bubbles, and monetary shocks. Such shocks can have
substantial effects on the real economy in the presence of sticky nominal wages and
prices. Consensus estimates for the rate at which PPP deviations damp, however, suggest
a half-life of three to five years, seemingly far too long to be explained by nominal
rigidities. It is not difficult to rationalize slow adjustment if real shocks – shocks to tastes
and technology – are predominant. But existing models based on real shocks cannot
account for short-term exchange-rate volatility. (pp. 647-648.)2



1
  See for example Frankel (1986), Lothian and Taylor (1996), Wu (1996), Papell (1997), Cheung and Lai
(2000) and Murray and Papell (2000).
2
   Earlier, Stockman (1987) also questions whether the slow convergence of real exchange rates can be
explained by slow adjustment of nominal prices.



                                                 1
       Here we do not provide a full resolution to the purchasing power parity puzzle,

but we do offer a refinement: it is nominal exchange rates, not prices, that adjust slowly

toward purchasing power parity. In fact, when we allow nominal prices and exchange

rates to adjust at different speeds, we find that nominal exchange rates usually take years

to converge, while prices often converge within months. Why then do Rogoff (1996),

Stockman (1987), and others mate the convergence speed of the real exchange rate with

the convergence speed of prices? Probably it is because that is the sort of dynamics that

arise from RESP models. In those models, prices, nominal exchange rates, and real

exchange rates converge to the long run at the same rate.

       Our finding raises a new puzzle: why does the nominal exchange rate converge so

slowly? We do not present an alternative theory that answers this question. The model

we present is purely empirical. Perhaps this new puzzle is related to the empirical failure

of uncovered interest parity (UIP). In terms of the RESP model, the forward-looking

behavior implicit in rational expectations modeling of the UIP condition is the key to the

solution that puts exchange rates and prices on a saddle path, and reduces the

dimensionality of the system. However, we do not attempt any theoretical modeling of

an alternative to UIP. The UIP puzzle has been very resistant to theoretical explanations,

so we leave it and this new puzzle for future research.

       Our model is one in which nominal prices converge toward equilibrium price

levels that are unobserved. The exchange rate between any two countries converges

toward an equilibrium exchange rate that is linked to prices in the long run by purchasing

power parity. The model has a state-space representation that can be estimated with the

help of the Kalman filter.




                                             2
       Superficially, our empirical model appears similar to models in the

macroeconomics literature in which variables (such as GDP) are decomposed into a

transitory and a random walk component. But our formulation of the state-space model

allows more flexibility than many other applications in macroeconomics. To emphasize

the difference, we refer to “equilibrium” and “disequilibrium” components, rather than

“permanent” and “transitory” components of our time series. There are some important

distinctions between our model and the permanent-transitory decompositions. For one,

our unobserved equilibrium price levels and exchange rates are not simply posited to be

pure random walks. We allow transitory dynamics both in the equilibrium prices and

exchange rates, as well as in the disequilibrium components. Also, identification of our

model does not require arbitrary independence restrictions on the covariance matrix of

innovations to equilibrium and disequilibrium variables. Indeed, RESP models could not

be nested in our formulation if we required equilibrium and disequilibrium innovations to

be independent. An underlying structural monetary shock, for example, must be allowed

to influence both equilibrium prices and exchange rates and deviations from the

equilibrium.

       There are three reasons why we are able to build a state-space model with these

attractive features. First, we make use of a reformulation of the standard state-space

model due to Morley, Nelson and Zivot (2001). Second, our model is multivariate, which

in some cases allows identification with fewer covariance restrictions than in univariate

models when there are cross-equation restrictions on the behavior of the variables. Third,

and most importantly, we make use of structural identifying restrictions. In particular, we

use the long-run PPP restriction and also rely on the economic structure of RESP models




                                            3
to guide our formulation of the decomposition between equilibrium and disequilibrium

components of exchange rates and prices.

       In section 1, we lay out the empirical model. Section 2 relates the model to RESP

models directly, as a way to develop some restrictions that are helpful in estimation. (We

build a model that nests a RESP model as a special case.) In section 3, we discuss

intuitively where identification of the model comes from. Section 4 reports results, and

the outcome of some specification tests. Section 5 compares our approach to other recent

studies that have allowed different speeds of adjustment for exchange rates and prices. In

section 6, we conclude and speculate on what type of economic behavior might produce

the results we find. There are two appendices. The first rigorously relates our model to

RESP models, and the second gives the detail of our set-up of the Kalman filter.



1. Model

       We propose an unobserved components (UC) model to examine price level and

exchange rate adjustment. The log price levels and the log nominal exchange rate for a

given pair of countries gravitate over time toward an unobserved equilibrium based on

purchasing power parity (PPP), but have transitory deviations from the equilibrium.

       In its most general form, our model has the observed log price levels, pit ,

i = 1, K, n , and the log exchange rates, s jt , j = 2, K, n , (where the exchange rates are

expressed as the price of country j’s currency in terms of the country 1’s currency) adjust

toward unobserved equilibrium values according to stationary autoregressive processes:

                                  φ ip ( L)( pit − pit ) = vit ,                         (1)




                                                4
                                    φ sj ( L)( s jt − s jt ) = v sjt .                       (2)

The lag operators, φ ip (L) and φ sj (L) , are all k-th order, and the roots lie outside the unit

circle; pit is the equilibrium price level in country i, and s jt represents the equilibrium

value of s jt ; vit represents a disequilibrium innovation to country i’s price level, and v sjt

is a disequilibrium innovation to j’s exchange rates. Meanwhile, the first differences of

the unobserved equilibrium log price levels adjust according to autoregressive processes:

                                    φ ip ( L)(∆pit − µ i ) = vit .                           (3)

Again, φ ip (L) is a k-th order lag operator whose roots lie outside the unit circle; µ i

represents a deterministic drift in country i’s equilibrium price level; and vit is an

innovation to the equilibrium price level. The equilibrium exchange rate for country j

relative to country 1 (the base country) relates to equilibrium price levels according to

PPP:

                                         s jt = p1t − p jt .                                 (4)

Finally, the equilibrium and disequilibrium innovations have mean zero and a joint

Normal distribution.

        Equation (1) takes the form of price-adjustment equations in open-economy

models presented by Mussa (1982) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1984). The equilibrium

prices, pit , are interpreted in those models as the price level that would prevail in each

country if prices were perfectly flexible, given the current values and history of the

exogenous variables. Under this interpretation, equation (3) describes what the evolution




                                                   5
of pit would be if prices were perfectly flexible. Our model incorporates a unit root in

these equilibrium prices, but does not require that they follow a random walk. For

example, with fixed money demand, nominal prices could follow such a process if money

supplies were exogenously generated as unit root processes.

        Equation (4) imposes long-run purchasing power parity. Rogoff (1997) claims

there is a growing consensus on this empirical regularity.3 Equation (2) indicates there

are transitory deviations from purchasing power parity.

        It is easy to relate this model to stochastic versions of the RESP model. In section

2 we discuss the relationship in detail. It is useful now to point out the main contrast

between this model and the RESP models: in RESP models, φ ip (L) and φ sj (L) are

restricted to be the same as each other.



2. Estimation

        To keep the dimensionality of our model reasonable, we impose three

specification assumptions prior to estimation. First, for simplicity and transparency in

terms of convergence properties, we assume first-order autoregressive adjustment

processes (i.e., k = 1 ). Second, we impose some restrictions, discussed below, on the

covariance matrix of the equilibrium and disequilibrium innovations. Third, since our

main focus is on the difference between the speeds of adjustment for nominal prices and

for nominal exchange rates, we assume that nominal prices adjust at the same speed for




3
  However, see Engel (2000). The permanent deviations from PPP that Engel argues may exist have very
small effects on real exchange rates over the horizons we are investigating.



                                                 6
each country (i.e., φ pi = φ p and φ pi = φ p for all i) and nominal exchange rates adjust at

the same speed for each country pair ( φ sj = φ s for all j).

        We do not assume that all of the innovations to equilibrium and disequilibrium

prices and exchange rates are independent. Such a strong assumption is not necessary to

identify the model. Furthermore, independence would have the drawback of not nesting

RESP-style dynamics. Appendix 1 presents a RESP model for a two-country case, and

discusses the restrictions implied by that model. In this section, we discuss those

restrictions more informally and describe how they are accommodated in our estimation.

        Consider equations (1) and (3), the price-adjustment equation and the equation

determining the dynamics of equilibrium prices. In the RESP model, the innovation vit

embodies structural monetary and aggregate demand shocks that move the equilibrium

price level. If we were to assume independent innovations, the error term in the price-

adjustment equation (1), vit , would not be correlated with vit . The implication from

equation (1) is that any shock that pushes up pit would push pit up immediately by

exactly the same amount. But this kind of immediate proportional response of prices,

pit , to shocks that affect equilibrium prices, pit , is completely inconsistent with the

price-stickiness assumptions of RESP models. RESP models assume negative correlation

between vit and vit . Indeed, a literal representation of predetermined nominal prices has

these terms perfectly negatively correlated: vit = −vit . Under this assumption, the price

adjustment equation (1) can be written as:

                              pit = (1 − φ pi ( L))( pit − pit ) + Et −1 pit .




                                                    7
          In practice, we assume that while vit and vit might be correlated, there is not

perfect negative correlation. The assumption of perfect negative correlation means that

prices do not respond at all in the current period to shocks that affect pit . That is an

impractical assumption in our empirical model. Our data are sampled quarterly, so the

assumption means that, even after one full quarter, prices show no response to vit

innovations. We find in our empirical work that prices actually adjust fairly quickly –

generally more than half of the adjustment occurs within six months. Even if prices do

not respond on impact to vit innovations to equilibrium prices, we should allow for the

possibility that some of the adjustment occurs within the first quarter. So, we allow

Cov(vit , vit ) to be non-zero, but we do not impose perfect negative correlation.

          Another instance in which it is important not to assume independence is between

the innovations to s jt and to p1t and p jt . A key feature of the RESP model is that

exchange rates instantaneously reflect shocks that ultimately are reflected in goods prices.

To accommodate this behaviour, we also allow for non-zero values of Cov(v sjt , v jt ) and

Cov(v sjt , v1t ) .

          Then, since the innovations to the exchange rate equation, v sjt , and the

innovations to prices, v jt and v1t , are correlated with the innovations to equilibrium

prices, v jt and v1t , it is logical to allow v sjt to be correlated with v jt and v1t . So, we

also allow Cov(v jt , v sjt ) and Cov(v1t , v sjt ) to be non-zero.

          Meanwhile, we assume Cov (vit , v jt ) = 0 , Cov (vit , v jt ) = 0 , and Cov (vit , v jt ) = 0 ,




                                                    8
i ≠ j.    These are typical assumptions in RESP models.                        They correspond to an

assumption that domestic monetary and aggregate demand shocks are uncorrelated with

the corresponding foreign shocks.

         Our model generalizes the models of Mussa (1982) and Obstfeld and Rogoff

(1984) in two ways. The first is relatively trivial. As we discussed above, we do not

impose the restriction that innovations to current and equilibrium prices in each country

are perfectly negatively correlated. The second is crucial. The two-country model yields

saddle-path dynamics in which prices and the exchange rate converge at the same speed.

It has a linear restriction of the form:

                          s jt − s jt = −η j ( p jt − p jt ) + η1 ( p1t − p1t ) ,

where η j and η1 are constants, with a symmetric model ( η1 = η j ) implying that φ 1p ( L) ,

φ pj (L) , and φ sj (L) are all the same. We do not impose this restriction. Instead, we

allow prices to have one speed of convergence and the exchange rate to have another.

Indeed, it is by jettisoning the restriction that φ 1p ( L) , φ pj (L) , and φ sj (L) are the same

that we move from a model in which we can speak meaningfully about the speed of

adjustment of the real exchange rate to a model that focuses on the speed of adjustment of

nominal prices and nominal exchange rates.

         As we have mentioned, we do impose that φ 1p ( L) and φ pj (L) are identical. The

literature that links the slow adjustment of the real exchange rate to the speed of

adjustment of nominal prices has made this assumption. Without that assumption, RESP

models would not imply that real exchange rates could be represented by low-order




                                                    9
autoregressive processes. We maintain the assumption of identical speeds of adjustment

of prices, but break the link to exchange rate adjustment imposed by RESP models since

it is this link that we are interested in testing.

       In section 4, we estimate the model for the G7 countries. We first estimate the

model pairwise for the U.S. as the base country and each of the other six countries

separately. Then we estimate the model jointly for all seven countries. In the two-

country models, we impose further restrictions that arise in the RESP model. These

proportionality restrictions hold for the symmetric RESP model, discussed in the

appendix, and might well be expected to hold for our model given the assumption that

nominal prices adjust at the same speed for each country.

       The first proportionality restriction we impose is that, while the direction is

opposite, the degree of exchange overshooting or undershooting should be the same in

response to equal shocks to pt and pt∗ :

                                 Cov(v sjt , v jt )       − Cov(v sjt , v1t )
                                                      =                         ,            (5)
                                   Var (v jt )               Var (v1t )

Intuitively, the model implies that pt and pt∗ respond one for one to shocks to domestic

and foreign money supplies respectively.                     The exchange rate may overshoot (or

undershoot) in its initial response to money shocks, so that v sjt = k (v jt − v1t ) . Equation

(5) follows, given our assumption of the independence of domestic and foreign monetary

shocks.

       Model symmetry yields the second restriction we impose. It is that the relationship

between equilibrium and disequilibrium price shocks is proportional in each country:




                                                      10
                               Cov(v jt , v jt )        Cov(v1t , v1t )
                                                   =                    ,                   (6)
                                  Var (v jt )            Var (v1t )

      The third restriction is natural in light of the previous two.             It is that the

relationship between disequilibrium price shocks and disequilibrium exchange shocks is

proportional with opposite signs in each country:

                              Cov(v sjt , v jt )       − Cov(v sjt , v1t )
                                                   =                         .              (7)
                                Var (v jt )               Var (v1t )

      We do not impose these restrictions in the model in which all seven countries are

handled simultaneously.     This seven-country model is more stable (more strongly

identified) than the two-country models, so we need fewer restrictions. In addition, it is

considerably less tractable to impose these restrictions in the seven-country model.



3. Interpretation

      The unobserved components model that we use resembles the permanent-transitory

decompositions of GDP by Harvey (1985) and Clark (1987). Those models decompose a

single GDP time series into a random walk component and a transitory component

modeled as an AR(2) process, which are assumed to be independent. Superficially we

seem to be doing something similar to prices and exchange rates. But our “equilibrium”

prices and exchange rates are not constrained to be pure random walks. They can have

transitory dynamics.    Moreover, we do not need to impose restrictions that the

innovations to the equilibrium and disequilibrium components are independent.

However, it is intuitive to compare our approach with the GDP decompositions of Harvey

(1985) and Clark (1987) to get a sense of where our results come from.




                                                   11
          First, the assumption of independence between the permanent and transitory

components used by Harvey (1985) and Clark (1987) is not needed even in their models.

Morley, Nelson and Zivot (2001) show how the same model can be estimated without

imposing any assumption about the correlation of the permanent and transitory

components. They speculate that part of the reason previous studies have imposed

independence is that they write down the state-space representation in such a way that the

transitory component is in the observation equation of the Kalman filter, and the

permanent component is in the state equation. The usual implementation of the Kalman

filter assumes independence of the errors in the state equation and the measurement

equation.4 But, Morley, Nelson and Zivot (2000) show that if the model is written such

that both the transitory and permanent components are in the state equation, it is easy to

use the Kalman filter allowing the two components to be correlated. We make use of that

insight in setting up the Kalman filter for our model.                       Both the equilibrium and

disequilibrium variables are in the state equation.

          The cross-equation restriction that we have imposed – that purchasing power parity

holds for the equilibrium exchange rate – also helps identify our equilibrium and

disequilibrium prices and exchange rates in practice.                    That is, our model does not

separately decompose nominal prices for each country and each nominal exchange rate

into equilibrium and disequilibrium components. The equilibrium component of the

exchange rate between countries i and j is constrained to equal pit − p jt .

          We rely on the structure of the RESP model, as well, to distinguish between

equilibrium and disequilibrium components. The notion of the equilibrium price level

4
    Versions of the Kalman filter exist where the errors in the state and measurement equations are correlated.




                                                       12
arises in the context of a nominal price adjustment equation. Our model implies a

univariate ARMA(2,2) model for pit − pit −1 .               We determine the “equilibrium” and

“disequilibrium” dynamics in the context of price adjustment in RESP models, which

have prices gradually returning to the equilibrium value. So our equation (1), which is

based on the price adjustment behavior modeled by Mussa (1982) and Obstfeld and

Rogoff (1984), and others, puts structure on the data generating processes of prices.

       We have also imposed restrictions on the covariance matrix. These are not zero

restrictions on the covariances between the equilibrium and disequilibrium components.

Instead they are assumptions implying uncorrelated monetary shocks across countries.

(Also, in the two-country models, we impose further proportionality restrictions that arise

in symmetric RESP models.) While not all of the restrictions are necessary for strict

identification, they are all reasonable and help us derive stable estimates in practice

without altering our main conclusions.

         Appendix 2 discusses the Kalman filter and maximum likelihood estimation of

the model.



4. Results

         We consider six country pairs based on the G7 countries, with the US always

serving as the home country. The other countries are Canada, France, Germany, Italy,

Japan, and the UK. The prices are consumer price indexes (not seasonally adjusted) in

the third month of each quarter. The exchange rates are end-of-quarter prices of foreign




Such versions of the filter are more complicated and not frequently used.



                                                    13
currency expressed in US dollars. All data are from Datastream. The data are converted

into logarithms and multiplied by 100. The sample period is 1974Q1 to 1998Q2.

        We employ the OPTMUM procedure for the GAUSS programming language to

obtain maximum likelihood estimates. Numerical derivatives are used for estimation and

the calculation of asymptotic standard errors. Estimates appear robust to a variety of

starting values.

4a. Two-Country Models

        Table 1 presents the maximum likelihood estimates for our model and the country

pairs a) US and Canada, b) US and France, c) US and Germany, d) US and Italy, e) US

and Japan, and f) US and UK, respectively.                   The table reports the autoregressive

parameters for prices, φ p ; equilibrium prices, φ p ; and exchange rates, φ s ; the innovation

standard deviations for disequilibrium prices in the U.S., σ p ,1 , and the other country,

σ p , 2 ; the innovation standard deviations for equilibrium prices in the U.S., σ p ,1 , and the

other country, σ p , 2 ; and the innovation standard deviations for the disequilibrium

exchange rates, σ s .5

        The main result we highlight is that, for every country pair, the adjustment of

prices to the PPP equilibrium is much faster than the adjustment of the exchange rate.

The half-lives of price deviations from equilibrium are less than a quarter in the first three

cases and less than two quarters in the remaining three cases. Meanwhile, the half-lives




5
  To conserve space, we do not report estimates of the initial values of the equilibrium prices and exchange
rates, the unconditional means of the equilibrium inflation rates, or the off diagonal elements of the
covariance matrix. These estimates generally have large standard errors, so we do not draw any strong
conclusions from them.



                                                    14
of exchange rate deviations from equilibrium range from two years for the US/UK case,

to as many as thirteen years for the US/Canada case.

        The half-life estimates for prices do not provide much fodder either for advocates

of models where slow nominal price adjustment is an important element in business-cycle

behavior, or for supporters of models with rapidly adjusting nominal prices. Our point

estimates are consistent with the degree of price stickiness estimated in recent empirical

studies of sticky-price models, but the standard errors on the coefficient estimates are

large enough to encompass both alternatives.6 What is remarkable, of course, is the very

slow adjustment of nominal exchange rates.

        Equilibrium inflation is very persistent for every country pair. It seems unlikely

that we would be able to reject a unit root in equilibrium inflation in any of the cases.

However, if a unit root really were present, accounting for it should only serve to

strengthen evidence for the fast adjustment of prices.                In particular, an omitted

nonstationary component from equilibrium prices would show up in the estimated

deviations of prices from equilibrium, thus putting an upward bias on our estimates of the

persistence of those deviations.

        Innovations to exchange rate deviations from equilibrium have standard

deviations an order of magnitude larger than innovations to equilibrium prices and price

deviations. This is not too surprising given the relative volatility of observed prices and

exchange rates, which is the main stylized fact RESP overshooting models try to account

for. But, it is notable since it potentially explains why other studies have found that




6
  For example, Galí, Gertler, and López-Salido’s (2000) estimates imply a half-life of six months for
nominal prices in Europe.



                                                 15
nominal exchange rates do most of the adjustment towards PPP, even if prices adjust

more quickly. We discuss this point in further detail in the next section.

       Figure 1 presents plots of the equilibrium price levels for each two-country

model, the deviations of prices from equilibrium, and the actual and equilibrium

exchange rates. One reassuring aspect of these estimates is that the estimated equilibrium

and disequilibrium price levels for the U.S. appear to be quite similar across all six

models, though there is no constraint imposed here that they be the same. (The seven-

country model reported in the next section, of course, imposes that constraint.) The

extreme persistence of the exchange rate deviations from the equilibrium level is apparent

in these graphs. It does not appear that the persistence arises as the result of a single

episode, such as the large swing in the value of the dollar in the 1980s.

       The first row of Table 2 presents formal likelihood ratio tests of the hypothesis

that prices and the exchange rate adjust at the same speed against the alternative of

different speeds of adjustment.       Except for the US/Italy and US/Japan cases, the

likelihood ratio statistics are quite large, suggesting that the overall evidence for different

speeds of adjustment is strong. Thus, the results for the likelihood ratio test generally

support what the point estimates seem to suggest: prices adjust toward PPP more quickly

than exchange rates.

       The second row of Table 2 reports the results for a likelihood ratio test of the

various symmetry restrictions (same speed of adjustment for nominal prices across

countries and proportionality restrictions on the covariances) against the alternative of no

symmetry restrictions. The χ 2 (5) likelihood ratio statistics are generally not significant.




                                              16
Only the US/Japan case is significant at the 10% level. Both the same speed of

adjustment restriction on prices and the proportionality restrictions are insignificant when

tested for separately. Thus, the symmetry restrictions in our model appear to be justified,

with estimates changing little when the restrictions are relaxed. Again, we impose the

restrictions to keep the dimensionality of our model reasonable and to focus on the

difference between price adjustment and exchange rate adjustment.

         The third row of Table 2 reports the results for a likelihood ratio test of the null

hypothesis that all of the innovations are independent. The χ 2 (3) likelihood ratio

statistics are not significant at conventional levels. Thus, while it is important to relax a

strict independence restriction on the innovations in order to nest RESP-style dynamics,

this result reflects the fact that our main findings are not merely a product of the more

general covariance specification.7

         The fourth row of Table 2 reports the results for a likelihood ratio test of no break

in the unconditional mean of equilibrium inflation for each country against the alternative

of a structural break in 1980 from equation (3). As an empirical fact, the G7 countries

uniformly had higher inflation in the 1970s than they did afterwards. A reasonable

question, then, is whether our modeling assumption of a constant unconditional mean

throughout the sample period is strongly at odds with the data and is, in any way,

responsible for our main findings. The χ 2 (2) likelihood ratio statistics for a structural

break are generally insignificant, reflecting that, even though point estimates for the

unconditional means are greatly reduced after the 1970s, they are not estimated with any


7
  For a model with independent innovations, the likelihood ratio test results for the hypothesis that prices
and the exchange rate adjust at the same speed against the alternative of different speeds of adjustment are
essentially the same as the results reported in the first row of Table 2.



                                                    17
great precision. Meanwhile, the final row of Table 2 reports the results given a structural

break in 1980 for a likelihood ratio test of the hypothesis that prices and the exchange

rate adjust at the same speed against the alternative of different speeds of adjustment.

The results are similar to the model with no structural break, except that we can no longer

reject the null for the U.S./Canada case.



4b. Seven-Country Model

         Here we report the estimation results for a model of price levels and exchange

rates for all of the G7 countries. The only real ambiguity in extending the model to all

seven countries is whether there should be additional restrictions related to the exchange

rate components. Our approach is to allow all of the exchange rate components to be

correlated with each other and with the other unobserved components. That is, we do not

impose any additional zero covariance restrictions.

         Table 3 presents the maximum likelihood estimates for the key parameters from a

model of the G7 price levels and exchange rates. Encouragingly, the estimates for the

autoregressive coefficients and volatility parameters are quite similar to the estimates in

Table 1.8 As before, the results suggest that prices adjust more quickly than exchange

rates. The half-life of a deviation of prices from equilibrium is less than two quarters,

while the half-life of a deviation of exchange rates from equilibrium is more than two

years.

         The χ 2 (1) likelihood ratio test statistic for the null hypothesis that prices and the

exchange rate adjust at the same speed against the alternative of different speeds of




                                               18
adjustment is highly significant. Its value is 16.336, which has a p-value smaller than

0.001.

         Figure 2 presents plots of the equilibrium and disequilibrium price components,

and the actual and equilibrium exchange rates. The plots are strikingly similar to those

derived from the two-country models.

         We do not undertake further specification tests of the seven-country model

because of the enormous computational burden associated with estimation, and because

of the uniformly positive results from the specification tests of the two-country models.



5. Discussion

         Our main finding that prices adjust more quickly than exchange rates appears at

first glance to contradict the results of other related studies. For example, Wei and

Parsley (1995), and Goldfajn and Valdes (1999), contend that the exchange rate is

responsible for most of the adjustment toward purchasing power parity, rather than

nominal prices. The simple point we make here is that there is a distinction between the

“size” of the adjustment and the “speed” of adjustment. Since the nominal exchange rate

has a much larger innovation variance than prices, it deviates from its equilibrium more

than prices do when there is a shock. So the exchange rate must adjust more – but that

does not contradict our finding that it adjusts more slowly than prices.

         It is useful to frame the discussion by drawing a contrast between our approach,

and vector error correction models (VECM) (e.g., Cheung, Lai, and Bergman (1999).)



8
  Again, we do not report the initial values, mean inflation rates, or covariance parameter estimates to
conserve space, although it should be noted that the transitory exchange rate shocks are highly correlated
with each other.



                                                   19
Consider the following VECM for relative prices ( pt ≡ p1t − p 2t ) and the exchange rate

st for a pair of countries:




                                 pt +1 − pt = α p ( s t − pt ) + u tp+1 ,               (8)

                                 st +1 − s t = α s ( s t − pt ) + u ts+1 ,              (9)




where α p and α s are error correction coefficients and u tp and u ts are stationary

residuals.9 One might expect to find (as Cheung, Lai, and Bergman do) that α s is always

much larger in magnitude than α p . That is, exchange rates adjust much more than

relative prices in response to a deviation from PPP.

       The speed of adjustment is a measure of how fast a variable returns to some

equilibrium. Thus, in the traditional PPP literature, the real exchange rate is assumed to

converge to some constant level, q , in the long run. We can measure the speed of

adjustment by determining how much of the gap qt − q is carried through to the next

period in qt +1 − q . In our model, we look at speeds of adjustment for pt and st

individually. For example, the speed of adjustment for the nominal exchange rate is

measured by the degree to which st +1 − s t +1 has adjusted to the gap st − st .

       However, the VECM parameters do not measure speeds of adjustment.               For

example, the parameter α p is a measure of how relative inflation, pt +1 − pt , responds to

the real exchange rate gap, qt − q . (We can rewrite equations (8) and (9) so that the




                                                   20
error correction term can be written as qt − q .) The error correction term in (8) and (9)

is not the same as the exchange rate gap ( s t − s t ) or the relative price gap ( s t − pt )

implicit in our UC representation of prices and the exchange rate, but is, instead, equal to

their difference. So, our UC representation has prices adjusting only to the relative price

gap, while the VECM representation imposes that prices adjust equally to both gaps. α p

will not be large compared to our φ p because α p measures the response of prices to a

very large gap, qt − q , while φ p measures the response of prices to the smaller gap,

    pt − pt .   φ p captures how quickly prices are adjusting to their deviation from

equilibrium, while the error correction parameter α p measures how much prices are

responding to the price gap and the exchange-rate gap.

          An example makes this clear. If pt follows a random walk, then by construction

they would adjust to equilibrium instantaneously (i.e., very quickly indeed!). There

would be no relative price gap, only an exchange rate gap. However, since relative prices

follow a random walk, they would not adjust toward the exchange rate gap at all,

implying that α p would actually be zero.

          It appears from our findings that the main reason exchange rates adjust more than

relative prices is that the exchange rate gap is much larger than the relative price gap.

Specifically, we find disequilibrium exchange rate innovations are always an order of

magnitude more volatile than disequilibrium price innovations.

          Another way to think about the distinction between our UC modeling approach

and the VECM approach concerns the left-hand-side variable. Consider, for example, the

9
     Note that a finite-order VECM can only approximate the dynamics of the infinite-order vector MA



                                                  21
nominal exchange rate. In our UC model, we examine changes in the exchange rate

relative to its equilibrium value: st +1 − s t +1 − ( st − s t ) . The left-hand-side variable in the

VECM approach is simply st +1 − s t . It is, of course, an empirical question as to which

modeling approach fits the data the best.10 Our approach is easier to understand as a

generalization of the RESP model, and it is easier to infer the “speed of adjustment” from

our parameter estimates.

       Thus when one carefully distinguishes between the “size” and the “speed” of

adjustment, it becomes clear that our main findings do not contradict the conclusion that

exchange rates are responsible for most of the adjustment toward PPP.



7. Conclusions

        Our results suggest a new way of describing the purchasing power parity puzzle.

Nominal prices converge relatively rapidly to their equilibrium value, but exchange rates

converge slowly.        To be clear ours is not an economic model, and we have not

undertaken tests of any economic model. We have merely presented a new statistical

model of exchange rates and prices, but one that might be provocative to exchange-rate

modelers.

        We reject the label that our model is one with “sticky” exchange rates. All of the

RESP models have exchange rates converging slowly – at the same speed as nominal

prices. Stickiness refers to the innovation variance of relative prices or exchange rates.

A model with purely sticky nominal prices, for example, would have Var (vit + vit ) = 0 .


representation that corresponds to our UC model of prices and the exchange rate.




                                                   22
Our model does not imply “sticky” nominal exchange rates, because the variance of

innovations to the exchange rate is very large, and much larger than the innovation

variance of prices, vit + vit . What we find is that exchange rates are very volatile, but

converge to the PPP equilibrium much more slowly than nominal prices.

         What could explain the result that prices converge fairly quickly in each country

to their equilibrium levels, but the exchange rate moves only very slowly to the PPP

value?    One possible explanation is that persistent real shocks are important. Our PPP

model does not incorporate real shocks, but it is easy to see how a model with real shocks

could produce persistent nominal exchange rate deviations. If nominal prices adjust

quickly, but there are real shocks that imply a slowly-adjusting real exchange rate, then

the nominal exchange rate necessarily will adjust slowly to the PPP equilibrium. We are

skeptical that real shocks can explain our findings. As we have noted in our introduction,

the extreme volatility of real exchange rates suggests that the underlying source of shocks

is monetary or financial. Most theories of how real shocks affect real exchange rates is

through their influence on the relative price of nontraded goods. Engel (1999) documents

that virtually none of the short-run variation in real exchange rates for these advanced

countries is attributable to movements in the relative price of nontraded goods.

         Rogoff’s (1997) speculation is apropos:

        One is left with a conclusion that would certainly make the godfather of
purchasing power parity, Gustav Cassel, roll over in his grave. It is simply this:
International goods markets, though becoming more integrated all the time, remain quite
segmented, with large trading frictions across a broad range of goods. These frictions
may be due to transportation costs, threatened or actual tariffs, nontariff barriers,
information costs or lack of labor mobility. As a consequence of various adjustment
costs, there is a large buffer within which nominal exchange rates can move without
10
    However, the two models are not easily nested in a more general model. Model comparison based, for
example, on out-of-sample forecasting ability would be one approach to compare the models, but is beyond
the scope of this paper.



                                                  23
producing an immediate proportional response in relative domestic prices. International
goods markets are highly integrated, but not yet nearly as integrated as domestic goods
markets. This is not an entirely comfortable conclusion, but for now there is no really
satisfactory alternative explanation to the purchasing power parity puzzle. (p. 667-668.)


       Perhaps, in addition, when these frictions are present, there is more scope for

herding behavior and bubbles. Bubbles or herding might temporarily send the exchange

rate off on disequilibrium paths that result in the appearance of slow convergence to the

equilibrium. It is also suggestive to note that our empirical model of exchange rates is

consistent with the RESP model except in one respect: it implies uncovered interest

parity will not hold. (See Appendix 1.)

       There is still a purchasing power parity puzzle, but this paper refines the puzzle.

The new stylized fact that we document is that it is not unbelievably slow nominal price

convergence that accounts for the persistence of real exchange rates. The challenge is to

produce a theory that is consistent with the findings that nominal prices adjust relatively

quickly (though our findings do not contradict either flexible-price or sticky-price

models), that nominal and real exchange rates are highly volatile, and that nominal

exchange rates converge very slowly to the PPP equilibrium.




                                            24
                                      References


Cheung, Yin-Wong and Kon S. Lai, 2000, On the purchasing power parity puzzle,
      Journal of International Economics 52, 321-330.

Cheung, Yin-Wong, Kon S. Lai, and Michael Bergman, 1999, “Parity Convergence of
      Real Exchange Rates: What Role Does Price Adjustment Play?” Discussion
      Paper, California State University.

Clark, Peter K., 1987, The cyclical component of U.S. economic activity, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 102, 797-814.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1976, Expectations and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Political
      Economy 84, 1161-1176.

Engel, Charles 1999, Accounting for U.S. real exchange rate changes, Journal of Political
       Economy 107, 507-538

Engel, Charles, 2000, Long-run PPP may not hold after all, Journal of International
       Economics 51, 243-273.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1986, International capital mobility and crowding out in the U.S.
       economy: Imperfect integration of financial markets or of goods markets?, in R.
       Haver, ed., How Open is the U.S. Economy? (Lexington).

Galí, Jordi; Mark Gertler; and J. David López-Salido, 2000, European inflation dynamics,
        manuscript, New York University.

Goldfajn, Ilan, and Rodrigo Valdes, 1999, The aftermath of appreciations, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 114, 229-262.

Harvey, Andrew, 1985, Trends and cycles in macroeconomic time series, Journal of
      Business and Economics Statistics 8, 231-247.

Harvey, Andrew, 1993, Time Series Models, 2nd ed. (MIT Press, Cambridge).

Lothian, James, and Mark Taylor, 1996, Real exchange rate behavior: The recent float
       from the perspective of the past two centuries, Journal of Political Economy 104,
       488-509.

Morley, James, Charles Nelson, and Eric Zivot, 2001, “Why Are Beveridge-Nelson and
      Unobserved Component Decompositions of GDP So Different?” Discussion
      Paper, University of Washington.



                                           25
Murray, Christian J. and David H. Papell, 2000, The purchasing power parity persistence
      paradigm, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Mussa, Michael, 1982, A model of exchange-rate determination, Journal of Political
      Economy 90, 74-104.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1984, Exchange rate dynamics with sluggish
       prices under alternative price-adjustment rules, International Economic Review
       25, 159-174.

Papell, David, 1997, Searching for stationarity: Purchasing power parity under the current
        float, Journal of International Economics 43, 313-332.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, The purchasing power parity puzzle, Journal of Economic
       Literature 34 (June) 647-668

Stockman, Alan C., 1987, The equilibrium approach to exchange rates, Federal Reserve
      Bank of Richmond Economic Review 73 (March/April,), 12-30.

Wei, Shang-Jin, and David C. Parsley, 1995, Purchasing power disparity during the
      floating rate period: exchange rate volatility, trade barriers and other culprits,
      National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 5032.

Wu, Yangru, 1996, Are real exchange rates nonstationary? Evidence from a panel-data
     test, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 28, 54-63.




                                           26
                                             Appendix 1

        The purpose of this appendix is to derive the behavior of real exchange-rate

adjustment from a RESP model. The derivation helps understand the implicit restrictions

that are usually put on price and exchange-rate changes, and where we differ. We present

a two-country version of the RESP model.

        Start with money demand equations in the home and foreign country, and interest

parity (all constant terms will be suppressed for simplicity):

                                          u1t − p1t = −λ1i1t                            (A1.1)


                                         u 2 t − p 2 t = −λ 2 i 2 t                     (A1.2)


                                      i1t − i2t = E t ( s t +1 ) − st .                 (A1.3)


Here, u1t ( u 2t ) is the log of the money supply less money demand shifters in the home

(foreign) country, and i1t ( i2t ) is the home (foreign interest rate.)

        We define the equilibrium price, p1t ( p 2t ) as the level that p1t ( p 2t ) would equal

given current value of u1t ( u 2t ). Under flexible prices, real interest rates are assumed

constant, so nominal interest rates are assumed to equal the expected rate of inflation

(plus a constant).

                                u1t − p 2t = −λ1 ( E t ( p1,t +1 ) − p1t )              (A1.4)


                               u 2t − p 2t = −λ 2 ( Et ( p 2,t +1 ) − p 2t )            (A1.5)


        Each of (A1.4) and (A1.5) are univariate rational expectations difference




                                                    27
equations. They have solutions of the form:

                                                    p1t = A1 ( L)u1t                                               (A1.6)


                                                    p 2t = A2 ( L)u 2t                                             (A1.7)


Here A1 ( L) ( A2 ( L) ) is the lag-operator on money supply and money demand shocks in

the home (foreign) country that solves equation (A1.4) (equation (A1.5)).

       We posit that nominal prices in each country adjust slowly toward their

equilibrium levels. But, we make two adjustments. First, only a fraction δ 1 of prices are

sticky. A fraction 1 − δ 1 adjust instantaneously. (In the foreign country, a fraction δ 2 of

prices are sticky.) Second, we allow an i.i.d. shock to hit prices, so that even when δ 1 = 1

or δ 2 = 1 there can be some deviation of the actual price level from its expected level:

            p1,t +1 − p1t = −θ 1 ( p1t − p1t ) + δ 1 E t ( p1,t +1 ) + (1 − δ 1 ) p1,t +1 − p1t + ε 1,t +1         (A1.8)


          p 2,t +1 − p 2t = −θ 2 ( p 2t − p 2t ) + δ 2 E t ( p 2,t +1 ) + (1 − δ 2 ) p 2,t +1 − p 2t + ε 2,t +1    (A1.9)


Prices each period adjust part of the way toward their equilibrium value, under the

assumptions: 0 < θ 1 < 1 and 0 < θ 2 < 1 . There are also terms that account for drift in the

equilibrium prices.

       Equations (A1.1), (A1.2) and (A1.3) imply


                                                    1                 1
                            Et ( s t +1 ) = s t +      ( p1t − u1t ) − ( p 2t − u 2t )                            (A1.10)
                                                    λ1                λ2


       If long-run PPP holds, so st = p1t − p 2t , equations (A1.4) and (A1.5) yield:




                                                           28
                                                   1                 1
                           Et ( s t +1 ) = s t +      ( p1t − u1t ) − ( p 2t − u 2t )                (A1.11)
                                                   λ1                λ2


Subtracting (A1.11) from (A1.10),


                                                             1                 1
                Et ( s t +1 ) − Et ( s t +1 ) = s t − st +      ( p1t − p1t ) − ( p 2t − p 2t )      (A1.12)
                                                             λ1                λ2


        Equations (A1.8), (A1.9) and (A1.12) can be written in matrix form as a three-

equation homogenous system of difference equations:

                    é Et ( p1,t +1 − p1,t +1 ) ù é1 − θ 1    0              0ù é p1t − p1t ù
                    êE ( p                     ú ê        1−θ 2             0úú êê p 2t − p 2t úú
                    ê t 2,t +1 − p 2,t +1 )ú = ê 0                                                   (A1.13)
                    êë Et ( st +1 − s t +1 ) úû êë 1 / λ1 1 / λ 2           1úû êë st − s t úû


Diagonalizing equation (A1.13) yields


                    é Et ( p1,t +1 − p1,t +1 ) ù é1 − θ 1   0               0ù é p1t − p1t ù
                    êE ( p                     ú ê        1−θ 2             0úú êê p 2t − p 2t úú
                    ê t 2,t +1 − p 2,t +1 )ú = ê 0                                                   (A1.14)
                    êë      Et ( z t +1 )      úû êë 0      0               1úû êë z t          úû


where


                                               λ1θ 1
                        z t = p1t − p1t −             ( p 2t − p 2t ) + λ1θ 1 ( s t − s t ) .        (A1.15)
                                               λ 2θ 2


        Inspection of equation (A1.14) shows that imposing the condition that the system

be expected to converge to the steady state requires zt = 0 . This is an important property

of the RESP model, and the key difference between our model and the RESP model: that

model makes st − st be a linear combination of p1t − p1t and p 2t − p 2t . This is the




                                                         29
requirement that the economy be on a stable saddle path. Our model does not impose

that. As we discuss further below, our model is fundamentally different than the RESP

model, even the version of the RESP model in which θ 1 ≠ θ 2 .

       If θ 1 ≠ θ 2 , we will be unable to represent the dynamics of the real exchange rate

only in terms of lagged values of the real exchange rate, because domestic and foreign

prices converge at different speeds. But, if θ 1 = θ 2 = θ and λ1 = λ 2 = λ , we can use

equations (A1.12), (A1.15) and the condition that zt = 0 to get:

                                    Et ( st +1 − st +1 ) = (1 − θ )( st − st )                    (A1.16)


Equations (A1.8), (A1.9) and (A1.16) show that domestic prices, foreign prices and the

exchange rate all converge at the same speed (in expectations) when θ 1 = θ 2 and

λ1 = λ 2 . Defining the real exchange rate as qt ≡ st − p1t + p 2t , we have:

                                  Et ( qt +1 − qt +1 ) = (1 − θ )( qt − qt ) .


       It may seem that merely relaxing the assumptions of θ 1 = θ 2 and λ1 = λ 2 yields a

model in which domestic prices, foreign prices and exchange rates converge at different

speeds. Clearly in this case, domestic prices converge at a rate of θ 1 and foreign prices

converge at the rate θ 2 . The exchange rate equation could be written, for example, as:

                                                                     1      θ
                  Et ( s t +1 − st +1 ) = (1 − θ 1 )( st − s t ) −      (1 − 1 )( p 2t − p 2t )
                                                                     λ2     θ2


However, there is no unique way to write the exchange rate equation, because the

condition that zt = 0 implies that st − st is a linear combination of p1t − p1t and




                                                        30
p 2t − p 2t . That is, there are only two independent equations in the dynamic system

(whether or not θ 1 = θ 2 ) in the RESP model. The reduced dimension of the system is a

result of the requirement that is imposed that the system converges to steady state. The

exchange rate must jump in response to shocks so it is on the path that leads to the steady

state.

         So, our model can be thought of as generalizing the RESP model in two ways: we

do not require that prices in both countries and the exchange rate converge at the same

speed, and we allow for three independent equations for st − st , p1t − p1t , and p 2t − p 2t .

         To write the system of stochastic equations implied by the RESP model, note


                                         p1,t +1 − Et ( p1,t +1 ) = A1, 0 u1,t +1 ,                               (A1.17)


where A1,0 is the first term in A1 ( L) . Similarly:


                                         p 2,t +1 − Et ( p 2,t +1 ) = A2, 0 u 2,t +1 .                            (A1.18)


We can use this to write equations for p1,t +1 − p1,t +1 and p 2,t +1 − p 2,t +1 :


                        p1,t +1 − p1,t +1 = (1 − θ 1 )( p1t − p1t ) − δ 1 A1, 0 u1,t +1 + ε 1,t +1 ,


                      p 2,t +1 − p 2,t +1 = (1 − θ 2 )( p 2t − p 2t ) − δ 2 A2, 0 u 2,t +1 + ε 2,t +1 .

         Then define          v1t ≡ −δ 1 A1, 0 u1t + ε 1t ,       v 2t ≡ −δ 2 A2,0 u 2t + ε 2t ,       v1t ≡ A1, 0 u1t , and

v 2t ≡ A2,0 u 2t .   These random variables correspond to the error terms in the price-

adjustment equations (1), and the equilibrium price equations (3) in the text.




                                                            31
           Then, because of the saddle path property that tells us zt +1 = 0 , we have:


                                              −1                             1
                          st +1 − s t +1 =         ( p1,t +1 − p1,t +1 ) +        ( p 2,t +1 − p 2,t +1 )
                                             λ1θ 1                         λ 2θ 2


                                                        −1               1
Therefore,                                   vts+1 =         v1,t +1 +        v 2,t +1 .                              (A1.19)
                                                       λ1θ 1           λ 2θ 2


           Define κ 1 ≡ 1 / λ1θ 1 and κ 2 ≡ 1 / λ 2θ 2 . Then we can write the covariance matrix

as:

          é v1t ù é σ p ,1                                   − κ 1σ 2p ,1           − δ 1σ 2p ,1                  ù
                          2
                                             0                                                              0
          êv ú ê 0                     σ 2
                                                        κ 2σ         2
                                                                                0        −δ σ              2      ú
          ê 2t ú ê                       p,2                         p,2                                 2 p,2    ú
      Var ê vts ú = ê− κ 1σ p2 ,1    κ σ          κ 1 σ p ,1 + κ 2 σ p , 2 δ 1κ 1σ p ,1 − δ κ σ                   ú
                                           2         2 2           2 2                2                      2
                                                                                                                      (A1.20)
          ê ú ê                                                                                                   ú
                                        2 p,2                                                           2 2 p,2

          ê v1t ú ê − δ 1σ p ,1                        δ 1κ 1σ 2p ,1          σ 2p ,1
                            2
                                         0                                                   0                    ú
          êëv 2t úû ê 0              − δ 2σ p , 2
                                            2
                                                      − δ 2κ 2σ p , 2
                                                                   2
                                                                                0          σ 2p , 2               ú
                    ë                                                                                             û


In equation (A1.20), there are only eight independent elements to estimate: δ 1 , δ 2 , κ 1 ,

κ 2 , σ 2p ,1 , σ 2p , 2 , σ 2p ,1 , and σ 2p , 2 . Of course, the usual restriction that the lower and upper

triangles be identical reduces the dimension of the matrix to fifteen. There are four

additional zero restrictions that reduce the dimension to eleven.                                           The other three

restrictions come about because of the saddle-path restriction in equation (A1.19).

Without that saddle-path restriction, there would be eleven elements to estimate:

                                 é v1t ù é σ p ,1           σ sp ,1              σ pp ,1   0 ù
                                              2
                                                     0
                                 êv ú ê 0          σ p , 2 σ sp , 2
                                                      2
                                                                                   0     σ pp , 2 ú
                                                                                                   ú
                                 ê 2t ú ê
                             Var ê vt ú = êσ sp ,1 σ sp , 2 σ s2
                                      s
                                                                                 σ sp ,1 σ sp , 2 ú .                 (A1.21)
                                 ê ú ê                                                             ú
                                 ê v1t ú êσ pp ,1    0      σ sp ,1               σ 2p     0 ú
                                 êëv 2t úû ê       σ pp , 2 σ sp , 2                     σ 2p , 2 úû
                                           ë 0                                     0




                                                                32
In our estimates of the bivariate models, we impose δ 1 = δ 2 , and κ 1 = κ 2 . Those

restrictions imply the proportionality restrictions of equations (5), (6) and (7).

       Finally, as noted in the conclusions section, if we retain all of the equations of the

RESP model (equations (A1.1), (A1.2), (A1.4)-(A1.9)), but do not assume uncovered

interest parity (A1.3) and instead assume that exchange rates adjust to equilibrium at

some rate 1 − ζ :

                                     st +1 − s t +1 = (1 − ζ )( s t − s t ) + vts ,

we can solve to find that the uncovered interest parity condition does not hold:

                                                 1                  1
            Et ( s t +1 ) − s t = i1t − i 2t −      ( p1t − p1t ) +    ( p 2 t − p 2t ) − ζ ( s t − s t ) .   (A1.22)
                                                 λ1                 λ2




                                                           33
                                         Appendix 2

        This Appendix details estimation of the two-country models. The estimation of

the seven-country model generalizes in the obvious ways.

        For estimation given the restrictions, we cast the model in state-space form and

apply the Kalman filter and maximum likelihood based upon the prediction error

decomposition as discussed in Harvey (1993). The state equation, which represents the

evolution of the unobserved components, is

                                     β t = µ~ + Fβ t −1 + v~t ,                   (A2.1)

where

                     éφ p      0     0   0            0   0            0    ù
                     ê0       φp     0   0            0   0            0    ú
                     ê                                                      ú
                     ê0        0     φs  0            0   0            0    ú
                     ê                                                      ú
                   F=ê0        0     0 1+φp          −φp  0            0    ú,
                     ê0        0     0   1            0   0            0    ú
                     ê                                                      ú
                     ê0        0     0   0            0 1+φp          −φp   ú
                     ê0                                                     ú
                     ë         0     0   0            0   1            0    û



                         é p1t − p1t ù  é       0       ù             é v1t ù
                         êp − p ú       ê               ú             êv ú
                         ê 2t     2t ú
                                        ê       0       ú             ê 2t ú
                         ê st − st ú    ê       0       ú             ê vts ú
                         ê           ú  ê               ú             ê ú
                   β t = ê p1t ú , µ~ = ê µ1 (1 − φ p ) ú , and v~t = ê v1t ú .
                         ê p1,t −1 ú    ê       0       ú             ê0ú
                         ê           ú  ê               ú             ê ú
                         ê p 2t ú       ê µ 2 (1 − φ p )ú             êv 2 t ú
                         ê p         ú  ê               ú             ê0ú
                         ë 2,t −1 û     ë       0       û             ë û



Note that the covariance matrix for v~t , denoted Q ≡ E[v~t v~t′] , is a simple linear




                                                34
transformation of (A1.21). Meanwhile, the observation equation, which relates the price

levels and exchange rate to their unobserved components, is

                                            yt = A + Hβ t ,                                 (A2.2)

where

                       é p1t ù        é p1, −1 ù         é1 0 0 1 0 0 0ù
                  yt = ê p 2t ú , A = ê p 2, −1 ú , H = êê0 1 0 0 0 1 0úú .
                       ê       ú      ê         ú
                       êë s t úû      êë s −1 úû         êë0 0 1 1 0 − 1 0úû

The inclusion of a separate initial value for the equilibrium exchange rate corresponds to

relative, rather than absolute, PPP.11 Meanwhile, we include initial values for the

equilibrium price levels in A to address the lack of appropriate startup values for the

Kalman filter. In particular, equilibrium prices follow unit root processes that have no

unconditional expected values. By including initial values in estimation here, we are able

to normalize the corresponding initial state variables to zero. Then, we estimate

equilibrium prices by adding the estimated initial values to the filter output.12

        The Kalman filter for this state-space model is given by the following six

equations:

                                       βt |t −1 = µ~ + Fβt −1|t −1                          (A2.3)

                                      Pt |t −1 = FPt −1|t −1 F ′ + Q                        (A2.4)

                                        ηt |t −1 = y t − Hβt |t −1                          (A2.5)

                                          f t |t −1 = HPt |t −1 H ′                         (A2.6)

                                       βt |t = βt |t −1 + K t ηt |t −1                      (A2.7)


11
   Since price data is in index form, only relative PPP is tenable.
12
   An alternative approach would be to make an arbitrary guess about the corresponding Kalman filter
startup values and assign our guess an extremely large variance.



                                                    35
                                              Pt |t = Pt |t −1 − K t HPt |t −1                        (A2.8)

where β t|t −1 ≡ Et −1 [ β t ] , for example, denotes the expectation of βt conditional on

information up to time t − 1 ; Pt |t −1 is the variance-covariance of βt |t −1 ; ηt |t −1 is a vector of

the conditional forecast errors of the observed series; f t |t −1 is the variance-covariance of

ηt |t −1 ; and K t ≡ Pt |t −1 H ′f t |−t 1−1 is the Kalman gain.

         Given arbitrary initial parameter estimates and initial values β0|0 and P0|0 based

on unconditional expected values and the normalizations discussed above, we solve

equations (A2.3)-(A2.8) recursively for t = 1,..., T to obtain filtered inferences about βt

conditional on information up to time t.

       Then, as a by-product of the Kalman filter, we obtain ηt |t −1 and f t |t −1 , which allow

us to calculate maximum likelihood estimates of the various parameters based on the

prediction error decomposition (Harvey, 1993):

                         ì          1 T                         1 T                             ü
                      maxíl (θ ) = − å ln((2π ) | f t |t −1 |) − å ηt′|t −1 f t |−t 1−1ηt |t −1 ý ,
                                               3
                                                                                                      (A2.9)
                       θ
                         î          2 t =1                      2 t =1                          þ

where θ is the vector of parameters.




                                                           36
                                                    Table 1
                             Maximum Likelihood Estimates for the Two-Country Models
  Parameter        US/Canada      US/France      US/Germany          US/Italy        US/Japan   US/UK

      φp              0.273             0.478         0.480           0.681           0.641      0.569
                     (0.201)           (0.128)       (0.114)         (0.244)         (0.163)    (0.120)

      φs              0.987             0.942         0.928           0.927           0.958      0.919
                     (0.015)           (0.033)       (0.032)         (0.034)         (0.022)    (0.038)

      φp              0.955             0.965         0.926           0.938           0.962      0.935
                     (0.026)           (0.020)       (0.029)         (0.028)         (0.019)    (0.030)

     σ p ,1           0.430             0.397         0.358           0.421           0.421      0.327
                     (0.059)           (0.050)       (0.059)         (0.069)         (0.078)    (0.039)

     σ p,2            0.365             0.235         0.396           0.359           0.497      0.783
                     (0.058)           (0.037)       (0.049)         (0.100)         (0.068)    (0.032)

      σs              2.193             5.612         5.900           5.435           6.191      5.265
                     (0.158)           (0.423)       (0.426)         (0.398)         (0.489)    (0.389)

     σ p ,1           0.230             0.263         0.295           0.276           0.252      0.324
                     (0.039)           (0.042)       (0.050)         (0.050)         (0.050)    (0.036)

     σ p,2             0.267            0.268         0.212           0.527           0.299      0.535
                      (0.060)          (0.042)       (0.046)         (0.103)         (0.055)    (0.021)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses




                                                         37
                                                              Table2
                                                Likelihood Ratio Specification Tests
              Test                    US/Canada     US/France     US/Germany         US/Italy   US/Japan   US/UK

     Speed of Adjustment                5.585          11.633          7.555          1.477      1.772      3.665
         H 0 : φ p = φs                (0.018)         (0.000)        (0.224)        (0.224)    (0.183)    (0.056)
                                        1 d.f.          1 d.f.         1 d.f.         1 d.f.     1 d.f.     1 d.f.
          H1 : φ p ≠ φs


   Symmetry Restrictions                6.778           1.946          8.144          4.102      9.784      3.838
    H 0 : φ 1p = φ p2 ; φ 1p = φ p2    (0.238)         (0.857)        (0.148)        (0.535)    (0.082)    (0.573)
                                        5 d.f.          5 d.f.         5 d.f.         5 d.f.     5 d.f.     5 d.f.
  and equations (5),(6),(7)
H1 : no symmetry restrictions


  Independent Innovations               1.344           4.406          3.235          2.658      5.961      1.542
  H 0 : diagonal covariance            (0.719)         (0.221)        (0.357)        (0.447)    (0.114)    (0.673)
     H1 : reported model                3 d.f.          3 d.f.         3 d.f.         3 d.f.     3 d.f.     3 d.f.




                                                                 38
                                                     Table2 (continued)
                                             Likelihood Ratio Specification Tests
             Test                  US/Canada     US/France     US/Germany         US/Italy               US/Japan   US/UK

  Structural Break in 1980            3.301             4.257            2.941             5.570          2.562      3.979
  H 0 : No break in mean of          (0.192)           (0.119)          (0.230)           (0.062)        (0.278)    (0.137)
       inflation process              2 d.f.            2 d.f.           2 d.f.            2 d.f.         2 d.f.     2 d.f.
     H1 : Structural break


   Speed of Adjustment
  Conditional on Structural           0.604             7.590            5.913             1.580          0.021      3.799
      Break in 1980                  (0.437)           (0.006)          (0.015)           (0.209)        (0.885)    (0.051)
        H 0 : φ p = φs                1 d.f.            1 d.f.           1 d.f.            1 d.f.         1 d.f.     1 d.f.
         H1 : φ p ≠ φs
Notes: Chi-square statistics are reported. P-values are in parentheses. “d.f.” are degrees of freedom.




                                                                   39
                                                         Table 3
                                      Maximum Likelihood for the Seven-Country Model
  Parameter           US             Canada      France          Germany        Italy                    Japan            UK


      φp             0.607
                    (0.035)

      φs             0.965
                    (0.010)

      φp             0.965
                    (0.010)

     σ p ,i          0.538            0.449            0.303           0.457            0.524            0.525            1.064
                    (0.034)          (0.030)          (0.025)         (0.031)          (0.082)          (0.033)          (0.084)

     σ s, j                           2.320            6.093           6.167            5.778            6.755            5.921
                                     (0.042)          (0.001)         (0.002)          (0.037)          (0.079)          (0.111)

     σ p ,i          0.191            0.210            0.225           0.176            0.453            0.317            0.274
                    (0.004)          (0.028)          (0.005)         (0.003)          (0.015)          (0.007)          (0.003)
Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. For computational reasons, we calculate the standard errors for the seven-country
model using the outer-product-gradient method and holding the off-diagonal elements of the variance-covariance matrix fixed at their
estimated values. Thus, these standard errors will tend to be biased downwards and are reported for illustrative purposes only.




                                                                40
  250                              250                              250                                   250                           250                              250
  200                              200                              200                                   200                           200                              200
  150                              150                              150                                   150                           150                              150
  100                              100                              100                                   100                           100                              100
   50                               50                               50                                   50                             50                              50
    0                                0                                0                                    0                              0                               0
         75   80 85 90 95                 75   80 85 90   95               75 80   85   90 95                   75 80   85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95              75   80 85 90   95




                            1.0                                4                                4                                  4                                4                               4
   1.0                      0.5      4                         2      4                         2          4                       2                                2     4                         2
                                                                                                                                          4
   0.5                      0.0      2                         0      2                         0          2                       0      2                         0     2                         0
   0.0                      -0.5     0                         -2     0                         -2         0                       -2     0                         -2    0                         -2
  -0.5                      -1.0    -2                         -4    -2                                    -2                      -4    -2                         -4    -2                        -4
                                                                                                -4
  -1.0                              -4                               -4                                    -4                            -4                               -4
         75   80 85 90 95                 75   80 85 90   95               75 80   85   90 95                   75 80   85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95              75   80 85 90   95




                                                                                                                                        -440
    40                                                                                                -640                                                               120
                                                                                                                                        -460
    20                                                                                                -660                                                               100
                                   -150                             -50                                                                 -480
     0                                                                                                -680                                                                80
                                                                                                                                        -500
   -20                                                                                                -700                                                                60
                                                                                                                                        -520
   -40                             -200                             -100                              -720                                                                40
                                                                                                                                        -540
   -60                                                                                                -740                                                                20
                                                                                                                                        -560
   -80                                                                                                -760                                                                 0
                                   -250                             -150                                                                -580
         75   80 85 90 95                 75   80 85 90   95               75 80   85   90 95                   75 80   85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95              75   80 85 90   95




Fig. 1 – Price Components and Exchange Rates for the Two-Country Models
The first row displays estimated equilibrium price levels for country pairs US/Canada, US/France, US/Germany, US/Italy, US/Japan,
and US/UK, respectively. In order to depict cumulative inflation over the sample period, the equilibrium prices are normalized to
begin at zero. The second row displays the estimated movements away from equilibrium for the same six country pairs. In both the
first and second rows, the dashed lines correspond to the US components. The third row displays the observed nominal exchange rates
for the country pairs, with the dashed lines representing estimated equilibrium exchange rates implied by PPP. Estimates of the
unobserved components come from the Kalman filter for the two-country models. The y-axis units are logarithms multiplied by 100.




                                                                                                     41
  250                            250                              250                                   250                           250                              250
  200                            200                              200                                   200                           200                              200
  150                            150                              150                                   150                           150                              150
  100                            100                              100                                   100                           100                              100
   50                             50                               50                                   50                             50                              50
    0                              0                                0                                    0                              0                               0
         75   80 85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95               75 80   85   90 95                   75 80   85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95              75   80 85 90   95




                            4                                4                                4                                  4                                4                               4
                            2                                2                                2                                  2                                2                               2
    4                              4                                4                                     4                             4                                4
                            0                                0                                0                                  0                                0                               0
    2                              2                                2                                     2                             2                                2
                            -2                               -2                               -2                                 -2                               -2                              -2
    0                              0                                0                                     0                             0                         -4     0                        -4
                            -4                               -4                               -4                                 -4
   -2                             -2                               -2                                    -2                            -2                               -2
   -4                             -4                               -4                                    -4                            -4                               -4
         75   80 85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95               75 80   85   90 95                   75 80   85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95              75   80 85 90   95




                                                                                                                                      -440
    40                                                                                              -640                                                               120
                                                                                                                                      -460
    20                                                                                              -660                                                               100
                                 -150                             -50                                                                 -480
     0                                                                                              -680                                                                80
                                                                                                                                      -500
   -20                                                                                              -700                                                                60
                                                                                                                                      -520
   -40                           -200                             -100                              -720                                                                40
                                                                                                                                      -540
   -60                                                                                              -740                                                                20
                                                                                                                                      -560
   -80                                                                                              -760                                                                 0
                                 -250                             -150                                                                -580
         75   80 85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95               75 80   85   90 95                   75 80   85 90 95               75   80 85 90   95              75   80 85 90   95



Fig. 2 – Price Components and Exchange Rates for the Seven-Country Model
The first row displays estimated equilibrium price levels for country pairs US/Canada, US/France, US/Germany, US/Italy, US/Japan,
and US/UK, respectively. In order to depict cumulative inflation over the sample period, the equilibrium prices are normalized to
begin at zero. The second row displays the estimated movements away from equilibrium for the same six country pairs. In both the
first and second rows, the dashed lines correspond to the US components. The third row displays the observed nominal exchange rates
for the country pairs, with the dashed lines representing estimated equilibrium exchange rates implied by PPP. Estimates of the
unobserved components come from the Kalman filter for the seven-country model. The y-axis units are logarithms multiplied by 100.




                                                                                                   42
