                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      FIRM AGE AND WAGES


                                             Charles Brown
                                            James L. Medoff


                                          Working Paper 8552
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8552


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




We have benefited from comments by seminar participants at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Cornell,
Columbia, Michigan, and the ADRES Conference at INSEE. Ken Troske provided both helpful comments
and tabulations from Census Bureau data. Martin Ven Denburgh provided excellent research assistance.
The data collection and our research were supported by the National Science Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2001 by Charles Brown and James L. Medoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Firm Age and Wages
Charles Brown and James L. Medoff
NBER Working Paper No. 8552
October 2001
JEL No. J3



                                             ABSTRACT


        In this paper, we analyze the relationship between how long an employer has been in business
(firm age) and wages. Using data from special supplements to the Survey Research Center's monthly
Survey of Consumers, we find that firms that have been in business longer pay higher wages (as previous
studies have found), but pay if anything lower wages after controlling for worker characteristics. There
is some evidence that the relationship is not monotonic, with wages falling and then rising with years in
business. Older firms provide better fringe benefits and more stable employment, but these differences
do not appear very important in understanding the age-wage relationship. Established employers do
appear to make greater use of back-loaded compensation, consistent with their higher probability of
remaining in business.




Charles Brown                                                   James L. Medoff
Department of Economics                                         Department of Economics
University of Michigan                                          Harvard University
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
charlieb@umich.edu
        We know a great deal about how the characteristics of individuals are related to labor

market outcomeswhich types of workers earn higher wages, who is more likely to quit or be

laid off, who is more likely to work part-time or not at all. We know less about the relationship

between firm characteristics and various labor-market phenomena, except for a few such

characteristics that have been the focus of much recent research. Prominent examples include

unionization (Lewis, 1986; Freeman and Medoff, 1984), employer size (Oi, 1983; Brown,

Hamilton, and Medoff, 1990; Oi and Idson, 1999), and industry (Dickens and Katz, 1987;

Krueger and Summers, 1988).

        A fourth key characteristic of firms is their age. Beneath the relatively gradual changes in

aggregate employment lies a far less tranquil picture at the firm level (Leonard, 1987 and 1994;

Davis and Haltiwanger, 1992). This finding has led to considerable interest in the determinants

of firm birth, growth, and death rates (Jovanovic, 1982; Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson, 1988

and 1989), and, more broadly, to interest in differences between old and young firms. Dunne,

Roberts, and Samuelson (1989) report that manufacturing plants that have been in business

longer are less likely to close, and Brock and Evans (1986) show that older firms are less likely to

fail (controlling for plant and firm size, respectively).

        An emerging literature suggests that older firms pay higher wages, even after other

relevant firm characteristics are held constant. Dunne and Roberts (1990a, 1990b) find that older

manufacturing plants pay higher wages to their production workers, controlling for size, industry,

and region, whether or not one controls for the probability the plant will close. Davis and

Haltiwanger (1991) also find that older manufacturing plants pay higher wages, and age remains


                                                   1
a statistically significant determinant of wages once industry and size are held constant. Troske

(1998, Table 11.11) reports similar results: controlling for employer size and location, workers in

plants that are less than five years old earn nearly 20 percent less than workers in plants that have

been in business 15 years or more. Blanchflower and Oswald (1988) find no significant
                                                                    1
relationship between wages and years in operation in British data; Winter-Ebmer finds a positive

relationship in Austria.

       While differences in wages (and other outcomes) by age of firm may well be important,

limitations of available data make analysis of such differences difficult. Establishment data used
                                                                            2
in previous studies do not allow one to control for worker characteristics, which have been

found to account for some but not all of the wage differentials associated with other employer

characteristics. Moreover, previous research offers few clues as to why differences by age are

present in the data, and whether non-wage features of the employment contract are related to age

(as is true for union, employer size, and industry).

       The purpose of this paper is to provide a careful analysis of wages by age of firm. In

Section I, we present reasons why old and young firms might be expected to pay different wages.

In Section II, we describe a household-based survey that includes information on wages, worker

characteristics, employer characteristics including age of firm, and related non-wage

characteristics. In Section III, we examine the relationship between firm age and wages.


1. The lack of an age effect may reflect US-UK differences. It may also be due to differences in

control variables (in particular, Blanchflower and Oswald control for the financial condition of

the firm, which may be correlated with firm age).


2. Winter-Ebmer's Austrian data does include some information about worker characteristics.

                                                  2
Because we were concerned about the accuracy of worker reports of firm characteristics, we also

located Dun and Bradstreet's records for a subset of the employers of our respondents; section IV

examines whether wage equations differ significantly when D&B data on employer

characteristics replace the workers' own reports. We ask in in Section V whether differences in

non-wage characteristics can help us understand the firm age-wage relationship, and in Section

VI whether the wage-tenure profile differs between newer and established firms. We summarize

our main findings and their implications in Section VII.

I. Theoretical Links Between Firm Age and Wages

       The standard competitive model of heterogeneous firms and workers suggests that the

wages firms pay reflect the quality of the workers they hire and the working conditions they

offer. It thus provides a natural framework for thinking about wage differences by age of firm.

       Worker Quality

       Among observable indicators of worker quality, experience and tenure with the firm are

the most obviously related to firm age. Those working for newly-established firms cannot have

high levels of tenure. Older firms thus have longer-tenure workers, and they are likely to have

workers with more overall experience as well. While there is much inter-firm mobility, many

workers eventually stay with one firm for much of their work life (Hall, 1982; Farber, 1998).

Age-related differences might lead to other, cohort-related differences at one point in time; e.g.,

with secular increases in workers' education, the older workers employed by established firms

may have less education than the younger workers at newly-created firms.

       For most analytical purposes, older firms paying higher wages because their workers are

more experienced and have higher tenure (or lower wages because they have less education)



                                                 3
would not be regarded as "true" firm-age differentials. Nevertheless, it is important to explore

this possibility, because the establishment-based data used in earlier studies do not allow analysts

to control for such differences.

       Firm Age, Survival, and Employment Stability

       If experience and tenure are the worker characteristics most likely to differ by age of firm,

probability of survival is perhaps the most obvious non-wage job characteristic to explore. As

noted in the introduction, younger firms are much more likely to expire than older ones. As one

might expect, having one's place of employment close has negative effects not only on

employment but also on wages. Gibbons and Katz (1991) report that workers displaced by plant

closings averaged 20 weeks of joblessness following displacement, and their wages (typically

about two years later) were about 16 percent below pre-displacement levels. Even six years after

displacement, wages are reduced by about nine percent , and subsequent job loss is more likely

(Stevens, 1997); food consumption remains below pre-displacement levels (Stephens, 2001). It

is reasonable to view the higher probability that younger firms will close as an important negative

job characteristic, which implies that such firms would have to offer higher wages in order to
                                     3
attract a given quality of worker.

       The fact that established firms are more likely to survive has other implications, both for

wage levels and for the slope of the wage-tenure profile. Idson (1996, pp. 279-281) argues that


3. The existing literature provides mixed evidence on whether the prospect of layoff or plant

closing leads to higher wages. Dunne and Roberts (1990a, Table 2) find that U.S. manufacturing

plants with high probability of closing pay higher wages. Blanchflower (1991) however finds

that workers receive higher wages when they expect employment at their workplace to increase.


                                                 4
firms whose likelihood of survival is high offer more firm-specific training, which would make

wages rise more rapidly with tenure and raise the average level of wages. Baker, Gibbons, and

Murphy (1994) suggest that firms encourage worker effort by promising higher future wages to

workers who work harder now, but that these implicit contracts are compromised if the firm has

a high discount rate (which tempts the firm to renege). Milgrom and Roberts (1992, p. 266)

argue that, while implicit contracts can be enforced by the firm's reputation, "[a] major constraint

on reputational enforcement mechanisms is that the horizon over which the relationship is

expected to continue must be relatively long if the value of reputation is to exceed the gain from

cheating." Established firms, with more secure survival prospects, would be more likely to

honorand so be able to make greater use ofthese implicit contracts. Once again, this would

make the wage-tenure relationship steeper, and average wages higher (since these contracts lead

to greater effort by workers).

       Fringe Benefits

       Older firms are more likely to offer fringe benefits like pensions or health insurance. One

reason is that, as noted above, they tend to pay higher wages, and such fringe benefits are tax-

advantaged, making them particularly attractive to higher-paid workers. A more mechanical

"explanation" is that firms tend not to have pension or health insurance plans when they start in

business, and gradually adopt them afterwards. One reason for such behavior is that the cost of

such fringes includes a relatively fixed set-up cost. Uncertainly about survival probability (and

the need for the entrepreneur to focus first on more basic production and marketing decisions)

encourage new firms to postpone such decisions.




                                                 5
       Empirically we (Brown and Medoff, 1996, pp. 285-286) find that established firms are

more likely to offer pension plans and health insurance, though the latter difference is only

marginally significant when we control for worker characteristics. Offering pensions or health

insurance should allow older firms to attract workers of given quality at lower wages.

       Ability to Pay

       The relationships between firm age and wages outlined so far are those that one would

expect in competitive markets, in which workers care about features of the job and their

compensation, but not about the profitability of the firm per se. An alternative hypothesis is that

firms find it costly to pay wages below those seen as fair by workers (Akerlof and Yellen, 1990)

in light of the firm's ability to pay (Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1986, p. 733; Blinder and

Choi, 1990, pp. 1008-1009). Ifas passive learning models suggest (Pakes and Ericson, 1998)

firms that have survived longest are on average those with the greatest underlying potential
             4
profitability, the wage regarded by workers as fair (and hence, in equilibrium, the wage chosen


4. Peterson and Rajan (1995, p. 435) find that established firms pay significantly lower interest

rates than newer ones, holding size (book value of assets) and indebtedness constant, and note

that their finding is consistent with the hypothesis that survival is a signal about the borrower's

true quality. Bartel (1994, Table 1) finds positive effects of age of the business on labor

productivity, controlling for size. The estimated effects are sizeable (a one standard deviation

increase in firm age increasing ln (output/worker) by .09) but imprecisely estimated (t=1.2). She

argues that "young businesses have low levels of labor productivity because their technology has

not yet been well defined and their employees devote a significant amount of their time to

designing and redesigning an appropriate production technology" (p. 416).

                                                  6
by the firm) is likely to be higher at established firms. The claim of inability to pay higher wages

is much more credible when made by a new firm whose long-run existence is in doubt than
                                                                           5
(absent very special circumstances) when made by a long-surviving firm.

       An alternative path to the same result is to imagine firms and (even non-union) workers

bargain over the rents from the employment relationship. Hildreth and Oswald (1997) present

such a model and find profitability is positively related to wages even in the long run.

II. Data

       In order to investigate the relationship between firm age and wages, we added

supplementary questions to the regular Survey of Consumers, which is conducted by the Survey

Research Center at the University of Michigan. Each month, a sample of 500 adults is

interviewed by telephone, collecting basic demographic information (schooling, age, race, sex,

and marital status) as part of its mission of monitoring consumer attitudes and expectations.

From September 1991 through March 1992 the supplement asked whether the respondent was

currently employed and if so whether s/he was an employee of a private business or non-profit

organization. Each private wage and salary worker was asked a standard set of questions about

labor market status years of full-time work experience, years of tenure with current employer,

usual workweek, coverage by collective bargaining, occupation, industry, and employer size

(employment at the worker's establishment and the company/organization as a whole).


5. Age may also contribute more directly to potential profitability. Firms that have been in

business longer are likely to produce better-known products, providing a brand loyalty that newer

entrants are hard-pressed to match even with equal advertizing budgets (Scherer, 1980, p. 260),

and a less elastic demand for their product.

                                                 7
       Three additional types of information were added in order to investigate the importance

of age of firm. First, respondents were asked "how long has this (company/organization) been in

(business/operation)?" Second, we asked each respondent for the name and address of his/her

workplace, and added Dun and Bradstreet data on industry, establishment and company

employment, and years in business for that employer to the data file. Third, we asked

respondents about job characteristics that the previous section suggested would be related to age

of firm and to wages, such as the probability of losing the job to layoff or plant closing, the

availability of employer-provided pension and health insurance plans, and the financial condition
                                                                         6
of the firm (whether the firm could afford a 10 percent wage increase).

       During the months of our supplement, Survey of Consumers respondents included 1410

currently employed private wage and salary workers, which is in line with expected "losses" of

those who are not employed, self-employed, and government workers. Sample means, standard

deviations, and sample sizes for individual variables are presented in the first three columns of

Table 1. The demographic variables are unsurprising, except perhaps for women comprising half




6. The layoff question was "In the next few years, if you remain with your current employer, how

likely is it that you would lose your job due to a layoff or your workplace closing down

altogether?" with responses recoded so that "almost certain"=1.0, "probable"=.75, "50-50

chance"=.5, "unlikely"=.25, "extremely unlikely"=0.0. The ability to pay question was "Without

going out of business, do you think your employer could afford to increase the pay of all its

workers by 10 percent?" with responses recoded so that "definitely"=1.0, "probably"=.75, "50-50

chance"=.5, "probably not"=.25, and "definitely not"=0.0.


                                                  8
                                                                         7
of our sample. Roughly 10 percent of the sample did not report a wage or employment at the

company where they work; other variables, including establishment size and age of business,

posed fewer problems. The fourth column of the table gives mean values of the variables in the

sample (N=1067) with complete data for all of the variables. The complete-data sample looks

very much like the larger sample.

       The final column of Table 1 gives mean values for the sample for which we have

complete data and matching information from Dun and Bradstreet's. We discuss the D&B data

in greater detail in Section IV. For now, we note that we were more likely to match larger and

more established employers, but differences in worker characteristics between the matched and

larger sample are again very small.

III. Evidence on Firm Age and Wages

       Evidence that established firms pay higher wages is largely based on establishment data

from manufacturing. We therefore begin my asking whether, controlling for employer

characteristics typically available in establishment surveys, there is evidence that older firms pay

higher wages in our (household-based) data (not limited to manufacturing). The first two

columns of Table 2 show that we, too, find higher wages at larger establishments and firms, and
                                             8
(controlling for these) at older firms as well. The relationship between firm age and wages is


7. We treated ln wage (in cents per hour) < 5 or >10 (i.e., hourly wages <$1.48 or >$220) as

missing.


8. The union coefficients are negative because most unionized workers are in blue-collar

occupations, and we are not controlling for personal characteristics correlated with occupation.

Analyses of union wage effects using establishment data usually focus on blue-collar workers.

                                                 9
economically significanta one standard deviation increase in age increases wages by 7 percent

when age is entered linearly and 4.6 percent using ln-age.

       The next two columns underline the importance of controlling for differences in worker

characteristics when measuring the impact of firm age. The firm age effect is eliminated (col. 3)

or becomes significantly negative (col. 4) by the addition of controls for worker characteristics.

While personal characteristics are obviously correlated with the employer variables, they do not

lead to collinearity problemsin fact, the standard errors of the employer variables are reduced

when we control for worker characteristics (because they reduce residual variance). While firm

age is positively related to union coverage and to employer size, these links are weak enough that
                                                                                                      9
controlling for age of firm has little effect on our estimates of these more traditional variables.

       Comparisons among the specifications in columns 1-4 of Table 2 raise two questions.

First, which control variables are responsible for the dramatic change in the estimated effect of

firm age? Thinking of the personal characteristics included in columns 3-4 but not in columns 1-

2 as omitted variables, we can write

       ln w = b1 (age of business) + Σb2,jXj + error

       ln w = c1 (age of business) + Σc2,jXj + Σc3,kZk + error

         Zk = ak (age of business) + Σak,jXj + error,

where X = establishment variables (besides age of business) held constant in columns 1-2, and Z

= worker characteristics added in columns 3-4. The change in the coefficient of age of business,

b1-c1, due to controlling for Z is equal to Σakc3,k. Values of Σakc3,k for the added personal


9. When we do not control for firm age, the union and employer size coefficients are the same

(to three decimal places) as those in column 3.

                                                  10
characteristics are given in Table 3. As expected, the experience and tenure variables are most

important. The surprise in Table 3 is the small but consistent contributions of the other variables

whose connection to age of business was much less clear a priori. Across the board, older firms

are hiring workers with characteristics associated with higher wages. This uniformity leads us to

expect that controlling for unmeasured worker characteristics would make the age-of-firm

coefficients more negative.

       While controlling for worker characteristics when measuring the effect of age of business

is not possible with the establishment data that previous researchers used when they found a

positive relationship, it is possible with the Worker Establishment Characteristic Database
                                                                      10
(WECD) recently created at the U.S. Census Bureau (Troske, 1998).          Ken Troske has

generously provided results of regressions similar to Table 2, based on the WECD. Several

differences are worth noting: WECD includes only manufacturing workers, has age of plant

rather than age of the business, has more detailed industry, occupation, and geographic controls

but no measure of tenure or union status. With age of plant entered linearly, adding worker

controls changes its coefficient from .007 (s.e.=.0006) to .0008 (.0005); with the logarithmic




10. The long form of the U.S. Census included detailed information on the location of the

respondent's workplace. The WECD then matches those employed in manufacturing to Census

Bureau establishment data based on that detailed location information. Matched workers tend to

be found in plants that are larger than average, and earn about 10 percent more per hour, than is

true of manufacturing workers in general. Despite these concerns, Troske (1999) concludes that

estimates of the size-wage relationship are are very similar to those found in other data.


                                                11
variable, the coefficient falls from .021 (.005) to .008 (.001). So, in Troske's WECD equations,

the worker controls reduce the effect of age of plant from positive (though smaller than in Table
          11
2) to zero.

        A second question raised by Table 2 is why the estimated effects of years in business

differ so much between linear and logarithmic specifications. While the difference is dramatic in

columns 3-4 (implied elasticity of -.004 in column 3 vs. -.035 in column 4), it is also significant

in columns 1-2 (.088 vs .042).        To resolve this puzzle, we allowed a more flexible

relationship between firm age and wages, using a spline with kinks at firm ages of 15, 30, and 60

years (roughly the quartiles of the distribution). The results are summarized in Table 4. The

individual spline segments are not very precisely estimatewe are asking a lot of 1000

observationsbut they are jointly significant, and they have very similar implications for the

linear and logarithmic specifications. These are shown in the bottom half of the table, where the

predicted wage at various points of the firm-age distribution (the quartile points, and age=90,

which is near the 10th percentile) are calculated, and normalized to zero at the median age of 30

years. When worker characteristics are not held constant, the wage-age relationship is U-shaped,

with the increasing segment dominating. With worker characteristics held constant, the U-shape


11. In a slightly different specification with controls for worker characteristics, Troske (1999)

reports a coefficient of ln(plant age) of .002 (.005). Doms, Dunne, and Troske (1997) match

WECD data to establishments in five industries (for which they also have unusual data on

adoption of technology). In these five industries, older plants pay higher wages; this difference

becomes negative but insignificant when controls for worker education and age are added. They

control throughout for capital intensity and number of technologies adopted.

                                                 12
remains, but the initial decreasing segment is more dominant. Once the splines' flexibility is

introduced, it matters little whether the splines are based on a linear or logarithmic age variable,

so they do effectively account for the difference between the linear and logarithmic results in

Table 2.

IV. Dun and Bradstreet Data

        Because we were concerned about the accuracy of worker reports of employer

characteristics, we asked respondents for the name, address, and telephone number of the place

where they worked, and added Dun and Bradstreet data for those employers we could match. We

were able to match about half of the sample, with losses due to respondents' reluctance to tell us

where they worked (17 percent), inability to locate the employer in Dun and Bradstreet's (22

percent), and a residual category of matches we questioned (11 percent), most often because

respondents had provided seriously incomplete information about their employers (see Brown
                            12
and Medoff, 1996, p. 278).       As we noted in discussing Table 1, the employers we could match

were larger and had been in business somewhat longer (based on respondent reports) than the

ones we could not match; wages and personal characteristics were not very different.

        A comparison of worker reports and D&B data shows encouraging agreement on

establishment and firm size (r>.8) and less on firm age (r=.5). For firm age, however, part of the

discrepancy appears related to changes in ownership. When a business is sold to a new owner,


12. Decisions about questionable matches were based only on the name, address, and telephone

number of the employer as given by the worker with the same information from the D&B match

candidate. We did not evaluate matches based on comparing worker and D&B data on employer

size, age, or industry.


                                                 13
Dun and Bradstreet's years in business variable often measures years in business under current

ownership. We strongly suspect that our respondents did not treat such changes of ownership as

a rebirth. On this issue, it is not clear what the ideal convention would be (Oi and Idson, 1999, p.

2210), and so these discrepancies are not necessarily "errors" in the workers' reports.

       In Table 5, we present regressions using this smaller sample, with employer variables

based on worker reports (columns 1-4) and D&B data (columns 5-8). Compare first the worker

reports in Table 5 with the analogous columns in Table 2, which are based on worker reports but

use the full sample. Establishment size is less important and firm size more important in Table 5

than in Table 2 but the effect of proportionally increasing both is nearly equal in the two tables.

Age of business coefficients are a bit less positive/more negative among the matched employers,

but the general patterns of the two tables are quite similar. Standard errors are, of course, larger

in the smaller sample.

       Comparisons of the D&B-based results in columns 5-8 with those using worker reports in

the first four columns show weaker effects of age of business, though these results are not large

once we control for personal characteristics.

       Given Dun and Bradstreet's handling of changes of ownership, it possible for workers

tenure with employer to exceed the age of that employer in the D&B file. Excluding cases where

this happens from Table 5's regressions increases the correlation between worker reports and

D&B reports of firm age to .6, and raises the absolute value of the D&B-based age coefficients in

Table 5, so that they are even more similar to those based on worker reports.

V. Non-Wage Job Characteristics and Wages

       The evidence in Tables 2-5 suggests that, after controlling for worker characteristics,



                                                 14
wages fall with age of firm at least initially, before perhaps increasing. Can differences in non-

wage job characteristics account for this pattern?

       As noted in the introduction, established employers tend to offer better fringe benefits and

more stable employment (which should lead to lower wages, all else constant) and might be seen

as having greater ability to pay above-market wages (which would lead to higher wages).

Differences in fringe benefits and job stability might account for the generally downward-sloping

age-wage relationship, and ability to pay might help explain the eventually increasing

relationship.

       The simplest test of these links is to enter measures of fringe benefit availability, job

(instability, and perceived ability to pay higher wages into the wage equations of Table 2. This is

done in the first column of Table 6. Comparing this column to column 4 of Table 2 shows that

the additional variables account for none of the observed relationshipif anything, they intensify

the puzzle. The same conclusion holds for the more complicated U-shaped formcolumn 4 of

Table 4 vs column 2 of Table 6.

       Inspection of the coefficients of the four additional variables reveals why they cannot

account for the age-wage relationshipnone has the sign predicted by the theory. At least for

the two fringe benefit variables and the instability measure, this reflects the difficulty of finding

evidence of compensating differentials in cross-section wage equations. If, for example, workers

with greater (unmeasured) ability receive higher wages and are more likely to be in pension
                                                                      13
plans, the omitted ability biases the pension-plan variable upward.



13. Workers with more tenure should place greater value on employment stability (since they

have more invested in the relationship) and pensions (since pension values often jump

                                                 15
       Our ability to pay measure turns out to be only weakly related to firm age or to wages. If

anything, we would have expected that those who work for successful firms would be above

average on unmeasured characteristics, so omitted variables are an unlikely explanation for the

weak relationship with wages. (We also asked respondents whether their employer was in better

or worse financial condition than its competitors, but "better" so dominated the responses that

there was little useful variation in this measure.)

       For the two fringe benefit measures, there is a way around the problem of estimating the

effect of fringes on wages. At least as an approximation, we might expect workers to "pay" for

$1 of pensions or health insurance with a $1 reduction in wages. On average, establishments that

offered pension plans spent about 7.2 percent of wage costs on pensions; establishments that
                                                                                   14
offered health insurance spent about 9.5 percent of wage costs on such insurance.       We can


discontinuously at eligibility for early retirement). In a spot-market model of compensating

differentials, the interaction of tenure and employment instability should be positive, and the

interaction of tenure and pensions should be negative. Neither of these predictions is supported

by the data.


14. For pensions, we calculated the ratio of employer costs for retirement plans to wages

(including holiday and vacation pay) in private industry, which was .041 in 1988 according to

Employment Cost Index data. We divided this by the proportion of workers whose employers

offer retirement plans, .57 in the 1988 Current Population Survey. Thus, we estimate that, for

employers offering such plans, they account for about .041/.57=7.2 percent of wage costs. For

health insurance, we took the ratio of insurance costs to wages (.071), and divided by the fraction

of workers whose employers offer health plans (.75); thus, for employers offering health

                                                  16
impose the belief that such benefits reduce wages dollar for dollar, or, equivalently, focus on the

logarithm of "total compensation" defined as

       ln (wage + pension cost + health insurance cost) =

       ln (wage) +ln (1 + pension/wage + health insurance/wage) ≈

       ln wage + .072 * has pension + .095 * has health insurance.

In columns 3 and 4 of Table 6, we replace ln (wage) with ln (total compensation) as our

dependent variable.

       Comparing column 3 of Table 6 with column 4 of Table 2 reveals that these two benefits

account for about 30 percent of the negative effect of firm age on wages. In column 4 of Table 6,

we see that the spline in age of business continues to suggest a U-shaped relationship. Given that

we have imposed a 1-for-1 tradeoff between fringes and wages, we think this approach if
                                                                                                15
anything overestimates the ability of fringes to explain the link between firm age and wages.        It

is possible, however, that among firms that offer pensions or health insurance, older firms offer
                      16
more generous plans (which would lead even our constrained estimates to understate the


insurance, its cost amounts to about .071/.75=9.5 percent of wages. All data are from Piacentini

and Foley, 1992, Tables 2.6 and 2.15.

       This procedure in effect assumes that firms offering these benefits pay average wages

(while in fact they pay higher wages), and so the ratio of benefit costs to wages is overstated.


15. As explained in the previous note, our procedure also tends to overstate the ratio of pension

or health insurance costs to wage payments.


16. Carroll and Hannan (2000, p. 434) conjecture that firms founded before the rise of

government-provided benefits offeredand continue to offermore generous fringe benefits,
                                           17
relationship between fringe benefits and age of firm). Lacking data on generosity of fringe

benefit plans by age of firm, we cannot pursue this possibility.

VI. Firm Age and Wage-Tenure Profiles

       We noted earlier that both human capital theory and some models of labor contracts to

motivate worker effort predict that wages should increase with tenure, and that this relationship

is likely to be more pronounced where the employment relationship itself is more secure. Since

new firms have higher failure rates, workers have less incentive to invest in firm-specific human

capital, and firms have more incentive to renege on (and so can make less use of) promises of

higher future wages in return for greater current effort. Yet no study in the emerging literature on

firm age and wages has looked at the relationship between firm age and the slope of the wage-

tenure profile.

       In the first two columns of Table 7, we add an interaction between tenure and firm age (or

ln firm age) when the worker started with the firm to the wage equations of Table 2. The

coefficients of these interaction terms are positive, as expected, and suggest differences in wage

growth at large and small firms may be practically important. On average, one year of tenure

increases wages by 1.7 percent, and a year of tenure and experience by 2.7 percent; a one

standard deviation increase in age of firm increases this by about .25 percentage points.

       The point estimates in columns 1-2 are, however, only marginally significant. Moreover,

if one adds the age*tenure interaction to specifications with age splines (as in Table 4), the

interaction term is essentially zero.

       In columns 3 and 4, we difference the wage equation in columns 1-2, so that the change


but they acknowledge that reliable data are not available.


                                                 18
in ln real wage (i.e., ln wage - ln starting wage in $1992, using the personal consumption

deflator) is the dependent variable. Fixed personal characteristics drop out when we difference,

as do employer characteristicsassuming, as we must given the data, that these are relatively

stable. The remaining explanatory variables are the change in tenure = the change in experience

(= tenure at survey date), (the change in) tenure squared, the change in experience squared, and

the age of firm*tenure interaction.

        With this specification, the evidence that wages grow faster at established firms is quite

strongthe interaction coefficients are nearly twice as large as in the "levels" specification and
                                    17
are highly significant statistically.

        The stronger results in columns 3 and 4 are "explained" by the fact that initial wages are

negatively related to firm age*tenure, and so subtracting initial wage from current wage makes

the age*tenure interaction larger (more positive). One interpretation of this negative relationship

is that (unmeasured) quality of those hired by established firms has grown more positive over

time, but specification error correlated with firm age*tenure obviously includes other

possibilities. The differenced equations in columns 3-4 correct for such specification errors, and




17. Starting wages are no doubt measured less accurately than current wages, and the wage-

change measure has a few striking outliers. Nevertheless, eliminating observations in the top and

bottom five percent of the distribution of wage changes per year had essentially no effect on the

estimated age*tenure interaction. Alternatively, one might argue that wages should grow faster

in larger firms. Adding an interaction between tenure and ln firm size reduces the age*tenure

interaction by only 20-30 percent, and so leaves the story line unchanged.


                                                19
                                                                                18
have somewhat smaller standard errors. On balance, they seem more reliable.

       If established firms are able to offer more firm-specific training and make greater use of

implicit contracts with deferred compensation (and so induce greater worker effort), we would

expect wages to be lower initially but higher eventually (and, since workers are investing more

and working harder, on average). This makes the generally negative estimates in the previous

tables more striking.

VII. Conclusions

       We began with a number of hypotheses linking firm age and wages, ranging from the

relatively mechanical tendency for established firms to have older, longer-tenure workers to

subtler relationships based on established firms offering more stable employment and better

fringe benefits and perhaps being seen as having greater ability to pay high wages.

       Unlike employer characteristics such as size, industry, and union coverage, the higher

wages paid by established firms are completely explained by the observable characteristics of

their workers. Indeed, after controlling for these characteristics, the relationship between firm

age and wages is negative, at least over much of the firm-age distribution. Moreover, it is not

just experience and tenure, but also education, occupation, and other demographic characteristics

associated with higher wages that are positively related to age of firm. We therefore expect that,

if our measured worker characteristics were more extensive, the relationship between age of firm

and wages would be more negative still.



18. The usual argument against differencing is that it increases the noise to signal ratio. But in

our equation the variable of interest (firm age*tenure) is the same in the cross-section and

differenced specification, because the initial value of firm age*tenure is identically zero.

                                                 20
       Established firms are more likely to offer pensions and health insurance, and these should

allow them to obtain workers of given quality at lower wages. However, even assuming a one-

for-one tradeoff between benefit costs and wages leaves most of the negative relationship

between firm age and wages unexplained. Established firms also provide more stable

employment. The usual difficulties of estimating compensating differentials modelswith

incomplete controls for worker quality, estimated effects of amenities on wages are likely to be

less negative or even positivemake it difficult for us to conclude how important such

differences in employment stability are for wages.

       The hypothesis that firms with greater ability to pay end up paying higher wages leads to

the prediction that established firms should pay higher wages. As we noted earlier, once we

control for worker characteristics, there is no longer a positive differential to explain. Our

measure of ability to pay was only weakly related to age of firm, and was not associated with

higher wages. Our tentative conclusion is that variation in ability to pay is not an important part

of the relationship between firm age and wages, though it would be worthwhile to repeat this

analysis with objective measures of ability to pay based on profits (which do seem related to

wagesHildreth and Oswald, 1997).

       Finally, we investigated the relationship between age of firm and the slope of workers'

wage-tenure profiles. While such second-order effects are hard to detect in modest-sized

samples such as ours, it does appear that established firms offer steeper wage-tenure profiles.

       Another interesting (though, given the size of our sample, somewhat tentative) conclusion

is that the relationship between firm age and wages is not monotonic. Wages fall as firm age

increases, but this relationship appears to be reversed among older firms.


                                                 21
       What might account for such a pattern? We suspect that no one factor can do so.

Working backwards from data to theory, we should be looking for relationship that can account

for new firms' paying higher wages that becomes much less important as firms age, and/or a

positive wage-age relationship that is muted among young firms. Compensating differentials for

the risk of the firm closing is an example of the first sort of relationshipfirm failures (Evans,

1987, Table 1) and plant closings (Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson, 1989, Table I) decline

sharply over the first decade or so of their existence, and then much more gradually. The link

between firm age and the ability to use reputation to enforce implicit contracts may be an

example of the second. For example, in Baker, Gibbs, and Murphy's (1994) model, firms with

high discount rates (in our framework, young firms) cannot use implicit contracts because

workers realize the incentive to renege is too large. Reductions in the discount rate (increases in

firm age) have no effect, until a critical threshold is reached, at which point not only do implicit

contracts become viable but they become increasingly important over some range as the discount

rate continues to fall (firm age continues to increase). If, as in their model, worker effort

parallels the use of implicit contracts, wages will eventually increase with firm age.

       Our findings suggest three directions for future research. First, two of our more intriguing

findingsa U-shaped relationship between firm age and wages, and a tendency for older firms to

offer steeper wage-tenure profilesneed to be replicated with other (hopefully larger) data sets.

Longitudinal data could be particularly valuable, providing better controls for unmeasured

worker ability and a much clearer picture of how wages vary with worker tenure at younger and

older firms. Second, there may be a positive relationship between the age of a business and the

age of the capital it uses; it is not clear which age concept is more appropriate. It may, for


                                                 22
example, be that older firms use older capital, which requires less skill and so employ less-skilled

workers. Doms, Dunne, and Troske (1997) find that wages are higher in plants that use new

technologies. However, Doms (1994) finds that age of plant and use of new technologies are

nearly uncorrelatedwhich suggests that any correlation between wages and plant age must be

due to other factors besides technology. It seems unlikely that the merits of different measures of

firm or plant age can be assessed empirically without a data set that includes both measures.

Third, if wages fall with age of firm, or trace out a U-shaped pattern once worker characteristics

are held constant, explaining this differential will require better understanding of the relationship

between age of firm and other features of the work environment.




                                                 23
                                           References

Akerlof, George and Yellen, Janet. "The Fair Wage/Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment,"

       Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 105, no. 2, May 1990, pp. 255-283.

Baker, George; Gibbons, Robert; and Murphy, Kevin. "Subjective Performance Measures in

       Optimal Incentive Contracts," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109, 1994, pp. 1125-

       1156.

Bartel, Ann. "Productivity Gains from the Implementation of Employee Training Programs,"

       Industrial Relations vol. 83, no. 4, October 1994, pp. 411-425.

Blanchflower, David. "Fear, Unemployment, and Pay Flexibility," Economic Journal vol. 101.

       no. 406, May 1991, pp.. 483-496.

Blanchflower, David and Oswald, Andrew. "The Wage Curve," unpublished paper, December

       1988.

Blanchflower, David; Oswald, Andrew; and Garrett, Mario. "Insider Power in Wage

       Determination," Economica vol. 57, May 1990, pp. 143-170.

Blinder, Alan and Choi, Don. "A Shred of Evidence on Theories of Wage Stickiness," Quarterly

       Journal of Economics vol 105, no. 4, November 1990, pp. 1003-1016.

Brock, William and Evans, David. The Economics of Small Business (New York: Holmes and

       Meier, 1986).

Brown, Charles and Medoff, James. "Employer Characteristics and Work Environment,"

       Annales d'Économie et de Statistique, no, 41/42, 1996.

Brown, Charles; Hamilton, James; and Medoff, James. Employers Large and Small (Cambridge

       MA: Harvard University Press, 1990).



                                               24
Carroll, Glenn and Hannan, Michael. The Demography of Corporations and Industry (Princeton:

       Princeton University Press, 2000).

Davis, Steven and Haltiwanger, John. "Wage Dispersion Between and Within U.S.

       Manufacturing Plants," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1991.

Davis, Steven and Haltiwanger, John. "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and

       Employment Reallocation," Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 107, no. 3, August

       1992, pp. 819-864.

Dickens, William and Katz, Lawrence. "Inter-industry Wage Differences and Industry

       Characteristics" in Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the

       Structure of the Labor Market (New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987), pp. 48-89.

Doms, Mark; Dunne, Timothy; and Troske, Kenneth. "Workers, Wages, and Technology,"

       Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 112, no. 1, February 1997, pp. 253-290.

Dunne, Timothy. "Plant Age and Technology Use in U.S. Manufacturing Industries," RAND

       Journal of Economics, vol. 25, no. 3, Autumn 1994, pp. 488-499.

Dunne, Timothy and Roberts, Mark. "Wages and Risk of Plant Closing," unpublished paper,

       June 1990.

Dunne, Timothy and Roberts, Mark. "Plant, Firm, and Industry Wage Variations," unpublished

       paper, December 1990

Dunne, Timothy; Roberts, Mark; and Samuelson, Larry. "Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit in U.S.

       Manufacturing," RAND Journal of Economics vol. 19, no. 4, Winter 1988, pp. 495-515.




                                             25
Dunne, Timothy; Roberts, Mark; and Samuelson, Larry. "The Growth and Failure of U.S.

       Manufacturing Plants," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 104, no. 4, November 1989,

       pp. 671-698.

Evans, David. "Tests of Alternative Theories of Firm Growth," Journal of Political Economy,

       vol. 95, no. 4, August 1987, pp. 657-674.

Farber, Henry. "Are Lifetime Jobs Disappearing? Job Duration in the United States, 1973-1993,"

       in John Haltiwanger and Marilyn Manser, eds., Labor Statistics Measurement Issues

       (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1998), pp. 157-203.

Freeman, Richard and Medoff, James. What Do Unions Do? (New York: Basic Books, 1984).

Gibbons, Robert and Latz, Lawrence. "Layoffs and Lemons," Journal of Labor Economics, vol.

       9, October 1991, p. 350-380.

Hall, Robert. "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy," American Economic

       Review, vol. 72, September 1982, pp. 716-724.

Hildreth, Andrew and Oswald, Andrew. "Rent-Sharing and Wages: Evidence from Company

       and Establishment Panels," Journal of Labor Economics vol. 15, April 1997, pp. 318-337.

Idson, Todd. "Employer Size and Labor Turnover," Research in Labor Economics, vol. 15,

       1996, pp. 273-304.

Jovanovich, Boyan. "Selection and the Evolution of Industry," Econometrica vol. 50, May 1982,

       pp. 649-670.

Kahneman, Daniel; Knetsch, Jack; and Thaler, Richard. "Fairness as a Constraint on Profit

       Seeking: Entitlements in the Market," American Economic Review vol. 86, no. 4,

       September 1986, pp. 728-741.



                                              26
Krueger, Alan and Summers, Lawrence. "Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage

       Structure," Econometrica, vol. 56, no. 2, March 1988, pp. 259-293.

Leonard, Jonathan. "In the Wrong Place at the Wrong Time: The Extent of Frictional and

       Structural Unemployment," in Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard, eds., Unemployment

       and the Structure of the Labor Market (New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987).

Leonard, Jonathan, "Organizational Form, Growth, and Stability," in Toshiaki Tachibanaki, ed.,

       Labour Market and Economic Performance (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1994), pp.

       296-311.

Lewis, H. Gregg. Union Relative Wage Effects (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986).

Milgrom, Paul and Roberts, John. Economics, Organization, and Management (Englewood

       Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992).

Oi, Walter. "Heterogeneous Firms and the Organization of Production," Economic Inquiry vol.

       21, April 1983, pp. 147-171.

Oi, Walter and Idson, Todd. "Firm Size and Wages," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.,

       Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3 (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1999), pp. 2165-

       2214.

Pakes, Ariel and Ericson, Richard. "Empirical Implications of Alternative Models of Firm

       Dynamics," Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 79, no. 1, March 1998, pp. 1-45.

Peterson,Mitchell and Rajan, Raghuran. "The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending

       Relationships," Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 110, no. 2, May 1995, pp. 407-444.

Piacentini, Joseph, and Foley, Jill. EBRI Databook on Employee Benefits (Washington DC:

       Employee Benefits Research Institute, 1992).



                                              27
Scherer, F.M. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance (Chicago: Rand McNally,

       1980).

Stephens, Melvin. "The Long-Run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks," Review of

       Economics and Statistics, vol. 83, no. 1, February 2001, pp. 28-36.

Stevens, Ann Huff. "Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job

       Losses," Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 15, no. 1, part 1, January 1997, pp. 165-188.

Troske, Kenneth. "Evidence on the Employer Size-Wage Premium from Worker-Establishment

       Matched Data," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 81, February 1999, pp. 15-26.

Troske, Kenneth. "The Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database," in John Haltiwanger

       and Marilyn Manser, eds., Labor Statistics Measurement Issues (Chicago, University of

       Chicago Press, 1998), pp. 371-404.

Winter-Ebmer, Rudolf. "Firm Size, Earnings, and Displacement Risk," Working Paper 9418,

       Institut fur Volkswirtschaftslehre, Johannes Kepler Universität Linz, October 1994.




                                              28
                                     Table 1

                       Sample Means and Standard Deviations

                                                                         Clean
                                         All                  Complet    D&B
                                        Cases                  eData    Matches
                                                              N=1067    N=533
Variable                     Mean      Std. Dev.     N         Mean      Mean
Years of Schooling            13.7        2.1      1408        13.8      13.7
Years of Experience           15.4       11.0       1398       15.0      15.6
Years of Tenure               6.74       7.82      1397        6.72      6.95
Female                        0.50       0.50      1410        0.49      0.47
Married                       0.60       0.49      1409        0.60      0.61
Widowed or Divorced           0.18       0.39      1409        0.18      0.19
Black                         0.07       0.26      1400        0.06      0.05
Hispanic                      0.04       0.18      1400        0.03      0.03
ln (Wage/Hour)                6.92       0.59      1255        6.96      6.97
ln (Site Employment)          4.07       2.18      1390        4.05      4.33
ln (Firm Employment)          5.76       3.10      1245        5.83      5.86
Age of Business (years)       40.1       32.0      1332        39.7      41.8
ln (Age of Business)          3.29       1.09      1332        3.27      3.37
Union Contract                0.11       0.31      1402        0.10      0.11




                                       29
                                       Table 2

             Wages, Age of Firm, and Other Employer Characteristics
                       Complete Data Sample, N=1067
                     Dependent Variable = ln (Wage/Hour)

Variable                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
Union Contract                      -.014         -.007          .053          .057
                                    (.058)        (.058)        (.051)        (.051)
ln (Site Employment)                  049          .050          .035          .037
                                    (.011)        (.011)        (.010)        (.009)
ln (Firm Employment)                 .012          .015          .009          .013
                                    (.008)        (.008)        (.007)        (.007)
Age of Business/10                   .022                       -.001
                                    (.006)                      (.005)
ln (Age of Business)                               .042                       -.035
                                                  (.019)                      (.016)
Weighted Standard                    .193          .196          .125          .126
Deviation of Industry Effects
Worker Characteristics                No            No           Yes           Yes


Notes:

Standard errors in parentheses below coefficients.

Worker characteristics in columns 3 and 4: education, years of full-time
experience (2), tenure (2), race, Hispanic, sex, marital status (2), marital status x
sex (2), occupation (12).

All regressions include dummy variables for region (3) and a constant.




                                            30
                             Table 3

             Effects of Added Worker Characteristics
                 on Age of Business Coefficients
                        (based on Table 2)

                               Effect on Age Coefficient
                                col(1)-col(3)     col(2)-col(4)
Education                              .003            .006
                         2
Experience + Experience                .004            .018
                  2
Tenure + Tenure                        .008            .034
Race + Hispanic                        .000            .001
Sex                                    .002            .004
Marital Status                         .002            .002
Sex * Marital Status                   .001            .002
Occupation                             .002            .005
Sum                                    .023            .077




                               31
                                               Table 4

                                Wages and Age-of-Business Splines

                                             (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
 Spline Coefficients:
 Age of Business/10                         -.080                           -.119
                                           (.063)                          (.052)
 Max[(Age-15)/10,0]                          082                            .086
                                           (.097)                          (.080)
 Max[(Age-30)/10,0]                         .044                            .039
                                           (.062)                          (.051)
 Max[(Age-60)/10,0]                         -.025                           .012
                                           (.033)                          (.027)
 ln (Age of Business)                                       -.030                           -.066
                                                           (.043)                          (.036)
 Max[ln(Age)-ln(15),0]                                      -.008                           -.041
                                                           (.120)                          (.099)
 Max[ln(Age)-ln(30),0]                                      .232                            .124
                                                           (.175)                          (.144)
 Max[ln(Age)-ln(60),0]                                      .009                            .141
                                                           (.199)                          (.164)
 ln-wage differential,
 relative to Age = 30:
 Age of Business = 1                        .108            .108            .216            .250
 Age of Business = 15                       -.003           .026            .049            .074
 Age of Business = 30                       .000            .000            .000            .000
 Age of Business = 60                       .140            .134            .017            .012
 Age of Business = 90                       .204            .217            .070            .076
 F(3,n-k) for three spline variables         2.01           4.66            5.42            3.27
                                            P≈.10          P<.01           P≈.001          P<.05
 F(4,n-k) for all four age variables        5.09            4.78            4.07            3.62
                                           P<.001          P<.001          P<.01           P<.01

Notes:

Control variables are the same as those in corresponding column of Table 2.

F(3,n-k) tests the hypothesis that the coefficients of the three spline variables are all zero. F(4,n-k)
tests the hypothesis that the coefficients of all four age of business variables are zero.

                                                   32
                                                     Table 5

                              Wages, Age of Firm, and Other Employer Characteristics
                                    Sample with Matching D&B Data, N=533
                                      Dependent Variable = ln (Wage/Hour)

Employer Variables From                    Worker Reports                                D&B Data
Variable                         (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)      (7)      (8)
Union Contract                  .017       .028       .100       .101      .061         .051     .108     .106
                               (.080)     (.080)     (.069)     (.069)    (.079)       (.079)   (.069)   (.068)
ln (Site Employment)            .028       .029       .016       .017      .041         .041     .034     .035
                               (.018)     (.018)     (.014)     (.104)    (.018)       (.018)   (.014)   (.014)
ln (Firm Employment)            .032       .035       .027       .029      .030         .032     .019     .017
                               (.013)     (.013)     (.010)     (.010)    (.012)       (.012)   (.010)   (.009)
Age of Business/10              .016                  -.006                .003                  -.010
                               (.008)                (.007)               (.007)                (.006)
ln (Age of Business)                       .027                  -.044                  .004              -.032
                                          (.028)                (.023)                 (.021)            (.017)
Weighted Standard Deviation     .167       .170       .114      .114       .150        .151     .092     .091
of Industry Effects
Worker Characteristics           No         No        Yes        Yes        No          No       Yes      Yes

Notes:

See Table 2.




                                                       33
                                            Table 6

                 Wages, Age of Firm, and Non-wage Job Characteristics
                         Dependent Variable = ln(Wage/Hour)

                                            N = 1052                     N=   1060
 Variable                             (1)              (2)         (3)            (4)
 ln (Age of Business)               -.042             -.071      -.030           -.058
                                    (.016)            (.036)     (.017)          (.037)
 Max[ln(age)-ln(15),0]                                -.054                      -.043
                                                      (.098)                     (.101)
 Max[ln(age)-ln(30),0]                                 .141                       .126
                                                      (.143)                     (.147)
 Max[ln(age)-ln(60),0]                                 .149                       .129
                                                      (.163)                     (.168)
 Pension Plan Offered                .139              .141       -.072          -.072
                                    (.039)            (.039)
 Health Insurance Offered            .014              .021       -.095          -.095
                                    (.042)            (.042)
 Probability of Job Loss            -.054             -.049
                                    (.054)            (.054)
 Ability to Afford 10% Wage         -.057             -.050
 Increase                           (.038)            (.038)
 Worker Characteristics              Yes               Yes        Yes             Yes


Notes:

Control variables are the same as those in Table 2, column 4.

Coefficients of Pension Plan and Health Insurance variables in columns 3 and
4 are constrained to equal minus the ratio of pension and health costs to wage
bill costs in establishments offering these benefits.




                                              34
                                              Table 7

                            Age of Firm and the Wage-Tenure Profile

  Variable                            (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)
  Age of Business/10                 -.0034
                                    (.0063)
  (Age of Business0/10)              .0009                            .0017
   * Tenure                         (.0006)                          (.0004)
  ln(Age of Business)                                 -.0399
                                                     (.0180)
  [ln(Age of Business0)]                              .0023                         .0039
   * Tenure                                          (.0013)                       (.0011)


Notes:

Age of business0 is the age of the business when the worker joined; i.e., age of
business at survey date - tenure.

In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is ln(Wage/Hour). Control variables
are the same as those in Table 2, column 4. N=1036 (a few cases with calculated
age of business0<0 were deleted).

In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the ln(Wage/Hour) minus
ln(Starting Wage/Hour), with the starting wage adjusted for inflation. Control
variables are tenure, tenure squared, and the change in (experience squared).
N=971, due to deletion of cases that did not report starting wage.




                                                35
