                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE MARKET FOR CRASH RISK


                                             David S. Bates


                                          Working Paper 8557
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8557


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2001 by David S. Bates. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Market for Crash Risk
David S. Bates
NBER Working Paper No. 8557
October 2001
JEL No. G13



                                             ABSTRACT


        This paper examines the equilibrium when negative stock market jumps (crashes) can occur, and
investors have heterogeneous attitudes towards crash risk. The less crash-averse insure the more
crash-averse through the options markets that dynamically complete the economy. The resulting
equilibrium is compared with various option pricing anomalies reported in the literature: the tendency of
stock index options to overpredict volatility and jump risk, the Jackwerth (2000) implicit pricing kernel
puzzle, and the stochastic evolution of option prices. The specification of crash aversion is compatible
with the static option pricing puzzles, while heterogeneity partially explains the dynamic puzzles.
Heterogeneity also magnifies substantially the stock market impact of adverse news about fundamentals.




David S. Bates
Finance Department
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242-1000
and NBER
Tel: 319-353-2288
Email: david-bates@uiowa.edu
Empirical option pricing research involving stock index options has revealed substantial divergences
between the “risk-neutral” distributions compatible with observed post-’87 option prices, and the
conditional distributions estimated from time series analyses of the underlying stock index. Perhaps
the most important has been the substantial disparity between implicit standard deviations (ISD’s)
inferred from at-the-money options, and the subsequent realized volatility over the lifetime of the
option. As illustrated below in Figure 1, ISD’s have generally been higher than realized volatility.
Furthermore, regressing realized volatility upon ISD’s almost invariably indicates that ISD’s are
informative but biased predictors of future volatility, with bias increasing in the ISD level.


       While the level of at-the-money ISD’s is puzzling, the shape of the volatility surface across
strike prices and maturities also appears at odds with estimates of conditional distributions. It is now
widely recognized that the “volatility smirk” implies substantial negative skewness in risk-neutral
distributions, and various correspondingly skewed models have been proposed: implied binomial
trees, stochastic volatility models with “leverage” effects, and jump-diffusions. And although these
models can roughly match observed option prices, the associated implicit parameters do not appear
especially consistent with the absence of substantial negative skewness in post-’87 stock index
returns. To paraphrase Samuelson, the option markets have predicted nine out of the past five
market corrections. A further puzzle is that the predictions are somewhat countercyclical. Within
the Bates (2000) jump-diffusion model, implicit jump risk was highest immediately after substantial
market drops, and was low during the bull market of 1992-96.


       It is of course possible that the pronounced divergence between objective and risk-neutral
measures represents risk premia on the underlying risks. The fundamental theorem of asset pricing
states that provided there exist no outright arbitrage opportunities, it is possible to construct a
“representative agent” whose preferences are compatible with any observed divergences between
the two distributions. However, Jackwerth (2000) and Rosenberg and Engle (2000) have pointed
out that the preferences necessary to reconcile the two distributions appear rather oddly shaped, with
sections that are locally risk-loving rather than risk-averse. Furthermore, the post-’87 Sharpe ratios
from writing put options or straddles seem extraordinarily high -- two to six times that of investing
directly in the stock market.
                                                  2

       The overall industrial organization of the stock index option markets does not appear
especially compatible with the idealized construction of representative agents. In that construction,
all individuals trade until at the margin they are indifferent to taking on more or less risk. The
resultant risk-pooling of systematic risks across all agents permits the calibration of standard asset
pricing models from aggregate data sources: e.g., estimating the consumption CAPM based on
aggregate consumption data, or the CAPM based on proxies for the return on aggregate wealth.
However, most investors do not routinely use options to manage the underlying risks. Although
stock index options are among the most actively traded options, the stock positions hedged by
exchange-traded options on the S&P index or futures represented at most 2.6% of the S&P 500
market capitalization in 1998.1


       In stock index option markets, individual investors can easily buy options but face obstacles
at the broker level to writing naked puts or calls. While hard data are not readily available,
anecdotal evidence suggests a fundamental post-’87 dichotomy between the buyers and sellers in
the stock index option market. A broad array of individual and institutional investors buy options
as part of their overall risk management strategies, while a relatively concentrated group of option
market makers predominantly write them and delta-hedge their positions. And although all investors
need not be rational for markets to be efficient, this broad and apparently persistent dichotomy
between buyers and sellers suggests closer scrutiny of option market making is warranted.


       The objective of this paper is therefore to focus more carefully on the financial intermedia-
tion of crash risk through option markets. A general equilibrium model is constructed in which
relatively crash-tolerant option market makers insure crash-averse investors. Heterogeneity in
attitudes towards crash risk is modeled via heterogeneous state-dependent utility functions similar
to those in Ho, Perraudin and Sørensen (1996). Crashes can occur in the model, given occasional
adverse jumps in news about fundamentals. Derivatives are consequently not redundant in the



       1
        This is computed based upon the 1998 open interest for CBOE options on the S&P 100 and
S&P 500 indexes, and for CME options on S&P 500 futures. It represents an upper limit in
assuming every option corresponds one-for-one to an underlying stock position. Strategies
involving multiple options (vertical spreads, collars, straddles, etc.) would substantially reduce the
estimate of the stock positions being protected.
                                                  3

model and serve the important function of dynamically completing the market. Given complete
markets, equilibrium can be derived using an equivalent central planner’s problem, and the
corresponding dynamic trading strategies and market equilibria are identified.


       The view of options markets as an insurance market for crash risk may be able to explain
some of the option pricing anomalies -- especially if there exist barriers to entry. If crash risk is
concentrated among option market makers, calibrations based upon the risk-taking capacity of all
investors can be misleading.2      Speculative opportunities such as writing straddles become
unappealing when the market makers are already overly involved in the business. Furthermore, the
dynamic response of option prices to market drops resembles the price cycles observed in insurance
markets: an increase in the price of crash insurance caused by the contraction in market makers’
capital following losses.3


       This paper therefore represents an initial exploration of the financial intermediation of crash
risk via the options markets. Section 1 recapitulates the various stylized facts from empirical options
research that the various models will attempt to match. Section 2 introduces the basic framework,
and identifies a benchmark homogeneous-agent equilibrium. Section 3 explores the implications
of heterogeneity in agents. Section 4 concludes.




       2
     Basak and Cuoco (1998) make a similar point regarding calibrations of the consumption
CAPM when most investors don’t hold stock.
       3
       Froot (2001, Figure 3) illustrates the strong, temporary impacts of Hurricane Andrew in
1992 and the Northbridge earthquake in 1994 upon the price of catastrophe insurance.
                                                   4

1. Empirical option pricing anomalies and stylized facts
Three categories of discrepancies between objective and risk-neutral measures will be kept in mind
in the theoretical section of the paper: volatility, higher moments, and the implicit pricing kernel
that in principle reconciles the objective and risk-neutral probability measures. Furthermore, each
category can be decomposed further into average discrepancies, and conditional discrepancies.


       The unconditional volatility puzzle is that implicit standard deviations (ISD’s) from stock
index options have been higher on average over 1988-98 than realized volatility over the options’
lifetimes. For instance, ISD’s from 30-day at-the-money put and call options on S&P 500 futures
have been 2% higher on average than the subsequent annualized daily volatility over the lifetime
of the options.4 This discrepancy has generated substantial post-’87 profits on average from writing
at-the-money puts or straddles, with Sharpe ratios two to six times that of investing in the stock
market. See, e.g., Fleming (1998) or Jackwerth (2000).


       The conditional volatility puzzle is that regressing realized volatility upon ISD’s generally
yields slopes that are significantly positive, but significantly less than one. For instance, the
regressions using the 30-day ISD’s and realized volatilities mentioned above yield volatility and
variance results



                         jτ ' t%1 (∆ ln Fτ ) ' .0160 % .756 ISDt % gt%T , R ' .45
                   365     T                2                              2
                    T                                                                           (1)
                                              (.0142) (.102)


                        j (∆ ln Fτ ) ' .0027 % .681 ISDt % gt%T , R ' .33
                           T
                   365              2                   2          2
                                                                                                (2)
                    T τ ' t%1         (.0033) (.161)




       4
      The puzzle is slightly exacerbated by the fact that at-the-money ISD’s are in principle
downwardly biased predictors of the (risk-neutral) volatility over the lifetime of the options.
                                                   5




             Figure 1. ISD’s and realized volatility, 1988-98. ISD’s are from 30-
             day S&P 500 futures options. Realized volatility is annualized, from
             daily log-differenced futures prices over the lifetime of the options.

with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses.5 Since intercepts are small, the
regressions imply that ISD’s are especially poor forecasts of realized volatility when high.


       The skewness puzzle is that the levels of skewness implicit in stock index options are
generally much larger in magnitude than those estimated from stock index returns -- whether from
unconditional returns (Jackwerth, 2000) or conditional upon a time series model that captures salient
features of time-varying distributions (Rosenberg and Engle, 2000). Furthermore, implicit skewness
falls off only slightly for longer maturities of stock index options of, e.g., 3-6 months.6 By contrast,

       5
         Christensen and Prabhala (1998) argue that measurement error in ISD’s may be biasing
slope estimates downwards, and estimate essentially unitary slopes on post-’87 monthly data using
instrumental variables. Using instrumental variables on my data had negligible effect on point
estimates. However the associated loss of power did increase standard errors, to the point where
unbiasedness could not be rejected in some cases. Jorion (1995) provides a Monte Carlo assessment
of measurement error’s impact on volatility regressions.
       6
         In options research, implicit skewness is roughly measured by the shape of the volatility
“smirk,” or pattern of ISD’s across different strike prices (“moneyness”). The skewness/maturity
interaction can be seen by examined by the volatility smirk at different horizons conditional upon
rescaling moneyness proportionately to the standard deviation appropriate at different horizons. See,
                                                 6

the distribution of log-differenced stock indexes or stock index futures converges rapidly towards
near-normality as one progresses from daily to weekly to monthly holding periods.


       A further puzzle is the evolution of distributions implicit in option prices. Figure 2 below
summarizes that evolution using updated estimates of the Bates (2000) 2-factor stochastic
volatility/jump-diffusion model with time-varying jump risk. The affine structure of that model
permits a factor representation of implicit cumulants in terms of two underlying state variables. The
first factor (V1) affects variance directly and also determines the jump intensity, thereby affecting
cumulants at all maturities. The second factor (V2) influences instantaneous variance (with roughly




 Table 1
 Implicit jump parameters, and (risk-neutral) cumulants at 1- and 6-month horizons,
 1988-98 estimates.
 Average jump size:          -6.6%
 Jump standard deviation:   11.0%
 Jump intensity:            λt ' 81.41 V1t % .01 V2t

 1-month cumulants

  K2 '     1.76e&4 % .2053       V1 t % .0795 V2 t
  K3 ' &1.01e&5 & .0371          V1 t & .0012 V2 t
  K4 ' 2.47e&6 % 10.54e&3 V1 t % .06e&3 V2 t

 6-month cumulants

  K2 ' .0058 % 1.3080 V1 t % .3802 V2 t
  K3 ' &.0012 & .8112 V1 t & .0336 V2 t
  K4 ' .0007 % .7556 V1 t % .0083 V2 t

 Average factor realizations: Avg(V1 ) ' .0092; Avg(V2 ) ' .0143.
                                               3/2                        2
 Conditional variance = K2 ; skewness = K3 / K2 ; excess kurtosis = K4 / K2 .




e.g., Bates (2000, Figure 4). Tompkins (2000) provides a comprehensive survey of volatility surface
patterns, including the maturity effects.
                                                 7




   Figure 2. Implicit factor estimates from S&P 500 futures options, 1988-98.
   V1 affects all cumulants, at all maturities. V2 affects conditional variance but has little
   impact on higher cumulants. Units are in instantaneous variance per year conditional on no
   jumps (left scale), or in implicit jump frequency (right scale). See Bates (2000) for
   estimation details.

half the variance loading of V1 -- see Table 1 below), but has relatively little impact on higher
cumulants.




       The graph indicates that the sharp market declines over 1988-98 (in January 1988, October
1989, August 1990, November 1997, and August 1998) were accompanied by sharp increases in
implicit jump risk. The puzzles here are the abruptness of the shifts (Bates (2000) rejects the
hypothesis that implicit jump risk follows an affine diffusion), and the magnitudes of implicit jump
risk achieved following the market declines. Furthermore, affine models assume the risk-neutral and
objective jump intensity are proportional. These models therefore imply objective crash risk is
highest immediately following crashes, which some (e.g., Chernov et al, 1999) would find
unappealing.
                                                  8


       Finally, there is the implicit pricing kernel puzzle discussed in Jackwerth (2000) and
Rosenberg and Engle (2000). The sharp discrepancy between the negatively skewed risk-neutral
distribution and roughly lognormal objective distribution at monthly horizons causes the risk-neutral
mode to be to the right of the estimated objective mode, even though the risk-neutral mean is
perforce to the left of the objective mean. If the level of the stock index is viewed as a reasonably
good proxy for overall wealth of the representative agent, this discrepancy in distributions implies
marginal utility of wealth is locally increasing in areas – implying utility functions that are locally
convex in areas, rather than globally concave.7


       It is possible that a standard representative agent/pricing kernel model can explain the above
puzzles. Pan (2001), for instance, finds a substantial risk premium on time-varying jump risk is a
promising candidate. The risk premium raises implicit jump risk, volatility, and skewness relative
to the values from the objective distribution, while the time variation in jump risk can explain the
conditional volatility bias. Bates (2000) finds that this model can also match the maturity profile
of implicit skewness better than models with constant implicit jump risk.


       The challenges for this explanation are the magnitude of the speculative opportunities
associated with the implicit risk premia, and its failure to address the pricing kernel anomaly. The
stochastic evolution of implicit and objective jump risk is also puzzling,




       7
         Jackwerth’s results are disputed by Aït-Sahalia and Lo (2000), who find no anomalies when
comparing average option prices from 1993 with the unconditional return distribution estimated
from overlapping data from 1989-93. The difference in results perhaps highlights the importance
of using conditional rather than unconditional distributions, as in Rosenberg and Engle (2000). For
instance, both conditional variance and implicit standard deviations are time-varying; and a
substantial divergence between the two can produce anomalous implicit utility functions even in a
lognormal environment.
                                                   9

2. A jump-diffusion economy
I consider a simple continuous-time endowment economy over [0, T ] , with a single terminal
dividend payment D̃T at time T. News about this dividend (or, equivalently, about the terminal
value of the investment) arrives as a univariate Markov jump-diffusion of the form
                                 d ln D ' µd dt % σd dZ % γd dN                                   (3)


where Z is a standard Wiener process,
       N is a Poisson counter with constant intensity λ , and
        γd < 0 is a deterministic jump size or announcement effect, assumed negative.


       Financial assets are claims on terminal outcomes. Given the simple specification of news
arrival, any three non-redundant assets suffice to dynamically span this economy; e.g., bonds, stocks,
and a single long-maturity stock index option. However, it is analytically more convenient to work
with the following three fundamental assets:
    1) a riskless numeraire bond in zero net supply that delivers one unit of terminal consumption
       in all terminal states of nature;
    2) an equity claim in unitary supply that pays a terminal dividend DT at time T, and is priced
       at St at time t relative to the riskless asset; and
    3) a jump insurance contract in zero net supply that costs an instantaneous and endogenously
                                           (
       determined insurance premium λt dt and pays off 1 additional unit of the numeraire asset
       conditional on a jump. The terminal payoff of one insurance contract held to maturity is

               m0
                    T (
        NT &         λt dt .


Other assets such as options are redundant given these fundamental assets, and are priced by no
arbitrage given equilibrium prices for the latter two assets. Equivalently, the jump insurance
contract can be synthesized from the short-maturity options markets with overlapping maturities that
we actually observe. The equivalence between option and jump insurance contracts is discussed
below in section 3.5.


       Agents are assumed to have crash-averse utility functions over terminal outcomes of the form
                                                       10

                                                              1& R
                                                   Y Ñ T   W̃T      &1
                           U(Wt , Nt , t) ' Et e                          for R > 0                      (4)
                                                              1& R



where WT is terminal wealth, NT is the number of jumps over [0, T ] , and Y > 0 is a parameter of
crash aversion. This generalization of power utility is the deterministic-jump equivalent of the
equilibrium pricing kernel specification in Ho, Perraudin, and Sørensen (1996), and has several
advantages. First, as discussed in Ho et al and below, these preferences for a representative agent
facing independent and identically distributed returns imply constant risk-neutral jump intensities,
facilitating option pricing under the risk-neutral probability measure. Indeed, the above utility
function can be derived as the entropy-minimizing pricing kernel that generates specific
instantaneous equity and jump risk premia given an i.i.d jump-diffusion process.


       Second, these preferences retain the homogeneity of standard power utility, and the myopic
investment strategy property of the log utility subcase.                  Third, investors with crash-averse
preferences ( Y > 0 ) use exaggerated certainty-equivalent crash frequency estimates when choosing
portfolio allocations, in a fashion potentially consistent with risk-neutral jump intensities inferred
from option prices:

                                  u(W̃T ) ' j
                                            4
                         Y Ñ T                  e &λT λT e Y N
                  E0 e                                          E0 [ u(WT)*N jumps ]
                                          N'0          N!                                                (5)
                                                 Y      (
                                        ' e λT (e & 1) E0 u(WT) * λ( ' λ e Y .




       An alternate interpretation is that Y captures heterogeneous beliefs regarding the unknown
frequency of crashes.8 However, this interpretation would require strong priors that preclude
investors from updating their subjective jump frequency λ e Y based on learning over time, or from
trading with other investors in the heterogeneous-agent equilibria derived below.




       8
        See Shefrin (1997) for an alternate model for pricing options under heterogeneous beliefs.
                                                    11

       The above is a model of “external” crash aversion. An alternate “internal” crash aversion
model could be constructed assuming investors’ aversion to crashes depends only on the degree to
which their own investments are directly affected:
                                                                   Ñ T
                                 U(WT ) ' u(WT ) exp &y j γw                                     (6)



where γw is the jump in log wealth conditional upon a jump occurring, and conditional upon the
investor’s portfolio allocation. The major advantage to the external crash aversion in (4) is its
analytic tractability. While it is possible to work out homogeneous-agent equilibria using internal
crash aversion, deriving heterogeneous-agent equilibria is trickier. The difference in specifications
echoes the analytic advantages of external over internal habit formation models discussed in
Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997, p. 327-8).


2.1 Equilibrium in a homogeneous-agent economy
The fundamental equations for pricing equity and crash insurance are
                                       ηt ' E t ηT
                                                 E t ηT D T
                                       St '
                                                     ηt                                          (7)
                                        (          ηt% dt*dN ' 1
                                       λt ' λ
                                                          ηt


where ηT / ηt is a nonnegative pricing kernel. The first two equations are standard; see, e.g.,
Grossman and Zhou (1996). The last is derived in Bates (1988, 1991).9 If all agents have identical
crash-averse preferences of the form given in (4) above, the pricing kernel can be derived from the
terminal marginal utility:
                                   ηT ' UW (WT , NT ) *W           ' DT
                                                               T

                                            &R     Y NT
                                                                                                 (8)
                                      ' DT e              .

       9                                                       (
        A crash insurance with instantaneous cost λt dt that pays off 1 unit of the numeraire
conditional upon a jump occurring in (t, t % dt ] is priced at
                              (
                          ηt λt dt ' Et η t% dt 1*dN ' 1 ' λ dt η t% dt*dN ' 1

yielding the above expression.
                                                                             12

The following is useful for computing relevant conditional expectations.


Lemma: If dt / ln Dt follows the jump-diffusion in (3) above and Nt is the underlying jump
counter with intensity λ , then
                Φ d˜T % ψ Ñ T                                                                           2         Φ γd % ψ
         Et e                    ' exp Φ dt % ψ Nt % (T & t) Φ µd % ½ Φ2 σd % λ e                                             &1   .    (9)


Proof: There is a probability wn ' e &λ τ (λτ) n / n! of observing n / NT & Nt jumps over (t, T ] .
                                                                                                     2
Conditional upon n jumps, ∆ d / ln DT / Dt - N[µd τ % γd n, σd τ] for τ / T & t , and
                        Φ d˜T % ψ Ñ T         Φ dt % ψ Nt
                 Et e                    ' e                 Et exp[Φ ∆ d˜ % ψ ñ]
                                               Φ dt % ψ Nt             ˜
                                         ' e                 Et exp[Φ ∆d* n ' 0 % ñ(Φ γd % ψ)]
                                                                                                                                       (10)
                                               Φ dt % ψ Nt                                      2            Φ γd % ψ
                                         ' e                 exp (Φ µd % ½ Φ2 σd )τ % λτ e                              &1 .

The last line follows from the independence of the Wiener and jump components, and from the
moment generating functions for Wiener and jump processes.                                                                               O


       Using the lemma and the pricing kernel (8) yields the following asset pricing equations:
                                                                                 Y & R γd
                                                              λ( ' λ e                                                                 (11)
                                                                                                2
                                                     &R      Y Nt       (T & t )[&R µd % ½ σd % (λ( & λ)]
                                         ηt ' D t e                 e                                                                  (12)

                                                                                 2          2
                           St ' Dt exp (T & t) (µd % ½ σd & R σd ) % λ((e γ & 1)                                                       (13)



       The last equation implies that the price of equity relative to the riskless numeraire follows
roughly the same i.i.d. jump-diffusion process as the underlying dividend process, with identical
instantaneous volatility and jump magnitudes:

                                         dS / S ' µ dt % σd dZ % k (d N & λ dt )                                                       (14)

          γ
for k ' e d & 1 . The instantaneous equity premium
                                                µ ' R σ2 % (λ & λ( ) k
                                                                             2                                                         (15)
                                                    . R (σ2 % λ γd ) % (& λ γd ) Y
                                                     13

reflects required compensation for two types of risk. First is the required compensation for stock
market variance from diffusion and jump components, roughly scaled by the coefficient of relative
risk aversion. Second, the crash aversion parameter Y $ 0 increases the required excess return when
stock market jumps are negative.


       Crash aversion also directly affects the price of crash insurance relative to the actual arrival
rate of crashes:
                                       log(λ( / λ) ' &R γd % Y .                                  (16)


Finally, derivatives are priced as if equity followed the risk-neutral martingale

                              dS / S ' σd dZ ( % k (d N (& λ( dt)                                 (17)


where N ( is a jump counter with constant intensity λ( . The resulting (forward) option prices are
identical to the deterministic-jump special case of Bates (1991), given the geometric jump-diffusion.


2.2 Consistency with empirical anomalies
The homogeneous crash aversion model can explain some of the stylized facts from section 1. First,
unconditional bias in implied volatilities is explained by the potentially substantial divergence
                                                              2
between the risk-neutral instantaneous variance σ2 % λ( γd implicit in option prices, and the actual
                                  2
instantaneous variance σ2 % λ γd of log-differenced asset prices. Second, the difference between λ(
and λ is consistent with the observation in Bates (2000, pp. 220-1) and Jackwerth (2000, pp. 446-7)
of too few observed jumps over 1988-98 relative to the number predicted by stock index options.
The extra parameter Y permits greater divergence in λ( from λ than is feasible under standard para-
meterizations of power utility.


       To illustrate this, consider the following calibration: a stock market volatility σ = 15%
annually conditional upon no jumps, and adverse dividend news of γd ' &10% that arrives on
average once every four years ( λ ' .25 ). From equations (15) and (16), the equity premium and
crash insurance premium are
                                             µ . .025 R % .025 Y
                                                                                                  (18)
                                      ln (λ( / λ) ' .10 R %       Y
                                                      14

For R = 1 and Y = 1, the equity premium is 5%/year, while the jump risk λ( implicit in option prices
is three times that of the true jump risk. Thus, the crash aversion parameter Y is roughly as
important as relative risk aversion for the equity premium, but substantially more important for the
crash premium. Achieving the observed substantial disparity between λ( and λ using risk aversion
alone ( Y ' 0) would require levels of R that most would find unpalatable, and which would imply
an implausibly high equity premium.


         Since returns are i.i.d. under both the actual and risk-neutral distribution, the homogeneous-
agent model is not capable of capturing the dynamic anomalies discussed in section 1. The standard
results from regressing realized on implicit variance cannot be replicated here, because neither is
time-varying in this model. Were there a time-varying volatility component in the dividend news
process, however, the difference between λ( and λ would affect the intercept from such regressions
but could not explain why the slope estimate is less than 1. Second, the model cannot match the
                          (
observed tendency of λt to jump contemporaneously with substantial market drops. Finally, the
i.i.d. return structure implies that implicit distributions should rapidly converge towards
lognormality at longer maturities -- which does not accord with the maturity profile of the volatility
smirk.


         Furthermore, Jackwerth’s (2000) anomaly cannot be replicated under homogeneous crash
aversion. As discussed in Rosenberg and Engle (2000), Jackwerth’s implicit pricing kernel involves
the projection of the actual pricing kernel upon asset payoffs. E.g., stock index options with
terminal payoff V(St ) have an initial price
                                           E0 [η t V(St )]
                                    v0 '
                                                 η0
                                                      E0[η t * St ]                               (19)
                                       ' E0 V(St )
                                                           E0 [ηt ]
                                       / E0 [V(St ) M(St ) ] ,


where M(St ) has the usual properties of pricing kernels: it is nonnegative, and E0[ M(St ) ] ' 1 .


         It is shown in the appendix that for crash-averse preferences, this projection takes the form
                                                  15

                                                  &R   p St *λ e Y
                                 M(St ) ' κ(t) St                                                       (20)
                                                        p (St *λ )


where κ(t) is a function of time and p (St * λ) is the probability density function of St conditional
upon a jump intensity of λ over (0, t). Implicit relative risk aversion is given by &M lnM(S) / M ln S .
For Y ' 0 , one observes the strictly decreasing pricing kernel and constant relative risk aversion
associated with power utility. For Y > 0 , it is proven in the appendix that ln M(St ) is a strictly
decreasing function of ln St that is illustrated below in Figure 3. Thus, this pricing kernel cannot
replicate the negative implicit risk aversion (positive slope) estimated by Jackwerth (2000) and
Rosenberg and Engle (2000) for some values of St . However, crash-averse preferences can replicate
the higher implicit risk aversion (steeper negative slope) for low ln St values that was estimated by
those authors and by Aït-Sahalia and Lo (2000).




        Jackwerth (2000, p.446) conjectures that the negative risk aversion estimate may be
attributable to investors overestimating the crash risk relative to the observed ex post crash
frequency. Within this model, such overestimation is equivalent to a positive value of Y , and cannot
generate the required divergences between objective and risk-neutral distributions. In equilibrium
the equity premium (15) is also positively affected by Y, shifting the mode of the objective
                                               ln M(St)

                                                 2

                                              1.5

                                                 1

                                              0.5

                                                                                         ln(St / S0 )
               -0.3       -0.2       -0.1                     0.1       0.2        0.3

               Figure 3. Log of the implicit pricing kernel conditional upon
               realized returns. Calibration: t ' 1/12, σd ' .15, R ' Y ' 1,
               γd ' &.10, λ ' .25 .
                                                       16

distribution sufficiently to the right to preclude observing Jackwerth’s anomaly. Of course, there
could still be an anomalous disparity between the risk-neutral distribution and the estimate of the
objective distribution.


       Jackwerth’s exploration of whether the divergence between the risk-neutral and estimated
objective distributions is implausibly profitable is a separate issue. Within this framework, crash
aversion can generate investment opportunities with high Sharpe ratios.            For instance, the
instantaneous Sharpe ratio on writing crash insurance is
                             λ( dt & Et [1*d N ' 1 ]          (λ( & λ) dt
                                                       '
                                 Vart[1*d N ' 1]            λ dt (1 & λ dt)
                                                                                                 (21)
                                                         λ(
                                                       '    & 1
                                                         λ

which can be substantially larger than the instantaneous Sharpe ratio µ / σ2 % λ k 2 on equity given
investors’ aversion to this type of risk. The put selling strategies examined in Jackwerth implicitly
involve a portfolio that is instantaneously long equity and short crash insurance. Since adding a high
Sharpe ratio investment to a market investment must raise instantaneous Sharpe ratios, this model
is consistent with the substantial profitability of option-writing strategies reported in Jackwerth
(2000) and elsewhere.
                                                    17

3. Equilibrium in a heterogeneous-agent economy
As this model is dynamically complete, equilibrium in the heterogeneous-agent case can be
identified by examining an equivalent central planner’s problem in weighted utility functions. The
solution to that problem is Pareto-optimal, and can be attained by a competitive equilibrium for
traded assets in which all investors willingly hold market-clearing optimal portfolios given
equilibrium asset price evolution. Section 3.1 below outlines the central planner’s problem, while
Section 3.2 discusses the resulting asset market equilibrium. Section 3.3 identifies the supporting
individual wealth evolutions and associated portfolio allocations, and confirms the optimality of the
equilibrium. Section 3.4 discusses the implications for option prices, while Section 3.5 compares
the equilibrium with the stylized facts discussed above in Section 1.


3.1 The central planner’s problem
Under homogeneous beliefs about state probabilities, the central planner’s problem of maximizing
a weighted average of expected state-dependent utilities is equivalent to constructing a representa-
tive state-dependent utility function in terminal wealth (Constantinides 1982, Lemma 2):
                                                                  1& R
                 U(WT , NT ; ω) / max j ωY f ( NT )  Y
                                                               WY T      & 1
                                                                                , R>0
                                 {WYT} Y                           1& R
                                                                                                (22)
                 subject to WT ' j WY T , WY T $ 0 œ Y
                                     Y

for fixed weights ω / {ωY } that depend upon the initial wealth allocation in a fashion determined
below in Section 3.3. Since the individual marginal utility functions UW (WYT , NT ; Y ) ' %4 at
WY T ' 0 and the horizon is finite, the individual no-bankruptcy constraints WYT $ 0 are non-binding
and can be ignored. Optimizing the Lagrangian
                                                   1& R

                             j ωY f ( N T )                   % ηT WT & j WYT
                                         Y
                                              WYT & 1
                   max                                                                          (23)
                  {WYT }, ηT Y                     1& R                         Y



yields a terminal state-dependent wealth allocation
                                             WYT           [ωY f Y(NT )]1 / R
                         wY (NT , T ; ω) /          '
                                                          j [ωY f (NT )]
                                             WT                  Y      1/R                     (24)
                                                          Y


and a Lagrangian multiplier
                                                                   18
                                                                                        R

                                                           j ωY f (NT )
                                                                                    1
                                            &R                            Y
                                   ηT '    WT                                       R

                                                             Y                                      (25)
                                                  &R
                                       / WT f (NT ; ω)


where f is a CES-weighted average of individual crash aversion functions f Y ’s. The Lagrangian
multiplier ηT ' UW (WT , NT ; ω) is the shadow value of terminal wealth, and therefore determines
the pricing kernel when evaluated at WT ' DT . From the first-order condition to (23), all individual
terminal marginal utilities of wealth are directly proportional to the multiplier:
                                                                              ηT
                                       UW (WYT , NT ; Y ) '                         .               (26)
                                                                              ωY


3. 2 Asset market equilibrium
As in equations (7) above, the pricing kernel ηT / ηt can be used to price all assets. That asset
market equilibrium depends critically upon expectations of average crash aversion. Define
                       g(Nt , t; λN ) / Et f (Nt % ñ) * λN
                                                                                                    (27)
                                       ' j
                                                    e &λN (T & t)[λN (T & t) ]n
                                                                                f (Nt % n)
                                           n                      n!


as the conditional expectation of f (NT ) given jump intensity λN over (t, T ] for future jumps
ñ / NT & Nt . It is shown in the appendix that the resulting asset pricing equations are
                                           κη (T & t )            &R                &R γd
                                  ηt ' e                   Dt g Nt , t, λ e                         (28)
                                                                                 (1& R) γd
                                  St           κS (T & t )       g Nt , t, λ e
                                       'e
                                  Dt                             g Nt , t, λ e
                                                                                 &R γd
                                                                                                    (29)
                                               κS (T & t )
                                       / e                       m(Nt , t)

                                                                                            &R γd
                              (                        &Rγd        g Nt % 1 , t, λ e
                            λ (Nt , t) ' λ e                                                        (30)
                                                                                        &R γd
                                                                       g Nt , t, λ e


                              2            &Rγd
where κη ' &Rµd % ½ R 2 σd % λ (e                   & 1) ,
                              2          &R γd         γ
and     κS ' µd % (½ & R) σd % λ e               (e d & 1) .
                                                        19

        The equilibrium equity price follows a jump-diffusion of the form

                        dS
                           ' µ(Nt , t) dt % σd dZ % k(Nt , t) (d N & λ dt)                         (31)
                         S

where
                                                  dS dη
                           µ(Nt ,t ) ' &Et
                                                   S η                                             (32)
                                              2
                                       '   R σd   % [λ & λ((Nt , t) ] k(Nt , t)

and
                                                        γd   m[Nt % 1, t]
                                  1 % k(Nt , t) ' e                                                (33)
                                                               m[Nt , t]


for m[N, t ] defined above in equation (29). The risk-neutral price process follows a martingale of
the form
                             dS               (               (
                                ' σd dZ % k(Nt , t) [d N ( & λt dt ]                               (34)
                              S
                                                                                      (   (
for N ( a risk-neutral jump counter with instantaneous jump intensity λt (Nt , t) , the functional form
of which is given above in equation (30).


        Several features of the equilibrium are worth emphasizing. First, conditional upon no jumps
the asset price follows a diffusion similar to Dt -- i.e., with identical and constant instantaneous
volatility σd . This property reflects the assumption of common relative risk aversion R, and would
not hold in general under alternate utility specifications or heterogeneous risk aversion. A further
implication discussed below is that all investors hold identical equity positions.


        Second, the equilibrium price process and crash insurance premium depend critically upon
the heterogeneity of agents. This is simplest to illustrate in the unitary risk aversion case, for which
equilibrium values can be expressed directly in terms of the weighted distribution of individual crash
aversions. Define pseudo-probabilities
                                                             &γd
                                     ωY exp[Y Nt % λ e          (T & t) (e Y & 1) ]
                        πY t /
                                 j ωY exp[Y Nt % λ e
                                                               &γd                                 (35)
                                                                   (T & t) (e Y & 1) ]
                                 Y
                                                        20

as the weight assigned to investors of type Y at time t, and define cross-sectional average ECS (C) ,
variance VarCS (C) , and covariance with respect to those weights. It is shown in the appendix that
the asset market equilibrium takes the form
                                    (
                                ln(λt / λ) ' &R γd % ln ECS e Y
                                                                                                         (36)
                                          . &R γd % ECS Y % ½ VarCS [Y ]

                  ln(St / Dt)                           Y                              &γd     γ
                                 ' &κs % ln ECS e Φ(e       & 1)
                                                                   * Φ ' λ (T & t) e         (e d & 1)
                     T& t                                                                                (37)
                                                   2               &γd       Y   γd
                                 . µd &   (R & ½) σd   % λe              ECS e (e &1)

                                                       &γd
                            ln(1 % kt) . γd 1 % λ e          (T & t) CovCS Y, e Y .                      (38)



          To a first-order approximation, jump insurance premia in (36) and equity prices in (37)
replicate the homogeneous-agent equilibria, using average values for Y and e Y , respectively.
However, heterogeneity introduces second- and higher-order effects, as well, depending upon the
dispersion of agents. In particular, the size of log equity jumps ln (1 % kt ) in (33) and (38) can be
substantially magnified relative to the dividend signal γd when there is substantial heterogeneity in
agents.


          Figure 4 below illustrates these impacts in the case of only two types of agents, conditional
upon the initial wealth distribution and its impact on social weights ω (given below in equation
(41)) and conditional upon an adverse dividend shock γd ' &.03 . The impact of small dividend
announcements upon jumps in log equity prices is greatest in the central areas of wealth distribution.
The substantial divergence of preferences in the center implies greater trading of crash insurance,
and more substantial wealth redistribution and shifts in the investment opportunity set conditional
upon a jump. The result is that a modest 3% drop in the dividend signal can induce a 3% to 18%
drop in the log price of equity! As indicated in Table 2 below, this magnification is also present for
alternate values of the risk aversion parameter R.
                                                     21


                                        (                                &R γd
       The crash insurance rate λt is always between the λ e                     value of the crash-tolerant
                                   Y & R γd
investors ( Y ' 0 ), and the λ e              value of the crash-averse investors. Its value depends
monotonically upon the relative weights of the two types of investors, and is biased upward relative
to the wealth-weighted average by the variance term in equation (36). The equity premium µ varies
somewhat with the magnitude of crash risk, in a non-monotonic fashion.


       A final observation is that the asset market equilibrium depends upon the number of jumps
Nt , and is consequently nonstationary. This is an almost unavoidable feature of equilibrium models
with a fixed number of heterogeneous agents. Heterogeneity implies agents have different portfolio
allocations, implying their relative wealth weights and the resulting asset market equilibrium depend




 Table 2. Average log jump size ln (1 % kt ) conditional upon initial wealth allocation
 w1 ' W1(0) / W(0) and risk aversion R. Calibration: σ ' .20 , λ ' .25 , γd ' &.03 , T ' 50 .

      ln (1 % kt ) given:                                         R
           w1                         .5              1            2                  4           8
             0                     -.030            -.030        -.030              -.030       -.030
                .0001              -.030            -.030        -.030              -.030       -.030
                .001               -.032            -.032        -.030              -.030       -.030
                .01                -.052            -.045        -.036              -.031       -.030
                .1                 -.157            -.136        -.090              -.044       -.034
                .2                 -.189            -.178        -.135              -.061       -.038
                .3                 -.187            -.189        -.163              -.079       -.043
                .4                 -.171            -.183        -.177              -.097       -.048
                .5                 -.149            -.166        -.178              -.114       -.053
                .6                 -.125            -.144        -.169              -.128       -.059
                .7                 -.101            -.118        -.149              -.135       -.066
                .8                 -.076            -.090        -.119              -.129       -.072
                .9                 -.053            -.060        -.079              -.096       -.065
                .99                -.032            -.033        -.035              -.035       -.033
                .999               -.030            -.030        -.030              -.030       -.030
             1                     -.030            -.030        -.030              -.030       -.030
                                                      22

       Figure 4: Impact of initial relative wealth share w1 ' W1(0) / W(0) upon initial
 equilibrium quantities. Two agents, with crash aversion Y ' 0, 1 , respectively. Calibration:
 σ ' .20 , λ ' .25 , γd ' &.03 ; R ' 1, T ' 50, t ' 0 .
                                                                           (
           Log jump size ln(1 % kt )                       Crash premium λt / λ
                                                           2.75
                0.2      0.4     0.6    0.8           1
 -0.025                                                     2.5
  -0.05
                                                           2.25
 -0.075
                                                              2
   -0.1
                                                           1.75
 -0.125
                                                            1.5
  -0.15
 -0.175                                                    1.25


                                                                    0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8     1

                                              (
           Equity premium µt ' R σ2 % (λ & λt ) kt

  0.08


  0.07


  0.06


  0.05



               0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8        1



upon the nonstationary outcome of asset price evolution.10 In this model, the number of jumps Nt
and time t are proxies for wealth distribution. Crashes redistribute wealth towards the more crash-
averse, making the representative agent more crash-averse. An absence of crashes has the opposite
effect through the payment of crash insurance premia.




          10
         See Dumas (1989) and Wang (1996) for examples of the predominantly nonstationary
impact of heterogeneity in a diffusion context. An interesting exception is Chen and Kogan (2001),
who show that external habit formation preferences can induce stationarity in an exchange economy
with heterogeneous agents.
                                                                    23

3.3 Supporting wealth evolution and portfolio choice
An investor’s wealth at any time t can be viewed as the value (or cost) of a contingent claim that
pays off the investor’s share of terminal wealth WT ' DT conditional upon the number of jumps:
                                           η̃T
                     WY (t) ' Et                 D̃T wY (NT , T; ω)
                                           ηt
                                                                     1/R Y N T / R
                                                                    ωY e                              (1& R) γd
                                           Et f (NT ; ω)                                       * λe
                                                               j
                                                                      1/R Y N / R                                 (39)
                                                                     ωY e T
                                                                Y
                               ' St
                                                                                   (1& R) γd
                                                        Et f (NT ; ω) * λ e
                               / St wY (Nt , t; ω) ,


see equation (A.16) in the appendix for details. The quantity wY ( Nt, t ; ω) is the current share of
current total wealth W(t) ' St , and appropriately sums to 1 across all investors. The weights ω of
the social utility function are implicitly identified up to an arbitrary factor of proportionality by the
initial wealth distribution:
                      wY*t ' 0 ' wY ( 0, 0 ; ω)
                                                  1/R    Y NT / R                 1&       1
                                                                                                      (1& R) γd
                                                                                                                  (40)
                                 ' κ E0 ωY e                        f (NT ; ω)             R
                                                                                               * λe

                               (1& R) γd
for κ / E0 f (NT ; ω) * λ e                . In the R ' 1 case the mapping between ω and the initial wealth
distribution is explicit, and takes the form
                                                                            Y
                                            wY*t ' 0 ' κ ωY e λ T (e            & 1)
                                                                                       .                          (41)



        The investment strategy that dynamically replicates the evolution of WY (t) can be identified
using positions in equity and crash insurance that mimic the diffusion- and jump-contingent
evolution:
                                                        24


                                 MWY (St , Nt , t)
                       XY '                          ' wY (Nt , t; ω)
                                       MS
                       QY ' [∆WY & NS ∆ S ]dN ' 1                                                (42)

                           ' S(1 % kt )[wY (Nt % 1, t, ω) & wY (Nt , t, ω) ] .



where kt ' k(Nt , t) is the percentage jump size in the equity price given above in equations (33) and
(38). Thus, each investor holds XY ' WY (t) / St shares of equity (i.e., is 100% invested in equity),
and holds a relative crash insurance position of
                                  QY (t)                  wY (Nt % 1, t; ω)
                      qY (t) /              ' (1 % kt )                       & 1 .              (43)
                                  WY (t)                     wY (Nt , t; ω)


The wealth-weighted aggregate crash insurance positions jY wY (Nt , t ; ω) qY (t) appropriately sum
to 0.


        Figure 5 below graphs the individual crash insurance demands (q0 , q1 ) given crash aversions
Y ' 0 and 1, respectively, conditional upon the initial wealth allocation w1 ' W1(0) / W(0) and its




              1.5
                          Crash-averse investors’ q1
                 1


              0.5
                        Total demand w1 q1


                              0.2            0.4             0.6          0.8         1 w1

            -0.5        Crash-tolerant investors’ q0

            Figure 5. Equilibrium crash insurance positions and
            aggregate demand for crash insurance, as a function of
            w1 ' W1(0) / W(0) . Calibration is the same as in Figure 4.
                                                  25
                            (
impact upon equilibrium (λt , kt ) . The aggregate demand for crash insurance w1 q1 is also graphed,
using the same calibration as in Figure 4 above. At w1 ' 0 , crash-tolerant investors (Y ' 0) set a
                                        (       &γd
relatively low market-clearing price λt ' λ e         and sell little insurance. Crash-averse investors
                                                                                                     (
(Y ' 1) insure heavily individually, but are a negligible fraction of the market. As w1 increases, λt
does as well (see Figure 4 above) and the crash insurance positions of both investors decline.
Aggregate crash insurance volumes are heaviest in the central regions where both types of investors
are well represented. As w1 approaches 1, the high price of crash insurance induces crash-tolerant
investors to write contracts that will cost them 60% of their wealth conditional upon a crash.


3.3.1 Optimality
The individual’s investment strategy yields a terminal wealth WYT , and an associated terminal
marginal utility of wealth UW (WYT , NT ; Y ) that (from equation (26)) is proportional to the
Lagrangian multiplier ηT that prices all assets. Therefore, no investor has an incentive to perturb
his investment strategy given equilibrium asset prices and price processes. Furthermore, as noted
above, the markets for equity and crash insurance clear, so the markets are in equilibrium. Since
all individual state-dependent marginal utilities are proportional at expiration, the market is
effectively complete. All investors agree on the price of all Arrow-Debreu securities, so their
introduction would not affect the equilibrium.


3.3.2 Comparison with myopic investment strategies
The equilibrium asset price evolution in Section 3.2 involves considerable and stochastic evolution
over time of the instantaneous investment opportunity set. Since Merton (1973), hedging against
such shifts has been identified as the key distinction between static and dynamic asset market
equilibria. As there are conflicting results even in a diffusion setting as to the quantitative
importance of such hedging,11 and as there has been little exploration of the issue in a jump-diffusion
context, a comparison with the myopic investment strategies characteristic of static equilibria may




       11
          Campbell and Viceira (1999) and Campbell, Rodriguez and Viceira (2001) find substantial
hedging against stochastic shifts in expected returns, while Chacko and Viceira (1999) find little
hedging against stochastic volatility. The two approaches diverge in the specification and
calibration of shifts in the investment opportunity set.
                                                     26

be useful. Furthermore, myopic strategies are optimal when investors have unitary risk aversion
( R ' 1 ), or when returns are i.i.d. -- e.g., in the case of investor homogeneity.


          The myopic portfolio allocation is defined as the position that maximizes terminal expected
utility
                                                                    1& R
                                                            Y NT   WT      &1
                             J(Wt , Nt , t) / max Et e                                           (44)
                                                                    1&R


conditional upon assuming instantaneous investment opportunities will remain unchanged at the
current level over the investor’s lifetime. Those opportunities are summarized by the instantaneous
cost of crash insurance λ( , and the price process

                                dS / S ' µ dt % σ dZ % k (dN & λ dt) .


No assumption are made at this stage regarding the values of (µ, k, λ( ) .


It is shown in the appendix that the myopic investor will choose constant portfolio proportions
                                              1
                                x myopic '        µ % (λ( & λ) k
                                                2
                                             Rσ
                                                     1                                           (46)
                                              λe Y
                                q myopic '           R
                                                          & (1 % w ( k)
                                               λ(
where x / St X / W is the portfolio share in equity, and
          q / Q / W is the number of insurance contracts as a fraction of overall wealth.
If investors are homogeneous, the market-clearing conditions (x myopic, q myopic) ' (1, 0) yield the
equilibrium and time-invariant (µ, λ() given above in equations (11) and (15). The above myopic
                                                                           (
portfolio weights are also optimal under time-varying (µt , kt , λt ) when R ' 1 , but not for general
R.


          The myopic portfolio allocation equations (46) indicate that equity and crash insurance are
complements when jumps are negative ( k < 0 ). An increase in the price of crash insurance λ(
lowers the demand for both equity and crash insurance, while an increase in the expected excess
return µ on equity raises both. The equations also indicate that myopic crash insurance positions
                                                  27

but not equity positions are directly affected by the investor’s idiosyncratic crash aversion parameter
Y . Furthermore, at the equilibrium equity premium (32), myopic investors duplicate the optimal
investment strategy of holding 100% in equity, and diverge from that optimum only in their holdings
of crash insurance.


       Table 3 compares the optimal and myopic crash insurance strategies at the equilibrium values
          (
for (kt , λt ) resulting from various initial wealth allocations and risk aversion. The two strategies
are broadly similar across different asset market equilibria, and are identical either when risk
aversion R ' 1 , or when a preponderance of one type of individual ( W1(t) / W(t) = 0 or 1) yields a
homogeneous-agent equilibrium with a time-invariant investment opportunity set.


       The table indicates that a myopic strategy can be a poor approximation to the optimal
strategy in other cases. The divergence is most pronounced for the large positions achieved under
low levels of risk aversion (R ' ½) , but is also present for larger R values. For instance, when
crash-tolerant and crash-averse investors are equally represented ( W1 / W = ½) and R = 2, a 3%
adverse dividend shock will induce a 17.8% stock market crash (from Table 2). The crash-averse
buy crash insurance contracts from the crash-tolerant that pay off 36.5% of current wealth
                                                       myopic   myopic
conditional on a crash. The myopic positions (q0            , q1     ) = (-16.9%, 26.4%) in Table 3
substantially understate the magnitude of those optimal insurance positions.
                                                    28

Table 3. Optimal and myopic crash insurance positions, at equilibrium asset prices determined by
idiosyncratic crash aversions Y ' 0, 1 , initial wealth allocation w1 ' W1(0) / W(0) , and common risk
aversion R. Equilibrium values for ln (1 % kt ) and parameter values are in Table 2 above. Entries indicate
the payoff of insurance positions conditional on a crash, as a fraction of investor’s wealth.

                    Crash aversion Y ' 0 ; R =                       Crash aversion Y ' 1 ; R =
   w1
             0.5          1      2        4         8         0.5       1         2        4         8
                      (
 Optimal positions qY
 0.0         .000     .000      .000     .000      .000      6.200    1.667      .630     .276      .129
  .0001      .000     .000      .000     .000      .000      1.852    1.667      .652     .276      .129
  .001      -.002    -.002     -.001     .000      .000      1.773    1.660      .793     .277      .129
  .01       -.017    -.016     -.011    -.003     -.001      1.648    1.598     1.134     .299      .131
  .1        -.128    -.128     -.119    -.062     -.017      1.148    1.152     1.069     .557      .152
  .2        -.215    -.214     -.205    -.140     -.045       .858     .856      .822     .559      .179
  .3        -.285    -.282     -.270    -.204     -.080       .666     .657      .629     .477      .187
  .4        -.347    -.339     -.321    -.255     -.115       .520     .509      .482     .382      .173
  .5        -.402    -.391     -.365    -.293     -.145       .402     .391      .365     .293      .145
  .6        -.452    -.440     -.405    -.322     -.166       .301     .293      .270     .214      .111
  .7        -.499    -.485     -.444    -.341     -.177       .214     .208      .190     .146      .076
  .8        -.542    -.529     -.482    -.352     -.175       .136     .132      .121     .088      .044
  .9        -.584    -.572     -.518    -.345     -.153       .065     .064      .058     .038      .017
  .99       -.629    -.609     -.497    -.241     -.118       .006     .006      .005     .002      .001
  .999      -.651    -.613     -.418    -.217     -.114       .001     .001      .000     .000      .000
 1.0        -.839    -.613     -.382    -.215     -.114       .000     .000      .000     .000      .000
                     myopic
 Myopic positions qY
 0.0         .000     .000      .000     .000      .000      6.200    1.667      .630     .276      .129
  .0001      .000     .000      .000     .000      .000      6.195    1.667      .629     .276      .129
  .001      -.004    -.002     -.001     .000      .000      6.153    1.660      .628     .275      .129
  .01       -.041    -.016     -.007    -.002     -.001      5.764    1.598      .615     .272      .128
  .1        -.284    -.128     -.056    -.028     -.010      3.362    1.152      .500     .236      .117
  .2        -.429    -.214     -.091    -.051     -.021      2.122     .856      .418     .201      .104
  .3        -.522    -.282     -.117    -.066     -.032      1.440     .657      .358     .178      .091
  .4        -.592    -.339     -.142    -.073     -.041      1.012     .509      .309     .164      .080
  .5        -.648    -.391     -.169    -.077     -.048       .717     .391      .264     .154      .071
  .6        -.695    -.440     -.199    -.080     -.053       .501     .293      .220     .147      .066
  .7        -.737    -.485     -.234    -.087     -.055       .334     .208      .173     .137      .062
  .8        -.774    -.529     -.275    -.103     -.058       .201     .132      .122     .117      .058
  .9        -.808    -.572     -.324    -.142     -.072       .092     .064      .065     .075      .043
  .99       -.836    -.609     -.376    -.209     -.110       .008     .006      .007     .006      .004
  .999      -.839    -.613     -.381    -.214     -.114       .001     .001      .001     .001      .000
 1.0        -.839    -.613     -.382    -.215     -.114       .000     .000      .000     .000      .000
                                                           29

3.4 Option markets
3.4.1 Option prices
At time 0, European call options of maturity t are priced at expected terminal value weighted by
the pricing kernel:
                                                          ηt
                                    c(S0 , t; X ) ' E0          max(St & X, 0)
                                                          η0                                      (47)
                                                       (
                                                  /   E0 [ max(St        & X, 0) ] .


Conditional upon Nt jumps over (0, t ] , ηt and St have a joint lognormal distribution that reflects
their common dependency on Dt given above in equations (28) and (29). Consequently, it is shown
in the appendix that the risk-neutral distribution for St is a weighted mixture of lognormals,
implying European call option prices are a weighted average of Black-Scholes-Merton prices:

                              c(S0 , t; X ) ' j wN c BS(S0 , t; X, bN , r ' 0 )
                                                      (

                                              N

                                          ' j wN S0 e
                                                      (        bN t                               (48)
                                                                      N(d1N ) & X N(d2N )
                                              N
                 &R γd
where λN / λ e            ,
          (    e &λN t(λN t)N g(N, t; λN)
        wN /                              ,
                    N!        g(0, 0; λN)
                      γ
        bN ' &λN(e d & 1) % n γd % ln [m(N, t) / m(0,0)] / t ,
                                                  2
        d1N ' [ln (S0 / X ) % bN t % ½ σd t ] / σd t and
        d2N ' d 1N & σd t .
Put prices can be computed from call prices using put-call parity:
                                    p(S0, t, X ) ' c(S0, t, X ) % X & S0.                         (49)


       Since jumps are always negative, the distribution of log-differenced equity prices implicit
in option prices is always negatively skewed. The maturity profile of implicit skewness is quite
sensitive to the initial distribution of wealth, given the nonmonotonic dependency of ln(1 % kt ) on
wealth distribution shown above in Table 2 and Figure 4. For small values of w1 , a second jump
will be larger than the first. The increasing probability of multiple jumps at longer maturities causes
implicit skewness to fall slower than the 1 / t rate of i.i.d. returns, implying slower flattening out
                                                   30


                           -0.02                          w1 ' .8
                           -0.04

                           -0.06

                           -0.08


                                        0.2      0.4      0.6       0.8       1
                           -0.12
                                                                    w1 ' .1
                           Figure 6. Annualized risk-neutral skewness
                           Skew[t] × t , as a function of t.



of the implicit volatility smirk. For larger values of w1 the size of sequential jump sizes is reversed,
and implicit skewness can fall faster than the 1 / t rate of i.i.d. returns; see Figure 6.


        However, model-specific estimates from option prices such as in Table 1 above indicate that
implicit Skew [t] (rather than Skew [t] × t ) is roughly flat across option maturities t. This stylized
fact appears common to a broad array of futures options, as indicated in the Tompkins (2000) survey
of volatility smiles and smirks.12 Thus, although Bates (2000) argues that stochastic implicit jump
             (
intensities λt are needed to match the volatility smirk at longer maturities, it does not appear that
                                   (
the stochastic variation of (λt , kt ) in this model generates the correct maturity profile of implicit
skewness.


3.4.1 Option replication and dynamic completion of the markets
Options can be dynamically replicated using positions in equity and crash insurance. Instanta-
neously, each call option has a price c(St , Nt , t ) , and can be viewed as an instantaneous bundle of cS
units of equity risk, and [∆c & cS ∆ S ]dN ' 1 > 0 units of crash insurance.



        12
         Tompkins examines implicit volatility patterns from various countries’ futures options on
currency, stock index, bonds and interest rates, with the moneyness dimension appropriately scaled
by maturity-specific volatility estimates from at-the-money options. He finds some maturity
variation in implicit volatility patterns, but not much by comparison with the strong inverse pattern
predicted by i.i.d. returns.
                                                  31

       This equivalence between options and crash insurance indicates how investors replicate the
optimal positions of section 3.3 dynamically using the call and/or put options actually available.
Crash-averse investors choose an equity/options bundle with unitary delta overall and positive
gamma (e.g., hold 1½ stocks and buy one at-the-money put option), while crash-tolerant investors
take offsetting positions that also possess unitary delta (e.g., hold ½ stock, and write 1 put option).
Equity and option positions are adjusted in a mutually acceptable and offsetting fashion over time,
conditional upon the arrival of dividend news.


       A further implication is that the crash-tolerant investors who write options actively delta-
                                                                                                  (
hedge their exposure, which is consistent with the observed practice of option market makers. As λt / λ
increases (e.g., because of wealth transfers to the crash-averse from crashes) , the market makers
respond to the more favorable prices by writing more options as a proportion of their wealth.13 They
simultaneously adjust their equity positions to maintain their overall target delta of 1. This strategy
is equivalent to market makers putting their personal wealth in an index fund, and fully delta-
hedging every index option they write.


3.5 Consistency with empirical option pricing anomalies
The heterogeneous-agent model explains unconditional deviations between risk-neutral and
objective distributions analogously to the homogeneous-agent model. The divergence in the jump
            (
intensity λt implicit in options and the true jump frequency λ can reconcile the average divergence
between risk-neutral and objective variance, and between the predicted and observed frequency of
jumps over 1988-98. The heterogeneous-agent model can also be somewhat more consistent with
the maturity profile of implicit skewness than the homogeneous-agent model, although still appears
inadequate relative to observed patterns.


       The advantage of the heterogeneous-agent model is that it can explain some of the
                                                                     (
conditional divergences as well. First, the stochastic evolution of λt is qualitatively consistent with
                                                                         (
the evolution of jump intensity proxy V1 shown above in Figure 2. λt depends directly upon the



       13
         As indicated above in Figure 4, the total volume (open interest) in crash insurance and
therefore in options can either rise or fall as the wealth distribution varies.
                                                    32

relative wealth distribution, which in turn follows a pure jump process given above in (40) for the R ' 1
                                                                (
case. Consequently, market jumps cause sharp increases in λt , while an absence of jumps generates
                      (
geometric decay in λt towards the lower level of crash-tolerant investors.


        Figure 7 below illustrates the resulting evolution of instantaneous risk-neutral variance
         ( 2
( R σ2 % λt γt ) conditional on the five major shocks over 1988-98, and conditional on starting with
w1 = .1 at end-1987. This behavior is qualitatively similar to the actual impact of jumps on overall
variance and on jump risk shown above in Figure 2. However, the absence of major shocks over
1992-96 and the resulting wealth accumulation by crash-tolerant investors/option market makers
implies that the shocks of 1997 and 1998 should not have had the major impact that was in fact
observed.


        It is possible the heterogeneous model can explain the results from ISD regressions as well.
The analysis is complicated by the fact that instantaneous objective and risk-neutral variance are
nonstationary, with a nonlinear cointegrating relationship from their common dependency on the
nonstationary variable Nt :




                      0.06
                   0.0575
                     0.055
                   0.0525
                      0.05
                   0.0475
                     0.045
                   0.0425

                                      2         4         6         8        10
                   Figure 7. Simulated instantaneous risk-neutral variance
                           ( 2
                   R σ2 % λt γt conditional upon jump timing matching that
                   observed over 1988-98. Calibration: w1 (0) ' 10% ; i.e.,
                   crash-averse investors own 10% of total wealth at end-
                   1987.
                                                               33
                                                                        2
                                    Vart[d ln S] ' [σ2 % λ γt ] dt
                                         (                                             2                                 (50)
                                   Vart [d ln S] ' [σ2 % λ((Nt , t) γt ] dt



                                     (
for γt / ln [1 % k (Nt , t)] and λt > λ . It is not immediately clear whether regressing realized on
implied volatility is meaningful under nonlinear cointegration. However, the fact that implicit
variance does contain information for objective variance but is biased upwards suggests that running
this sort of regression on post-’87 data would yield the usual informative-but-biased results reported
above in equation (2), with estimated slope coefficients less than 1 in sample.


        It does not appear that the heterogeneous-agent model can explain the implicit pricing kernel
puzzle. Using the same projection as in (19) above , the projected pricing kernel is

                                                               jN ' 0 wN p (St * N )
                                                                    4         ((
                                  E0 [ηt * St ]           &R
                   M(St ) /                       '   κ St                           where
                                        η0                            p (St )
                                                                                                 (1 & R ) γd             (51)
                       e   &λ t
                             (λ t)  N
                                      ((                  wN m(N, t)R g N, t, λ e
                wN '               , wN '                                                                            .
                                                      jN ' 0
                             N!                        4                           R
                                                               wN m(N, t) g N, t, λ e
                                                                                                       (1 & R ) γd



As illustrated in Figure 8, this implicit pricing kernel appears to be a strictly decreasing function of St
-- in contrast to the locally positive sections estimated in Jackwerth (2000) and Rosenberg and Engle
(2000). However, the above implicit kernel can replicate those studies’ high implicit risk aversion


                                                      ln E0 [ηt * ∆ st ]

                                                           0.6

                                                           0.4

                                                           0.2


                             -0.3        -0.2     -0.1                      0.1            0.2       0.3       ∆st
                                                          -0.2


                             Figure 8. Log of the implicit pricing kernel
                             conditional upon realized asset returns.
                             Calibration: w1 ' .3, t ' 1/12 .
                                                   34

for large negative returns, as indicated by the slope of the line in Figure 8 for ∆ s in the -10% to
-20% ranges.


4. Summary and conclusions
This paper has proposed a modified utility specification, labeled “crash aversion,” to explain the
observed tendency of post-’87 stock index options to overpredict realized volatility and jump risk.
Furthermore, the paper has developed a complete-markets methodology that permits identification
of asset market equilibria and associated investment strategies in the presence of jumps and investor
heterogeneity. The assumption of heterogeneity appears to have stronger consequences than
observed with diffusion models. Jumps can cause substantial reallocation of wealth, and the
resulting shifts in the investment opportunity set can be substantial. Small announcement effects
regarding the terminal value of the market can have substantially magnified instantaneous price
impacts when investors are heterogeneous.


          The model has been successful in explaining some of the stylized facts from stock index
options markets. The specification of crash aversion is compatible with the tendency of option
prices to overpredict volatility and jump risk, while heterogeneity of agents offers an explanation
of the stochastic evolution of implicit jump risk and implicit volatilities. In this model, the two are
higher immediately after market drops not because of higher objective risk of future jumps (as
predicted by affine models), but because crash-related wealth redistribution has increased average
crash aversion. Crash aversion is also consistent with the implicit pricing kernel approach’s
assessment of high implicit risk aversion at low wealth levels, although the approach cannot
replicate the locally risk-loving behavior reported in Jackwerth (2000) and Rosenberg and Engle
(2000).


          While motivated by empirical option price regularities, the model in the paper is not suitable
for direct estimation. First, jump risk is not the only risk spanned in the options markets. Stochastic
variations in conditional volatility occur more frequently, and are also important to option market
makers.      Second, the nonstationary equilibrium derived here and characteristic of most
heterogeneous-agent models hinders estimation. The purpose of the paper is to provide a framework
                                                  35

for exploring the trading of jump risk through the options markets, as an initial model of the option
market making process.


       The framework in this paper can be expanded in various ways. For simplicity, this paper has
focused on deterministic jumps and an “external” crash aversion specification insensitive to the
impact of crashes upon individual wealth. Extending the model to random jumps and/or “internal”
crash aversion should be relatively straightforward, although feedback effects in the latter case could
require additional restrictions to achieve an equilibrium. A particularly interesting extension could
be to explore the implications of portfolio constraints on positions in options and/or jump insurance.
Selling crash insurance requires writing calls or puts -- a strategy that individual investors cannot
easily pursue. Further research will examine the impact of such constraints upon equilibria in equity
and options markets.
                                                               36

                                                  Appendix
Section A.1 of the appendix prices assets when agents are heterogeneous. Section A.2 derives the
myopic investment strategies. Section A.3 derives the objective and risk-neutral probability density
functions under heterogeneity. Section A.4 derives properties of the implicit pricing kernel under
homogeneous and heterogeneous agents.


A.1 Asset market equilibrium in a heterogeneous-agent economy (Section 3.2)
Lemma: If the log-dividend dt / ln Dt follows the jump-diffusion given above in equation (3) and
h(NT ) is an arbitrary function, then
                                                                2              m γd
              m                   m   (T & t) [mµd % ½ m 2 σd % λ ( e                 & 1) ]                          m γd
         Et DT h(NT ) * λ ' Dt e                                                               Et h (Nt % ñ ) * λe          (A.1)

where Et [C * λ] denotes expectations conditional upon a jump intensity λ over (t, T ] .


Proof:
               m              m
         Et DT h(NT ) ' Dt Et e m ∆ d h(NT )
                                             ˜
                                        m (∆ d*
                              m                n'0 % ñ γd )
                         ' Dt Et e                              h(Nt % ñ )
                                                     2
                              m    τ [mµd % ½ m 2 σd ]              m ñ γd
                         ' Dt e                          Et e                 h(Nt % ñ )
                                                                                                                             (A.2)
                                                                                      m γd n

                                                         j
                                                           4
                              m
                                                     2
                                   τ [mµd % ½ m 2 σd ]              e &λτ λ e
                         ' Dt e                                                                 h(Nt % n )
                                                         n'0              n!
                                                           2            m γd
                              m    (T & t) [mµd % ½ m 2 σd % λ ( e             & 1) ]                           m γd
                         ' Dt e                                                          Et h (Nt % ñ ) * λe           .

where τ / T & t . 


The asset pricing equations (28)-(30) follow directly from the lemma:
                             ηt ' E t ηT
                                             &R
                                  ' Et DT         f (NT )
                                        &R    κη (T & t)                                 &Rγd                                (A.3)
                                  ' Dt e                   Et f (NT ) *λ e
                                        &R    κη (T & t)                         &Rγd
                                  / Dt e                   g Nt , t; λ e
                                                                      37

                                              E t D T ηT
                                    St '
                                                      ηt
                                                        1& R
                                              Et DT              f (NT )
                                        '
                                                           &R
                                               Et DT            f (NT )
                                                                                          (1& R)γd    (A.4)
                                                      κS (T & t)   Et f (NT ) *λ e
                                        ' Dt e
                                                                                           &Rγd
                                                                    Et f (NT ) *λ e
                                                                                    (1& R)γd
                                                      κS (T & t)   g Nt , t; λ e
                                        / Dt e
                                                                                     &Rγd
                                                                    g Nt , t; λ e

                                (           ηt *jump
                              λt ' λ
                                               ηt
                                                  γ                                 &Rγd
                                        (Dt e d )&R Et f (NT ) *λ e                        , Nt % 1
                                    '
                                                      &R                           &Rγd               (A.5)
                                                  Dt Et f (NT ) *λ e                      , Nt
                                                                            &Rγd
                                          &R γd       g Nt % 1, t; λ e
                                    ' e
                                                                           &Rγd
                                                       g Nt , t; λ e



                                                                                               2
for κη ' &Rµd % ½ R 2 σ2 % λ (e &Rγ & 1) and κS ' (µd % ½ σd) & R σ2 % λ e &Rγ(e γ & 1) .


In the special case R ' 1 and for arbitrary λN ,
                          g(Nt , t, λN ) / Et f (NT ) * λN

                                            ' E t j ωY e
                                                                     Y NT
                                                                            * λN                      (A.6)
                                                           Y

                                            ' j ωY exp Y Nt % λN (T & t) e Y & 1 .
                                                  Y

                  &R γd                        (1& R) γd
Define λN / λ e           and λO / λ e                         , and define pseudo-probabilities
                                              ωY exp[Y Nt % λN(T & t) (e Y & 1) ]
                              πY t /
                                        j ωY exp[Y Nt % λN(T & t) (e & 1) ]
                                                                    Y                                 (A.7)
                                          Y


Using (A.6) for g, the equity pricing equation (A.4) becomes
                                                                       38

                                                   j ωY exp Y Nt % λO (T & t) e & 1
                                                                               Y
                         St          κS (T & t)        Y
                              'e
                      Dt                           j ωY exp Y Nt % λN (T & t) e & 1
                                                                               Y
                                                       Y
                                                                                                               (A.8)
                                                   j πY t exp (λO & λN ) (T & t) e & 1
                                     κS (T & t)                                           Y
                              ' e
                                                       Y

                                     κS (T & t)                 Y
                              ' e                  ECS e Φ (e       & 1)



for the cross-sectional expectation ECS (C) defined with regard to probabilities (A.7), and for
                                    γ          &R γd
Φ / (λO & λN ) (T & t) ' λ e d (e                      & 1) (T & t) . From (A.5), the jump risk premium has a similar
representation:

                                            j ωY exp Y (Nt % 1) % λN (T & t) e & 1
                                                                              Y
                     (
                    λt             &R γd       Y
                              'e
                    λ                              j ωY exp Y Nt % λN (T & t) e & 1
                                                                               Y
                                                   Y
                                                                                                               (A.9)
                                        j πY t e
                                   &R γd                   Y
                          ' e
                                           Y

                                   &R γd
                          ' e              ECS e Y .

       The approximation for the log jump size follows from the following approximations:
                                                               g(Nt , t; λO)
                               ln m(Nt ,t) / ln
                                                               g(Nt , t; λN )
                                                                                                              (A.10)
                                                           M ln g(Nt , t; λN)
                                                       .                          (λO & λN )
                                                                    MλN
                                                                    m(Nt % 1, t)
                         ln (1 % kt ) ' R γd % ln
                                                                      m(Nt , t)
                                                               M ln m(Nt; t)
                                            . R γd %                                                          (A.11)
                                                                      MNt

                                                               M2 ln g(Nt; t; λN)
                                            . R γd %                                 (λO & λN).
                                                                      MNt MλN


For R ' 1 , the partial derivatives of ln g are
                                                                              39

                                                      j ωY Y exp Y Nt % λN (T & t) e & 1
                                                                                    Y
                   M ln g(Nt , t; λN)                  Y
                                                 '
                          MNt                           j ωY exp Y Nt % λN (T & t) e & 1
                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                                 (A.12)
                                                           Y

                                                 ' ECS (Y )

                                         j ωY (T & t) e & 1 exp Y Nt % λN (T & t) e & 1
                                                       Y                           Y
           M ln g(Nt , t; λN)            Y
                                  '
                  MλN                                   j ωY exp Y Nt % λN (T & t) e & 1
                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                                 (A.13)
                                                           Y

                                  ' (T & t) ECS e Y & 1




while the cross-derivative is
        M2 ln g(Nt , t; λN)
                              ' (T & t) j πY t Y e Y & 1 & j πY t Y j πY t e Y & 1
            M Nt MλN                                   Y                                         Y                  Y            (A.14)
                              ' (T & t) CovCS Y, e Y .


Consequently (from (A.11)),
                  ln(1 % kt ) . Rγd % (λO & λN )(T & t) CovCS Y, e Y
                                                               γ      &R γd
                                                                                                                                 (A.15)
                                 . Rγd % λ e d (e                                 & 1)(T & t) CovCS Y, e Y .

Section 3.3, equation (39)
                                                           Y NT       1
                                   η̃T                 e              R
                    Vt ' Et              D̃T
                                   ηt                 f (NT )
                                                                                  1
                                  1& R Y N / R                               1&
                              Et DT e T                            f (NT )        R

                        '                                                                                                        (A.16)
                                                     &R
                                         Et DT                f (NT )
                                                                                                     1
                                1& R                                    Y NT / R                1&               (1& R) γd
                              Dt                 κS (T & t)    Et e                   f (NT )        R
                                                                                                         * λe
                        '                    e                                                                               .
                                   &R                                                                    &R γd
                              Dt                                          Et f (NT ) * λ e

                                                                          (1& R)γd
                                κS (T & t)   Et f (NT ) *λ e
Substituting in St ' Dt e                                                                from (A.4) yields (39).
                                                                              Rγd
                                                  Et f (NT ) *λ e
                                                      40

A.2 Myopic portfolio choice (Section 3.3.2)
The myopic portfolio allocation strategy (x, q) in equity and crash insurance maximizes the
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation

                0 ' max Et d J(Wt , Nt , t)
                   {x, q}
                  ' max Et Jt % W JW [x (µ & λk) & λ( q] % W 2JWW x 2 σ2                             (A.17)
                   {x, q}
                              % λ J W(1 % x k % q) , Nt % 1, t & J


under the assumption of constant (µ, σ, λ, λ(, k) , and subject to the terminal boundary condition
                                                                   1& R
                                                      Y NT       WT          &1
                              J(WT , NT , T ) ' e                                  .                 (A.18)
                                                                   1&R


The first-order conditions to (A.17) with respect to q and x are
                                                                                            (
                          (
                                  JW [W(1 % x k % q) , N % 1, t]                           JW
                        λ ' λ                                                 / λ
                                          JW (W, N, t)                                     JW
                                                                                                     (A.19)
                                 &W JWW     &1               (
                                                 µ % (λ & λ) k
                         x '
                                    JW                 σ2


Given the terminal utility specification, it is straightforward to show that the value function J is of
the form
                                                   1& R                          Y Nt
                                                 Wt              Y Nt        e          g2 (T & t)
                    J(Wt , Nt , t) ' g1(T & t)               e          %                            (A.20)
                                                 1& R                                  1& R


with an associated marginal utility function
                                                                        &R    Y Nt
                              JW (Wt , Nt , t) ' g1(T & t) Wt e                        .             (A.21)

                                    (
Since (&W JWW / JW) ' R and JW / JW ' e Y (1 % x k % q)&R , this marginal utility function yields
constant portfolio proportions that satisfy
                                                                          41
                                                                                       1
                             myopic                  myopic        λe Y R
                         x            k % q                     '          & 1
                                                                    λ(                                             (A.22)
                                                                   1
                                                 x myopic       '      µ % (λ( & λ) k
                                                                     2
                                                                  Rσ

under a constant investment opportunity set. Furthermore, the value function and these portfolio
proportions satisfies the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation for some functions g1 and g2 that
appropriately converge to 1 as t 6 T .


       If R ' 1 , myopic investment strategies are optimal even if investment opportunities
         (
(µt , σt , λt , kt ) are stochastic. Defining τ / T & t , the objective function becomes
                                                 Y NT
         J (Wt , Nt , t) / max Et e                         ln WT

                        ' max j
                                                 e &λτ(λτ)n Y (N t % n)
                                                           e            Et [ln WT * Nt % n jumps]
                                                     n!
                                                                                                                   (A.23)
                               Y Nt       λ τ (e Y & 1)                 (                            Y
                        ' e           e                     max       Et    ln WT * λ e


                                                                             ms ' t
                               Y Nt              Y                                 T                     (
                        ' e           e λ τ (e       & 1)
                                                             ln Wt %                   max Et (d ln Ws ) * λ e Y


          (
where Et      is a modified expectation conditional upon a jump intensity λ e Y over (t, T ] .
Consequently, the marginal utility
                                                                          Y Nt                   Y
                                                                      e          e λ (T & t)(e       & 1)
                                 JW (Wt , Nt , t) '                                                                (A.24)
                                                                                    Wt


is again of the form (A.21) above, and optimal portfolio proportions are given by (A.22) with R ' 1 .


A.3 Objective and risk-neutral distributions
Stock prices and pricing kernels are jump-dependent multiples of the dividend signal, which is in
turn a draw from jump-dependent mixture of lognormals. From (29), gross stock returns are
                                              St              &κS t   Dt m[Nt , t]
                                                      ' e                                                          (A.25)
                                             S0                       D0 m[0, 0]


                    2
for κS ' (µd % ½ σd ) & R σ2 % λ e &Rγ(e γ & 1) . The density function for ∆ d / ln[Dt / D0 ] is
                                                                  42

                pd (∆ d ) ' j wN n(∆d * µd t % N γd , σd t) for wN /
                           4
                                                                            2             e &λ t(λ t)N
                                                                                                                   (A.26)
                          N'0                                                                 N!
for n(z * m, σ2) equal to the normal density function with mean m and variance σ2 . Consequently,
log-differenced stock prices ∆ s / ln[St / S0 ] are also drawn from a mixture of normals:

p(∆ s) ' j wN n ∆s * (R & ½ σd ) t % λ e
            4
                                       2                &R γd     γ                                           2
                                                                (e d & 1) t % N γd % ln[m(N, t) / m(0, 0)], σd t
          N'0
                                                                                                                   (A.27)
        / j wN n ∆ s *
           4
                                 2
                           µN , σd t    .
          N'0




        Define 1(∆ s ' z) as the delta function that takes on infinite value when ∆ s ' z , zero value
elsewhere, and integrates to 1. The objective density function p(z) ' E0 [1(∆ s̃ ' z) ] , while the risk-
neutral density function is
                                            (
                         p ((z) ' E0 [1(∆ s̃ ' z) ]
                                                ηt
                                 ' E0                1(∆ s̃ ' z)
                                                η0                                                                 (A.28)

                                 ' j
                                        4       wN E0 ηt 1(∆ s̃ ' z) * N jumps
                                                                                          .
                                       n'0                              η0


        For any two normally distributed variables x̃ and ỹ and any arbitrary function h( y) ,
                                  E e x h( y) ' E e x E h( y ( )                                                   (A.29)


where y ( is also normally distributed with mean E( y) % Cov(x, y) and variance Var( y) .
                                                                                                                       2
Conditional upon n jumps, ln ηt and ∆ s are both normally distributed with covariance &R σd .
Consequently, (A.28) can be re-written as
                                wN E0(ηt * N jumps) E0 1(∆ s̃ ( ' z) * N jumps
                p ((z) ' j
                           4


                          N'0                                           η0
                                                                                      2       2
                       ' j
                           4    wN E0(ηt * N jumps) n(∆ s * µN & R σd , σd )
                                                                                                                   (A.30)
                          N'0                                          η0

                       / j wN n(∆ s * µN & R σd , σd )
                           4
                                 (                                 2        2

                          N'0
                                                                            43

Since η0 ' E0 ηt ' jN wN E0[ηt * N jumps] , the weights wn sum to 1. Furthermore, since
                                                                                                         (


                               &κη (T & t)&R          ˜                                   &R γd
                  ηt ' e                 D0 exp[&R (∆ d* N ' 0 % N t γd )] g N t , t, λ e       ,                                       (A.31)
                                                                            t




it is straightforward to show that
                                                               &R γd N                           &R γd
                                        (          wN e                  g N, t; λ e
                                       wN    '
                                                 j wN e
                                                  4
                                                                 &R γd N                           &R γd
                                                                                g N, t; λ e
                                                 N'0                                                                                    (A.32)
                                                 e &λN t (λN t)N g(N, t; λN)
                                             '
                                                       N!        g(0, 0; λN)
               &R γd
for λN / λ e           .


A.4 Implicit pricing kernels (equations (20) and (51))
Using equations (12) and (13), the projection of the pricing kernel upon the asset price in the
homogeneous-agent case is
                                                  E0 [ηt *St ]
                                     M(St) /
                                                           η0
                                                           &R        Y Nt
                                             ' E0 Dt e                      κ0(t) * St
                                                                                                                                        (A.33)
                                                                                R
                                                      &R             St                 Y Nt
                                             ' St E0                                e          κ0(t) * St
                                                                     Dt
                                                                &R               Y Nt
                                             ' κ1(t) St E0 e                              * St

where κ0 (t) and κ1 (t) capture time-dependent terms irrelevant to implicit risk aversion. The
distribution of st / ln St is an Nt -dependent mixture of normals:
                                                                                                                                N
                                                           2                                                         e &λ t (λ t) t
      p( st * Nt ) / pN (st ) - N (µ0 % Nt γd , σ2 t) with probability wN '                                                         .   (A.34)
                           t                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                         Nt !


Consequently, the conditional expectation in (A.33) can be evaluated using Bayes’ rule to evaluate
the conditional probabilities
                                                                                    wn p( st * n)
                                      Prob[Nt ' n * St ] '                                                   ,
                                                                                j wn p( st * n)
                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                        (A.35)
                                                                                n'0
                                                                     44

yielding an implicit pricing kernel

                                                              j wn p( st * n) e
                                                                 4
                                                                                Yn
                                                        &R n ' 0
                           M(St) ' κ1(t) St
                                                                     j wn p( st * n)
                                                                      4

                                                                                                                                    (A.36)
                                                                     n'0

                                                        &R   p(st * λ e Y )
                                       ' κ(t)         St
                                                                 p(st * λ)

where p(st * λ) denotes the unconditional density of st given a jump intensity of λ over (0, t] .
                                                                                                               s t & (µ0 % n γd )
Taking partials with respect to st and using the fact that ps (st * n) ' &p(st * n)                                     2
                                                                                                                                    yields
                                                                                                                      σd
(after some tedious calculations) an implicit risk aversion value
                                                                             ((
                              Mln M(St)                       &γd Cov0 (e Y ñ, ñ)
                          &                       ' R %                                                                             (A.37)
                                   Mst                            2
                                                                 σd t
                                                                              ((
                                                                           E0 [Y ñ]

         ((          ((
where E0 and Cov0 are defined with regard to the probabilities in (A.35). Since e Y n and n are
both increasing functions of n, the covariance term is positive. Consequently, the implicit risk
aversion is everywhere positive given γd < 0 .


       The heterogeneous-agent case is similar. From (28) and (29), the Lagrange multiplier is
                                                             R
                                κη (T & t)    &R       St                        &R γd
                      ηt ' e                 St                  g Nt , t; λ e
                                                       Dt                                                                           (A.38)
                                (κη % R κs) (T & t)     &R                               &R γd
                          ' e                         St m(Nt , t)R g Nt , t; λ e                .

                                                                                                     Y Nt
This is of the same form as (A.33), with m( Nt , t)R g( Nt , C) replacing e                                 . Consequently, the
implicit pricing kernel becomes
                                                              45


                                             j wn p( st * n) m(n, t) g n, t, λ e
                                              4
                                                                    R              &R γd

                                         &R n ' 0
                      M(St) ' κ1(t ) St
                                                              j wn p( st * n)
                                                               4


                                                              n'0
                                                                                           (A.39)
                                            j wn p( st * n)
                                             4
                                                         ((

                                     &R n ' 0
                            ' κ(t ) St
                                             j wn p( st * n)
                                                 4


                                             n'0

                                           &R γd
       ((        wn m(n, t)R g(n, t; λ e         )
for   wn    /                                            .
                j wn m(n, t) g(n, t; λ e
                 4
                            R                &R γd
                                                     )
                n'0
                                              46

                                          References
Aït-Sahalia, Yacine and Andrew W. Lo (2000). "Nonparametric Risk Management and Implied
Risk Aversion." Journal of Econometrics 94, 9-51.

Basak, Suleyman and Domenico Cuoco (1998). "An Equilibrium Model with Restricted Stock
Market Participation." Review of Financial Studies 11, 309-341.

Bates, David S. (1988). "Pricing Options on Jump-Diffusion Processes." Rodney L.White Center
working paper 37-88.

Bates, David S. (1991). "The Crash of '87: Was It Expected? The Evidence from Options
Markets." Journal of Finance 46, 1009-1044.

Bates, David S. (2000). "Post-'87 Crash Fears in the S&P 500 Futures Option Market." Journal of
Econometrics 94, 181-238.

Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay (1997). The Econometrics of Financial
Markets, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Campbell, John Y., Jorge Rodriguez, and Luis M. Viceira (2001). "Strategic Asset Allocation in
a Continuous-Time VAR Model." Harvard Economics Dept. working paper, July.

Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira (1999). "Consumption and Portfolio Decisions When
Expected Returns are Time Varying." Quarterly Journal of Economics , 433-495.

Chacko, George and Luis M. Viceira (1999). "Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice with
Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
7377, October.

Chan, Yeung Lewis and Leonid Kogan (2001). "Catching Up with the Joneses: Heterogeneous
Preferences and the Dynamics of Asset Prices." Wharton School working paper, June.

Christensen, B. J. and N. R. Prabhala (1998). "The Relation Between Implied and Realized
Volatility." Journal of Financial Economics 50, 125-150.

Dumas, Bernard (1989). "Two-Person Dynamic Equilibrium in the Capital Market." Review of
Financial Studies 2, 157-188.

Fleming, Jeff (1998). "The Quality of Market Volatility Forecasts Implied by S&P 100 Index
Option Prices." Journal of Empirical Finance 5, 317-345.

Froot, Kenneth A. (2001). "The Market for Catastrophe Risk: A Clinical Evaluation." Journal of
Financial Economics 60, 529-571.
                                                47

Grossman, Sanford J. and Zhongquan Zhou (1996). "Equilibrium Analysis of Portfolio Insurance."
Journal of Finance 51, 1379-1403.

Ho, Mun S., William R. M. Perraudin, and Bent E. Sorensen (1996). "A Continuous Time Arbitrage
Pricing Model with Stochastic Volatility and Jumps." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics
14, 31-43.

Jackwerth, Jens Carsten (2000). "Recovering Risk Aversion from Option Prices and Realized
Returns." Review of Financial Studies 13, 433-451.

Jorion, Philippe (1995). "Predicting Volatility in the Foreign Exchange Market." Journal of Finance
50, 507-528.

Merton, Robert C. (1973). "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model." Econometrica 41,
867-887.

Pan, Jun (2001). “The Jump-Risk Premia Implicit in Options: Evidence from an Integrated Time-
Series Study, MIT working paper, March. Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Econometrics.

Rosenberg, Joshua and Robert F. Engle (2000). "Empirical Pricing Kernels." New York University
working paper.

Shefrin, Hersh (1997). "Option Pricing When Beliefs are Heterogeneous: A General Equilibrium
Analysis." Santa Clara University working paper.

Tompkins, Robert G. (2000). "Implied Volatility Surfaces: Uncovering Regularities for Options
on Financial Futures." Vienna University of Technology working paper.

Wang, Jiang (1996). "The Term Structure of Interest Rates in a Pure Exchange Economy with
Heterogeneous Investors." Journal of Financial Economics 41, 75-110.
