                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ENDOGENOUS CURRENCY OF PRICE SETTING IN A DYNAMIC
                           OPEN ECONOMY MODEL


                                         Michael B. Devereux
                                            Charles Engel


                                          Working Paper 8559
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8559


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




We thank participants at a workshop at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for comments. Devereux
thanks SSHRC for financial support. Engel thanks NSF for support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Michael B. Devereux and Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Endogenous Currency of Price Setting in a Dynamic Open Economy Model
Michael B. Devereux and Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 8559
October 2001
JEL No. F3, F4



                                               ABSTRACT


        Many papers in the recent literature in open economy macroeconomics make different
assumptions about the currency in which firms set their export prices when nominal prices must be pre-
set. But to date, all of these studies take the currency of price setting as exogenous. This paper sets up a
simple two-country general equilibrium model in which exporting firms can choose the currency in which
they set prices for sales to foreign markets. We make two alternative assumptions about the structure of
international financial markets: one where there are complete markets for hedging consumption risk
internationally, and the other without risk-sharing possibilities. Our results are quite sharp: exporters will
generally wish to set prices in the currency of the country that has the most stable monetary policy. When
monetary stability is similar among countries, there is an equilibrium where firms from all countries set
their price in the currency of the buyer (local currency pricing). But except for a special case where money
variances are exactly identical across countries, there is no equilibrium where all firms set export prices
in their own currencies (producer currency pricing).




Michael B. Devereux                                                Charles Engel
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics
University of British Columbia                                     University of Wisconsin
997-1873 East Mall                                                 1180 Observatory Drive
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z1                                            Madison, WI 53706-1393
Canada                                                             and NBER
                                                                   cengel@ssc.wisc.edu
         The new Keynesian macroeconomics provides a rationale for sticky nominal prices.

When there are menu costs to changing prices, imperfectly competitive firms might find it more

profitable to leave prices unchanged when there is a shock to costs or demand than to change the

price. There is a growing literature in international macroeconomics building on the new

Keynesian sticky price framework that provides microeconomic foundations for analysis of open

economies. In a much-cited paper, Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) assumed that firms set prices in

their own currency when selling abroad. Subsequently, a long list of papers has investigated the

effects of alternative assumptions about the currency in which firms set prices when selling to

foreign markets.1      But to date, all of these studies have taken the currency of price setting as

exogenous.      Realistically however, a firm is unlikely to be indifferent between pricing in

domestic or foreign currency. When the firm sells abroad, would it prefer the price to be sticky

in the producer’s currency or the currencies of consumers?

         That question has been addressed previously in the literature, but always in a partial

equilibrium setting. The partial equilibrium setting is problematic because it takes as exogenous

variables that are influenced by the equilibrium price-setting configuration. For example, the

behavior of labor costs or aggregate demand might depend on how prices are set.

         We address the question of optimal choice of currency for price setting in a framework

closely related to that of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1998).2 Their model is a two-country general

equilibrium framework in which there are sticky nominal prices. The Obstfeld-Rogoff (OR)

model makes many simplifying assumptions in order to be able to derive analytical solutions that

are helpful for developing intuition. Thus it makes fairly specific assumptions about household’s

preferences; about production functions; about the probability distributions of shocks to the

1
 A partial list is Betts and Devereux (1996), Tille (2000), Devereux and Engel (2000), Devereux, Engel and Tille
(1999), Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2000), Corsetti and Pesenti (2001), and Sutherland (2001),



                                                        1
economy; and about price setting behavior (specifically that prices are reset every period.) We

will follow their framework, which allows us to derive some very simple conditions under which

firms will either set prices in advance in their own currency (“producer-currency pricing” or

PCP), or in consumers’ currencies (“local-currency pricing” or LCP).

         We emphasize the importance of monetary stability in determining the pricing choice in

equilibrium. We find that when there are large differences between the variance of money

supplies across countries, there is a tendency for all firms to price in the currency of the country

with the most stable money supply. As Guillermo Ortiz (1999), the governor of the Banco de

México, has commented:

         “The pass-through of exchange rates to inflation was much higher in Mexico than in

Canada, Australia or New Zealand. And this has to do a lot with history, with credibility of

monetary policies, and this is one of the big challenges that we are facing today in Mexico in the

conduct of monetary policy. And we have to really build sufficient credibility so that this pass-

through from exchange rate movements to inflation ceases to be such an automatic reaction.”

         In related work, Taylor (2001) argues along similar lines, making the case that pass-

through from both exchange rates and general costs may be endogenously determined by a

country’s inflation performance.

         The essential message of our results may be encapsulated as follows. The more stable is

a country’s monetary process, relative to its neighbors, the more likely it is that foreign exporters

will set their prices in that currency, and the more stable will be that country’s price level. By

the same token, because this country’s exporters will also tend to set their export prices in the




2
   Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000a), Devereux and Engel (2000), and Devereux, Engel, and Tille (1999) have
extended the Obstfeld-Rogoff model with uncertainty to the local-currency pricing case, and to pricing schemes that
mix local-currency pricing and producer-currency pricing.

                                                         2
home currency, the price level of the country’s trading partners, with less stable monetary

processes, will be less stable.

            At the same time, the results depend in an important way on the structure of international

financial markets. When international financial markets allow for full consumption risk-sharing

across countries, it is only relative monetary stability that matters. The country with the more

stable monetary process will have all world exports priced in its currency, even if neighboring

countries also have quite stable monetary processes. But when markets for international risk-

sharing are absent, then absolute monetary volatility becomes important. In this case, as long as

all countries have reasonably stable money supplies, we find that the equilibrium configuration

of price setting will be that all countries follow LCP, and exchange rate pass-through is zero.

But this equilibrium will be eliminated if monetary volatility rises in one country. In that case,

all world exports will be priced in the currency of the most stable money supply.

            Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000b) have also recently addressed the question of optimal

choice of currency for pricing in a general equilibrium model that differs from ours only slightly

in the preference assumptions. They find, as we do, that in the absence of risk-sharing an

equilibrium emerges in which all firms in both countries are follow LCP pricing when agents are

sufficiently risk averse.3 However, they confine themselves to the case of identical home and

foreign money supply processes, so they do not uncover the key result of our paper that the

pricing equilibrium is determined by differences in monetary variances across countries. Also,

their results are all from numerical simulations, while our analytical results allow us to precisely

characterize the conditions for various equilibria to emerge.

            In section 1, we lay out the model. In section 2, we derive the equilibrium price-setting

behavior under the assumption of complete markets in nominal financial claims. We test the


3
    In contrast to us, they find that under complete markets in their set-up there are no pure-strategy equilibria.

                                                              3
sensitivity of our findings to the assumption of financial market completeness by reexamining, in

section 3, our conclusions in a setting where no financial claims are traded. Then in section 4,

we discuss broader considerations that are left out of our stylized model.



1. The model

         Here we outline the features of the models we examine. There are two countries.

Infinitely-lived consumers in each country maximize expected lifetime utility, which is a

function of consumption, real balances and labor. They take prices and wages as given. There is

a continuum of monopolistic firms in each country. Each firm sets prices one period in advance.

Firms can set different prices for home and foreign consumers, and can set prices either in their

own currency or consumers’ currencies. Labor markets are competitive and nominal wages are

flexible. We will consider two different asset market structures. In one, there are complete

markets in nominal contingent claims. In the other, there is no international trade in assets, and

all firms are locally owned. Monetary authorities in each country increase the money supply

randomly and nominal exchange rates are floating. Monetary randomness is the only source of

uncertainty in the model.4

         Producers must set prices prior to the realization of monetary shocks.                          This is an

institutional constraint in our model. In section 4 we discuss how menu costs might generate

nominal price stickiness. Prices fully adjust to monetary shocks after one period; i.e., there is no

persistence to the price-adjustment process.




4
   Our results are completely unaffected in both the full risk-sharing and no risk-sharing case if we introduce
productivity shocks to the production process. Intuitively, it is because in both cases the equilibrium exchange rate
is unaffected by productivity shocks. We omit those shocks from the paper to keep things clean.

                                                          4
Consumers

        The representative consumer in the home country is assumed to maximize

                                                                     æ ∞ s −t ö
                                                            U t = Et ç å β u s ÷ ,                   0 < β <1
                                                                     è s =t    ø

where

                                                                         1                  æM ö
                                                           us =              C s1− ρ + χ lnçç s ÷÷ − ηLs , ρ > 0 .
                                                                        1− ρ                è Ps ø

C is a consumption index that is a geometric average of home and foreign consumption:

                                                                                     Chn C 1f−n
                                                                              C=                     .
                                                                                   n n (1 − n )1−n

We assume that there are n identical individuals in the home country, 0 < n < 1 .                                                                Ch and Cf are

indexes over consumption of goods produced at home and in the foreign country, respectively:

                                                                   λ                                                                                             λ
                    −1                          λ −1                   λ −1                                           −1                      λ −1                   λ −1
         C h = én                                          di ù                                      C f = é(1 − n)                                      di ù
                                 n                                                                                             1

               êë
                         λ
                             ò
                             0
                                     C h (i )          λ
                                                              úû                                           êë
                                                                                                                           λ
                                                                                                                               ò
                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                   C f (i )          λ
                                                                                                                                                            úû



        The elasticity of substitution between goods produced within a country is λ , which we

assume to be greater than 1. There is a unit elasticity of substitution between the home goods

and foreign goods indexes. M                                           are domestic real balances, and L is the labor supply of the
                                                             P

representative home agent.

        The price index, P, is defined by

                                                                               P = Phn Pf1−n ,

where

                                                             1                                                                                           1
                                                              1− λ                                                                                        1− λ
                 é1 n              ù                                                                          é 1 1                 ù
            Ph = ê ò Ph (i )1−λ di ú                                                                     Pf = ê    ò  Pf (i )1−λ di ú
                 ën 0
                                   û                                                                          ë −n
                                                                                                                1   n
                                                                                                                                    û


                                                                                       5
       There are 1 − n identical individuals in the foreign country. Their preferences are similar

to home country residents’ preferences. The terms in the utility function involving consumption

are identical in the home and foreign countries. The functional form for real balances and labor

are the same as for the home country residents, but, for foreign residents, they are functions of

foreign real balances and foreign labor supply.

       The optimal intra-temporal consumption demands are given by:

                                       −λ                                                  −λ
                      1 é P (i ) ù                                        1 é Pf (i ) ù
            C h (i ) = ê h ú                Ch               C f (i ) =        ê      ú         Cf
                      n ë Ph û                                          1 − n ëê Pf ûú

                       Ph C h = nPC                                  Pf C f = (1 − n ) PC

                n                                                1
            ò0
                    Ph (i )C h (i )di = Ph C h                  ò P (i )C
                                                                n
                                                                     f      f   (i )di = Pf C f




       We allow for two alternative assets market structures. In one, residents of each country

can purchase a full set of state-contingent nominal bonds: there is full international risk-sharing.

In the other, the polar opposite, there is no asset trade at all. Residents of one country can only

trade in commodities at spot exchange rates, and there are no possibilities for international risk-

sharing in assets markets. While both cases are extremes, this comparison serves to highlight the

role of international risk-sharing mechanisms in determining the form of price setting5.



Full risk-sharing

       When consumers have access to a full set of state contingent bonds, Chari, McGrattan,

and Kehoe (2000) show that the following risk-sharing condition (the CM condition) obtains




                                                  6
                                                                      ρ
                                                S t Pˆt*       æC ö
                                                         = Γ0 çç t* ÷÷ ,                                      (1.1)
                                                  Pt           è Ct ø

where St is the home currency price of foreign currency, and Γ0 is a constant, depending on

initial conditions.6 Pˆt* is the foreign-currency denominated foreign price level. Throughout this

paper, the ^ atop a nominal price indicates that it is denominated in foreign currency, while a *

superscript indicates a foreign quantity. Consumption will differ across the two countries only to

the extent that there are changes in the real exchange rate.



No risk-sharing

        Without any risk-sharing possibilities, commodity trade must balance across countries,

or, equivalently, domestic consumption must equal domestic income.                         Given our simple

specification of preferences, this implies that the nominal value of consumption must be

equalized across countries, when evaluated in any one currency:

                                                S t Pˆt*Ct* = Pt Ct                                          (1.2)

        In addition to the consumption demand equations listed above, we can derive the money

demand equation for the representative home-country resident:

                                                Mt     χCtρ
                                                   =                ,                                         (1.3)
                                                Pt 1 − Et (d t +1 )

                                                                                                Ct−+ρ1 Pt
where Et (d t +1 ) is the inverse of the gross nominal interest rate, and d t +1 = β                         is the
                                                                                               Ct− ρ Pt +1

pricing kernel for one period ahead dollars. Also, the trade-off between consumption and leisure

is given by:

5
 When the law of one price holds (as it does when all firms follow PCP pricing), consumption risk is completely
shared, even without complete assets markets, as OR (1998) show. But under the LCP specification, the law of one


                                                        7
                                                     Wt
                                                              =η .                             (1.4)
                                                    Pt Ctρ



Government

    Government increases the money supply with direct transfers. The government budget

constraint (in per capita terms) is simply

                                             M t = M t −1 + Tt .

         In addition, we assume the money supply follows a random walk:

                                                    Mt
                                             Et (                  ) = 1.                      (1.5)
                                                          M t +1

An analogous equation holds for the foreign money supply.



Firms

         Firms are monopolistic competitors. The production function for firm i is given by:

                                                       Yit = Lit ,

where Lit is employment of firm i at time t. The objective of the domestic firms is to set prices

to maximize the expected utility of the owners. When there is full risk-sharing, it does not

matter whether the owners of firms are home or foreign residents. Without risk-sharing, the

natural assumption to make is that domestic firms are all owned by domestic residents.

         But under either asset market structure, prices must be set before information about

random money supplies and productivity shocks is known. The optimization problem can be

expressed as one of maximizing the expected present value of profits using the market nominal

discount factor for the owners of the firm.


price does not hold.


                                                          8
          While the firm must set prices in advance, it has the option of setting prices in one of two

ways:

          PCP: Producers set the price in their own currency. The price that foreigners pay for

domestic goods, and the price that home residents pay for foreign goods fluctuate when the

exchange rate changes.

           LCP: Producers set the price in the consumers’ currency. Prices consumers face do not

respond at all to exchange rate changes.

      No state-contingent pricing is allowed.



Equilibrium relationships

      The goods-market equilibrium in the home country is written as:

                                             Pt Ct           Pt*Ct*
                                      Lt = n       + (1 − n ) * .
                                              Pht             Pht

There is an analogous condition for the foreign country.

          It is easy to verify from the money demand equation, (1.3), and the random-walk

assumption for money supplies that:

                                                  1− β Mt
                                           Ctρ = (    )    .                                     (1.6)
                                                   χ    Pt

This implies that the nominal interest rate is constant, in equilibrium. An analogous equation

holds for the foreign country.

          The solution for the exchange rate depends on the degree of international risk-sharing.

Under full risk-sharing, (i.e. condition (1.1)), equation (1.5) give us a solution for the exchange

rate:



6
    We assume Γ0 = 1.

                                                   9
                                                         Mt
                                             St =             .                             (1.7)
                                                     M t*

       Without risk-sharing, we may use equation (1.2) and (1.6) to obtain the following

solution for the exchange rate:



                                                     1            1− ρ
                                                         ρæ              ρ
                                           æM ö            Pˆ * ö
                                    S t = çç *t ÷÷        ç t ÷              .              (1.8)
                                                          çP ÷
                                           è Mt ø         è t ø

       While under full risk-sharing, the exchange rate will depend only on the exogenous

stochastic realizations of money, while in the economy without risk-sharing the exchange rate

will depend on the way in which home and foreign price levels respond to monetary shocks.



       Finally, the leisure-consumption tradeoff, (1.4), and equation (1.6) give us

                                                 ηχ
                                         Wt =        Mt .                                   (1.9)
                                                1− β



2. Optimal price setting with full risk-sharing

       Now we look at the decision that firm’s make when they set prices in advance. This

decision has two parts. The first part concerns which currency the firm should set prices in.

Then, given this decision, the firm must choose a price. In each case, the firm maximizes profits

evaluated at the discount factor relevant to their owners. We first examine the price setting

decision under full risk-sharing.

       The question of which currency to choose for price setting can’t be examined for one

firm in isolation. When prices must be set in advance, the currency of price setting will matter

for expected discounted profits of the firm. But the decision over which currency to set prices


                                                 10
will also depend upon the actions of all other firms, for two reasons. First, the firm (for instance

the home firm selling to the foreign country) will compete with all other home firms within the

industry, and the currency in which they price in will be relevant. Second, as shown in Devereux

and Engel (2000), the currency in which prices are set has macroeconomic implications for

aggregate demand, the consumer price index, employment and GDP. Both the volatility and

mean of these variables will differ in an economy with PCP relative to an economy with LCP.

This may affect the decision faced by any one firm. Thus, in principle the decision over which

currency to set prices in is a complex one, depending on the decision made by all other firms. In

fact, we will see that our model produces a very simple and intuitive solution.

         We adopt the following procedure. First, looking at the home country firm, we ask

whether if all home country firms set their export prices in home currency (PCP), is there an

incentive for a single home firm to deviate, and set its export price in foreign currency (choose

LCP)?7 If the answer is yes, then we can conclude that PCP is not an equilibrium outcome for

home country firms. Then we reverse the question by asking whether if all home country firms

were to set their export prices in foreign currency (LCP), there is an incentive for any one home

firm to deviate and set its price in domestic currency (choose PCP). If the answer to this is yes,

then LCP is not an equilibrium for all home country firms. By looking at the answer to both

questions we can see whether PCP or LCP (or possibly both) constitute an equilibrium for home

firms. What we find is that the condition to choose LCP when all other firms choose LCP is the

same as the condition to choose LCP when all other firms follow PCP. So, if that condition is

met, we conclude there is an equilibrium in which all firms follow LCP.




7
 In principle, this decision might depend on the pricing decisions of foreign producers also. In fact, as we’ll see, it
does not, so we can ignore this issue in our description.

                                                          11
        Then by employing symmetry, we can look at the decision of foreign firms. Finally,

using the results for both home and foreign firms, we can identify an equilibrium configuration

of price setting in the world economy.

Home firms follow PCP

        The optimization problem can be expressed as maximizing the expected present value of

profits using the market nominal discount factor for the owners of the firm. Since there is no

intertemporal aspect to the firms’ optimization problems (see, Obstfeld and Rogoff (1998)), this

reduces to maximizing one period ahead expected profits in each case. Moreover, because we

allow the firm to segment markets by country, we can focus exclusively on the decision over

pricing in the foreign market. In the PCP case the firm’s expected profit on foreign sales is:

                                                    Et −1 éë dt −1 ( Pht* (i ) X ht* (i ) − Wt ( X ht* (i )) ) ùû ,


where    X ht* (i ) = (1 − n )C ht* (i ) is total sales of firm i to foreign residents. Here, Pht* (i ) is the

home-currency price for the sale of home firm i to foreign consumers. Recall that the nominal

                                        Ct− ρ Pt −1
                                                 Ct*− ρ S t −1 Pˆt*−1
discount factor is d t −1         = β −ρ      =β                      , where the second equality makes use of the
                                     Ct −1 Pt     Ct*−−1ρ S t Pˆt*

risk-sharing condition.

        From section 1, foreign demand for the home good is

                                                                −λ                               −λ                               −λ
                                                é Pˆ * (i ) ù                    é Pˆ * (i ) ù        Pˆt*Ct*     é Pht* (i ) ù        S t Pˆt*Ct*
         X ht* (i )   =   (1 − n)C ht* (i )   = ê ht * ú             C ht*   = n ê ht * ú                     = n ê * ú                            .
                                                     ˆ                                ˆ                 Pˆht*                              Pht*
                                                ë Pht û                          ë Pht û                          ë Pht û

Recall that a ^ indicates the price is denominated in foreign currency. So Pˆht* (i ) is the foreign-

currency price paid by foreign residents for home-produced goods, and S t Pˆht* (i ) = Pht* (i ) .

        When all firms follow PCP, the first-order condition for the price of goods sold to foreign

consumers is:


                                                                               12
                                                                 λ Et −1 (Wt Ct*1− ρ )
                                           Pht* (i ) = Pht* =                          .                                   (2.1)
                                                                λ − 1 Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ )

Note that the derivation of equation (2.1) does not depend on the price-setting decisions of

foreign firms, confirming that we can ignore the foreign firms pricing strategy. Using (2.1), we

can establish that the expected discounted profit of firm i in the home market earns in period t is

given by

                                      [ (                                   )]
                                 Et −1 d t −1 ( Pht* (i ) − Wt ) X ht* (i )) = K t −1 Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ ) ,                   (2.2)

                 nβ Pt −1
where K t −1 =             . Conditional on period t-1 variables, expected discounted profit depends
                  λ Ct−−ρ1

only on foreign consumption.

        Now consider the potential benefit for firm i if it deviates from all other firms, and sets

the price in the foreign currency. Isolating the firm’s profits from foreign sales, it maximizes:

                                                [ (                                          )]
                                         Et −1 d t −1 ( S t Pˆht*dev (i ) − Wt ) X ht*dev (i )) ,

where Pˆht*dev (i ) is the foreign-currency price set by the deviating firm, and X ht*dev (i ) is demand

for its product given by:

                                                                       −λ                             −λ
                                                            é Pˆ *dev (i ) ù  é S Pˆ *dev (i ) ù           St Pˆt *Ct*
                 X   *dev
                     ht     (i ) = (1 − n)C   *dev
                                              ht     (i ) = ê ht * ú Cht* = n ê t ht *         ú                       .
                                                                   ˆ                                          Pht*
                                                            ë Pht û           ë Pht            û

If firm i sets its price in the foreign currency, a home country nominal depreciation will reduce

foreign demand for firm i’s product, relative to demand for all other home goods.

        The first-order condition for the optimal choice of Pˆht*dev (i) is given by:

                                                           λ Et −1 (Wt S t− λ Ct*1− ρ )
                                          Pˆht*dev (i ) =                                .                                 (2.3)
                                                          λ − 1 Et −1 ( S t1−λ Ct*1− ρ )




                                                                  13
        Note that the deviating price depends directly upon the distribution of the exchange rate,

while the optimal price for PCP producers (2.1) does not. Using (2.3) we may establish that the

expected discounted profit for the deviating firm is:

                                                                            λ −1
                                                         æ é P*           ù              ö
                                                         ç
                                             K t −1 Et −1 ê       ht               *1− ρ ÷
                                                         ç S Pˆ *dev (i ) ú      C t     ÷
                                                                                           .                                       (2.4)
                                                         è ë t ht         û              ø

Substituting in for the optimal prices from expressions (2.1) and (2.3), expression (2.4) can be

rewritten as:

        K t −1 ( Et −1 (Wt S t− λ Ct*1− ρ ))1−λ ( Et −1 ( S t1−λ Ct*1− ρ )) λ ( Et −1 (Wt Ct*1− ρ )) λ −1 ( Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ ))1−λ

If wages, consumption and the exchange rate are lognormally distributed, this reduces to:

                             {                                                                 }
                      K t −1 ( Et −1 (Wt S t− λ ))1−λ ( Et −1 ( S t1−λ )) λ ( Et −1 (Wt )) λ −1 Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ )                   (2.5)

        If all other firms are follow PCP pricing, then firm i would prefer to deviate and follow

an LCP pricing strategy if expected discounted profits by doing so were higher. Comparing

expression (2.5) to profits under PCP pricing, given by (2.2), this reduces to the condition

                                 ( Et −1 (Wt S t− λ ))1−λ ( Et −1 ( S t1−λ )) λ ( Et −1 (Wt )) λ −1 > 1 .                          (2.6)

Under the lognormality assumption, this can be further reduced to the simple expression:

                                             Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) > 0 ,                                         (2.7)

where lower-case letters are the natural logs of their upper-case counterparts.

        We thus obtain a very simple condition determining whether the home firm would wish

to deviate from a PCP equilibrium and set prices in foreign currency. The logic behind this

condition is easy to obtain. Clearly if there were no variation in the exchange rate, there would

be no difference between pricing in domestic and foreign currencies. Thus, the main question is

how exchange rate volatility impacts on the expected profit of the deviating firm. Focusing on

expression (2.4), we see that exchange rate volatility on its own, holding prices and foreign

                                                                  14
consumption constant, would tend to raise expected discounted profits. For given prices and

foreign consumption, expected discounted profits are increasing in exchange rate volatility. But

exchange rate volatility also affects the optimal price that the deviating firm sets. Looking at

expression (2.3) we see that exchange rate volatility increases the optimal price for the deviating

firm. The impact of exchange rate volatility on the firm’s optimal deviating price in fact

outweighs the direct effect of exchange rate volatility on expected discounted profits, so that we

find the net impact of exchange rate volatility on expected discounted profits of the deviating

firm is negative. Were this the complete picture, a firm would never wish to deviate from PCP.

But exchange rate volatility also has a second indirect effect insofar as exchange rates are

correlated with marginal cost. If the exchange rate is positively correlated with marginal cost for

the firm, then the optimal price of the deviating firm will be lower (see 2.3), and expected profits

higher, given a deviation. Condition (2.7) then just represents the sum of the direct and two

indirect effects of exchange rate volatility on expected discounted profits for the deviating firm.

       How does condition (2.6) and (2.7) relate to the earlier studies of the currency of price

setting decision, based on partial equilibrium analysis (e.g. Giovannini, 1988, Friberg, 1998)?

These studies differed in mainly three ways. First, they took aggregate variables (such as foreign

demand and the foreign CPI) as given. Second, they were focusing on the decision of a single

producer facing a demand curve in isolation, where implicitly the price of all other goods is fixed

in foreign currency. Finally, these studies for the most part assumed risk neutrality, so the firm

wishes to maximize expected profits alone. In this setting Giovannini (1988) shows that when

the demand curve is convex (concave) in own price, the home firm would wish to set price in

domestic (foreign) currency.

       By contrast, our environment is general equilibrium, where both demand and all other

prices are endogenous. In addition however, the firm competes against other domestic firms, so

                                                 15
the currency in which these other firms set their prices is relevant. In our model, the elasticity of

demand between the home good and foreign goods is unity, so under the partial equilibrium

analysis of Giovannini (and risk neutrality), this would imply that the home firm would be

indifferent to pricing in home or foreign currency. But the relevant comparison for the firm in

our environment is between her prices and the prices of domestic competitors. Finally, instead

of having risk neutrality, we explicitly condition profits with the stochastic discount factor

relevant for the firms’ owners. In combination with our full risk-sharing assumption, this in fact

eliminates the direct importance of the exchange rate in determining overall demand for home

goods, relative to foreign goods. Again, what matters for the firm is the demand for her variety

of the home good, relative to the varieties of other home firms.

        Following from this discussion, we can make some observations about (2.6) and (2.7).

Although we are allowing for the full general equilibrium effects of alternative pricing policies,

the conditions governing the optimality of deviating are remarkably simple. In particular, the

fact that foreign consumption demand is endogenous is not important to the decision over which

prices to set. This is somewhat surprising, since both for PCP pricers in equation (2.1) and LCP

deviators in equation (2.3), the covariance of Ct*1− ρ with home nominal wages and the exchange

rate matters for the optimal ex ante price. The covariance of Ct*1− ρ with the exchange rate also

affects expected discounted profits of the LCP deviator, beyond its influence on prices, as can be

seen in equation (2.4). As we noted, the partial equilibrium models of the optimal choice of

currency for pricing, such as Giovannini (1988), treat aggregate variables as exogenous and so

ignore these covariances. But if Ct*1− ρ were treated as exogenous and uncorrelated with wages

and exchange rates in equations (2.1), (2.3), and (2.4), we would still derive equations (2.6) and

(2.7) as the condition for choosing LCP when all other firms choose PCP.


                                                 16
                                                                                                  λ
        To see this, note that if Ct*1− ρ were independent, we would have Pht*ind =                   Et −1 (W ) ,
                                                                                                 λ −1

                         λ Et −1 (Wt S t− λ )
and Pˆht*dev−ind (i ) =                        . Profits of the deviator would then be given by:
                        λ − 1 Et −1 ( S t1−λ )

                                                                        λ −1
                                  n
                                  λ
                                          é
                                    Et −1 ê
                                                 ˆ
                                                   Pht*ind
                                                   *dev − ind
                                                                    ù
                                                                    ú                 (      )
                                                                               Et −1 Ct*1− ρ .
                                          ëê S t Pht          (i ) ûú

The condition for deviation to be profitable is then

                                                                               λ −1
                                               é         Pht*ind          ù
                                         Et −1 ê              −           ú           > 1,
                                               êë S t Pˆht
                                                         *dev   ind
                                                                    (i ) úû

which is exactly equivalent to conditions (2.6) or (2.7). Thus, the condition to switch to LCP

pricing is that the expected value of the optimal PCP price relative to the optimal dollar value of

the LCP price (raised to the λ − 1 power) be greater than one.

        Condition (2.7) was derived without making reference to the solution for the nominal

exchange rate and nominal wages in terms of the money supplies. Now, combining expression

(1.7) for the exchange rate, and (1.9) for the nominal wage with condition (2.7), a firm will

deviate and follow an LCP pricing strategy when all other firms in the home country follow a

PCP strategy if and only if:

                                           Vart −1 (mt ) > Vart −1 (mt* ) .                                 (2.8)

That is, the home firm will wish to deviate from PCP pricing if and only if the volatility of home

money exceeds that of foreign money.                    Moreover, this condition holds irrespective of the

covariance of home and foreign money supplies. What matters is only the total monetary

volatility, not the covariance across countries.

        Now from the results so far, we can state the following propositions:




                                                             17
Proposition 1: An equilibrium exists in which all home firms are PCP pricers if and only if

                                          Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) ≤ 0 .

Proof: If this condition is met, then no firm will wish to switch to LCP pricing when all other

firms are PCP pricing, from condition (2.7).



Corollary: An equilibrium exists in which all home firms are PCP pricers if and only if

                                                Vart −1 (mt ) ≤ Vart −1 (mt* ) .



Home firms follow LCP

       Now assume that all home producers set prices in the foreign currency for sales to

foreign consumers, and ask whether an individual producer has an incentive to deviate. We can

follow the same logic as before. The discounted expected profits from sales to the foreign

market are given by:

                                                [ (
                                          Et −1 d t −1 ( S t Pˆht* (i ) − Wt ) X ht* (i )) ,   )]
where foreign demand is given by

                                                                          −λ                               −λ
                                                          é Pˆ * (i ) ù                    é Pˆ * (i ) ù        Pˆt*Ct*
                   X ht* (i )   =   (1 − n)C ht* (i )   = ê ht * ú             C ht*   = n ê ht * ú                     .
                                                               ˆ                                ˆ                 Pˆ *
                                                          ë Pht û                          ë Pht û                 ht


       The optimal price for the LCP firm is:

                                                             λ Et −1 (Wt S t−1Ct*1− ρ )
                                       Pˆht* (i ) = Pˆht* =                                                                  (2.9)
                                                            λ − 1 Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ )

The expected discounted profits of these LCP price setters is given by:

                                                        K t −1 Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ )                                             (2.10)




                                                                  18
Note that this is exactly the expected discounted profit level for firms if they are all PCP price

setters. Thus, for a given distribution of foreign consumption, expected profits will be the same

if either all home firms follow PCP rules or LCP rules8.

        If all other home firms are setting prices in the foreign currency for foreign consumers,

firm i might consider setting the price in the home currency. Expected profits for the deviating

firm are then given by:

                                                     [ (
                                                Et −1 d t −1 ( Pht*dev (i ) − Wt ) X ht*dev (i )) ,    )]
where

                                                                                   −λ                                 −λ
                                                                é Pht*dev (i ) ù                   é Pht*dev (i ) ù        Pˆt*Ct*
                    X ht*dev (i )   =   (1 − n)C ht*dev (i )   =ê                       C ht*   = nê
                                                                        ˆ* ú                               ˆ* ú
                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                ë S t Pht û                        ë S t Pht û               Pˆ *
                                                                                                                              ht


        The optimal price for the PCP deviator is given by:

                                                                 λ Et −1 (Wt S tλ −1Ct*1− ρ )
                                               Pht*dev (i ) =                                  .                                       (2.11)
                                                                λ − 1 Et −1 ( S tλ −1Ct*1− ρ )

Using this, the equilibrium expected discounted profits for the PCP deviator are:

                                                                 æ é S Pˆ * ù λ −1       ö
                                                   K t −1 Et −1 çç ê *dev
                                                                        t ht
                                                                             ú Ct ÷
                                                                                   *1− ρ ÷
                                                                                                                                       (2.12)
                                                                    P (i ) û
                                                                 è ë ht                  ø

Substituting the expressions for optimal prices, (2.9) and (2.11), into equation (2.12), the

expected discounted profits of the firm that follows the PCP strategy when all others follow LCP

are:

         K t −1 ( Et −1 (Wt S tλ −1Ct*1− ρ ))1−λ ( Et −1 ( S tλ −1Ct*1− ρ )) λ ( Et −1 (Wt S t−1Ct*1− ρ )) λ −1 ( Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ ))1−λ

Again, under lognormality, this can be simplified to:


8
  In fact however, expected foreign consumption will not be the same. As shown in Devereux and Engel (2000), the
presence of LCP (for all firms, both home and foreign) will generate a very different process for output and
consumption for both the home and foreign economies than would PCP. But in any case, a comparison of profits
from this perspective is not relevant to the question of whether either PCP or LCP constitutes an equilibrium.

                                                                         19
                          {                                                                        }
                    K t −1 ( Et −1 (Wt S tλ −1 ))1−λ ( Et −1 ( S tλ −1 )) λ ( Et −1 (Wt S t−1 )) λ −1 Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ )   (2.13)

         Comparing equation (2.13) to the profits for firms that LCP price, it will pay to deviate

from LCP pricing if and only if:

                              ( Et −1 (Wt S tλ −1 ))1−λ ( Et −1 ( S tλ −1 )) λ ( Et −1 (Wt S t−1 )) λ −1 > 1             (2.14)

This condition can be expressed as:

                                            Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) < 0 .9                               (2.15)

         If we use the expressions for equilibrium wages and exchange rates, (1.7) and (1.9), then

the necessary and sufficient condition for a firm to switch to PCP pricing when all other firms

follow an LCP pricing strategy is:

                                                  Vart −1 (mt ) < Vart −1 (mt* ) .                                       (2.16)

         The following propositions follow:



Proposition 2: An equilibrium exists in which all home firms follow an LCP pricing strategy if

and only if

                                             Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) ≥ 0 .



Corollary: An equilibrium exists in which all home firms are follow LCP pricing if and only if

                                                  Vart −1 (mt ) ≥ Vart −1 (mt* ) .



         Comparing propositions 1 and 2, we see that there is an equilibrium in which all home

firms are LCP pricers if (Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st )) ≥ 0 or Vart −1 (mt ) ≥ Vart −1 (mt* ) , and there is


9
  Careful examination reveals that the expression on the left-hand side of equation (2.14) equals the inverse of the
expression on the left-hand side of equation (2.6) under log normality.

                                                                   20
an equilibrium in which all home firms are PCP pricers if the reverse relationship holds.

Moreover, except for the special case of equal monetary variances, the two cannot overlap.

When there is an equilibrium where all home firms set prices under PCP, there is generically no

equilibrium where they will set prices under PCP, with the reverse statement holding also.

        So far, we have looked only at the decision facing home firms. But it turns out that the

decision facing foreign firms is identical, given the symmetry of the model. Foreign firms will

wish to pre-set prices in foreign currency if the volatility of foreign currency is less than that of

domestic currency, and will wish to set prices in home currency if the reverse holds. Then we

can go on to state the following proposition:



Proposition 3: There is an equilibrium in which all home and foreign firms set prices in the

home currency if and only if:

                                     Vart −1 (mt ) ≤ Vart −1 (mt* ) .

There is an equilibrium in which all home and foreign firms set prices in the foreign currency if

and only if:

                                     Vart −1 (mt ) ≥ Vart −1 (mt* ) .



        The pattern is that firms choose to set prices in the currency of the country with the

lowest monetary variance.

        Note that if one of these inequalities is strict, then there cannot be an equilibrium in

which all firms in both countries follow PCP, nor there can there be an equilibrium where all

firms in both countries follow LCP. The following proposition follows immediately:




                                                   21
Propoposition 4: A necessary and sufficient condition for their to be an equilibrium in which all

 firms in both countries follow a PCP strategy, or in which all firms follow an LCP strategy, is

                                      Vart −1 (mt ) = Vart −1 (mt* ) .

       Proposition 4 represents a case where there is no unique equilibrium for the choice of

price setting currency.   Individual firms in the home and foreign countries are indifferent

between pricing in either currency.



3. Optimal price setting without risk-sharing



       To what extent do the results in the previous section depend upon the assumption of full

risk-sharing? We investigate this question by moving to the polar opposite assumption of no

risk-sharing, so that commodity trade must be balanced in every period. This is represented by

condition (1.2).

       An important effect of using the trade balance condition instead of complete markets is

that the exchange rate is no longer determined by equation (1.7). In the previous analysis,

equation (1.7) was important because it obtained irrespective of the pricing decisions of firms.

When equation (1.2) holds, then equation (1.8) gives us the equilibrium expression for the

exchange rate. It is clear that (except when ρ = 1 ) the exchange rate will in depend on how

home and foreign price levels respond to monetary shocks.

       We will show that we can derive propositions that are similar to Proposition 1 and

Proposition 2, in the absence of asset trade. However, the corollaries to both propositions do not

in general hold in this case. That is, the determinants of the currency of pricing involve more

than just the rankings of monetary variances. We follow the same set of steps.



                                                    22
Home firms follow PCP

            If all firms follow PCP pricing, then expected discounted profit earned in foreign

markets, foreign demand, and the discount factor are all defined as before.10



            When all firms follow PCP, the the first-order condition for the price of goods sold to

foreign consumers is:

                                                                 λ Et −1 (Wt Ct1− ρ )
                                          Pht* (i ) = Pht* =                          .
                                                                λ − 1 Et −1 (Ct1− ρ )

Note that this differs from the optimal price with full risk-sharing, c.f. equation (2.1), since it is

domestic and not foreign consumption now that weights marginal cost in the pricing rule. The

expected discounted profit that firm i in the home market earns in period t is given by

                                                        K t −1 Et −1 (Ct1− ρ ) ,

                   nβ Pt −1
where K t −1 =               .
                    λ Ct−−ρ1

            Now if an individual home firm deviates and sets its price in foreign currency, it will

choose price Pˆht*dev (i ) given by:

                                                          λ Et −1 (Wt S t− λ Ct1− ρ )
                                         Pˆht*dev (i ) =                               .
                                                         λ − 1 Et −1 ( S t1−λ Ct1− ρ )

            The expected discounted profit for the deviating firm is:

                                                        æ é P*                  λ −1        ö
                                                        ç            ht
                                                                              ù        1− ρ ÷
                                           K t −1 Et −1 ç ê                   ú      C t    ÷÷ .
                                                        ç ë S t Pˆht*dev (i ) û
                                                        è                                    ø




10
     However, in the absence of full risk sharing, home and foreign discount factors are no longer identical.

                                                                   23
       Following the same steps as in the previous section (with equations (2.5)-(2.7)), we

conclude that under the lognormal assumption, if all other firms are PCP pricers, firm i would

prefer to deviate and follow an LCP pricing strategy if and only if:

                                 (Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st )) > 0 .            (3.1)

This is the same condition as (2.7) in the previous section.

       However, there is not in general a simple relationship equivalent to equation (2.8) that

can be derived from condition (3.1). This is because the exchange rate from (1.8) now depends

on the pricing strategies followed by the home and foreign firms. We shall analyze some

possible outcomes shortly.



Home firms follow LCP

       Following steps analogous to those of section 2, we find that the optimal price charged to

foreign consumers of the home good when all home firms follow an LCP pricing strategy is:

                                                     λ Et −1 (Wt S t−1Ct1− ρ )
                               Pˆht* (i ) = Pˆht* =
                                                    λ − 1 Et −1 (Ct1− ρ )

The expected discounted profits of these LCP price setters is given by:

                                                 K t −1 Et −1 (Ct1− ρ )

       The optimal price for a home firm that chooses to deviate and price in its own currency

when all other home firms price in the foreign currency is given by:

                                                  λ Et −1 (Wt S tλ −1Ct1− ρ )
                                Pht*dev (i ) =                                 .
                                                 λ − 1 Et −1 ( S tλ −1Ct1− ρ )

The expected discounted profit for the firm that deviates from PCP pricing is:

                                                  æ é S Pˆ * ù λ −1        ö
                                    K t −1 Et −1 çç ê *dev
                                                         t ht
                                                               ú    C 1− ρ ÷
                                                                      t    ÷
                                                    ë Pht (i ) û
                                                  è                        ø

                                                          24
        It will pay to deviate from LCP pricing if and only if:

                                      Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) < 0 .

Likewise, given the symmetry of the model, we can show that the foreign firm will find it

advantageous to deviate from PCP if the following condition is met

                                      −Covt −1 ( wt* , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) > 0 ,

On the other hand, the foreign firm will find it advantageous to deviate from LCP if

                                      −Covt −1 ( wt* , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) < 0 .

How do these conditions translate into restrictions on the underlying monetary variances? To

investigate this, we make some conjectures about pricing strategies. Then from the implied

behavior of exchange rates, we can establish whether these conjectures represent equilibrium

strategies.

        First, conjecture that all firms in both countries followed PCP pricing. Then it is easy to

show that the law of one price holds for all goods, and given identical preferences, purchasing

                                                                                           Mt
power parity holds: S t Pˆt* = Pt . From equation (1.8), this implies S t =                       . Then using
                                                                                           M t*

equation (1.9) for the nominal wage, the necessary and sufficient condition for a home firm to

follow PCP pricing when all other home firms follow PCP pricing is:

                     Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) = Vart −1 (mt ) − Vart −1 (mt* ) ≤ 0 .

In the same way, the necessary and sufficient condition for a foreign firm to follow PCP when all

other foreign firms follow PCP is:

                    − Covt −1 ( wt* , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) = Vart −1 (mt* ) − Vart −1 (mt ) ≤ 0 .




                                                           25
These two conditions are incompatible, and so there can be no equilibrium in which all firms

follow PCP strategies, except in the special case where Vart −1 (mt ) = Vart −1 (mt* ) . So we have the

following proposition, which is analogous to Proposition 4 for the case of PCP pricing:



Propoposition 5: A necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of an equilibrium in

which all firms in both countries follow a PCP strategy is Vart −1 (mt ) = Vart −1 (mt* ) .



        Now conjecture that all firms in both countries follow LCP strategies. In this case, both

Pt and Pˆt* are determined at time t − 1 , and Vart −1 ( Pt ) = Vart −1 ( Pˆt* ) = 0 . Then using equation

(1.8) and (1.9), a necessary and sufficient condition for a given home firm to follow LCP pricing

if all other home firms follow LCP pricing is:

        Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) = (2 ρ − 1)Vart −1 (mt ) − Vart −1 (mt* ) − 2( ρ − 1)Covt −1 (mt , mt* ) ≥ 0 .

Similarly, if all foreign firms follow LCP pricing, a necessary and sufficient condition for any

given foreign firm to follow LCP pricing is:

     − Covt −1 ( wt* , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) = (2 ρ − 1)Vart −1 (mt* ) − Vart −1 (mt ) − 2( ρ − 1)Covt −1 (mt , mt* ) ≥ 0 .

If both of these conditions are met, all firms in both countries will follow LCP pricing.



Proposition 6: There is an equilibrium in which all firms in both countries follow LCP pricing if

and only if the following two conditions are met:

                    Vart −1 (mt ) + Vart −1 (mt* ) ≤ 2 ρVart −1 (mt ) − 2( ρ − 1)Covt −1 (mt , mt* ) ,

                   Vart −1 (mt ) + Vart −1 (mt* ) ≤ 2 ρVart −1 (mt* ) − 2( ρ − 1)Covt −1 (mt , mt* ) .




                                                            26
        Clearly for large enough ρ , both conditions can be met. So, in contrast to the case of

full risk-sharing, here it is possible for an equilibrium to exist in which all firms price in the

consumers’ currencies, even when Vart −1 (mt ) ≠ Vart −1 (mt* ) .

        Proposition 6 therefore allows for a case where all export firms would like to keep their

prices fixed in the local currency of sale, rather than their own currency.        It requires that

consumers be relatively risk averse. The intuition behind the proposition can be developed in

light of the discussion of the previous section. We saw there that exchange rate variance,

holding marginal costs constant, led to a reduction in profits for the LCP firm relative to the PCP

alternative, and reduced the incentive to set prices in the buyer’s currency. On the other hand, a

positive covariance between the exchange rate and marginal costs tends to raise profits for the

LCP firm, and increases the incentive to price in the buyer’s currency. But when all firms follow

LCP pricing rules, and the coefficient of relative risk aversion exceeds unity, the impact of

monetary variance on the exchange rate is dampened, relative to the covariance of the exchange

rate and marginal costs.       This increases the incentive to follow LCP pricing, and, if the

conditions of proposition 6 are met, supports the LCP pricing rule for both countries as an

equilibrium, even without identical monetary variances.

        Note however, that if monetary variances move out of line too much, then the global LCP

pricing equilibrium is eliminated. The conditions of proposition 6 will not hold if one country’s

monetary variance is too high, relative to the other.

        We have shown that generically, global PCP pricing is not an equilibrium. Global LCP

pricing can be an equilibrium for high risk aversion, and as long as monetary variances are not

too far apart. What about asymmetric pricing equilibria? Is there an equilibrium where all world

exporting firms price in home (foreign) currency?



                                                   27
        First, conjecture that all home firms follow PCP pricing and all foreign firms follow LCP

pricing. If all foreign firms set prices in advance for home consumers in terms of domestic

currency, then Pt is predetermined. But, with home firms following a PCP pricing strategy, Pˆt*

varies with the exchange rate. We have, expressing prices in logs, pˆ t* = − nst + zt −1 , where zt −1

represents predetermined components of the price index.

        Using this solution for the foreign CPI in the equation for the exchange rate (1.8), we can

establish that a home firm will follow PCP pricing when all other home firms follow PCP pricing

if and only if the following condition is met (using (1.9) and (3.1)):

                                     Covt −1 ( wt , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) =
        (2( ρ − 1)(1 − n) + 1)Vart −1 (mt ) − Vart −1 (mt* ) − 2( ρ − 1)(1 − n)Covt −1 (mt , mt* ) ≤ 0

Likewise, a foreign firm will follow LCP pricing if all other foreign firms follow LCP pricing if

and only if:

                                       − Covt −1 ( wt* , st ) − 12 Vart −1 ( st ) =
            (2( ρ − 1)(1 − n) + 1)Vart −1 (mt* ) − Vart −1 (mt ) − 2( ρ − 1)(1 − n)Covt −1 (mt , mt* ) ≥ 0

We therefore have the following proposition:



Proposition 7: There is an equilibrium in which all home and foreign firms set prices in the

home currency if and only if the following two conditions are met:

               Vart −1 (mt ) − Vart −1 (mt* ) ≤ −2( ρ − 1)(1 − n)(Vart −1 (mt ) − Covt −1 (mt , mt* )) ,

               Vart −1 (mt ) − Vart −1 (mt* ) ≤ 2( ρ − 1)(1 − n)(Vart −1 (mt* ) − Covt −1 (mt , mt* )) .

A necessary condition for these two conditions to be met is Vart −1 (mt ) ≤ Vart −1 (mt* ) .




                                                            28
          The symmetry of the home and foreign country allows us to derive the following

proposition for the alternative case, where all exports are priced in foreign currency:



Proposition 8: There is an equilibrium in which all home and foreign firms set prices in the

foreign currency if and only if the following two conditions are met:

                   Vart −1 (mt* ) − Vart −1 (mt ) ≤ −2( ρ − 1)n(Vart −1 (mt* ) − Covt −1 (mt , mt* )) ,

                     Vart −1 (mt* ) − Vart −1 (mt ) ≤ 2( ρ − 1)n(Vart −1 (mt ) − Covt −1 (mt , mt* )) .

A necessary condition for these two conditions to be met is Vart −1 (mt* ) ≤ Vart −1 (mt ) .

          Propositions 7 and 8 cannot both be met, except in the special case in which the log

money supplies are equal.11 That is, it is generically not possible to have one equilibrium in

which all firms price in the home currency and simultaneously another equilibrium in which all

firms price in the foreign currency. Note also that for either proposition 7 or proposition 8 to

hold, it is necessary that the monetary variances are quite far apart. That is, the condition

Vart −1 (mt ) ≤ Vart −1 (mt* ) ( Vart −1 (mt* ) ≤ Vart −1 (mt ) ) is not a sufficient condition for proposition 7

(proposition 8). If risk aversion is greater than unity, and reasonably large, and the monetary

variances differ only slightly, then neither of these propositions will apply.                            In that case,

proposition 6 will represent the only pricing equilibrium in the economy without full risk-

sharing.12




11
     Another case in which both propositions could be met is ρ = 1 and equal monetary variances.
12
   Nevertheless, it is possible for the conditions of Proposition 6 to be met at the same time that the conditions of
either Proposition 7 or Proposition 8 are met. That implies there can be situations of multiple equilibria. If home
monetary variance is smaller than foreign monetary variance, then it is possible that there will exist both an
equilibrium in which all firms price in the home currency and one in which they all follow LCP pricing. And, if
home monetary variance exceeds foreign monetary variance, it is possible that there will exist both an equilibrium in
which all firms price in the foreign currency and one in which they all follow LCP pricing.


                                                            29
        The economy without full risk-sharing then offers us some interesting conclusions

regarding the equilibrium configuration of international pricing. First, it is generically not

possible to have exporters in all countries set prices in their domestic currency. It is possible that

exporters will choose to set prices in the currency of the buyer, so long as risk aversion is

relatively large, and the monetary variances are not too far apart. But if the monetary variance of

one country is too high, then this equilibrium will be eliminated, and it will be replaced by one in

which the country’s exporters will set their prices in the currency of the other country, as will the

exporting firms in the other country. In addition, if risk aversion is relatively low, we tend to

move towards the results of the previous section: all world exports will be set in the prices of the

country with the lowest monetary variance.



4. Discussion and conclusions

        The results of the last two sections depend on the type of international financial markets

in existence, and also depend on the degree of risk aversion. It is possible to have multiple

equilibria in international price setting arrangements; in the full risk-sharing case this is possible

if monetary variances are exactly identical; in the no risk-sharing case this is possible if the

monetary variances are different, but not too far apart.

        Nevertheless, a very strong message comes out of the result of both sections. A country

that has highly volatile monetary policy will find that its import prices will be pre-set in foreign

currency, and as a result it will experience a high rate of pass-through from exchange rates to

imported good prices. A country with a low volatility of monetary policy is more likely to have

its import goods prices set in its own currency, with a very low rate of exchange rate pass-

through. When all countries have very low monetary policy volatility, and international financial




                                                 30
markets are incomplete, we are likely to see emerge a low rate of exchange rate pass-through

generally.

       These results are consistent with the contention of Ortiz (1999) and the discussion of

Taylor (2000), suggesting not only that exchange rate pass-through is endogenous, but that it

may depend directly on the degree of predictability in monetary policy. Thus, the results would

rationalize why exchange rate pass-through would be high in a country that has historically had

quite unstable monetary policy, such as Mexico, and low in countries such as New Zealand and

Canada, which have historically benefited from very stable monetary policy.

       While our results do lend some support to the view that exchange rate pass-through

depends on monetary policy, there are a number of features left out of the present analysis. As in

the previous literature in the `new open economy macroeconomics’, we have not discussed why

firms must set nominal prices one period in advance. The answer from the new Keynesian

literature is that small “menu costs” make it more profitable for a firm to set prices ahead of

time: the loss in profits from not altering prices optimally when there are small demand shocks

are second-order, so even very small menu costs imply it is optimal not to change prices. In the

international setting, the firm may necessarily have to incur costs of adjusting prices. If prices

are set in the home currency, there may be costs associated with adjusting foreign-currency

prices, and vice-versa.

       One can justify the analysis of the paper, which does not explicitly consider menu costs,

by assuming that the costs of adjusting prices are the same whether prices are set in home or

foreign currency. If the costs are very different, menu cost considerations might alter the optimal

choice of currency for price setting. But it may be that these costs are all quite small, so that the

considerations of the previous sections dominate menu cost considerations. It is unfortunately




                                                 31
difficult to quantify menu costs and compare them to the gains in expected discounted profits

that we have focused on.

       Therefore, we view this paper as giving only a partial answer to the question of the

optimal currency for price setting. Our analysis has expanded on the previous partial equilibrium

modeling and we have found that the partial equilibrium results may well be overturned in

general equilibrium.    But further theoretical and empirical work is needed to incorporate

considerations of transactions costs, distribution and intermediate products.




                                                32
                                          References

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2000a, Does exchange rate stability increase trade
      and welfare?, American Economic Review 90, 1093-1109.

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2000b, Trade flows, prices and the exchange rate
      regime, Study Center Gerzensee, mimeo.

Betts, Caroline and Michael B. Devereux, 1996, The exchange rate in a model of pricing to
        market, European Economic Review, 40, 1007-1021.

Campa, José M., and Linda S. Goldberg, 2001, Exchange rate pass-through into import prices: a
      macro or micro phenomenon?, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo.

Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, 2000, Can sticky price models generate
       volatile and persistent real exchange rates?, National Bureau of Economic Research,
       working paper no. 7869.

Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti, 2001, Optimal interest rate rules and exchange rate pass-
        through,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo.

Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel, 2000, Monetary policy in the open economy revisited:
      Price setting and exchange rate flexibility, National Bureau of Economic Research,
      working paper no. 7665.

Devereux, Michael B., Charles Engel, and Cédric Tille, 1999, Exchange rate pass-through and
      the welfare effects of the euro, National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper
      no. 7382.

Friberg, Richard, 1998, In which currency should exporters set their prices?, Journal of
        International Economics 45, 59-76.

Giovannini, Alberto, 1988, Exchange rates and traded goods prices, Journal of International
      Economics 24, 45-68.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, Exchange rate dynamics redux, Journal of
       Political Economy 103, 624-60.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1998, Risk and exchange rates, National Bureau of
       Economic Research, working paper no. 6694.

Ortiz, Guillermo M., 1999, Dollarization: fad or future for Latin America?, IMF Economic
       Forum, transcript.

Sutherland, Alan, 2001, Incomplete pass-through and the welfare effects of exchange rate
       variability, University of St. Andrews, mimeo.



                                              33
Taylor, John B., 2000, Low-inflation, pass-through, and the pricing power of firms, European
       Economic Review 44, 1389-1408.

Tille, Cédric, 2000, ‘Beggar-thy-neighbor’ or ‘beggar thyself’? The income effects of exchange-
        rate fluctuations, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report 112.




                                              34
