                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MIGRATION CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM


                                          Robert Kaestner
                                           Neeraj Kaushal
                                          Gregg Van Ryzin


                                         Working Paper 8560
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8560


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2001




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2001 by Robert Kaestner, Neeraj Kaushal and Gregg Van Ryzin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Migration Consequences of Welfare Reform
Robert Kaestner, Neeraj Kaushal and Gregg Van Ryzin
NBER Working Paper No. 8560
October 2001
JEL No. J6



                                              ABSTRACT


        In this paper, we investigate whether or not recent state and federal changes in welfare policy --
the imposition of time-limited benefits, the use of financial sanctions for non-compliance, and the setting
of strict work eligibility rules -- affect the migration of low-educated unmarried women. Estimates of
welfare’s effect on migration reveal that welfare policy does indeed affect migration. Recent changes in
policy that have made public assistance a less attractive alternative are associated with greater migration
among low-educated unmarried women. Welfare reform has motivated low-educated women to move
greater distances more frequently, and to combine such moves with employment. Estimates also indicate
that welfare reform is associated with more local (i.e., within county) changes in residential location that
are associated with employment, although estimates of this effect were not robust to estimation method.
The close link between residential moves and employment in the post-reform period is consistent with
the idea that welfare reform has motivated people to move for economic reasons such as better
employment opportunities. This evidence suggests that the traditional way of thinking about the effect
of welfare on migration -- as a strategic move to obtain higher benefits -- is inadequate.




Robert Kaestner                                  Neeraj Kaushal              Gregg Van Ryzin
Institute of Government and Public Affairs       The Graduate Center         Baruch College/CUNY
University of Illinois at Chicago                City University of New York
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
Tel: 312.996.8227
Email: kaestner@uic.edu
                                                  Introduction

        Individuals respond to financial incentives. This basic tenet of economic theory underlies the

fundamental program design problem associated with many government assistance programs. The problem

government officials face is how to structure assistance programs to help a specific group of persons achieve

some desired outcome without inducing unintended behavioral changes that undermine the policy’s original

intentions. Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) was one such program that received much

attention because of perceived unintended and adverse consequences it may have engendered. Scholars from

several disciplines have investigated whether or not the AFDC program (welfare) caused women to reduce

their labor market attachment, increase their fertility, alter their family structure and change their residential

location.

        The effect of welfare or cash assistance on residential choice has been labeled the “welfare magnet

effect.” The label arises from the hypothesis that current and potential welfare recipients are attracted to

states with more generous benefits—i.e., magnet states. Current and potential welfare recipients may

migrate to states with generous benefits or a state’s generous benefits may dampen migration out of the state

that would otherwise occur. Such migration may affect the level of welfare benefits that states offer because

it may increase the number of program participants and thus the total cost of providing a given level of

benefits. Consequently, states may be reluctant to offer generous benefits and as a result, welfare benefits

may be lower than the socially desirable level (Brueckner 2000). More generally, the availability of public

assistance programs may reduce migration among low-income families, when such a move might increase

their ability to become economically independent—for example, because of improved job prospects or

greater family support at the new location.

        Recent state and federal changes in the AFDC program provide an excellent opportunity to re-

examine the effect of welfare policy on migration. State waivers to the AFDC program beginning in the

early 1990s and the passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunities Reconciliation Act

(PRWORA) in 1996 resulted in profound changes in welfare policy that made public assistance a less

attractive alternative for low-income families. Therefore, we would expect low-income families to increase



                                                                                                                 2
their investment in migration; just as we would expect them to increase their investments in all types of

human capital, and in other activities (e.g., job search) that enhance economic independence. Accordingly,

in this paper, we investigate whether or not recent state and federal changes in welfare policy—the

imposition of time-limited benefits, the use of financial sanctions for non-compliance, and the setting of strict

work eligibility rules—affect the migration of low-educated unmarried women. We focus on low-educated

women because this is the demographic group most likely at risk of welfare receipt and therefore most likely

to be affected by changes in welfare policy. If welfare policy does affect migration, it should be easier to

identify such effects during a period of rapid and significant change in policy such as that which has recently

occurred. Earlier studies of the welfare magnet effect had to rely on a much smaller amount of variation in

state welfare policy making it more difficult to detect an effect. This difficulty may partly explain the

inconsistent nature of the findings from that earlier empirical literature (Brueckner 2000). Such lack of

consensus underscores the importance of additional study of the welfare magnet effect.

                                             Previous Literature

        Brueckner (2000) and Meyer (2000) provide recent reviews of the empirical literature related to the

migration effects of welfare policy. Both authors note that the evidence is mixed. At one extreme is the

study by Levine and Zimmerman (1995), who found that the generosity of welfare benefits had no effect on

the migration decisions of poor single women. In contrast, Enchautegui (1997) found very large effects; a

$25 (one standard deviation) increase in the difference in weekly AFDC benefits between states results in a

44% increase in the probability that a single woman will migrate out-of-state.

        Meyer (2000) suggests that differences in methods may explain much of the inconsistency in

reported estimates, and his discussion of this problem provides important guidance for our empirical

analysis. The first statistical issue Meyer (2000) discusses is that of sample selection. Several previous

studies (e.g., Gramlich and Laren, and Echautegui 1997) have examined the recent migration history of a

sample of current welfare recipients. This sampling strategy tends to overstate the effect of welfare policy on

migration. Some current welfare recipients may have migrated from low- to high-benefit states for reasons

unrelated to the generosity of welfare benefits, but because they are more likely to be eligible for and thus



                                                                                                                3
receive benefits in high-benefit states, it appears that their migration was welfare-induced. In other words,

program participation is endogenous, determined by state welfare policy. The research implication of this

criticism is clear: analyses of the effect of welfare policy on migration should not be limited to current (or

past) welfare recipients.1 It is preferable to examine a group at risk of welfare receipt, but not necessarily

receiving benefits.

         A similar empirical problem exists if samples are limited on the basis of poverty status (e.g., Walker

1994 and Levine and Zimmerman 1995). Limiting the sample to currently-poor families will bias the effect

of welfare induced migration. The same reasoning used in the case of welfare participation applies here

(Meyer 2000). Some currently-poor families may have migrated from low- to high-benefit states for reasons

unrelated to the generosity of welfare benefits, but because poverty status is correlated with benefit levels, it

appears that their migration is welfare induced. The direction of the bias depends on the correlation between

benefit levels and poverty status. Meyer (2000) argues that poverty will be lower in high-benefit states

because wages are higher in high-benefit states. This reasoning suggests that using poverty status will

understate the effect of welfare-induced migration. Again, the empirical lesson to be gleaned from this

criticism is to select a sample of at-risk families using characteristics other than program participation and

poverty status, for example, education.

         Meyer (2000) also discusses the empirical problems associated with studies that use a comparison-

group approach. In these studies, the migration of a group likely to be affected by welfare policy, the target

group, is compared to the migration of an otherwise similar group unaffected by welfare policy, the

comparison group. The advantage of this approach is that it has the potential to control for omitted

determinants of migration that are difficult to measure and which may be correlated with variation in state

welfare policy. The disadvantage of the comparison-group approach is finding suitable target and

comparison groups. We have already discussed the problems associated with identifying an appropriate

target group to study. Past studies, only some of which have used a comparison-group approach, have used


1
  Meyer (2000) shows that selecting the sample on the basis of prior period welfare receipt produces biased estimates,
but the bias is in the opposite direction and is likely to be smaller than if current program participation is used to select
the sample.

                                                                                                                                4
single mothers on AFDC (Gramlich and Laren 1984; Enchautegui 1997), all single mothers (Blank 1988;

Enchautegui 1997; Meyer 2000), poor single mothers (Levine and Zimmerman 1995), low-educated women

(Enchautegui 1997; Meyer 2000), and low-educated mothers (Meyer 2000) as target groups.2 Perhaps the

more serious difficulty, however, is to identify an appropriate comparison group. There is rarely a perfect

choice. Ultimately, the choice involves a tradeoff between a comparison group whose behavior is similar to

the target group, but likely to be affected by the policy of interest, and a comparison group unlikely to be

affected by policy, but whose behavior is not similar to the target group. Departures from either of these two

selection criteria will result in biased estimates, although dissimilarity of the comparison group can result in a

bias in any direction; whereas choosing a comparison group that is similar to the target group but affected by

welfare policy will result in a bias toward zero.3 In light of this statistical problem, previous studies have

tended to use more than one comparison group. Among those groups that have been used are poor married

women (Levine and Zimmerman 1995), poor single women without children (Levine and Zimmerman 1995;

Meyer 2000), poor married women (Levine and Zimmerman 1995), all married women (Meyer 2000), and

poor single men (Levine and Zimmerman 1995). The quality of the comparison group is critical to the

success of this approach, and different choices may lead to different inferences.

        Virtually all of the previous studies of the effect of welfare on migration have focused on interstate,

or inter-region, migration. This focus is explained by the fact that historically, most of the variation in

welfare policy has been between states. Thus, it was natural for previous researchers to focus on interstate

moves and interstate differences in welfare benefits. However, welfare may also affect within-state moves.

The availability of cash assistance may discourage current and potential welfare recipients from migrating to

locations within their state that have better employment opportunities, more affordable housing, and greater

family support. For example, welfare may discourage central city residents from moving to suburban

locations where jobs are often more plentiful. Recent changes in welfare law, which have created significant

within-state variation in policy, allow us to examine these within-state moves. Current and potential welfare


2
 The use of marital status and presence of children may also be problematic because these outcomes are influenced by
welfare policy.



                                                                                                                       5
recipients may be more likely to invest in migration activities now that public assistance is temporary and the

burdens of participation greater. The reduced attractiveness of public assistance may have induced migration

related to improved job prospects and greater family support in the new location. These moves may occur

within and between states. All else equal, migration among residents of high-benefit states, regardless of

destination, is expected to be lower than migration among residents of low-benefit states; generous benefits

dampen the economic incentive to invest in migration. Thus, even if there were no strategic migration

behavior, in terms of seeking out higher welfare benefits, we would still expect to find positive net migration

between low- and high-benefit states. Thus, previous studies’ focus on interstate moves may have masked

significant effects of welfare on residential location.

         This brief literature review has drawn attention to three points. Additional study of the migration

effects of welfare is warranted because of the policy importance of the issue and because there is no

consensus as to the existence or magnitude of the welfare magnet effect. Second, methodological issues

matter. We believe a good argument can be made for the use of a comparison-group approach; and when

using this approach, it is arguably better to use demographic characteristics relatively unaffected by welfare

policy to define target and comparison groups than to use program participation status or poverty status.4

Finally, no previous study has examined the effect of welfare on within-state migration. Indeed, welfare may

have a much greater effect on within-state moves than on interstate moves. Identifying only the latter

understates the total effect of welfare on migration.

                                                  Research Strategy

         To obtain estimates of the effect of welfare reform on migration we rely mainly on a comparison-

group approach, which is also known as difference-in-differences (DD). The DD procedure is a quasi-

experimental research design that compares the change before and after welfare reform in the migration of a

group affected by welfare reform—the target group—to the change before and after welfare reform in the


3
  This statement is true only if the target group contains a higher proportion of affected members than the comparison
group.
4
  We also use what we will refer to as a statistical comparison group. Specifically, we limit the sample to the target
group, and include state-specific time trends in the regression model to account for changes over time in a state that may
correlated with changes in welfare policy.

                                                                                                                         6
migration of a similar group unaffected by welfare reform—the comparison group. The logic of the DD

procedure is revealed by Table 1.


                                                Table 1
                           Residential Moves Before and After Welfare Reform

        Period /             Before Welfare Reform         After Welfare Reform               After-Before
        Group                       (e.g., 1995)                 (e.g., 1999)

Target Group                             A                             B                           B-A
(Affected by Reform)

Comparison Group                         C                             D                           D-C
(Unaffected by Reform)

Difference-in-                                                                                   (B-A)-
Differences                                                                                      (D-C)

        In Table 1, the difference B-A measures the change in migration, defined for example as any change

in residence between year (t-1) and year (t), of the target group, the group affected by welfare reform, before

and after the policy change. This difference may be due to the effect of welfare reform and other factors that

change over time. The difference D-C measures the change in migration before and after welfare reform of

the comparison group, a group whose behavior is similar to the target group, but a group unaffected by

welfare reform. Changes in the migration of the comparison group are due to factors unrelated to welfare

reform because this group is by definition unaffected by welfare reform. Thus, the difference-in-differences,

(B-A)-(D-C), measures the effect of welfare reform on the migration of the target group. The effect of other

factors is eliminated by subtracting the before-and-after change of the comparison group from the before-

and-after change of the target group. Obviously, a critical assumption of the DD procedure is that changes in

migration caused by factors unrelated to welfare reform are the same for the target and comparison groups.

We discuss this assumption in more detail below in the Data section.

        The DD analysis can also be cast in a regression framework. For example, the regression

specification that corresponds to Table 1 is as follows:



        (1) Move ik ( t −1) = α 0 + α 1 Treat k + α 2 Reform j (t −1) + α 3 (Treat k x Reform j(t -1) ) + eijkt


                                                                                                                  7
where Moveik(t-1) is an indicator of whether or not woman ‘i’ in group ‘k’ migrated, or more generally moved,

between year (t-1) and year (t). The variable Treatk in equation (1) denotes membership in our target group.

Reform j(t-1) is an indicator equal to one if it is an observation from a period after welfare reform. The key

parameter in equation (1) is α3, which is the DD estimate corresponding to (B-A)-(D-C). Note that policy

variables are measured as of year (t-1) prior to the move, and they refer to the policy in place in the state of

residence in the year (t-1).

        As written, the DD estimate obtained from a regression using the specification in equation (1) would

equal the estimate obtained by the subtractions in Table 1. This simple specification of the regression model

generates no advantage over the differences in means in Table 1. An expanded specification of the

regression model that includes controls for personal characteristics, unmeasured state effects, and

unmeasured time effects does have some advantage. Notably, DD estimates obtained from such a model will

be more precise. Perhaps even more important, however, is the inclusion of personal characteristics, which

may strengthen the validity of the underlying identification assumption of the DD analysis. The DD

procedure assumes that unmeasured time-varying factors affect the migration decisions of the target and

comparison groups equally. Controlling for observed differences between the target and comparison groups

improves the chances that this assumption will be correct.

        In practice, we estimate a model similar to equation (2) below.



              Move ijk ( t −1) = β j + ( β j x Treat k ) + δ t + X ijkt Γ + Z j (t −1) λ + α 1Treat k +
        (2)
                              α 2 Reform j (t −1) + α 3 (Treat k x Reform j(t -1) ) + eijkt



Equation (2) includes controls for state effects (β j), year effects (δt), personal characteristics (Xijkt) such as

age, race and number of children measured at year (t), and state level variables (Zj(t-1)) such as the

unemployment rate measured at year (t-1) and referring to state of residence in the prior year.




                                                                                                                      8
        A strength of the difference-in-differences analysis is that it controls, in a parsimonious way, for time

variation in outcomes unrelated to welfare reform—for example, due to macroeconomic changes. Clearly,

this statement is correct only if we have chosen the “right” comparison group. Assuming we have chosen

correctly, then, it is not as crucial in a DD analysis of the effect of welfare reform to control for

macroeconomic activity as it is in other approaches (see Ziliak et al. 2000, and Figlio and Ziliak 1999 for an

example in the context of welfare reform and caseload declines). To be cautious, however, our regression

model includes controls for macroeconomic activity; specifically, we include the unemployment rate in the

state of residence at the time of the survey (i.e., March) in the prior year, and the annual rate of

unemployment in the calendar year two years prior to the survey (e.g., 1993 for the 1995 survey).

        An alternative to the difference-in-differences approach is to limit the sample to members of the

target group, and to control for unmeasured time variation using a purely statistical procedure. The

advantage of this approach is that we do not need to identify an appropriate comparison group, which may be

difficult in practice. Instead, we include controls for state-specific time trends in the model. The regression

model specification for this alternative is:



        (3) Move ij (t −1) = β j + δ ( β j x Trend t ) + X ijkt Γ + Z j (t −1) λ + α 1 Reform j (t −1) + eijkt .



There are two disadvantages with this approach. First, there may be non-linear time effects that will remain

unaccounted for by the linear trend specified in equation (3). Second, there will be a significant amount of

collinearity between the state-specific trends and the indicators of welfare reform. This collinearity can

make it difficult to identify the effect of the policy, and also prohibits the inclusion in the regression model of

controls for non-linear time effects, since this will only exacerbate the collinearity problem. In the current

case, however, there is enough independent variation in welfare reform policy to obtain relatively precise

estimates; a regression of an indicator of welfare policy (time-limited benefits) on controls for state and state-

specific trends yielded an R-square statistic of 0.69.




                                                                                                                   9
                                                     Data

        The data we use come from the Census Bureau’s March series of Current Population Surveys (CPS)

that are based on a nationwide sample of approximately 62,500 housing units interviewed each year. We use

data from the years 1992 to 2000. We chose these years because they cover virtually all of the period of

recent welfare reform. The March CPS contains information on important individual characteristics such as

age, education level, ethnicity, race, personal earnings, and place of residence; and family characteristics

such as family size, number of children under age six, number of children under age 18, family income, and

its composition. We use these variables as controls in our regression analyses.

        Most significantly, however, the CPS provides information about year-to-year changes in residential

location. In each year, respondents to the survey are asked whether they moved residences from the prior

year, and whether this move involved a change of county, change of urban/rural status or change of state.

State of prior residence is provided, as is the urban/rural designation of the prior residence. Using these data

we are able to construct a variety of dependent variables:

        •   an indicator of whether or not a person has changed residence in the prior year,

        •   an indicator of whether or not a person has moved to a new county,

        •   an indicator of whether or not a person has moved out-of-state,

        •   an indicator of whether or not a person moved from a central city to a non-central city,

        •   and an indicator of whether or not a person moved from a non-central city to a central city.

These dependent variables allow us to investigate a variety of hypotheses. Of particular importance to us is

whether or not welfare policy induced moves were for what we will refer to as economic or strategic reasons.

The broadest definition, any move, consists primarily of intrastate moves, and corresponds most closely to

the concept of migration for economic reasons—better employment, more affordable housing, and greater

family support. On the other hand, migration for strategic reasons—higher welfare benefits in the destination

state—by definition requires an interstate move. Interstate moves may also reflect migration for economic

reasons because of the high correlation of economic activity in small geographic areas (e.g., county and

state). One way to separate out the two types of migration is to combine migration outcomes with


                                                                                                               10
employment outcomes. Clearly, migration for economic reasons will be associated with employment since

employment is one of the primary reasons people move. Migration for strategic reasons is not likely to be

associated with employment since the motivation for this type of move is to take advantage of the more

generous benefits in other states. Thus, we redefine all the dependent variables listed above by conditioning

on employment status. For example, the first dependent variable listed above is redefined to equal one if a

person changed residence and is currently working and zero otherwise.

        Our key independent variable is welfare policy. We focus on three aspects of welfare reform: time

limits on benefits, financial sanctions for failure to comply with work requirements, and exemptions from

work requirements. The federal law imposed a maximum lifetime benefit limit of five years for each family,

but 19 states have lifetime limits shorter than five years. In addition, all but two states (Michigan and

Vermont use state money to replace federal money) have had a time limit since implementation of TANF in

1997, but eight states imposed these limits before the federal law was passed as part of a waiver from AFDC

rules. The other two aspects of reform, financial sanctions and work exemptions are almost always

associated with the federal law and are thus highly correlated with time limits. Because of this fact, we do

not obtain separate estimates of their effect. Instead, we investigate whether or not migration is differentially

affected if a state has only a time limit, or a time limit and one of these other two policies. We define a state

to have a sanction policy if the state reduces benefits at least partially for initial failure to comply with work

requirements and reduces benefits completely for repeated failure. We consider a state to have strict

exemption policy if it requires all recipients with children over six months of age to work. While there are

other aspects of welfare reform that may be analyzed, we limit our attention to these three because they are

prominent components of welfare reform and are relatively easy to define and measure. Thus, to the extent

that other aspects of welfare reform are correlated with these two items, we need to be cautious in our

interpretation of the results. Both policy variables are measured as of the date they became effective and are

merged to the March CPS files in the appropriate year.5


5
  We used a variety of data sources to define the policy variables including the 1999 CEA report, information from the
National Governors Association and summaries of legislation maintained by the Agency for Children and Families of
the Department of Health and Human Sevices.

                                                                                                                     11
        We include a variety of other independent variables in the analysis:

•   Age - five dummy variables indicating the following age ranges, 18-22, 23-27, 28-32, 33-38, and 39-44,

•   Race/ethnicity – three dummy variables indicating black, non-Hispanic, white, non-Hispanic and

    Hispanic,

•   Number of children – two dummy variables indicating the presence of children age 18 or younger and

    the presence of children age 5 or younger,

•   Other family income – defined as total family income less respondent earnings,

•   Education – a dummy variable indicating respondent has high school degree,

•   State – 51 state dummy variables,

•   Urban/rural – three dummy variables indicating that respondent’s residence in prior year was in central

    city, non-central city but in MSA, and non-MSA,

•   Year – nine year dummy variables,

•   Unemployment – unemployment rate in the state of residence at the time of the survey in the in the prior

    year (e.g., March 1994 for the 1995 survey) and the annual rate of unemployment two years prior (e.g.,

    1993 for the 1995 survey).



Sample Selection

        As noted above, we rely primarily on a comparison-group approach, also known as difference-in-

differences (DD), to obtain estimates of the effect of welfare reform on migration. The DD method

compares the changes in migration before and after welfare reform for two groups of people, those most and

least likely to be affected by the welfare reform law. The group most affected by reform is the target group.

We use low-educated (≤12 years of education), unmarried women between the ages of 18 and 44 as our

target group. This is an appropriate target group because many women in this group are at risk of welfare

receipt. Indeed, in 1994, when welfare rolls were at their peak nationally, approximately 23% of this group

received welfare. In some cases, we further restrict the sample to women with children. Among this latter




                                                                                                            12
group, 43% received welfare in 1994. Importantly, we do not use welfare receipt or income to define our

target group, and thus we avoid the most serious biases noted by Meyer (2000).

        The selection of the comparison group is difficult. We need to select a sample of persons who have

similar migration patterns as our target group, but who were unaffected by welfare reform laws. We use two

comparison groups:

        •   married women with 12 or fewer years of education,

        •   and unmarried women with 13 to 15 years of education.

We chose the first comparison group, married women with 12 or fewer years of education, because they have

a similar level of education as our target group, and because their marital status makes it unlikely that they

will be affected by welfare reform. However, migration decisions of married persons are complicated by

spousal considerations; married persons move less often than do unmarried persons. Partly to control for this

difference, our empirical analysis includes controls for family income and the number of children in the

family. Thus, we are assuming that, conditional on observed characteristics, the migration of married and

unmarried women with 12 or fewer years of education would be the same in the absence of welfare reform.

We chose the second comparison group because women in this group have the same marital status, and their

education levels are not too dissimilar to those of our target group. One potential problem with this group,

however, is that a significant portion of it is at risk of welfare receipt. In 1994, 7% of women in this group

received welfare. While this is significantly less than the 23% who receive welfare among the unmarried

women with 12 or fewer years of education, it is still relatively high. This “contamination” of the

comparison group will yield estimates of the effect of welfare reform that are biased toward zero.

        The selection of target and comparison groups using marital status and presence of children is not

innocuous. The advantage of using these selection criteria is that we identify a target group in which a large

majority of women are at risk of public assistance receipt and a comparison group that has similar education

level and child rearing responsibilities—two important correlates of migration. The disadvantage is that

welfare reform may affect fertility and marriage, and thus we could confound estimates of the effect of

welfare reform with changes in sample composition. For example, if welfare reform decreases fertility and


                                                                                                             13
increases marriage, then the before-and-after difference we calculate is the sum of three effects: welfare

reform, other time-varying factors that affect outcomes, and changes in sample composition. We try to

account for the effect of other factors by subtracting the before-and-after difference of the comparison group.

Thus, our estimate of the effect of welfare reform may be biased, assuming the validity of the comparison

group, by changes in sample composition. However, there is little existing evidence that welfare reform

caused significant changes in fertility or marital status.6

         We partly address this concern by modifying our choice of target and comparison groups.

Specifically, we use the same sample of low-educated women, but use only marital status to define target and

comparison groups: unmarried women are the target group and married women are the comparison group.

This strategy eliminates the potential bias from changes in composition due to welfare reform induced

changes in fertility and allows us to assess the importance of this issue. In addition, we estimate alternative

models that do not rely on the presence of a comparison group. Specifically, we limit the sample to members

of the target group, and control for state-specific variation in migration that may be correlated with welfare

reform by including state-specific time trends.



                                                        Results

         Table 2 provides sample means of the dependent variables for the target and comparison groups used

in the analysis. As shown in Table 2, approximately one quarter of target group members move each year,

but most of those moves are within county. Only eight percent of target group members move to a different

county, and only three percent move to a new state. Rates of migration similar to those for the two target

groups are observed for members of the comparison group consisting of unmarried women. Among married

women, however, rates of migration are lower.

         In Table 3, we present OLS regression estimates of the effect of time-limited benefits on migration.

Estimates in this table were obtained using a comparison-group approach. The top panel of the table shows



6
 See Hoynes (1997) for a review of earlier research on this topic. More recently, Schoeni and Blank (2000) and
Kaushal and Kaestner (2001) find that welfare reform (e.g., time limits and family cap) have no effect on marital status.

                                                                                                                       14
estimates of the effect of welfare reform on the migration of low-educated unmarried women; the bottom

panel shows similar estimates for low-educated, unmarried women with children. Each row of the table

shows estimates obtained using the comparison group named in the first column. In the top panel, we show

estimates related to two different comparison groups: low-educated married women and unmarried women

with 13 to 15 years of education. In the bottom panel, there is only one comparison group: low-educated

married women with children. Each column of Table 3 shows regression estimates pertaining to a different

dependent variable.

        Estimates of the effect of time-limited benefits on the probability of changing residences are small in

magnitude and not statistically different from zero. The next dependent variable we consider is whether or

not a woman changed county of residence. In this case, estimates in Table 3 indicate that time-limited

benefits are associated with an increase in the probability of moving to a different county. All three

estimates are positive and two are statistically significant. All of the estimates are of the same approximate

magnitude suggesting an increase of approximately 0.8 percentage points, or an 11 percent increase, in the

probability of moving to a new county. The estimated effects of time-limited benefits on the probability of

changing state of residence are quite similar to those related to the probability of changing county. All three

estimates of the effects of time limits on the probability of changing state of residence are positive and two

are statistically significant. The magnitudes of these positive effects range from 0.3 to 0.7 percentage points,

which represent relative effects of between 9 and 21 percent. Taken together, these estimates indicate that

welfare reform induced low-educated women to migrate relatively long distances—across county or state

boundaries. In contrast, there is no evidence that welfare reform led to an increase in residence changes

involving smaller distances (e.g., within county). In fact, the increase in the number of between county and

between state moves while the number of total moves stayed constant implies that short distance changes in

residence declined.

        We next divide the sample in two parts: those that lived in a central city in the prior year and those

who did not. The rationale for dividing the sample in this way is related to the distinction between migration

for economic reasons and migration for strategic reasons. Central city areas usually have worse economic



                                                                                                             15
opportunities than non-central city areas and thus, welfare-reform related movements from a central city area

to a non-central city area are most likely related to migration for economic reasons—for example, better

employment opportunities. Moreover, most moves from central city to non-central city occur within state.

Similarly, if economic reasons are the driving force behind welfare-reform related migration decisions, we

would expect to see fewer moves from non-central city areas to central city areas. The estimates of the effect

of time limits on moves from central city areas to non-central city areas show a now recurring pattern. All

three estimates are positive and significant with magnitudes suggesting effects of between 16 and 24 percent.

There are no significant effects of time-limited benefits on the probability of moving from a non-central city

to a central city. In sum, most of the estimates in Table 3 indicate that welfare reform, as measured by the

imposition of time-limited benefits, is associated with a significant increase in migration of low-educated

unmarried women.

        The use of time-limited benefits to measure welfare reform is crude, although it represents perhaps

the most profound change in policy. Many states implemented a variety of other policy changes and this is

reflected in the analysis presented in Table 4. In this table we include two measures of welfare reform as an

attempt to measure differences in the intensity of reform. We construct two dummy variables: one that

indicates that a state has implemented a time limit, but which does not have a strict sanction or work

exemption policy, and the other that indicates that the state has a time limit and either a strict sanction or

work exemption policy. The estimates in Table 4 are consistent with those in Table 3; welfare reform tends

to be positively associated with an increase in migration of low-educated unmarried women. There is mixed

evidence, however, as to whether there is a dose-response effect. It is not always the case that migration is

affected more in states with time limits and other policies, as compared to states with only time limits. In

fact, the estimates are about evenly split in showing evidence for and against a dose-response effect.

Moreover, in nearly every case, statistical tests of whether the estimates associated with the two policy

measures differ could not reject the null hypothesis of equality. These results suggest that it is primarily the

imposition of time-limited benefits that is associated with migration, although other aspects of welfare

reform not explicitly measured may still assert an influence. This is an important finding because few



                                                                                                                 16
women in the sample actually reach the five-year limit. Low-educated women are responding to the policy

before exhausting their benefits.

        To further explore the distinction between migration for economic reasons and migration for

strategic reasons, we constructed variants of our dependent variables that combined migration and

employment outcomes. Specifically, for each dependent variable, we redefined the variable to be equal to

one (and zero otherwise) only if the respondent moved (residence, county, and state) between year (t) and

year (t-1) and was employed at the time of interview in year (t). The rationale for this strategy is that

migration for economic reasons should be associated with a higher probability of employment than migration

for strategic reasons. The estimates pertaining to this analysis are presented in Table 6 and sample means of

the dependent variables are shown in Table 5.

        The estimates in Table 6 provide additional insight. Welfare reform is positively associated with an

increase in the probability that a low-educated, unmarried woman will move, defined as any move, and have

a job. This contrasts with the corresponding estimate in Table 3 that indicates no effect of welfare reform on

the probability of moving. This provides evidence that moves are more likely to be associated with

employment after welfare reform than prior to welfare reform. The difference in the estimates suggests that

welfare reform has increased the employment of low-educated unmarried women, a result consistent with

previous studies (Kaushal and Kaestner 2001). Estimates in Table 6 also indicate that welfare reform is

associated with an increase in moving to a new county or new state, or from a central city to non-central city,

and having a job. The fact that the estimates in Table 6 are of approximately the same magnitudes as those

in Table 3 is evidence that more moves in the post-welfare reform period are associated with employment

than in the pre-reform period. In a related analysis, we examined whether the effect of welfare reform on

employment was larger for movers. Consistent with the evidence in Table 6, welfare reform had a larger

effect on employment of movers versus non-movers (results not shown). While not conclusive, this

evidence, and the evidence in Table 6 supports the notion that welfare reform has induced considerable

migration for economic reasons, in particular for employment.




                                                                                                            17
        Interestingly, differences in economic and social conditions between the origin and destination state

of movers have not changed pre- and post-welfare reform. In Table 7, we present average unemployment

rates, poverty rates, wages, and crime rates in the origin and destination states of persons who changed states

before-and-after the imposition of time-limited benefits. As the figures indicate, the post-reform period is

characterized by lower rates of unemployment, poverty and crime. This is consistent with the improving

economy during this period. However, destination-origin differences in unemployment and crime were

greater in the pre-reform period. Interstate movers in the pre-reform period moved to states with better

employment opportunities and states with lower crime. This is consistent with the more generous nature of

welfare benefits during the pre-reform period. In order to induce a low-educated woman to move, the

destination state must have significantly better opportunities.

        Up to this point, we have been discussing estimates obtained using a comparison-group approach.

As noted, the critical aspect of this approach is the choice of comparison group, and prudence motivated us

to use more than one comparison group to obtain such estimates. An alternative, however, is to limit the

sample to members of the target group and to include in the regression model controls for state-specific time

trends that may confound estimates related to our policy variables. Equation (3), presented above, defines

this model, and estimates from it are presented in Table 8. We present only those estimates analogous to

Table 3 since these estimates provide sufficient information as to whether or not the estimates of the effect of

welfare reform on migration presented earlier are sensitive to the method of estimation. In general, estimates

in Table 8 are consistent with those presented earlier: time-limited benefits are associated with a statistically

significant increase in the number of inter-county and interstate moves among low-educated unmarried

women. The one major difference between Tables 3 and 8 relates to moves from central cities to non-central

cities. For this outcome, estimates in Table 8 indicate that time-limited benefits are associated with a

decrease in the number of such moves, which is the opposite of that indicated by the estimates in Table 3.

The difference in these estimates is attributable to the fact that the positive estimates in Table 3 are the

combination of two changes associated with welfare reform: an absolute and relative decline in central city to

non-central city moves among the comparison groups, and an absolute increase, but relative decrease, in



                                                                                                               18
central city to non-central city moves among the target group. In Table 8, estimates were obtained without

using the comparison group, and the effect of welfare reform (i.e., time limits) is identified from deviations

from a linear trend in the number of central city to non-central city moves. Obviously, there was a relative

decline in the number of central-city to non-central city moves among low-educated unmarried women in

periods after welfare reform. The comparison-group estimate of this effect was positive because the decline

was greater, in fact negative in absolute terms, for members of the comparison group. It is not clear which

estimate is correct, and the lack of consistency between the estimated effects warrants a more cautious

interpretation of these estimates.



                                                 Conclusions

        In this paper, we have re-examined the effect of welfare on migration. We have taken a more

general approach to the problem than previous researchers by examining the effect of welfare on several

types of moves—within county, between county, between state, and between central city and non-central

city—not just interstate moves. While interstate moves to obtain more generous welfare benefits are

important because of the public finance implications of such moves, they may be a small part of the impact

of welfare policy on migration. Thus, our broader focus is appropriate; the availability of public assistance

affects investments in migration generally, and therefore may affect all types of changes in residential

location. Previous research has underestimated the total effect of welfare on migration by limiting the

analyses to examining only interstate moves. Moreover, a comparison of the effect of welfare on different

types of moves can identify exactly what types of migration decisions are being affected and can provide

insight into whether these moves are being motivated by a search for greater welfare benefits or for other

reasons such as improved job opportunities.

        The results of our analysis reveal that welfare policy does indeed affect migration. Recent changes

in welfare policy that have made public assistance a less attractive alternative are associated with greater

migration among low-educated unmarried women. Welfare reform has apparently motivated low-educated

women to move greater distances more frequently, and to combine such moves with employment. Estimates



                                                                                                               19
also indicate that welfare reform is associated with more local (i.e., within county) changes in residential

location that are associated with employment, although estimates of this effect were not robust to estimation

method. The close link between residential moves and employment in the post-reform period is consistent

with the idea that welfare reform has motivated people to move for economic reasons such as better

employment opportunities. Indeed, a comparison of the estimates of the effect of welfare reform on

interstate moves and on interstate moves that are associated with employment, suggest that nearly all

interstate moves among low-educated unmarried women were associated with employment. For example,

estimates indicate that the imposition of time-limited benefits was associated with a 0.007 increase in the

proportion of low-educated unmarried women who move across state boundaries. Welfare reform was also

associated with a 0.006 increase in the proportion of low-educated women who move across state boundaries

and who are working. This implies that six out of every seven interstate moves among this group that were

associated with welfare reform involved employment.

        This evidence suggests that the traditional way of thinking about the effect of welfare on migration—

as a strategic move to obtain higher benefits—is inadequate. Welfare appears to have a much larger effect on

residential location because of its relationship to employment. This suggests that states should adopt welfare

policies that facilitate changes in residential location such as transitional housing benefits and relocation

expenses. For example, preliminary data from Tulare County, California, which provides relocation

expenses to welfare recipients, suggests that such a policy could be effective. In the past three years, Tulare

County has provided moving expenses for 750 welfare recipients, and 85% of these people had jobs six

months after moving (Horst 2001). This suggests that states need to pay attention to housing policies related

to welfare just as they do to child care and health insurance.




                                                                                                                20
                                               References

Brueckner, Jan K. 2000. “Welfare Reform and the Race to the Bottom: Theory and Evidence.” Southern
       Economic Journal 66: 505-525.

Blank, Rebecca M. 1988. “The Effect of Welfare and Wage Levels on the Location Decisions of Female-
        headed Households. Journal of Urban Economics 24:186-211.

Council of Economic Advisers. 1999. Technical Report: The Effects of Welfare Policy and
       Economic Expansion on Welfare Caseloads: An Update. Washington, DC: Executive Office of
       the President of the United States.

Ennchautegui, Maria E. 1997. “Welfare Payments and Other Economic Determinants of Female
       Migration.” Journal of Labor Economics 15:529-554.

Figlio, David N., and James P. Ziliak (1999). Welfare Reform, the Business Cycle, and the
         Decline in AFDC Caseloads. In Sheldon H. Danziger, (Ed.). Economic Conditions and Welfare
         Reform (pp 17-48). Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Gramlich, Edward M. and Deborah S. Laren. 1984. “Migration and Income Redistribution
       Responsibilities. Journal of Human Resources 19:489-511.

Horst, Toni. 2001. “Move It or Lose It.” www.dismal.com July 5, 2001.

Hoynes, Hilary Williamson. 1997. “Work and Marriage Incentives in Welfare Programs: What Have We
       Learned?” in Fiscal Policy: Lessons from Economic Research ed. By Alan Aurerbach.
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Kaushal, Neeraj and Robert Kaestner. 2001. “Welfare to Work: Has Welfare Reform Worked?” Journal
        of Policy Analysis and Management (forthcoming).

Levine, Phillip B. and David J. Zimmerman. 1995. “An Empirical Analysis of the Welfare Debate Using
        the NLSY. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5264, Cambridge, MA:
        NBER.

Meyer, BruceD. 2000. “Do the Poor Move to Receive Higher Welfare Benefits?” unpublished manuscript
       Northwestern University.

Schoeni, Robert F. and Rebecca M. Blank (2000). What has Welfare Reform Accomplished?
       Impacts on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty and Family Structure. National
       Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 7627, Cambridge, MA: NBER.

National Governors Association. 1997. Summary of Selected Elements of State Plans for Temporary
       Assistance for Needy Families as of November 20, 1997, National Governors' Association Center
       for Best Practices. http://www.nga.org/CBP/Activities/WelfareReform.asp.

Walker, James R. 1994. “Migration Among Low-income Households: Helping the Witch Doctors Reach
       Consensus.” unpublished manuscript University of Wisconsin.

Ziliak, James P., David N. Figlio, Elizabeth E. Davis, and Laura S. Connolly (2000). Accounting
         for the Decline in AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or the Economy. Journal of Human
         Resources, 35:570-586.

                                                                                                       21
                                                                  Table 2
                                                   Description of the Sample: 1992-2000

                                               Movers        Inter-county        Inter-state       Central City to   Non-central City
Comparison and Target Groups                                   Movers1            Movers          Non-central City    to Central City
                                                                                                     Movers1              Movers1
                                           N       Mean       N      Mean       N         Mean      N       Mean        N       Mean

Target Group:
 Unmarried Women                         56901     0.270    50212    0.079    56901       0.034   17309     0.102    32903     0.031
 Education: 12 years or fewer

Comparison Groups:
 Married Women                           65639     0.176    57917    0.057    65639       0.028   13259     0.109    44658     0.012
 Education: 12 years or fewer

 Unmarried Women                         57506     0.257    50730    0.097    57506       0.044   16538     0.124    34192     0.035
 Education: 13 to 15 years


Target Group:
 Unmarried Women with Children           24733     0.293    21813    0.075    24733       0.033   8331      0.093    13482     0.034
 Education: 12 years or fewer

Comparison Group:
 Married Women with Children             52281     0.167    46182    0.053    52281       0.026   10586     0.104    35596     0.011
 Education: 12 years or fewer


Note: 1. Sample does not include observations from 1995.




                                                                                                                                        22
                                                                Table 3
                        OLS Regression Estimates of the Effect of Time Limit on Migration of Unmarried Women
                               (Difference-in-differences analysis using CPS data for years 1992-2000)

Dependent Variable                            Movers           Inter-county        Inter-state      Central City to     Non-Central
                                                                 Movers1            Movers         Non-central City    City to Central
Target Group/                                                                                         Movers1          City Movers1
 Comparison Group

Unmarried Women
Education: 12 years or fewer

 Married Women                                 -0.000             0.008***           0.007***           0.024***            0.002
 Education : 12 years or fewer                (0.005)            (0.003)            (0.002)             (0.007)            (0.002)

 Unmarried Women                               -0.004             0.006              0.003               0.016**            0.001
 Education : 13 to 15 years                   (0.005)            (0.004)            (0.002)             (0.007)            (0.003)

Unmarried Women with Children
Education: 12 years or fewer

 Married Women with Children                   0.002             0.008*             0.005*               0.021**            0.001
 Education: 12 years or fewer                 (0.007)            (0.004)            (0.003)             (0.009)            (0.003)


Notes: 1. Analysis excludes data for the year 1995.
       2. Each cell is a separate regression that includes the target group and the corresponding comparison group labeled in each row.
       3. Heteroscedasticity adjusted standard errors in parentheses.
       4. * .05<p=<.1, ** .01<p=<.05, *** p=<.01.




                                                                                                                                          23
                                                              Table 4
OLS Regression Estimates of the Effect of Time Limits, Financial Sanctions and Work Exemptions on Migration of Unmarried Women
                              (Difference-in-differences analysis using CPS data for years 1992-2000)

                                             Movers                   Inter-county             Inter-state Movers          Central City to
Dependent Variable                                                      Movers1                                           Non-central City
                                                                                                                              Movers1
                                    Time Limit      Time        Time Limit      Time       Time Limit      Time        Time Limit      Time
Target Group /                                      Limit,                      Limit,                     Limit,                     Limit,
 Comparison Group                                 Sanctions,                  Sanctions,                 Sanctions,                 Sanctions,
                                                  Exemption                   Exemption                  Exemption                  Exemption
Unmarried Women
Education: 12 years or fewer

 Married Women                         -0.000        -0.000        0.008        0.009**       0.008**      0.006***      0.018*       0.026***
 Education : 12 years or fewer        (0.008)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.011)      (0.008)

 Unmarried Women                       0.011         -0.010        0.010        0.004         0.010**       0.000        0.036***          0.005
 Education : 13 to 15 years           (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.010)          (0.008)

Unmarried Women with Children
Education: 12 years or fewer

 Married Women with Children           -0.004        0.004         0.002         0.010*       0.004         0.006*        0.013            0.023**
 Education : 12 years or fewer        (0.012)       (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.014)          (0.011)


Notes: 1. Analysis excludes data for the year 1995.
       2. Each cell is a separate regression that includes the target group and the corresponding comparison group labeled in each row.
       3. Heteroscedasticity adjusted standard errors in parentheses.
       4. * .05<p=<.1, ** .01<p=<.05, *** p=<.01.




                                                                                                                                                    24
                                                                 Table 5
                                            Description of the Sample of Migrants: 1992-2000

                                          Movers and       Inter-county        Inter-state      Central City to   Non-central City
Comparison and Target Groups               Have Job       Movers and have    Movers and have   Non-central City    to Central City
                                                                Job                Job         Movers and have    Movers and have
                                                                                                     Job                Job
                                          N      Mean        N      Mean       N       Mean      N       Mean        N       Mean

Target Group:
 Unmarried Women                         56901   0.160     50212    0.047    56901     0.020   17309     0.061    32903     0.018
 Education: 12 years or fewer

Comparison Groups:
 Married Women                           65639   0.096     57917    0.029    65639     0.014   13259     0.059    44658     0.007
 Education: 12 years or fewer

 Unmarried Women                         57506   0.204     50730    0.076    57506     0.033   16538     0.096    34192     0.029
 Education: 13 to 15 years


Target Group:
 Unmarried Women with Children           24733   0.151     21813    0.037    24733     0.016    8331     0.049    13482     0.017
 Education: 12 years or fewer

Comparison Groups:
 Married Women with Children             52281   0.085     46182    0.025    52281     0.012   10586     0.052    35596     0.005
 Education: 12 years or fewer


Note: 1. Sample does not include 1995.




                                                                                                                                     25
                                                                 Table 6
                         OLS Regression Estimates of the Effect of Time Limit on Migration of Unmarried Women
                                (Difference-in-differences analysis using CPS data for years 1992-2000)

Dependent Variable                            Movers            Inter-county        Inter-state       Central City to     Non-Central
                                            and have Job        Movers and          Movers and       Non-central City    City to Central
Target Group/                                                    have Job1           have Job          Movers and       City Movers and
 Comparison Group                                                                                       have Job1          have Job1

Unmarried Women
Education: 12 years or fewer

 Married Women                                  0.021***           0.011***           0.006***            0.019***            0.002
 Education: 12 years or fewer                  (0.004)             (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.006)             (0.002)

 Unmarried Women                               0.013***             0.007**            0.003              0.016***            0.001
 Education: 13 to 15 years                     (0.005)             (0.003)            (0.002)            (0.006)             (0.002)

Unmarried Women with Children
Education: 12 years or fewer

 Married Women with Children                   0.037***             0.012***          0.007***            0.015**             0.002
 Education: 12 years or fewer                  (0.006)             (0.003)            (0.002)            (0.007)             (0.003)
         1
Notes:    Analysis excludes data for the year 1995.
         2. Each cell is a separate regression that includes the target group and the corresponding comparison group labeled in each row.
         3. Heteroscedasticity adjusted standard errors in parentheses.
         4. * .05<p=<.1, ** .01<p=<.05, *** p=<.01.




                                                                                                                                            26
                                                                  Table 7
                               Differences in State Characteristics of Movers Before and After Time Limit


 Community Characteristics                    No Time Limit                                      Time Limit
                                     Move From              Move To                 Move From                 Move To

Unemployment Rate                        6.58                   6.31                    4.64                   4.60

Median Real Wage1                        4.91                   4.83                    4.89                   4.87

Median Real Wage1,2                      4.87                   4.81                    4.90                   4.88

Poverty Rate                            14.42                  14.38                   12.74                   12.76

Poverty Rate2                           14.30                  14.17                   12.80                   12.77

Crime Rate                              5568                   5351                     4680                   4702

 Violent Crime                           724                    639                     556                     547

 Property Crime                         4844                   4711                     4124                   4155



Note: 1Deflated with CPI base years 1982-84.
      2
        Three year moving average.




                                                                                                                        27
                                                                   Table 8
                          OLS Regression Estimates of the Effect of Time Limit on Migration of Unmarried Women
                                  (With controls for state-specific trends; CPS data for years 1992-2000)

Dependent Variable                             Movers            Inter-county        Inter-state       Central City to     Non-Central
                                                                   Movers 1           Movers          Non-central City    City to Central
Sample                                                                                                   Movers 1         City Movers 1

Unmarried Women                                  0.005             0.009**              0.004            -0.023***             0.002
Education: 12 years or fewer                    (0.007)            (0.005)             (0.003)           (0.009)              (0.004)


Unmarried Women with Children                    0.014              0.014**            0.008*              -0.019              -0.003
Education: 12 years or fewer                    (0.012)            (0.007)             (0.004)            (0.013)             (0.006)


         1
Notes:      Analysis excludes data for the year 1995.
         2. Each cell is a separate regression that controls for number of children, number of children less than age 6, family income, race,
            state unemployment rate, state unemployment rate with one year lag, state effects and state trend effects. Each regression also includes
            five age dummies and a dummy for high school.
         3. Heteroscedasticity adjusted standard errors in parentheses.
         4. * .05<p=<.1, ** .01<p=<.05, *** p=<.01.




                                                                                                                                                  28
