NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF INDONESIA’S FINANCIAL CRISIS ON
HOUSEHOLD WELFARE: A “RAPID RESPONSE” METHODOLOGY
Jed Friedman
James Levinsohn
Working Paper 8564
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8564
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

The authors are grateful to the World Bank for partially funding this research. Alan Winters and Will Martin
provided helpful comments. Special thanks is due to Angus Deaton who essentially suggested the methods
used in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2001 by Jed Friedman and James Levinsohn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Distributional Impacts of Indonesia’s Financial Crisis on Household Welfare:
A “Rapid Response” Methodology
Jed Friedman and James Levinsohn
NBER Working Paper No. 8564
October 2001

ABSTRACT
Analyzing the distributional impacts of economic crises is important and, unfortunately, an ever
more pressing need. If policymakers are to intervene to help those most adversely impacted, then
policymakers need to identify those who have been most harmed and the magnitude of that harm.
Furthermore, policy responses to economic crises typically must be timely. In this paper, we develop a
simple methodology to fill the order and we’ve applied our methodology to analyze the impact of the
Indonesian economic crisis on household welfare there. Using only pre-crisis household information, we
estimate the compensating variation for Indonesian households following the 1997 Asian currency crisis
and then explore the results with flexible non-parametric methods. We find that virtually every household
was severely impacted, although it was the urban poor that fared the worst. The ability of poor rural
households to produce food mitigated the worst consequences of the high inflation. The distributional
consequences are the same whether we allow households to substitute towards relatively cheaper goods
or not. However the geographic location of the household mattered even within urban or rural areas and
household income categories. Additionally, households with young children may have suffered
disproportionately adverse effects.

Jed Friedman
RAND Corporation
Santa Monica, CA 90407

James Levinsohn
Ford School of Public Policy
and Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jamesl@umich.edu

1

I. Introduction
The collapse of the Indonesia Rupiah during the 1997 Asian currency crisis precipitated a
12% decline in Indonesia’s GDP the following year as well as rampant inflation. In an 18-month
span, food prices nearly tripled and prices for other goods also rose substantially. The degree to
which Indonesian households were vulnerable to these changes depended on a mix of factors
including the types of goods the household consumed, which goods’ prices rose the fastest, and
the degree to which changes in income were able to buffer households from the brunt of the price
shocks. In this study we focus on the first two factors, namely household consumption choices
and goods price changes, in order to explore how the price changes impacted households across
both the income distribution and the different regions of Indonesia. We develop and apply a
simple methodology that requires only the sort of data that is often readily available immediately
after an economic crisis. Although this paper focuses on the Indonesian experience, our
methodology is intended to be applicable to a wide range of situations and countries. By so doing,
we hope to present a meaningful yet straightforward methodology that can be adopted to analyze
the distributional consequences of financial crises and inflation anywhere in the world.
A careful and definitive investigation of the impacts of the Indonesian currency crisis,
and potential differential impacts across levels-of-living, ideally requires detailed income and
expenditure information for a large number of households, both before and after the crisis. This
ideal data does not exist. Some sources of data approach this ideal, in particular the Indonesian
Family Life Survey (IFLS). Consecutive waves of the IFLS (namely waves 2 and 2+) have
gathered pre- and post- crisis information for a panel of 2500 households. Various studies using
this data have investigated impacts of the crisis on consumption, employment, and education (see
Frankenberg et al. 1999, Smith et al. forthcoming, Thomas et al. 2001). While this data presents
an impressive depth of information for households, unfortunately it is limited to a relatively small
sample of households in a minority of provinces and thus cannot speak to the breadth of the crisis
across the sweep of Indonesian geography or income distribution. Approximately a year and a
half after the release of the initial IFLS based reports (and three years after the onset of the crisis),
studies employing nationally representative post-crisis (non-panel) household information have
begun to appear, an example of which is Suryahadi et al. (2000).
Our approach will be distinct from the above studies in that we will only utilize
household data collected before the onset of the crisis. We then match this consumption data with
information on commodity price changes brought on by the crisis in order to calculate simple
measures of compensating variation - the amount of money sufficient to compensate households

2

following price changes and enable a return to pre-crisis levels of utility. We calculate this
compensating variation with a variety of methods and compare and contrast the strengths and
weaknesses of each approach. Our analysis employs data with sufficient degrees of freedom to
allow an exploration of differences in compensating variation across the spectrum of household
income and location.
Because the analysis presented here only requires pre-crisis household consumption
information and price change data, our approach is applicable to many other settings. This is
because numerous countries now conduct periodic household consumption surveys and even
more collect more-or-less current price data used for computing price indices. An important
benefit of these methods is the relative immediacy of the findings. Post-crisis household surveys
can yield valuable and even definitive information however this data is only available after the
substantial lag needed for data collection and processing. In the face of rapid economic change
and social disruption, the information needs of policy makers are immediate. We hope to suggest
a “rapid response” method that can be implemented at the onset of a financial crisis well before
this post-crisis household data can be collected and disseminated.
The next section discusses the details of the data sources. This is then followed by an
explanation of the methods of analysis in Section III. Section IV presents the basic results while
Section V extends the results and investigates the robustness of the findings. The final section
(Section VI) offers some concluding thoughts.
II. Data
In this study we match household level data on consumption with provincial level
information on commodity price changes. The consumption data derive from the 1996 National
Socio-Economic Survey, known by the Indonesian acronym SUSENAS. Indonesia regularly
conducts this extensive household consumption survey that typically covers fifty to sixty
thousand households. These surveys are conducted every three years and the 1996 wave, which
surveyed 61,965 households, was the most recent survey before the onset of the crisis. While
these surveys are large, they are not panels. That is, there is no systematic effort to track the same
households over time. However they do cover the entire geographic range of the country and
contain very detailed consumption data on a total of 306 food and non-food goods. SUSENAS
also records whether food goods were purchased in the market or produced by the household. If
food is self-produced, SUSENAS imputes a value of this consumption at prevailing local prices.
SUSENAS also imputes a value for owned housing.

3

It is important to note that SUSENAS does not contain information on prices. Rather the
data enable the computation of unit values, which are defined as expenditure for a particular good
divided by quantity consumed. These unit values may differ across households that in fact face
identical prices due to differences in the quality of consumption. For example, while all
households in a village may face the same prices for high quality and low quality rice, the unit
values recorded for a household that bought mostly high quality rice will be higher than the unit
values recorded for the household that bought mostly low quality rice. These higher unit values
simply reflect the higher mean quality of total rice purchases. This type of data can be (and in fact
have been) used to estimate demand elasticities exploiting the spatial variation in the data using
methods developed by Deaton (1988, 1990, 1997). We note this, as the unit value data will be
utilized in subsequent sections.
We also have recent price data that has been supplied by the Indonesian Central
Statistical Office (the Biro Pusat Statistik, or BPS). The price data contain monthly price
observations for 44 cities throughout the country over the period January 1997 to October 1998.
This time period, which begins before the advent of the crisis, spans the steep devaluation of the
Rupiah and subsequent (and temporary) stabilization at the new higher rate. We employ a single
price change measure- the percent change in price from January 1997 to October 1998. By
adopting such a long time period from before the onset of rapid inflation until after the inflation
has largely abated, we hope to capture a robust measure of the price changes associated with the
crisis.
The price data supply information for both aggregate goods, such as food or housing, as
well as for individual goods such as cassava or petrol. There are approximately 700 goods with
observed prices in the data. However, the types of goods observed vary by city, perhaps reflecting
taste/consumption heterogeneity throughout the country. On average, a particular city has price
information for about 350 goods. Jakarta has as many as 440 goods listed while some small cities
only have price information for 300 goods.
Each of the 27 Indonesian provinces is represented by at least one city in the price data.
In order to match households from the SUSENAS data to as local a price change as possible, we
calculate province specific price changes from the city-level data. For those provinces that have
only one provincial city in the price data, we take those price changes as representative of the
entire province. For those provinces with more than one city in the price data, we calculate an
average provincial price change using city-specific 1996 population weights.
The accuracy of this extrapolation of city price data to an entire province will surely vary
with the size and characteristics of the province considered. For example, Jakarta, the national

4

capital, is also its own province and the observed price changes will fairly accurately represent
the price changes faced by residents throughout the province. On the other hand, the price
changes for Irian Jaya, a vast mountainous province, are based on price changes observed in the
provincial capital Jayapura. Price changes in the provincial capital may not be a completely
accurate proxy for price changes in remote rural areas. Indeed a recent paper suggests that postcrisis inflation in rural areas may have been 5% higher than in urban areas (Frankenberg et al.
1999). We frequently report separate results for rural and urban households and the fact that price
data were collected in cities should be kept in mind as those results are reviewed.1
We match the price change data with the consumption data at the most disaggregate level
possible in order to calculate the measures of compensating variation, which will be detailed in
the next section. There are 219 products and product aggregates that appear in both the
SUSENAS and our price data. We attempt to match goods across the two data sets at the lowest
level of aggregation possible. For the case of food (both raw and prepared) we were able to match
155 individual goods between the two data sets. In the case of non-food items we matched 64
different goods, both individual goods such as firewood and kerosene, as well as aggregate goods
such as toiletries and men’s clothing.
For certain groups of goods the price data are more disaggregated than the consumption
data reported in SUSENAS. In order to link the new price data with the existing consumption
data, we use the prices for those commodities that appear in both the price data set and in
SUSENAS. In some cases we also aggregate commodities in the price data to match a product
category in the SUSENAS data. The match between the price data and the consumption data is
good, but not perfect. We find that we have detailed price data for most, but not all, of the goods
that comprise a household’s total expenditure. On average, expenditures on matched goods
account for 79 percent of a household’s total expenditure- a little greater for poor households and
a little less for wealthy ones.
For use in subsequent analysis, we calculate the budget shares of each of the 219 items
based on the reported monthly expenditures for each item. For durable goods and other non-food
1

We have looked at how unit values in urban and rural areas have changed across different Susenas survey
years (1984, 1987, 1990, 1993, and 1996) to investigate potential differences in the time trend of urban and
rural prices. We do this by fixing a specific food basket and then pricing this basket separately for both
urban and rural areas in each survey year. Instead of actual prices, however, we use the mean national
urban or rural unit values as our price measure. In essence, we’ve generated separate price indices for urban
and rural areas. The time trends of these indices are virtually identical. For example the urban index
increased by 187% over the 1984 – 1996 period while the rural index increased by 182%. Each three year
change in urban areas is even closer in magnitude to its rural counterpart. This pre-crisis co-movement of
urban and rural unit values suggests that urban and rural prices may behave quite similarly following the
crisis and thus our extension of urban price changes to rural areas may not introduce significant bias.

5

items, we use the monthly average of annual expenditure, and not the expenditures in the month
preceding the survey, in order to more accurately measure monthly expenditures for durables that
are infrequently purchased. Table 1 gives an overview of the consumption data by reporting
budget shares for selected composite goods. These goods are not chosen from among the 219
items but rather are composite aggregates constructed only for the expositional purposes of Table
1. Even the rice good in the first row of Table 1 is an aggregate of three different varieties. To
highlight the heterogeneity in consumption patterns, we report mean budget shares for the entire
sample as well as for the top and bottom decile of household expenditures. Clearly, rice is the
single most important commodity, as measured by the budget share, for the majority of
Indonesians. Households in the bottom expenditure decile devote more than a quarter of all
outlays to rice, while for the mean household a still substantial 16% of total expenditures goes
towards rice. The next most important aggregate consumption category encompasses housing and
utilities, especially so for the top expenditure decile where 22% of spending goes towards those
ends.
Alongside the budget shares, Table 1 also reports the average price increase for each
product aggregate. This is accomplished by calculating the household specific price increase of
the composite goods using household expenditure shares to weight the price increases of each
constituent individual good. We then average these household-specific price increases over all
households. By any measure, the inflationary impacts of the crisis were large. The all-important
rice price increased by an average of almost 200%, and the prices for many foodstuffs increased
by more than 100%. Non-food prices did not rise nearly as rapidly, with the housing and utilities
price increasing the least - only 24% on average. Listed next to the mean price increases are the
standard deviations of the price increases for the aggregate goods. Due to the constructed nature
of the reported price changes, variations in price change will arise due both to geographic
variation in price changes as well as household variation in consumption of individual goods. For
rice, a relatively homogenous good, all of the variation in the rice price increase is geographical
and a standard deviation of 30% shows how varied the price increases actually were.2 If the price
changes for rice were distributed in a roughly normal fashion then fully one-third of households
experienced an increase in the rice price outside the interval (165%, 225%). Other reported price
changes combine variation in household consumption choice with regional variation in price
changes and as such the standard deviations of these price changes tend to be larger.

2

Although there are three rice varieties from the Susenas consumption data, the BPS price data supplies
only one price change for all rice varieties.

6

Given the wide dispersion of price changes, both within and across product aggregates,
what a household consumes and where a household lives will go a long way towards determining
the particular impacts of the crisis for each household. The next section discusses how we
measure these household specific consequences.
III. Methodology
To consider the impacts of the price increases on household welfare, we will look at
changes in consumer surplus brought about by the change in prices. We start with a minimum
expenditure function C(u,p) which, given existing prices p, relates the minimum cost needed to
attain utility level u [see Deaton and Muellbauer (1980), chapter 2, for a discussion of the general
properties of cost functions]. A first-order Taylor expansion of the minimum expenditure function
with respect to price will yield an approximation of the income required to compensate the
household after a price change and to restore that household to the pre-change utility level. Hence
this expression will approximate the compensating variation. Noting that the partial derivative of
the minimum expenditure function with respect to price yields quantities consumed, we derive
this simple expression:

(1)

∆C ≈ q ∆p

where q is a 1 x n vector of consumption goods quantities, ∆p a 1 x n vector of price changes, and
n the number of consumption goods in the total demand system. We note that this first
approximation of compensating variation requires information only on pre-crisis consumption
quantities and on price changes; neither pre-crisis price levels nor, more importantly, post-crisis
consumption choices are needed.
It is straightforward to reformulate (1) in terms of budget shares, w, and proportionate
price changes with the following expression:
n

( 2)

∆ ln C h ≈ ∑ wih ∆ ln p ih
i =1

where i subscripts the individual goods in the commodity system and h refers to the household.
The budget share w is simply the household cost of good i divided by pre-crisis total household
expenditures. Made clear in (2) is the simple fact that any differential distributional impact of the

7

price changes must derive both from the presence of large relative price changes and large
differences in the budget shares across households. Table 1 shows this exact combination of
factors existed in Indonesia following the crisis.
In general, the costs of attaining pre-crisis utility levels will increase less rapidly than (2)
may suggest since households have the ability to substitute away from goods whose prices have
disproportionately risen. Hence this compensating variation measure provides a maximum bound
on the impact of the crisis, since this index does not take into account the substitution toward
relatively less costly products that will take place. Given the large relative price changes
following the crisis this substitution surely occurred to some extent and thus (2) may not be an
entirely accurate approximation. Returning to the minimum expenditure function, a second-order
Taylor expansion of the minimum expenditure function does permit substitution behavior:

(3)

∆C ≈ q∆p +

1 T
∆p s ∆ p
2

In (3), q and ∆p are quantity and price change vectors as before and s is the n x n matrix of
compensated derivatives of demand. Similar to (2), we can reformulate the above expression in
terms of budget shares and proportional price changes as:

n

( 4)

∆ ln C h ≈ ∑ wih ∆ ln pih +
i =1

1 n n
cij ∆ ln pih ∆ ln p hj
∑∑
2 i =1 j =1

where the expression cij contains the Slutsky derivatives sij and is defined by the expression:

cij =

p i sij p j
Ch

With some simple algebraic manipulation we can show the cij term above to be equivalent to wiεij,
where εij is defined as the compensated price elasticity of good i with respect to price change j.
Thus we can restate (4) as:
n

(5)

∆ ln C h ≈ ∑ wih ∆ ln p ih +
i =1

1 n n h
wi ε ij ∆ ln pih ∆ ln p hj
∑∑
2 i =1 j =1

8

It is the two formulations of compensating variation given in (2) and (5) that we will use
to explore the possible differential impacts of the Indonesian currency crisis. The only additional
pieces of information required in (5) and not found in (2) are the εij terms. Thus an approximation
to the compensating variation that also wishes to account for potential household substitution
behavior requires estimates of a complete set of price elasticities in addition to the pre-crisis
consumption quantities and post-crisis price changes. Exactly how these elasticities are estimated
depends on the types of data used in the analysis. Our task appears difficult since we have no
information on household consumption changes over time nor do we have information on price
levels. Instead of prices we have data on unit values. In a series of papers Deaton (1988, 1990,
1997) presents an approach to elasticity estimation using only a single cross-section of household
information. Crucial to this approach is the twin recognition that prices for equivalent goods can
greatly vary across space in a lesser developed country setting and that household survey
information is often gathered in clusters in order to reduce survey costs. Given these insights as
well as certain assumptions on how households choose the quality of goods purchased, the
clustered nature of this data can be exploited to purge the unit value data of quality components.
The cross-spatial variation in these purged unit values can then be utilized to identify own-price
or cross-price elasticities. This is the method adapted here to estimate the εij terms.
We now summarize this method in a bit more detail before moving on. Deaton suggests
adopting the following econometric specifications for the log quantity (lnq) and log unit value
(lnv) of a particular good:
0
ln q hc = α 0 + β 0 ln x hc + γ 0 z hc + ε p ln π c + f c + u hc

ln v hc = α 1 + β 1 ln x hc + γ 1 z hc + ψ ln π c + u 1hc
where h and c index household and cluster respectively, x represents total household
expenditures, z household demographic characteristics, and π the (unobserved) price of the good.
The quantity equation contains a cluster fixed effect, fc, and the coefficient of interest is εp, the
price elasticity. The simplified process described here only concerns the estimation of own-price
elasticities- cross-price terms can be added through a relatively straightforward extension. The
final estimate of εp derives from two main steps. In the first step, the within cluster variation of
household income and characteristics is utilized to estimate β and γ (since prices are constant
within clusters, these parameters can be consistently estimated). The estimated coefficients are
then employed to generate the two variables:

9

yˆ hco = ln qhc − βˆ 0 ln xhc − γˆ 0 zhc
yˆ 1 = ln v − βˆ 1 ln x − γˆ1 z
hc

hc

hc

hc

The next step is to calculate the cluster-level averages of y0 and y1. Then a “regression” of the
cluster averaged y0 on the cluster averaged y1 will yield an estimate of the ratio of εp to ψ:

ε p cov( yˆ c0 yˆ 1c )
=
ψ
var( yˆ c1 )
Finally, combining the above expression with an estimate of ψ (which itself is identified from
previously estimated coefficients in an expression (not shown) determined by the model of
household quality choice) enables the researcher to calculate the price elasticity estimate.3
If one wishes to estimate a demand system of our dimensions, some product aggregation
is necessary. There are simply not enough degrees of freedom in the SUSENAS data to estimate a
demand system for 219 products complete with the all-important cross-price elasticities. The
types of goods for which we can estimate price elasticities are also limited by the fact that
SUSENAS reports unit values solely for food goods. Hence we reduced the dimensions of the
problem through aggregation and decided to estimate elasticities for 22 composite goods - 21
aggregate food goods and a residual non-food consumption category. A subsequent table in the
next section lists each of these aggregate goods.
Beyond estimating the εij's, another issue concerns the services provided by owneroccupied housing and self-produced agriculture. Many households, especially in rural areas, own
their own home. Although the price of housing has increased, these households are, in an absolute
sense, perhaps not better off (they are still living in the same house). However these households
are better off relative to those who do not own their own home. We choose to account for these
services provided by owner occupied housing by treating the imputed rental value for these
homes as a negative expenditure. Many households, mostly rural, also produce some of their own
food. Households that consume self-produced foodstuffs are also potential net exporters of
agricultural products. As the price of food rose, the value of their production also increased.
3

This brief discussion ignores the identification of ψ as well as the important role of measurement error
corrections in the original series of papers. We refer readers to those works for a much more extensive
presentation and discussion.

10

Clearly, if the household were a net exporter of food, the household would benefit from the price
increase. To the extent that a household produced some of its own food, such production would
mute the impact of price increases relative to a household that purchased food in the market. Thus
we account for self-produced agricultural products by treating the imputed value of self-produced
food as a negative expenditure.4,5
Once the budget share and price change data have been matched, and the price elasticities
estimated, we then calculate our two measures of compensating variation for each household. So
that we can explore in a flexible manner how (2) and (5) vary across the levels-of-living, our
principal approach will be non-parametric. Specifically, we use locally weighted least squares to
estimate the compensating variation at each point in the income distribution (see Fan, 1992, for
an introduction of this method). Local observations were weighted with a biweight kernel and,
after experimentation, we choose to adopt a bandwidth of 0.4 units of the independent variable
(which will be log per capita monthly household expenditures).6
To assess a household's level-of-living, we divide the data two ways. The first is merely
by per capita household expenditure, and the second is a binary poor/non-poor measure
dependent on whether the household’s per capita expenditure exceeds or falls below a
predetermined poverty line. Each measure is discussed in turn.
Perhaps the most standard approach to measuring the level-of-living in a developing
country setting is to use some estimate of household expenditures. In this view, the level of
household consumption constitutes the lion's share of total household utility and total
consumption is most easily proxied by the household’s actual expenditures. Expenditure levels
are generally viewed as a better measure of welfare than income since the ability to smooth
consumption in the presence of income shocks suggests that expenditures rather than income
more closely tracks actual welfare.7
4

Note that this approach will understate the effects of the price increases to the extent that we do not
observe nor adjust for price increases of intermediate inputs used in agricultural production.

5

There is a long standing debate over whether shadow prices in rural households engaged in agricultural
production equate market prices for agricultural inputs such as labor or land. To the extent that these
shadow prices may diverge from market prices, the “valuation” for self-produced food, based on market
prices, will not be entirely accurate. Benjamin (1992) presents evidence from rural Java that hosuehold
shadow prices for agricultural inputs such as labor are not significantly different from market prices.

6
7

The Stata code for all of the analysis will be made available at www.econ.lsa.umich.edu/~jamesL.

Chaudhuri and Ravallion (1994) investigate the competing merits of using these two welfare indicators
and find little difference when the goal is to distinguish poor from non-poor households. This paper
remains within the standard literature and uses household expenditures as a main measure of household
welfare.

11

In addition to this continuous measure of level-of-living, an alternative binary poverty
measure is also adopted. A household is deemed poor if its per capita expenditure falls below a
predetermined poverty line. The poverty lines used here are calculated from the 1996 SUSENAS
using a “cost of basic needs” approach to poverty determination as set forth in Ravallion (1994),
Bidani and Ravallion (1993), and Ravallion and Bidani (1994). The details of the particular
method used here are presented in Friedman (2001), but the general approach is summarized as
follows: a nutritionally adequate food bundle (with nutritional guidelines stipulated by WHO,
1985) that reflects the actual consumption choices of Indonesian households is determined and
then priced. The total cost of this bundle is scaled upwards by an econometrically estimated factor
that represents the cost of essential non-food goods. Thus this final value, which we take as the
poverty line, proxies the total cost of essential food and non-food consumption needs. Due to
important differences in relative prices between urban and rural areas, poverty lines are computed
separately for each region. For the 1996 SUSENAS, this method translates into a poverty line of
36,956 Rupiahs per person per month in urban areas and 32,521 Rupiahs in rural areas. These
values yield poverty headcounts of 9.3% in urban areas and 24.9% in rural areas.
IV. Results
The impacts of the crisis were not uniform. Instead household consumption choices,
sources of income, and location mattered greatly in determining the specific impact. The diversity
of impacts was due both to wide geographical variation in price changes as well as wide variation
in household structure and consumption. An earlier paper (Levinsohn et al., 1999) explores this
heterogeneity in much detail. Our concern here is solely focused on the relative differences in the
compensating variation (cv) measures across the income distribution. This relative difference is
exhibited quite clearly in Table 2, which reports summary mean values of equation (2) by decile
of household expenditure as well as poor/non-poor status. For all households we see that the
compensating variation has an inverted u-shape, with the lowest decile having an average cv of
73% of initial household expenditures, rising to a 85% of household expenditures for those in the
sixth, seventh, and eighth deciles, while falling back to 77% for households in the top decile.
From this perspective, it was the Indonesian households in the middle of the distribution that were
most adversely impacted by the price changes. Indeed poor households would need to earn less
income (as a proportion of initial expenditures) than non-poor households- 77% versus 82%- in
order to return to original consumption levels.

12

However we see in the next two columns that this story obscures important differences
between households in rural and urban areas. When separating the sample in this manner, the
distributions of the impacts tell opposing stories. For urban areas, households in the lower deciles
need the greatest relative amount of new income to return to pre-crisis consumption levels and,
indeed, this amount declines monotonically as household expenditures increase. For rural areas,
lower income households need the least relative compensation and then this proportion increases
monotonically with expenditures. Table 2 suggests that it is the urban poor who are the most
adversely affected by the crisis needing, on average, 109% of their pre-crisis income in order to
reach pre-crisis utility levels. The rural poor, on the other hand, require the least amount, only
70% of their pre-crisis income. In general, urban households, composed mainly of households
that do not grow their own food, fare the worst under the price changes.
This is the same story captured in Figure 1, which depicts the entire distribution of the
compensating variation measure as estimated by locally weighted least squares. The figure also
includes the urban and rural poverty lines for reference, as well as bootstrapped 95% confidence
interval for each regression line.8 The urban regression line declines almost completely
monotonically from its peak at the bottom of the income distribution to its trough at the top of the
distribution. In contrast, the rural regression line rises from its low at the bottom of the
distribution and then flattens out for households beyond the top third of the distribution. After this
point in the expenditure distribution there are virtually no differences in the cv measure, and no
statistically significant difference, between urban and rural households. However the large
differences between poor urban and poor rural households are indeed significant at conventional
levels and as Figure 1 shows quite clearly, the urban poor were the most adversely affected while
the rural poor were perhaps the least impacted.
The results in Table 2 and Figure 1 derive from equation (2) and likely overstate the true
compensating variation since (2) does not allow for the substitution behavior that surely occurred
to some degree. As already discussed, the addition of the second order terms in (5) may give a
better approximation to the true cv since it does include substitution terms. These elasticities were
identified by the spatial variation of consumption choices and unit values in the 1996 SUSENAS
following the methods discussed earlier. Before moving on to estimates of equation (5), Table 3
presents these estimated price elasticities for the 22 composite good demand system (21 food
goods such as rice or meat and the residual non-food category). The own price elasticities for
each composite good are located on the diagonals in the price matrix and they are negative for
8

The bootstrapped standard errors were estimated with 50 draws (with replacement) from the total sample
and took into account the clustered nature of the underlying survey data.

13

almost every good. The estimated own price elasticity of rice is estimated to be -.48, exactly
equal to that found by Case (1991) using earlier SUSENAS data and different methods of
estimation. The three goods (preserved meat, prepared beverages, and alcohol) that are estimated
to have positive own-price elasticities are goods that have substantially fewer positive
consumption values than the other goods, in other words they are not widely consumed and as
such are not likely to be precisely estimated. The cross price elasticities are generally smaller in
magnitude than the own price elasticities and, of course, vary in sign depending on whether the
data suggests a particular pair of goods to be substitutes or complements.
With this matrix of own and cross price elasticities we re-estimate the compensating
variation using (5) and then contrast the results with those we found with (2). The comparisons,
again estimated with locally weighted least squares and shown in Figure 2, are separated by urban
and rural household location. As is readily apparent, the qualitative conclusions drawn with
equation (2) also hold with results that now allow for substitution behavior. Across urban areas,
the compensating variation declines as household expenditures increase, again suggesting that
poor urban households are affected the most severely by the price changes. Similarly, poor rural
households appear to fare the best, with little difference between wealthier urban and rural
households.
However, the differences in the levels estimated for (2) and (5) are quite pronounced. The
cv measures that allow for substitution are substantially less than those that do not, and this holds
true at all expenditure levels and for both urban and rural households. Indeed, as a rule of thumb,
the estimates of (5) are roughly half as much as the estimates of (2), with the difference being
greatest for lower income urban households. Thus (5) suggests that the overall impacts of the
crisis weren't nearly as severe as found with (2).
Without further information it is difficult to know which of the results from (2) and (5)
are closer to the truth. We know that (2) surely overstates the impacts of the price changes since it
restricts households to consume goods in the same proportions as they have done before the large
relative price changes of the crisis. However we have reason to believe that (5) as currently
estimated may dramatically understate the true compensating variation. If so then the true cv lies
somewhere between the two regression lines for (2) and (5). We believe the results for equation
(5) may overstate the true degree of substitution because the reduction in food consumption
implied by the ε matrix and the price changes results in very low caloric intakes, much lower than
would actually be exhibited (and indeed has been suggested by measured changes in the bodymass index in Frankenberg et al., 1999). Essentially the problem lies with the estimated point
elasticities themselves. We believe these estimates may not be accurate for two important

14

reasons. One, (5) specifies the compensated price elasticity of demand while the estimation
methods employed yield uncompensated price elasticities, which also involve the income effects
from a price change. To the extent that the uncompensated price elasticities are larger than the
compensated price elasticities, our measured effects in Figure 2 will be too large. Another and
perhaps even greater problem is due the fact that the estimated elasticities are essentially local
approximations based on consumer behavior at the observed prices. Hence SUSENAS might give
fairly good estimates of how households respond to a price change on the order of five or ten
percent. When the price changes under consideration are on the order of 100 to 300 percent, the
answer is essentially dictated by choice of functional forms. This is troubling for most any
parametric approach to the estimation of demand elasticities. In essence, we are forced to make
out-of-sample predictions for every household and the further the real price changes are from the
range of prices (or unit values) in SUSENAS, the more important our particular choice of
functional form.9
We still present results with the cross-price elasticities since, in principal, they are an
important refinement over (2). Noting the difficulties of accurately accounting for substitution
behavior given only one cross-section of households and given price changes of the magnitude
found in Indonesia in 1998, we don't wish to claim that the true post-crisis cvs are those estimated
from equation (5). We do find it reassuring that the distributional consequences implied by (5) are
the same as those implied by (2), however, and present results from both specifications. The
combined results from both (2) and (5) may be of greater use to policy makers than either (2) or
(5) alone.
V. Extensions
Having presented the basic results for equations (2) and (5), we now turn to four
extensions that explore the robustness of the findings. These extensions: i) Explore how the
results may differ if we ignore the services provided by owned housing and self-produced food;
ii) Explore potential differences if, instead of the 219 highly disaggregate goods, we use a fewer
number of more highly aggregated goods; iii) Explore the degree of spatial variation in the cv
measures, and iv) Explore how the cv measures may be influenced by household size and
demographic composition.
9

We did re-estimate the cross-price elasticity matrix with a variant of Stone’s demand system (see Deaton
and Muellbauer, 1980, chapter 3) that does attempt to approximate compensated price elasticities. The
results were largely similar to those presented in Figure 2, suggesting that most of the overstatement is due
to the unavoidable out-of-sample predictions.

15

The first extension investigates differences in our findings if we do not account for the
services provided by owned housing and self-produced food. Figure 3 presents this scenario,
separate for urban and rural households, by presenting the non-parametric regression lines for the
compensating variation given in (2) with and without valuing self-produced food and owned
housing as negative expenditures. It is quite apparent that ignoring household self-production
dramatically changes the results, especially for rural households. For households in urban areas,
where only a minority of households produce some of their own food, the qualitative results are
the same whether or not we value self-production- poor urban households are affected
substantially more than wealthy ones. However without self-production and owned-housing, the
regression line is shifted upwards in an almost parallel fashion, so that the levels of compensating
variation are now approximately 15% greater than before.
For rural areas, however, ignoring self-production results in attributing the greatest
adverse consequences to the rural poor as opposed to the rural wealthy, a complete reversal of the
findings in Figure 1. The levels of cv for the rural poor also increase dramatically, almost
doubling to approximately 130% of initial expenditures from the 70% reported in Table 2. The
levels also rise for the rural wealthy but by a much smaller proportion. Clearly the ability of rural
households, especially lower income rural households, to produce their own food served to buffer
those households from the worst effects of the crisis. Urban households to a large degree could
not share in this benefit.
We are also interested in exploring how the degree of aggregation affected the results.
Remember that we attempted to match consumption and price changes at as low a level of
aggregation as possible to more fully allow for heterogeneity in both consumption choices and
price changes. The motivation, however, for looking at a more aggregate index stems from the
fact that the disaggregated index only accounts for 79 percent of household expenditures on
average. It is possible that we excluded important unobserved goods and this exclusion can either
exacerbate or mitigate the measured welfare effects, depending on the relative price changes of
those excluded goods. Concerned about this potential bias, we compute another compensating
variation measure based on 19 aggregate commodities instead of the original 219. These
aggregates include 15 food categories, such as cereals or meat, and four non-food categories such
as housing or clothing. A benefit of this aggregate measure is that it covers 97 percent of the
individual household’s expenditures (this coverage is virtually the same for rural or urban
households and across the income distribution).
The results shown in Figure 4 suggest that little is changed if we base the compensating
variation measures on the more aggregate consumption goods. Indeed the regression lines

16

representing the aggregate and disaggregate measures are virtually identical for both urban and
rural households. The analysis based on aggregated data is essentially unaffected by aggregation
bias, at least in this case where our disaggregate measures include many important consumption
goods. We find this reassuring on two fronts. First, Figure 4 implies that our main results are not
biased by any "missing" consumption. Second, not every household survey from the rest of the
world records consumption at such a disaggregate level as found in SUSENAS. However Figure
4 suggests that similar analysis conducted with these other surveys may suffer little detriment
from aggregation bias as long as the basic consumption categories are covered in the data.
All of the preceding analysis has ignored cross-spatial variation in the compensating
variation measures except by distinguishing urban from rural households. However Indonesia's
population is spread out over 27 provinces on thousands of islands. Many of the studies
previously cited concerning post-crisis household changes have shown that different areas of the
country were impacted differently by the crisis due to geographic variation in both price changes
and sources of income. Our findings are no different. When we calculate the mean province level
values of our main cv measure the geographical diversity is readily apparent. For example,
households in urban East Nusa Tenggara, a collection of islands east of Bali and Lombok, needed
an additional 53% of pre-crisis expenditures in order to maintain consumption, while households
in urban Southeast Sulawesi needed 124%. Although in every province rural households faced a
smaller cv than their urban counterparts, the regional variation among rural households is equally
dramatic. In Bengkulu, a Sumatran province, the cv for rural households averaged 105% while
the figure for Irian Jaya was only 30%.
Besides these summary measures, we’ve also estimated the non-parametric regression
lines separately for each province, ordered the estimated cvs at each point in the expenditure
distribution, and then plotted the 10th and 90th percentile of the provincial specific cvs, along with
the median. The resulting figure, Figure 5, presents some measure of the geographic variance of
the impacts while controlling for per capita household expenditures. It is quite apparent that the
effects of the crisis depended not only on the location of the household in the national expenditure
distribution but also on the location of the household in space. For urban households, the 90th
percentile is roughly twice that of the 10th percentile although this ratio is even greater for poorer
households. Among rural households the spread between the 90th and 10th percentiles is even
greater than that for urban households. Clearly, even within rural and urban areas, the household
location is an important determinant in the overall impact of the crisis.
Until this point our principal measure of household welfare has simply been the
household’s per person expenditure level. Although a common measure, it imposes certain

17

restrictions on how welfare may or may not vary across observable demographic information
such as household size or age and gender composition. Specifically, this measure does not
recognize the possibility of scale economies at the household level nor does it recognize that
consumption needs of individual household members may vary across gender or the lifecycle.
Larger households, especially those with a greater number of working age adults, may be better
off than smaller households at equivalent income levels since purchases of household public
goods are shared among a greater number of household members. A consequence of this may be
proportionally greater household expenditures for food (an important household private good) as
public goods such as housing are more easily afforded. In addition to household size, the
demographic composition of the household is likely to affect household consumption choices to
the extent that consumption needs vary across the lifecycle or across gender. For example,
households with children will almost surely spend more on education than otherwise equivalent
households without children. Of course any differences in household consumption due to
demographic influences will affect our cv measures.
We explore these issues in our final extension with some simple OLS regressions of the
main cv measure on household size and demographic composition, as well as some relevant
covariates including per capita household expenditures. These regressions, estimated separately
for urban and rural households, are presented in Table 4. An earlier finding of this paper is also
apparent in Table 4 in the estimated coefficients for household expenditures; the positive
coefficient for rural households indicates the crisis impact increases with income levels in rural
areas while the opposite story is indicated by the urban household coefficient. Turning to the
question of household size, larger households are associated with higher cvs, especially
households in rural areas. The potential reasons for this result are numerous but, surprisingly,
higher foodshares resulting from the larger household sizes is not one of these explanations. If
anything, food shares are negatively related to household size (results not shown), especially in
urban areas, once we control for per capita household expenditures. This finding may be
somewhat surprising in light of the discussion above but it is largely consistent with the multicountry results reported in Deaton and Paxson (1998). For whatever reasons, larger rural
households tend to consume more of goods whose prices have disproportionately risen. The
finding for urban households is the same, although not as pronounced. Indeed once we control for
household demographic composition the impact of household size on the cv measure disappears
for urban households.
The second columns in both the urban and rural panels of Table 4 report the results from
a regression of the cv measure on the proportion of household members falling into eight age and

18

gender categories: young (under 5 years) boys and girls, children and adolescents (5-14 years),
adult men and women, and male and female elders (ages 60 and over). The excluded reference
category is the proportion of adult men in the household. The results do indeed suggest that
consumption patterns differ by age and, to a lesser extent, by the gender composition of the
household members. Urban and, even more, rural households with a large proportion of young
children face a significantly higher cv measure. Households with young children tend to spend
more on food, especially rice, and since the prices of these commodities rose the fastest, these
households disproportionately suffered. Conversely households with a higher proportion of adult
women and, especially, elderly women (and elderly men in urban areas) tend to face lower cvs, in
part reflecting the relatively lower food needs of these groups. Thus in addition to urban/rural
status, provincial location, and overall income, other important factors that mediate the crisis
impact on the household level include household size (in rural areas) and household composition.
VI. Conclusions
Analyzing the distributional impacts of economic crises is important and, unfortunately,
an ever more pressing need. If policymakers are to intervene to help those most adversely
impacted, then policymakers need to identify those who have been most harmed and the
magnitude of that harm. Furthermore, policy responses to economic crises typically must be
timely. In this paper, we’ve developed a simple methodology to fill the order and we’ve applied
our methodology to analyze the impact of the Indonesian economic crisis on household welfare
there. In particular, we estimated the compensating variation for Indonesian households following
the 1997 Asian currency crisis. We found that virtually every household was severely impacted,
although it was the urban poor that fared the worst. The ability of poor rural households to
produce food mitigated the worst consequences of the high inflation. We found that the
distributional consequences were the same whether we allow households to substitute towards
relatively cheaper goods or not. Furthermore, these findings were not biased by any missing
consumption, however we computed very different results, even opposite in some sense, if we
ignored the relative benefits of self-production or owned housing. Finally, even within urban or
rural areas, the geographic location of the household greatly mattered and households with young
children suffered disproportionately adverse effects.
While our methodology is simple and uses more or less readily available data, it is not
perfect. Two limitations in particular need to be kept in mind. First, it is easy to forget that the
Indonesian economic crisis was not the only change in the economic environment over this

19

period. Concurrent with the crisis, some areas of Indonesia were hard hit by forest fires and others
by drought. These and other disasters impact prices so that not all the price changes we observe in
the data are due solely to the economic crisis. Put another way, prices would have changed some
even absent the crisis. Our analysis speaks to the net effect of the many concurrent economic
changes Indonesian households faced. We do not make any attempt to decompose what portion of
the actual price changes are due to the financial crisis.
Second, all of the presented analysis concerns nominal changes. In terms of the real
impacts of the crisis we are mute. We have estimated compensating variation, but we have no
household information on actual changes in income or wages. This missing piece prevents us
from discussing the real costs of the crisis. However any attempt to comprehensively measure the
real costs to households requires time and energy intensive data collection. As a result, the
ultimate results may be available long after policymakers have responded to the crisis with new
or modified social policies. Because informational needs are relatively immediate, the simple
measures presented should be useful. Exactly how these measures predict actual outcomes
remains a topic of ongoing research. The necessary data are just now becoming available.

20

References
Benjamin, Dwayne. 1992. “Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor Demand: Testing
for Separation in Agricultural Household Models”. Econometrica, 60(2): 287-322.
Bidani, Benu and Martin Ravallion. 1993. “A Regional Profile of Poverty in Indonesia”. Bulletin
of Indonesian Economic Statistics, 29(3): 37-68.
Case, Anne C. “Spatial Patterns in Household Demand”. 1991. Econometrica, 59(4): 953-966.
Chaudhuri, Shubham and Martin Ravallion. 1994. “How Well Do Static Indicators Identify the
Chronically Poor?”. Journal of Public Economics, 53(3): 367-394.
Deaton, Angus. 1988. “Quality, Quantity, and Spatial Variation of Price”. American Economic
Review, 78(3): 418-431.
Deaton, Angus. 1990. “Price Elasticities from Survey Data: Extensions and Indonesian Results”.
Journal of Econometrics, 44(3): 281-309.
Deaton, Angus. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD.
Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer. 1980. Economics and Consumer Behavior. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson. 1998. “Economies of Scale, Household Size, and the
Demand for Food”. Journal of Political Economy, 106(5): 897-930.
Fan, Jianqing. 1992. “Design-adaptive Nonparametric Regression”. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 87(4): 998-1004.
Frankenberg, Elizabeth, Duncan Thomas, and Kathleen Beegle. 1999. “The Real Costs of
Indonesia’s Economic Crisis: Preliminary Findings from the Indonesia Family Life Surveys”.
RAND Working Paper No. 99-04, Santa Monica, CA.
Friedman, Jed. 2001. “Determinants of Poverty Change in Indonesia, 1984-1996”. Manuscript,
University of Michigan.
Levinsohn, James, Steven Berry, and Jed Friedman. 1999. “Impacts of the Indonesian Economic
Crisis: Price Changes and the Poor”. NBER Working Paper No. 7194, Cambridge, MA.
Ravallion, Martin. 1994. Poverty Comparisons. Fundamentals in Pure and Applied Economics,
Vol. 56. Harwood Academic Press, Chur, Switzerland.
Ravallion, Martin and Benu Bidani. 1994. “How Robust is a Poverty Profile?” The World Bank
Economic Review, 8(1): 75-102.

21

Smith, James, Duncan Thomas, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Kathleen Beegle, and Graciela Teruel.
Forthcoming. “Wages, Employment, and Economic Shocks: Evidence from Indonesia”. Journal
of Population Economics.
Suryahadi, Asep, Sudarno Sumarto, Yusuf Suharso, and Lant Pritchett. 2000. “The Evolution of
Poverty during the Crisis in Indonesia, 1996 to 1999”. Policy Research Working Paper No. 2435.
The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Thomas, Duncan, Kathleen Beegle, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Bondan Sikoki, John Strauss, and
Graciela Teruel. 2001. “Education in a Crisis”. Manuscript, Department of Economics,UCLA.
WHO/FAO/UNU Expert Panel. 1985. Energy and Protein Requirements. WHO Technical Report
#724, Geneva.

22

Table 1. Budget shares and price changes for selected aggregate goods
Mean budget shares
Product aggregate

Price changes

Bottom
decile

All
households

Top
decile

Mean price
increase

Standard
deviation

Rice

0.269

0.164

0.048

195.2%

29.2

Other cereals & tubers

0.030

0.010

0.003

137.5%

101.8

Fish

0.033

0.040

0.032

89.1%

67.4

Meat

0.008

0.025

0.040

97.0%

49.3

Dairy & eggs

0.015

0.027

0.031

117.1%

31.9

Vegetables

0.034

0.032

0.020

200.3%

129.5

Pulses, tofu, & tempeh

0.025

0.023

0.012

95.2%

76.0

Fruit

0.016

0.021

0.027

103.7%

61.3

Oils

0.040

0.030

0.015

122.0%

74.8

Sugar, coffee, and tea

0.041

0.034

0.019

142.9%

28.3

Prepared food and beverages

0.025

0.047

0.058

81.4%

51.7

Alcohol, tobacco, and betel

0.039

0.049

0.031

93.9%

43.8

Housing, fuel, lighting, and water

0.146

0.162

0.223

23.8%

10.9

Health

0.010

0.014

0.021

50.7%

32.9

Education

0.013

0.021

0.037

55.3%

31.9

Clothing

0.044

0.045

0.041

84.4%

25.2

Durable goods

0.013

0.034

0.075

114.3%

34.3

Note: Price increases are from January 1997 through October 1998. Mean price increases are computed as the average
across all households reporting positive consumption for a given good. Mean budget shares are reported for the
entire sample, as well as separately for the top and bottom expenditure decile.
Source: Authors' calculations from 1996 SUSENAS and BPS Price Data.

23

Table 2. Compensating variation by expenditure decile and poor/non-poor status
Expenditure
decile

All

Compensating variation
Urban

Rural

1

0.73

1.08

0.67

2

0.79

1.03

0.73

3

0.82

1.00

0.74

4

0.83

0.96

0.77

5

0.84

0.93

0.77

6

0.85

0.92

0.78

7

0.85

0.89

0.78

8

0.85

0.84

0.79

9

0.84

0.81

0.79

10

0.77

0.70

0.81

Poor

0.77

1.09

0.70

Non-poor

0.82

0.90

0.78

All households

0.82

0.91

0.76

Note: Compensating variation measured as a proportion of 1996 household expenditures
Source: Authors' calculations from 1996 SUSENAS and BPS Price Data.

Other
cereals

0.082
-5.046
-0.127
0.027
-0.295
0.073
0.318
0.128
0.121
0.097
-0.005
0.367
0.077
-0.144
-0.012
0.059
-0.018
-0.056
0.243
0.026
-0.681
0.053
0.017

-0.479

2.762

2.521

-0.383

-0.533

0.042

-0.224

-0.458

-0.194

-0.384

-0.465

-0.406

-0.104

-0.181

-0.238

-0.173

-0.210

0.140

0.020

-0.429

-2.806

-0.441

0.010

Rice

Other cereals

Tubers

Fresh fish

Preserved fish

Fresh meat

Preserved meat

Eggs

Dairy

Green vegetables

Other vegetables

Pulses

Tofu & tempeh

Fruit

Oils

Beverage additives

Spices

Other food

Prepared food

Prepared beverages

Alcohol

Tobacco and betel

Other consumption

Source: Authors' calculations from 1996 SUSENAS.

Product

Rice

0.008

0.001

0.161

-0.083

0.055

0.069

0.104

0.044

0.027

-0.141

0.010

-0.001

-0.042

0.189

0.097

0.013

0.127

-0.046

-0.059

0.217

-0.590

-0.413

-0.032

Tubers

-0.010

-0.104

0.859

0.246

0.092

-0.027

-0.072

-0.167

-0.143

0.098

0.102

-0.153

0.125

-0.202

-0.072

-0.006

0.256

0.056

0.373

-0.996

0.233

-0.074

-0.029

Fresh
fish

-0.003

-0.037

0.265

0.005

-0.006

0.004

-0.007

0.013

-0.003

-0.006

-0.033

-0.064

0.017

-0.041

-0.083

-0.080

0.254

0.118

-0.686

0.026

0.205

0.387

-0.038

Preserved
fish

0.019

0.151

-2.175

0.034

-0.037

-0.238

0.000

0.001

-0.136

-0.253

-0.111

0.266

-0.115

-0.067

-0.216

0.084

-0.418

-0.616

0.013

0.169

-0.672

-0.200

0.098

Fresh
meat

Table 3. Estimated price elasticities for aggregate food goods and residual consumption

-0.003

-0.182

2.039

0.259

-0.037

0.098

-0.034

-0.111

-0.019

0.044

-0.159

-0.271

0.074

0.136

0.548

-0.080

0.955

-0.004

-0.015

0.219

0.087

-0.134

-0.016

Preserved
meat

-0.013

0.001

0.506

-0.191

0.060

0.112

-0.057

-0.047

-0.004

-0.147

0.160

-0.248

0.034

0.014

0.040

-0.985

-0.281

-0.134

-0.022

-0.087

-0.531

-0.300

-0.008

Eggs

-0.008

-0.025

-0.012

-0.203

-0.093

0.013

-0.107

-0.106

0.007

-0.110

-0.025

-0.474

-0.004

-0.023

-0.133

-0.028

-0.260

0.109

0.138

-0.012

-0.167

-0.014

-0.009

Dairy

-0.002

0.033

-0.770

0.146

0.042

0.029

0.032

0.064

-0.009

-0.021

0.017

-0.014

0.002

-0.789

0.077

0.113

-0.215

-0.135

-0.103

0.026

-0.919

0.048

-0.018

Green
vegetables

0.002

0.030

0.447

-0.227

-0.033

-0.010

0.023

-0.036

0.022

0.003

0.052

0.169

-0.840

0.057

-0.002

0.031

-0.106

-0.173

0.091

0.071

-0.147

-0.667

0.003

Other
vegetables

24

0.023
0.262
0.467
-0.038
0.524
-0.091
-0.212
-0.052
-0.097
-0.099
-0.001
-0.136
-0.965
-0.006
0.058
-0.029
-0.073
-0.059
-0.090
-0.206
0.204
0.061
0.005

0.001
0.002

0.010
0.042

-0.186
0.092

0.259
0.071

0.122
0.060

0.041
-0.772

-0.057
0.115

0.008
0.056

0.049
0.091

-0.078
-0.040

0.143
-0.070
0.007

Preserved fish

Preserved meat

Dairy

Other vegetables

Tofu & tempeh

Oils

Source: Authors' calculations from 1996 SUSENAS.

Other consumption

Tobacco and betel

Alcohol

Prepared beverages

Prepared food

Other food

Spices

Beverage additives

Fruit

Pulses

Green vegetables

Eggs

Fresh meat

Fresh fish

Tubers

Other cereals

Rice

Tofu &
tempeh

Product

Pulses

Table 3. (cont.)

-0.311
-0.017
-0.001

0.209
0.025

-0.016
0.027

-0.064
-0.082

0.035
-0.831

-0.114
0.120

0.132
0.033

-0.094
0.027

-0.198
-0.023

-0.142
0.165

-0.053
-0.195

Fruit

-0.545
0.070
0.002

-0.044
-0.162

0.032
0.019

-1.003
0.109

0.032
-0.111

-0.134
-0.135

-0.150
0.110

-0.276
0.019

0.011
-0.182

-0.590
-0.012

0.058
0.289

Oils

-0.602
0.067
0.013

-0.060
0.720

-0.033
0.039

-0.039
-0.625

0.059
-0.094

0.031
-0.378

0.216
0.106

0.325
-0.155

-0.014
0.052

-0.387
-0.104

0.032
-0.239

Beverage
additives

0.668
-0.025
0.029

0.062
0.137

-0.305
0.177

0.038
0.017

0.292
0.074

0.061
0.216

0.283
0.138

0.007
0.131

-0.093
0.065

-0.196
0.135

-0.042
0.086

Spices

-0.569
0.026
-0.003

0.089
-0.231

0.027
-1.161

-0.017
0.029

-0.194
0.005

-0.095
0.192

-0.145
0.004

0.372
0.033

0.058
0.113

0.621
-0.003

-0.037
-0.210

Other
food

1.183
-0.147
0.002

-0.775
0.310

-0.062
0.064

-0.031
-0.013

0.022
0.030

-0.028
-0.048

0.124
0.064

0.269
0.007

-0.043
0.163

0.225
-0.025

-0.026
-0.292

Prepared
food

1.501
-0.260
-0.001

-0.339
1.912

-0.005
-0.008

0.144
0.132

-0.056
-0.060

0.156
-0.149

-0.296
-0.023

1.018
-0.019

-0.143
-0.075

0.660
0.185

0.032
0.430

Prepared
beverages

6.106
0.023
0.020

-0.135
-0.517

-0.080
0.114

0.019
0.101

-0.106
-0.069

0.242
-0.281

-0.037
0.257

0.330
-0.135

0.164
-0.047

-0.292
0.128

0.036
0.649

Alcohol

1.226
-0.876
-0.011

0.124
-0.296

-0.114
0.139

0.036
0.019

-0.069
0.016

-0.096
0.038

0.441
-0.086

0.540
0.015

-0.603
-0.063

0.052
0.304

-0.138
-0.276

Tobacco
and betel

-9.039
0.664
-0.482

-0.401
-3.857

0.248
-0.763

0.789
0.055

0.606
0.478

0.432
0.936

-2.696
-0.088

-5.594
0.390

1.066
-1.091

-0.822
-1.065

0.274
2.684

Other
consumption

25

26

Table 4. CV Regressions with household demographic controls
Independent variables
ln(Household PCE)

Rural households
0.0919
0.0948
0.0144

0.0147

0.0075

0.0076

ln(Household size)

0.1034

0.0722

0.0293

0.0013

0.0105

0.0127

0.0067

0.0068

--

0.1362

--

0.0817

--

0.0758

--

0.0289

--

-0.0106

Proportion of household:
male, 0-4 years old

Urban households
-0.1709
-0.1720

0.0401

female, 0-4 years

--

0.1224

male, 5-14 years

--

0.0511

female, 5-14 years

--

0.0186

0.0211

0.0404

0.0235

0.0300

0.0158

0.0307

0.0165

male, 15-59 years

--

--

--

--

female, 15-59 years

--

-0.0516

--

-0.0293

male, 60 years or more

--

-0.0226

--

-0.0791

female, 60 years or more

--

-0.1441
0.0322

--

-0.1857
0.0276

0.1117

0.1131

0.2620

0.2677

0.0276

0.0139

0.0352

R2
Unweighted N

37493

0.0303

24472

Note: OLS regressions include age, gender, and education of household head as well as province
dummies. Standard errors, reported below the estimated coefficients, are corrected for dependence
within survey clusters.
Source: Authors' calculations from 1996 SUSENAS and BPS Price Data.

Compensating Variation

0

.5

1

1.5

11

xgrid

Urban

Rural

Urban Poverty Line

upper1u
smth1r

12

Log of Per Capita Monthly Household Expenditures (Rupiahs)

10

Rural Poverty
Line

smth1u
lower1u

13

27

Figure 1. Compensating Variation, with 95% Confidence Intervals

(as a proportion of initial household expenditures)

Compensating Variation

0

.5

1

1.5

0

.5

1

1.5

11

11
xgrid

Rural

xgrid

Urban smth2r

Urban Poverty Line

smth2u

12

12

13

13

Substitution

No Substitution

Substitution

No Substitution

Log of Per Capita Monthly Household Expenditures (Rupiahs)

10

Rural Poverty
Line

smth1r

10

smth1u

28

Figure 2. Compensating Variation, with and without Substitution Effects

(as a proportion of initial household expenditures)

Compensating Variation

0

.5

1

1.5

0

.5

1

1.5

11

11

Rural
xgrid

asmth1r

Urban
xgrid

Urban Poverty Line

12

12

asmth1u

13

With Self-Production

Without Self-Production

13

With Self-Production

Without Self-Production

Log of Per Capita Monthly Household Expenditures (Rupiahs)

10

Rural Poverty
Line

smth1r

10

smth1u

Figure 3. Compensating Variation, with and without Self-Production

(as a proportion of initial household expenditures)

29

Compensating Variation

0

.5

1

1.5

0

.5

1

1.5

11

11
bsmth1r

xgrid
Rural

xgrid
Urban

Urban Poverty Line

Disaggregate Measure

12

12

bsmth1u

13

Disaggregate Measure

Aggregate Measure

13

Aggregate Measure

Log of Per Capita Monthly Household Expenditures (Rupiahs)

10

Rural Poverty
Line

smth1r

10

smth1u

Figure 4. Compensating Variation, Aggregate and Disaggregate Measures

(as a proportion of initial household expenditures)

30

Compensating Variation

0

.5

1

1.5

2

0

.5

1

1.5

2

11

11
xgrid

12

xgrid
Rural

12

Urbanmdsmth1r

Urban Poverty Line

mdsmth1u

Median

13

10th Percentile

Median

90th Percentile

13

10th Percentile

90th Percentile

Log of Per Capita Monthly Household Expenditures (Rupiahs)

10

Rural Poverty
Line

hismth1r
losmth1r

10

hismth1u
losmth1u

Figure 5. Dispersion of Compensating Variation Across Provinces,
10th, 50th, and 90th Percentiles (with Self-Production)

(as a proportion of initial household expenditures)

31

